Antar, a Bedouin Romance (complete, 4 vols.) (Antarah ibn Shaddad (trans. Terrick Hamilton), 1819)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: combined scan of the 1819-20 4-volume first edition (https://archive.org/details/antar-romance-hamilton). First English translation of the Sirah of Antar — the great pre-Islamic warrior-poet's romance epic.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

by Google as part of an ongoing effort to preserve the
information in books and make it universally accessible.


LBL AL.


ts
con


day


"\


“Jon


ANTAR,


A BEDOUEEN ROMANCE.


TRANSLATED FROM THE ARABIC.


BY TERRICK HAMILTON, ESQ.


ORIENTAL SECRETARY TO TIIE BRITISH EMBASSY
AT CONSTANTINOPLE.


LONDON:


JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE-STREET.


1819.


W. Bulmer and Co.


y


leveland Row, St. James's.


C


London Printed b


INTRODUCTION.


Tue Translator of “ The History of An-
tar” being out of England, it is not in the
Editor’s power to give to the reader much
preliminary information on ‘the contents
or nature of the Epic Tale, „which is now
for the first time in part submitted to the
European Public. - |
Antar is no imaginary personage. He
was the son of an Arab Prince of the
tribe of Abs, by a black woman, whom
his father had made captive in a predatory
excursion: and he raised himself by the
heroic qualities which he displayed from
his earliest youth, and by his extraordi-
a


li INTRODUCTION.


nary genius for poetry, from the state of —
slavery in which he was born, to the con-
fidence of his king, and to a preeminence
above all the Chiefs of Arabia. He flourish-
ed during the close of the sixth, and the
early part of the seventh century, of the
Christian æra; there is, consequently, little
or no allusion to the customs or institu- -
tions of Islamism throughout the work ;
though the Hero is frequently designated
as “ He by whom God organized the
earth and the world for the appearance of
the Lord of slaves.” |

The following Romance, as it may be
called, was first put together, probably
from traditionary tales current at the
time, by Osmay, one of the eminent scho-
lars, who adorned the courts of Haroun-al-
Raschid, and of his two learned succes- |
sors, Al-Amyn, and Al-Mamoun ; and it
still continues to be the principal source
whence the story-tellers of the coffee-


INTRODUCTION. Hi


houses in Egypt, Syria, and Arabia, draw
their most interesting tales: but, notwith-
standing, its general circulation in the
Levant, the name of Antar is hitherto
only known to us in Europe, as that of
the Author of one of the seven poems, sus-
pended in the temple of Mecca, and from
that circumstance called, The Moallakat.

The Author of this poem, and the Hero
of our history, are identified, as well by the
similar names which occur i in both; as by
the insertion of the poem itself in the body
of the history, when, after much persecu-
tion and opposition, Antar at length suc-
ceeds in suspending the poem within the
Holy Sanctuary which surrounds the
Kaaba. _

There is reason to believe that this is
the first attempt to transpose into an
European language, a real Arabian story,
depicting the original manners of the
Arabs of the desert, uncorrupted by the


iv ‘INTRODUCTION.


artificial and refined customs of the neigh-
bouring cities in Syria, Egypt, and Persia.

The characteristics of the real Arabs
or Bedowins are here presented in their
native simplicity. An eager desire for the
property of their neighbour; an uncon-
querable fondness for strife and battle ;
a singular combination of profuse hos-
pitality, with narrow economy—quick per-
ception —deep cunning — great personal
courage, a keen sense of honour, respect
for their women, and a warm admiration
and ready use of the poetical beauties of
their unrivalled language.

The supposition of the learned oriental-
ist Mons. Langlés, that the Thousand and
One Nights were originally composed in
the Pehlevi, or the old Persian, and from
that language translated into Arabic, ap-
pears still more probable, when we observe
the rich and gorgeous descriptions of the
works of art and nature which abound


INTRODUCTION. v


in them, their enchanted palaces—their
sultans and viziers, and all the attendant
magnificence of acourt; their genii and ma-
gicians—their want of individual charac-
ter in the leading personages;—and when
we contrast with those details the simple
manners of the Kings and Chieftains of the
desert, pourtrayed in this Romance; their
rude tents ; the familiarity with which they
live amongst each other, controuled only
by the rules of patriarchal authority ;
the almost total absence of supernatural
agents; and above all, the striking dis-
tinctions of character, which mark the
whole progress of the story. In this work
indeed, The Subordination of the warriors
and others, whether of high or low rark,
to the irresistible Antar; in undaunted
courage; in active prowess; in intellectual
acquirements; in public spirit; in the
ardour of his love ; in the excellence of his
poetry ; and in acts of private generosity


e


vi INTRODUCTION.


and benevolence, is strictly consistent with
the best rules which the Critics have de-
rived from the Homeric writings, for the
conduct of the Heroic poem.

In an adherence to these rules indeed,
the early European writers of Romantic
. Adventures, who followed the age of Char-
lemagne, and to whom, perhaps, Antar was
better known than to their successors, did
not follow the steps of their prototype. But
whether he really deserve that appellation,
that is, whether from the frequent inter-
course between the Eastern and Western
kingdoms of the Roman world, in the
Sth, 9th and 10th centuries, our Romance
writers imbibed their taste for the adven-
tures of Chivalry from this singular Tale,
is a question, to the solution of which we
may look forward, when the whole of it
shall be before the public. It may be ob-
served, however, that little more was want-
ing in order to compose the Romances of


e


INTRODUCTION. vii


the middle age, than to engraft on the
war, love, and courtesy of the Arabs, the
splendid and soft luxuries of the other
countries of the East, the witchcraft of
Africa, the religious fervour of the South
of Europe, and the gloomy superstitions of
the North.

The Editor abstains from adding any
further observations at present upon this
subject. It had been his intention to request
the indulgence of the reader for the orien-
tal phraseology which frequently occurs in.
the following pages; but he prefers leaving
the public to form their own opinion, how
far the Translator has rightly judged, in
presenting a literal translation of his ori-
ginal, by which the Arabic idioms might
be best preserved, rather than (by giving
to it a strictly English dress, and thereby
destroying its native freshness,) to have
been led into an indulgence of ornament,
which would have been equally remote


viil INTRODUCTION.


from the nice refinement of the languages
of Europe, and from the copious simplicity
of that of the desert.


THE


TRANSLATORS PREFACE.


Or the inhabitants of Arabia, previous to the
time of Mohommed, little is known; and, as far
as relates to their public history and govern-
ment, that small portion given to us by Abulfeda
by no means strengthens our wishes to obtain
any further details.

In the absence of any system of civilization,
prescription, or rather the will of a chief, was
law, either esteemed as such or enforced.. Sub-
ject to no other control, and under the guidance
of their heroes or kiags, the tribes carried on wars
and made predatory incursions under various
pretences ; sometimes merely to relieve their
present wants by capturing the flocks and herds
of neighbouring hordes (such depredations being
called gains); at others, with a view to gratify
their revenge for any real or imaginary outrage,

VOL. 1.


il PREFACE.


where retaliation had been delayed only to render
it more certain, when the opportunity for attack
might be attended with less danger, or their force
sufficiently powerful to ensure success.

This period is called the “ Time of Ignorance,”
by subsequent writers, in contradistinction to the
enlightened state in which they suppose them-
selves to have lived since the introduction of
Islamism. f

The Arabians, whether descended from Ish-
mael or from Cahtan (Yoctan), were divided into
two sorts, the one living in towns, the other in
tents. The former subsisted on the produce of
their flocks, by tillage, and even by the exer-
cise of trades. The latter had their pastures,
their principal food was camel’s flesh, its milk
was their usual drink, though wine was also a
liquor in which they indulged to the greatest
excess. By waylaying travellers and caravans,
or invading: their neighbours’ possessions, they
increased their precarious means, often changing
their place of residence in quest of better pas
turage or a greater abundance of water, accord-
ing to the seasons; avoiding in their course
tribes more powerful than themselves, and over-


PREFACE. ' Hi


powering the weak and unprotected. This habit
of life more particularly applies to the descend-
ants of Ishmael, or rather Adnan; for as the
genealogy from Ishmael to Adnan is involved
in obscurity, the Arabs to the north of Yemen
or Arabia Felix term themselves Adnanians; the
Arabs of the Jewish or Christian persuasion
chiefly residing in Syria and its confines. The
learning of a people so constituted must of course
have been very narrow and circumscribed. They
could boast of a slight knowledge in the stars,
so as to foretel the changes of the weather, and
to interpret dreams.

The grossest idolatry was their religion : images
under various forms and names, the ‘sun, the
moon, or some particular constellation, were the
objects of their worship; though many tribes
looked up to a Supreme Being, and only deemed
the planets or idols as mediators with the Divinity
at the final resurrection. Some did not believe
in a future state; but those who had any vague
notion on the subject imagined that the dead,
upon whose tombs a camel was slaughtered,
` should rise mounted-on its back, but those for
be


iv PREFACE.


whom this ceremony should not be performed,
would be called to judgment on foot. :

Mecca was at all times held in the highest
veneration, as the place where Abraham and
Ishmael had dwelt; the Caaba is believed to
have been erected by them; and as such, was
the object of a holy pilgrimage, attended with
most of the ceremonies in practice at the present
day. |

The genealogical descent of families, and the
history of -their nobility, were attended to with
the most scrupulous jealousy. But the accom-
plishments on which they most chiefly prided
themselves were, a perfect knowled ge of their lan-
guage, skill in arms, and hospitality to strangers.

“ The first they exercised themselves in by
“ composing orations and poems. Their orations
“ were of two sorts, metrical and prosaic; the
“ one being compared to pearls strung, and the
“ other to loose ones.. They endeavoured to
“ excel in both, and whoever was able in assem-
“ bly to persuade the people to a great enterprise,
“ or dissuade them from a dangerous one, or
“ gave them other wholesome advice, was ho-


PREFACE. vV


“noured with the title of Khatib, or orator,
“which is now given to the Mahommedan
“ preachers. They pursued a method very dif-
“ ferent from that of the Greek,or the Roman
“ orators; their sentences being like loose gems,
“ without connexion, so that this sort of com-
“ position struck the audience chiefly by the
‘“ fulness of the periods, the elegance of the ex-
pression, and the acuteness of the proverbial
“sayings; and so persuaded were they of their
“ excellency in this way, that they would not
“allow any nation to understand the art of
“ speaking in public, except themselves and the
n Persians ; which last were reckoned much in-
“ ferior, in that respect, tothe Arabians. Poetry
“was in so great esteem among them, that it
“was a great accomplishment and a proof of
“ ingenuous extraction for any one to be able
“to express himself in verse with ease and
“ elegance on any extraordinary occurrence ; and
“even in their common discourse they made
“ frequent applications of celebrated passages of
“ their famous poets. In their poems were pre-
“served the distinctions of descents, the rights
-“of tribes, the memory of great actions, and


vi PREFACE.


“the propriety of their language, for which
“ reasons an excellent poet reflected an honour
& on his tribe ; so that, as soon as any one began
“to be admired for his performances of this
“kind in a tribe, the other tribes sent publicly
“to congratulate them on the’occasion; and
“ themselves made entertainments, at which the
“ women assisted, dressed in their nuptial orna-
“. ments, singing, to the sound of timbrels, the
« happiness of their tribe, who had one now to
“ protect their honour, to preserve their genea-
“ logies and the purity of their language, and
“ to transmit their actions to posterity; for this
“ was all performed by their poems, to which
“ they were solely obliged for their knowledge
“ and instructions, moral and economical, and
“to which they had recourse as to an oracle, in
“ all doubts and differences. No wonder then
“ that a public congratulation was made on this
“ account, which honour they were so far from
“ making cheap, that they never did it but on
“ one of these three occasions, which were
“ reckoned great points of felicity, viz. on the
“ birth of a boy, the rise of a poet, or the fall of
“a foal of generous breed. To kcep an emu-


PREFACK. Vii


“ lation among their poets, the tribes had, once
“a year, a general assembly at Ocadh, a place
“ famous on this account, and where they kept
“a weekly mart, or fair, which was held on
“ Sunday. This annual meeting lasted a whole
“ month, daring which time they employed them-
“ selves, not only in trading, but in repeating
“ their poetical compositions, contending and
“ vying with each other for the prize, whence
“the place, it is said, took its name*. The
“poems that were judged to excel were laid up
“ in the king’s treasuries, as were the seven cele-
“ brated poems, thence called Moallacat, rather
“ than from being hung up on the Caaba, which
“honour they also had by public order, being
“ written on Egyptian silk, and in letters of gold;
“ for which reason they had also the name of
“ Modhahabat, or the golden verses. |
“ The fair and assembly at Ocadh were sup-
“ pressed by Mohammed, in whose time, and
« for some years after, poetry seems to have
“ been neglected by the Arabs, who were then
“ employed in their conquests, which being com-


© The original Arabic ruot Akdh, ngas subduing or con-
tending.


viii PREFACE.


“ pleted, and themselves at peace, not only this
“ study was revived, but almost all sorts of learn-
“ ing were encouraged and greatly improved. by
“them. This interruption, however, occasioned
& the loss of most of their ancient pieces of poetry,
“ which were then chiefly preserved by memory ;
‘“ the use of writing being rare among them in
“their time of ignorance. Though the Arabs
& were so early acquainted with poetry, they did
not at first use to write poems of a just length,
but only expressed: themselves in verse occa-
-© sionally, nor was their prosody digested into
“ rules till some time after Mohommed.

“ The exercise of arms and horsemanship they
“ were obliged to practise and encourage, by
“ reason of the independence of their tribes,
_ whose frequent jarrings made wars almost con-
“ tinual; and they chiefly ended their disputes in
“ field battles; it being an usual saying among
“them, that God bad bestowed four peculiar
“ things on the Arabs; that their turbans should
“ be to them instead of diadems, their tents in-
“ stead of walls and houses, their swords instexd


“ of entrenchments, and their poems instead of
“ written laws.


PREFACE. ix


- “ Hospitality was so habitual to them, and so
“ much esteemed, thatthe examples of this kind
“among them exceed what: can be ene
“ fram other nations. |

“ Nor were those the only good galie of
“ the Arabs; they are commended by the an-
“ cients for being most exact in their words, and
“ respectful to their kindred; and they have
‘* always been celebrated for their quickness of
“ apprehension and penetration, and the vivacity
“ of their wit, especially those ofthe desert,

“ As the Arabs have their excellencies, 80. have
“ they, like other nations, their defects and vices.
“ Their own writers acknowledge that they have |
“ a natural disposition to war, bloodshed, cruel-
“ty, and rapine; being so much. addicted to
“ bear malice, that they scarce ever forget an
“old grudge; which vindictive temper, some
“ physicians say, is occasioned by their frequent
“ feeding on camel’s flesh, (the ordinary food of
“ the Arabs of the desert, who are therefore ob-
“ served to be most inclined to these vices) that
“ creature peng most malicious and tenacious
“ of anger.”

Such is the language in which the leaned


x PREFACE.


translator of the Coran has delivered to the pub-
lic his account of the character of the Arabians,
as gathered from the writings of Abulfeda, Po-
cocke, and others. That the Arabs of those
days thus thought and thus acted is founded on
the concurrence of such respectable authority,
that the authenticity of this statement has never
been questioned ; but as the application of such
a system of habits and manners to the practice
of common life has been hitherto unknown, it is
with a view of exhibiting to the world a stronger
proof of the truth of this recorded evidence, that
the translation of the history of Antar is now for
the first time submitted to the public; a work
which represents, with the utmost detail, the
most faithful narrative of that mode of life in all
its variety, whether public or domestic, which
prevailed among the Arabs in that “ period of
ignorance,” and which, with some material
shades of difference, is stated, by modern tra-
vellers, to exist among the numerous tribes that
inhabit the deserts at this day. -

It would be interesting as a fact in literary
history, could we trace, with any certainty, the
source whence the materials which furnished the


PREFACE. . xi


basis of this romance were drawn, that it might
be ascertained how far historical evidence may
be cited to authenticate the different events, and |
how far they were only subjects of oral tradition,
down to the period when they were committed
to writing by Asmaee, during the reign of Ha-
roon Rasheed. i

From D’Herbelot we learn that, at the court
of that monarch, Asmaee was celebrated as the
author of several works on Arabic grammar and
theology; that he was one of the most learned
men of the age, and in great consideration with
Haroon himself, who used to listen with delight
to the traditions of the ancient Arabs, with which
Asmaee’s memory seems to have been most hap-
pily stored, and which he narrated in the pre-
sence of the assembled doctors, sometimes with
such detail and unwearied diligence, as to call
forth the animadversion of that prince, who
would request him not to overpower him with
such continued demands on his attention.

In order to affix more authority to this anec-
dote, it will not be irrelevant to mention that,
in the course of this tale, Asmaee once breaks
the thread of his narrative to state, that-as he


xii PREPACE.


was relating before Hareon and his courtiers
one of Antar’s astonishing exploits, both the
monarch and the ministers joined in expressing
their doubts of the truth of such tremendous
powers, and even ventured to question the pro-
bability of the leading subjects of his story. As-
maee faces these objections, asserting that every
fact rested on undoubted authority, and that the
story was a perfect picture of manners existing
at that time; and moreover (to place all further
hesitation beyond dispute), he boldly states, that
he himself had witnessed many of the scenes
he so forcibly describes, saying, that he was
then four hundred years of age, and had conse-
quently been alive long before the Comins of
-Mohommed.

What could be the deci of this extraordinary
falsehood (for it is frequently repeated, and some
of his heroes are also mentioned as having
yeached that patriarchal age), is difficult to
imagiņe ; however, the general points of the nar-
rative are not to be invalidated by so bold an
impossibility; and it may be presumed that the
tale, as it now stands, comprises every tradition
that he deemed worthy of notice, either as mat-


PREFACE. xii


ter of history or of amusement. Some of the
facts are to be found in Abulfeda as known
causes of troubles and dissensions among the
tribes, but still with some change of circum-
stance that may be either attributed to those
errors incidental to all traditional history, or to
the liveliness of the imagination of the author,
who may have wished to render his tale more
consonant to the taste of the times, by sacrificing
the dry detail of an uninteresting fact, to the
pleasure of engaging the attention of his au-
dience or his readers*. ;

Haroon Rasheed, who flourished during the
second century of the hegira, was, of course,
the contemporary of Charlemagne: already was
tbe communication open between the courts of
Asia and Europe, and mutual presents had
evinced the wish of the monarchs to establish
an intercourse between the two countries.

It is, therefore, no matter of doubt, that this


> It is also proper to mention, that the names of Johainah and
Aboo Obeidah frequently occur with the name of Asmaee, as the com-
pilers of this narrative, in the course of which there are continual breaks:
as thus, Asmaee said, or Johainah and Aboo Obeidah said, and ther


the narrative continues. ~


xiv PREFACE.


romance was composed or compiled at that pe-
riod; and that it was a book highly esteemed
seems equally notorious. It is, however, a very
surprising circumstance that, from that time al-
most down to the present century, no orientalist _
of Europe should have mentioned its existence.
Asia ‘possesses men of ingenuity and talents,
who have, with infinite labour, made commen-
taries on those books, generally considered as
objects of research; but Haji Calfa, the most
celebrated of the bibliographers of Asia, only
cursorily mentions it.

' ‘The most natural way of accounting for this
omission is to suppose, that as this book exclu-
sively related to the Arabs of the Desert, uncon-
nected with those men of literature, whose habits
and pursuits led them to prefer a residence in
cities and at courts, it may in the course of time
have been entirely lost to the learned readers,
and only felt and admired amongst the hordes
and tribes, whose manners it so accurately de-
scribed, and whose energies and passions it was
so well calculated to awaken, in the perusal of
those records of the intrepidity of their forefa-
thers. Thus it may have been so long neglected,


PREFACE. XV


till it was at last forgotten; still, however, che-
rished by those who could understand its value,
and engraven in the hearts and the memories of
men, who might boast as being the descendants
of heroes and warriors, whose glories made them
pant after martial fame, and roused them, if not
to imitate, at least not to discredit the celebrity
of their progenitors, who had lived honoured
and renowned, and whose splendid histories and
deaths would survive to remotest ages, recorded
by the pen of so devoted and enthusiastic an
admirer of their exploits, and so capable of
transmitting them to the latest posterity, in such
glowing and animating description.

Even at this period, Antar, as the hero of this
romance, or Asmaee, as the reporter of his deeds,
are but little known beyond the Deserts, and
the towns of Aleppo, Damascus, Bagdad, and
Cairo. To the Arabs, it is their standard work,
which excites in them the wildest emotions;
even read by some, firm in the memory of others ;
‘but listened to with avidity by all*.

© Mr. Burkardt, in a letter to the translator, mentions that when
he was reading a portion of it to the Arabs, they were in ecstacies of


delight, but at the same time so enraged at his erroneous pronunciation ,
that they actually tore the sheets out of his hauds.


. xvi PREFACE.


In Aleppo it is highly valued, particularly by
the Armenians ; and, in coffee-houses, it is read
aloud by some particular person, who keeps a
sheet in his hand, to which he occasionally refers
to refresh his memory. It is given to children,
who are obliged to copy it out, and thus acquire
the habit of speaking elegantly and correctly ;
and it may be attributed to this cause, that the
copies of Antar are generally found written most
execrably ill, and abounding in errors of every
kind. : |

Until the publication of the “ Mines de PO-
rient,” printed at Vienna, in 1802, the name of
Antar had searcely been heard in Europe. A
copy of the work is in the Imperial Library ; and
in the Catalogue raisonné of the Books written —
by M. Hammer, there is some account -of this
romance ; from which the following is extracted :

“ This work, which must be reckoned as very
“instrumental towards learning the manners,
“ dispositions, and habits of the Arabs, seems to
“ us more interesting than the celebrated ‘ Thou-"
“ sand and One Nights ; not indeed with respect
“to the fictions, in which this work almost en-
.“ tirely fails; but as a picture of true history.


PREFACE. xvii


« There is nothing about genii, magicians, or
‘¢ talismans, or fabulous animals; and if, indeed, |
“the bravery of the hero, who, unwounded,
“ slays hundreds and thousands of the foe, or
“the swiftness of his generous steed, that out-
“ strips the wind, appear incredible; these are
“ rather the results of a hyperbolical style, than
“í to be considered as fabulous figures, which
“ never, in the ‘opinion of orientals, invalidates
.“ the truth of history. The whole of this work
“ may be esteemed as a faithful account of the
.“ principal tribes of the Arabs, and particularly
“ of the tribe of Abs, from which sprung Antar,
“ in the time of Nushirvan, King of Persia, more
“ faithful in painting manners than in ene
“ events.

“The style is often TEM ai beautiful,
“ mixed with poetry, frequently in a common
“ diction, and sometimes the augmentations and
“ more recent interpolations plainly prove the
- adulterations of the copyist. (What would
°« that light of oriental literature, Sir William
“ Jones, have thought of the style and merits of
“ this work, who only treated of the fourteenth

VOL. I. : s


XVLi PREFACF.


4 volume, in his Commentaries on Asiatic
“ Poetry*?) It chiefly treats of the love of Antar
“and Ibla, and also of their family, down to
“ the death of the hero.

“ This work, which is generally called a ro-
“ mance of chivalry, though impossible to be
“ translated, owing to the number of volumes,
“ may be gleaned; every part appertaining to
“history, should be carefully collected, and
“ nothing relative to manners omitted. Such,
“ with God’s help, we intend to publish.

“The author, from beginning to the end,
“ appears to be Asmaee, a famous philologist
“ and poet at the court of Haroon Rasheed; but
“ sometimes other authors and sources are men-
“ tioned, who, according to our opinian, appear
“to have been inserted by the story-teller in the
“ coffee-houses. This is the work, and not, as
“ig generally supposed, the Thousand and One
“Nights, which is the source of the stories which
“ ft} the tents and cottages in Arabia and Egypt;


è « I have only seen the fourteenth volume of this work, which


< u comprises ‘all that is elegant and noble in compositign. So lofty,
_“** ao various, and so bold is jts style, that I do not hesitate to rank it
* amongst the most finished poems.””— Sir W. Jones.


PREFACE. xix


“ though materials are often supplied from other
“ works* of the same kind.”

The above engaged the attention of persons
interested in oriental literature, and copies have
been demanded, but are with difficulty procúred,
owing to the unwillingness of those, who live by
reading the stories in the coffee-houses, to part
with them; and the expense of transcribing is
very heavy.

The translation, now made public, was under-
taken from a copy. procured at Aleppo, by the
kind exertions of Mr. Barker. It proved to be
a very. valuable work, being comprised in a
smaller form than any other as yet sent td
Europe. In general, the copies are bound up
in numerous volumes of variéus sizes, from forty
to twenty or less, exhibiting a mass to appal
the most enterprising of translators, well aware,


* The possessors of copies are—
1. Mr. Rich, at Bagdad.
2. M. d’Italinsky.
3. M. Aidé, at Constantinople.

° 4. Lord Aberdeen. me

5. Imperial Library at Vienna. °
6. Cambridge Library.

Some few volumes in the possession of Mr. Hamilton.

The Translator has two.

Some of them are imperfect.:


c2


xx PREFACE.


as he must be, that whatever his detérmination
might effect in making a translation of so pon-
derous a work, he could not expect any cor-
responding success in printing it for general
perusal.

- This difficulty, and the still greater difficulty
of abridging a work of so curious a texture,
must have prevented any one, acquainted with
its merits, from venturing on so arduous a task ;
and not till the translator saw it in so compressed


_ ashape, did he ever anticipate the possibility of


putting it into English.
. Whilst he was engaged on the work, he had
the advantage of receiving from Mr. Burkardt
a letter, in which he accounted for the abridged
state of that copy of Antar, stating that the
_ yoluminous work had been curtailed of many of
jts repetitions and muth of its poetry, by some
learned inhabitants of-Syria, and was therefore
called the Shamiyeh, or Syrian Antar, in contra-
distinction to the original large work, which was
ealled the Hijaziyeh, or Arabian Antar.

Mr. Burkardt strongly urged the translator to
persist in his undertaking, by adhering strictly
to the abridgment; anticipating the most com-


PREFACE.. XXI


plete success, and even a popularity equal to
that so long enjoyed by the Arabian Nights,
“to ma ” he adds, “ it is in every respect
superior.”

Under these inducements, and prompted by
the active encouragement of his friends, the
translator executed the task from the abridged
copy, which even in its reduced state bears too
formidable an appearance to attract universal
favour.


_ The translation has been completed some time,
and already has one volume met the approbation
of those who would kindly hope that his time
has not been mis-spent. For the appearance of
that volume in its mutilated state, the only
apology to be offered is the indulgent curiosity
of friends, who expressed a wish to see that
portion in print, before any further addition had
reached England. Whether such publication
was ill-timed, or whether the continuation might
not have been suppressed altogether, must be
decided by the future reception this part of the
-work will meet from the public.

Of the merits of this romance, as a work to be
tried by European critics, and ideas founded on


bd


e?


XxX PREFACE,


principles totally unknown to the Arabian author,
it will be no easy task to form a correct judg-
ment. <A person, unacquainted with oriental
literature, must frame his opinions on rules by
which he has been accustomed to regulate his
Opinions on matters of taste—such a critic must
unavoidably err-in any decision he may express.
On the other hand, an oriental scholar is gene-
rally too biassed in favour of languages that
have cost him years of unremitted toil to attain,
to view, with a mind sufficiently calm and un-
prepossessed, a work which, in an Asiatic country,
is considered as the standard of perfection. It
is true, an orientalist must imbibe some new
ideas of taste, before he can judge at all of the
merits of an otiginal Asiatic composition, but
whether he will be an impartial critic is very
doubtful. | `

That a translator of so immense a work must `
have felt a more than common gratification in
his labours, is evident ; otherwise he could never
have persisted in the continuance of it; unless it
may be presumed that a person, obstinately per-
severing in an undertaking against his convic-
tion, will in time become so full of his subject,


PREFACE. xxiii


as to see beauties where none exist, and become:
so much an Asiatic, as to forget. he had ever
been an European, either in habits or taate.

Leaving, therefore, the public to form their
opinions of this tale, through the uncertain me-
dium of a translation (only begging it may be
borne in mind, that the. original may. possess
beauties, the translator may have omitted or
overlooked, and that the translation, whenever
approved, by no means does justice to the ori-
ginal), he will endeavour to give some succinct
account of the object and nature of the work,
that the unprejudiced reader may have some
clue by which he may form his own mopio aa
its merits and defects.

Antar, as has been already observed ky the
editor of the first volume, is no imaginary per-
son: he is well known as a celebrated warrior,
and as the author of one of the seven poems sus-
pended on the Caaba at Mecca. His intre-
pidity is often mentioned by Abulfeda, as being
the subject of poetry : though it does not appear
that any precise composition relating to his
feats in arms is extant, some detached pieces
may have survived; still it must be supposed


xxiv PREFACE.


that oral tradition alone has commemorated in:
verse, current among succeeding generations,
those various proofs of heroism which Asmaee
afterwards embodied in his work. That he was
the son of Shedad, an Absian chief, is also well
attested ; though it does not so clearly appear
that he was born of a slave-woman.

It is not to be understood, that Asmaee merely
intended to compose a faithful history of those
times: his view seems rather to comprise in a
pleasing tale* numerous isolated facts, and the
most striking traits of the manners and usages
prevalent at that period; and therefore we may
presume, that he has embellished his narrative
with every additional circumstance that could
possibly throw an interest over his hero, or at-
tract the attention of his readers.

. And that he has succeeded among those for
whom the work was composed, there cannot be
the smallest doubt. It is also true, that many,
who at this day have read it in the original, have
expressed the delight and unwearied admiration


© Historic facts as they occur, when any authority can be quoted,
will be observed in the progress of the work.


PREFACE. XxV


they have felt in the perusal of its endless vo-
lumes. |

It may be assumed, that it is one of the most
ancient books of Arabian literature, composed
during the second century of the Hejirah, at a
lime when the arts were most successfully culti- `
vated amongst the Asiatic conquerors, and en-
couraged more particularly under the influence
of the Arab princes of Bagdad. Its language is
therefore uncommonly pure, equally remote from
the harshness of the earlier, or the conceits of
the later authors; and when we consider that it
was originally written in the Cufic character,
and has for a thousand years been transcribed
chiefly for the use of the Bedoweens, and often
by persons who probably did not comprehend
one word they were writing, it is a matter of
surprise, how it has retained so much purity and
correctness. Some few Persian and Turkish
words, subject to Arabic inflexions, are now and
then to be observed. Some other modern terms
may also have been inserted ; these are corrup-
` tions, and Mr. Hammer thinks that many inter-
polations have been made by the copyist. Words
often occur which are not to be found in any


xxvi PREFACE.


dictionary ; and some expressions there are,
which, though current to this day among the
Arabs: of the Desert, are not susceptible of the
same acceptation in any lexicon.

: The style of the work as a composition is very
plain and easy in construction ; but abounding
in an endless variety of diction, couched in the
most choice and appropriate terms. The sen-.
tences are short, much in the style of the Bible ;
the prose is even in rhythm throughout, continu-
ing uninterrupted but by a change of termina-
tion, according tothe powers of the author, or
the redundancy of expressions with the same
sound*. Thus, with short rhythmical periods
of various lengths, the author proceeds, for five
or six lines, to the end of his subject, and then
-‘yecommences other matter with a different rhyme.
This is particularly striking in all his descriptions
of battles, where the pauses are very frequent,
all with the same terminations; the periods be-
ing often formed of only two words, sometimes
of three, and thus hurrying on, with apparent
rapidity and great variety and spirit, throughout
a whole page.


® This is reckoned the greatest beauty in oriental compositions.


N


PREFACK. xxvii


| This species of composition produces the
necessity of continued repetitions ; and though
Asmaee has proved that his memory was sup-
pled with an infinity of expression, unrivalled
by any oriental author, yet the frequent recur-
rence of similar scenes and thoughts must of
course occasion such repetitions, as almost to
weary his warmest admirers; but when trans-
lated into another tongue, that admits of, com-
paratively speaking, no diversity of terms to
express the same meaning, they become most
tedious and disgusting..:

The poetry has the charm of a more elevated
style; and a wider range for the imagination
has been eagerly seized by the poet. Infinitely
more difficult in its construction, it is still na-
tural, and devoid of those conceits and absurdi-
ties that abound in almost all Asiatic composi-
tions. It comprises every variety to which poetry
is applied. The heroic, the complimentary, the
laudatory, the amatory, the ludicrous, the merry,
and the elegiac, are all combined in the utmost
profusion; even the pastoral is not omitted. A
specimen of this species of poetry occurs that is
perfectly unique in the language: the translator


xxviii © PREFACE.


never met with any thing of the kind. More-
over, on inquiry among some learned Musal-
mans, he could not understand that such com-
positions were at all known or appreciatéd amoug
them. Itis in the style of an eclogue, and is
introduced as a trial of skill amongst revellers
at a feast. Besides its originality, it has great
merit as an oriental composition, abounding in
terms ‘never before modelled into grammatical
inflection, and which excited the most unfeigned
admiration and surprise amongst some natives
of Constantinople, to whom these verses were
shown. > |

The heroic is, of course, a mixture of all that
is @old in imagery and inflated in expression ;
exaggeration and personal vanity run through-
out the whole; perhaps these are the legitimate
-characteristics of such poetry: certainly we have
the. highest authority for its currency, in a poet
‘whose writings are considered as the standard
for whatever is grand and majestical in that spe-
cies of poetical composition.

The elegiac has drawn tears from persons,
whose sympathy and tenderness were fashioned
to be roused by such scenes as are described in


PREFACE. XXIX


this work, and are therefore as true to nature as
those feelings which are recognized in a more
refined state of society.
- -The ludicrous and satirical are in some in-
stances too gross, often indelicate, but not ob- —
scene. There is something pretty:and original
in the amatory style; and the merry can move
to mirth in its innocence and playfulness,’ As
to the complimentary, it is, as is the case in all
languages, the least entitled to commendation,
abounding in ridiculous conceits and unintelli-
gible panegyric.
With respect to the magic and E S ENE
that occur in the. work, it may be proper to add,
for the benefit of those who indulge in the still
controverted point of the birth-place of sorcery,
that instances are to be found of supernatural
agency; though in the portion now published
no mention is made of any such influence over
the minds and actions of the heroes who figure
in the story. The belief that ghosts, or hobgob-
Jing, or genii, inhabited some peculiar spot, ge-
nerally prevailed ; and we perceive that Shiboob,
Antar’s brother, is often taken for one of those


XXX PREFACE.


august personages, owing to the rapidity with
which he transfers himself from plage to place.
The effects of an amulet ring, first worn by a
Christian warrior, who at his death bequeaths it
to Antar, in relieving a person from fits, are
noticed more than once. Sorceresses were also
sufficiently celebrated, even at that distant pe-
riod, to be here recorded, more for the iniquities
than for the good they were called upon to per-
form. One endeavours to inveigle Ibla to her
‘destruction, by means of two dæmon emissaries
she employs, and a magic fire she kindles. An-
‘other fortifies her castle with the illusion of su-
‘pernatural flames and smoke; whilst the sister
of this wicked enchantress dispels these seeming
horrors by her more potent spells. But, though
this latter is married in consequence, to one of
the Absian chiefs, she is- absolutely prohibited
from ever practising her magical arts, before
the marriage could be solemnized. It is thus
evident, that this engine of destruction was
‘regarded as abominable, and by no means
connected with any acknowledged source of
“resistance. Da7 SO N


PREFACE. XXXI


Allusions to genii frequently occur: one of
Antar’s sons is slain by them. They are de-
scribed as most hideous monsters, having their
eyes slit upwards, and uttering most terrific —
sounds. Antar restores to the human form one
of the genii who had been metamorphosed into
a horse; and, in return, he aids his deliverer in
avenging his son’s murder. ; |

Besides these instances, there are some other
events of minor consequence, where magic is
supposed to effect its purposes; and it may be
inferred, that the author has rather for his object
to give some account of the general notions
respecting sorcery and magic, at the period to
which the story relates, than to afford an.accu-
rate detail of its influence on the public mind,
during the reign of Haroon Rasheed, at which
time, though its delusions may not have gained
actual belief, yet as the machinery of a: tale, it
was reckoned indispensably necessary.

Antar’s sword is certainly of original manu-
facture; and, though’ not enchanted, may be
cited by the side of Durindana, _ Indian blades,
Davidean armour, anid Aadite* casques are in-


® So called, either because they had endured from the .time of A.


Xxx PREFACE.


vested with all the properties of magic weapons,
whether of offence or defence. |

-~ No warrior appears with a skin impervious to
the sword’s edge. There is, however, one hero,
who is a mass of bone, and no arm but Antar’s
can strike a blow to crush so miraculous a
production. . Others are also designated under
the formidable appellation of earth-rakers; thus
called from their immense stature, so that, when
on horseback, their feet tore up the ground ; and
others are denominated ear-strippers, one liver-
eaters, Kc. |

The frequent allusion to dragons and sea

monsters in the poetry, and in the description of
assailing heroes, proves that, in those days, the
introduction of fabulous animals, distinct from
those mentioned in Persian books, was considered
a legitimate embellishment in romantic fiction,
But the only animal whose appearance is men-
tioned is the camelopard*, which is described


tribe of Aad, or as being very ancient, they bore that distinction to

testify their antiquity and durability.

© © It is called in Arabic, Jirafah, whence comes the Spanish Girafa,

-and the French Giraffe; thus rendering ıt probable, that though the
imal is exclusively of African origin, it only beeame known i in Europe
through the Arabs.


PREFACE. xxxiii


as a beast of burthen, employed to carry a huge
giant, as no other animal was sufficiently power-
ful to bear so vast a weight. But as it is as-
certained that the camelopard is not a beast of
burthen, it may safely be presumed, that though
its existence had been proved, its distinctive
qualities were unknown.

And thus, with all the paraphernalia of chival-
rous equipment, heroes come forth, not only in
fields of battle or single combat, but also at
marriages and entertainments, merely for trials
of skill in arms in the midst of a course, to tilt
and joust with barbless spears in the presence
of kings and chiefs, who proclaim the merits of
the victor and the vanquished, sometimes distri-
buting prizes, or awarding a contested point, or
even deciding the fate of some damsel, the ob-
ject of amorous contention between two devoted
champions; and not unfrequently do these com-
bats, which commence innocently, end in blood-
shed. : |

It is also worthy of remark, that these chiefs,
when bound on a marauding enterprise, often
meet with extraordinary adventures ; sometimes
forlorn maidens, whose distresses they relieve, or

VOL. I. d


XXXIV | PREFACE.


matrons, whose husbands and sons have been
‘slain, and even heroes of inferior stamp, whose
cause they will adopt, and thus either soften his
sorrows, Or die in his defence. It must ‘be ac-
knowledged, that they sometimes take advan-
tage of the unprotected state to which females
are reduced, when their attendants have resisted
the assaults of a stranger; but imstances of the
purest generosity, and the most chivalrous sen-
timents of honour and decency will often mark
their acts, and induce us to marvel, how nations
so barbarous in blood could ever be melted into
pity and tenderness.

Miracles of a sublimer nature, such as storms,
and timely aid in the extremest perils, and vi-
sitations of extraordinary import, are attributed
to the proper source of such interventions. The
Almighty is here the sole actor: his influence is
ever unquestioned. It is not often invoked, nei-
ther does it often appear; thus rendering it the
more efficacious, and creating corresponding.
sentiments of awe and gratitude in the minds of
those who may be either its victims, or the obe
jects of its favour. |

The name of Mohommed is used more than


PREFACE. XXXY


once as the instrument of divine vengeance, at
the moment he was supposed to have been born;
but at whose breast he was inhaling life was un-
known : his name had been alone revealed, and
the first mention of it infuses so great dread into
the Persian army, that they are instantly routed 5.
the name of Mohommed seeming to rise from
every pebble, and from every grain of sand. His
infant cries are also stated as the means of work-
ing a great miracle, in a second destruction of
the Persians. i

Sach are the people and the manners this
book purposes to describe, a subject never be:
fore attempted, either by Asiatic or European:
a subject that has hitherto been supposed devoid
of all- interest, and certainly considered as‘sus-
ceptible of no variety. A nation of shepherds,
dwelling in tents, surrounded by deserts, appears
at first sight, as the very antipodes of those nations
whose usages and habits have supplied matter
for romance and historic fiction. In minds thus
savagely constituted, where could love dwell?
Where could courtesy, discretion, and those
nameless decencies and distinctions, persons of
cultivated manners can only feel and express,


XXXVI PREFACE. g


find a place? And without minds thus happily
organised, and without sensibilities as easily
roused as lasting, pliant or obdurate, according
to the object that excites them into action, or
bidding defiance to repulse, inconstancy, and
dangers, how could chivalry feed its enthusiasm,
or imagination awaken into life?

But in this work we find all these A
reconciled. We see heroes capable of the wildest
enterprises, and subject to the most vehement
emotions, to secure the approbation of their
mistresses. We see damsels braving every peril,
smiling in captivity, to meet the objects of their
love. We moreover meet with heroines cased
in armour covering hearts at once steeled against
the lance’s point or falchion’s edge, and a prey
to the utmost ecstacies of enthusiastic fondness
and refined irritability *.

_ Such are the personages who now, for the first
time, are found to have inhabited the wilderness
of sands, under no cultivation of mind, and
bound by no moral restraint, but what love and
friendship excited and established. Few could


© M. Sismondi asserts, that in those days no Arabian women were
known to bear arms.


PREFACE. XXXVI


read or write. None were philosophers. Wis- .
dom had its only support in the influence at-
tached to advanced years. Their sages were
superior in age, and enjoyed a confidence among
the tribes that no one could uproot, and which
Antar only, by his martial prowess and univer-
sally admitted superiority, could thwart.

Whether these traits will tend to suggest fur-
ther materials to induce the learned to adopt the
theory, so much disputed, that romance and all
Its artificial charms come from the East, and
therefore coincide with the opinions already sup-
ported so energetically by the Editor of the first
volume, the Translator, unbiassed in his own
views on the subject, with no decided opinions
to render him difficult, of conviction to argu-
ments in favour of an opposite system, leaves
the point, here untouched, to be canvassed by
persons whose time has been more immediately
employed in such matters, and whose pursuits
have led them more accurately to distinguish
between the pretensions produced in defence of
either question.

The Translator has divided the work into


XXXVI PREFACE.


three parts, in which order it is his intention to
publish it.

The first reaches to the marriage of Antar and
Ibla; in which it is the object of the author to
raise his hero to a sufficient eminence in rank
among the Arabs, by his conquests over various
countries, and more particularly by his victories
over the individual chiefs and heroes, most con-
spicuous for their power, and whose haughtiness
and martial spirit could ill brook the elevation
of one sprung from a slave woman, in order that,
by reducing these warriors to submission, and
by gaining their good will and friendship, he
might, by means of his own intrepidity and the
intercession of his friends advocating his cause,
attain the chief object of his ambition ; his ac-
knowledgment as an Arab chief, and his subse-
quent marriage with Ibla.

The second part includes the period when the
hero suspends his poem at Mecca. This grand
point he at length attains, not only by the
friendly dispositions of his former associates,
and the continuance of his own heroic deeds,
but also by the means of his two sons and a


PREFACE. XXXIX


brother, whom he discovers amongst the heroes
of the desert. Encouraged by their counsels,
and urged by his own ambition, after various
conflicts and conquests, he resolves to crush the
eavious malice of his domestic foes, and in de-
spite ọf all the machinations contrived against
him, and the hostilities of all the most potent
kings of Arabia, he succeeds in accompuening
this second object of his ambition.

The third part comprises the death of Aitas,
and most of his comrades and relations; in the
course of which he wages endless wars against
the more distant tribes,—visits Constantinople
and Europe, and invades that part of Arabia in-
habited by the Æthiopians, amongst whom he
discovers his mother’s relations, and finds out
that she was the daughter of a mighty monarch,
and himself thus descended in both lines from a
majestic race. His last conquest is over his do-
mestic enemies. His death is consonant with
the rules of poetical justice. He falls under the
hand of one whom he might have justly punished
with death, but who was the object of cruelty he
had never practised on any one before, not even
his most inveterate foes.


xl PREFACE.


This division is not at all pursued in the ori-
ginal; but as it is evident that the publication
of the whole work at once was impossible, the
translator has endeavoured to render its appear-
ance less objectionable. He has also taken an-
other liberty, and has divided the work into
chapters according to his own fancy.

The copy of the original from which the trans-
lation is made is an uninterrupted narrative.
But the larger copy* he has in his possession,
as also one or two other copies he has seen, is
divided into sections of very great length. An-
‘other copy, which he only saw for a few mi-
nutes, appeared to be cut up into portions much
shorter than the chapters as now printed. This
is the only alteration he has deemed it advisable
to make. Perhaps it would have made the work
more generally acceptable, had he ventured even


* Mr. Burkardt procured this at Cairo for the translator; it may
be a matter of regret that it had not come to hand still sooner, as the
present translation was already finished. ‘Thus he was deprived of the
satisfaction of comparing the two copies as he proceeded in the works
and it will be acknowledged, that afterwards it became too serious a
task. Mr. Burkardt said, he did not think there was any material dif-
ference ; and wherever the translator has referred to the large copy, he
has only found greater redundancies, except in some instances where
improvements and addition have been made in the translation.


PREFACE. xli


to curtail this abridgment, and to omit many of
those reiterated repetitions, which, whilst they
tend to give an idea of the original composition,
materially damp the interest of the story in our
estimation, and certainly weary the general reader.
But where to begin, or where to stop, is difficult
to decide. To take the opinion of the ignorant
in oriental literature would be unwise in the ex-
treme. The advantage of the advice of oriental
scholars was by no means easy to obtain; and
of even one acquainted with the book in ques-
tion, quite impossible*. 4

Under these circumstances, the translator, un-
willing to quit his original without having some
decided landmark to guide him when deviating
from the straight course, has adhered as closely
as possible to the Arabic idiom, only endeavour-
ing to render it intelligible to the English reader;
and if he has succeeded at all in combining what
is rarely compatible, an easy English style with


* Even Mr. Burkardt had never read it through; neither can the
translator say that he ever heard of an European who had waded through
the Hijaziyeh copy, the only one hitherto known.

The Translator takes this opportunity of expressing his thanks to
C. J. Rich, Esq., the East India Company's resident at Bagdad, for
much useful information.


VOL. 1. e


xlii PREFACE.


the character of the Oriental, he will not con-
sider his persevérance misapplied, or his opinion
of the original as erroneous. If, on the other
hand, the public should form a different opinion,
he begs their judgment may rest solely on the
translation, and he will readily join in wishing
that the task had devolved on one more capable
of doing justice to its merits*.


© Since the above has been in the press, a long treatise on Antar,
translated from the German, has appeared in the two last numbers of
the “ New Monthly Magazine,” for January, and February, 1820,
with the signature of M.de Hammer. The Translator regrets that
its late publication prevents his deriving any benefit from the suggestions
of so accomplished an Oriental scholar as M. de Hammer, to whose
exertions in every department of Asiatic literature the world is so
much indebted. M. de Hammer mentions having twice read through
the whole work!


r


Tne BINDER is requested to prefix this pre-
face to the first volume when bound.


LIFE AND ADVENTURES


OF


ANTAR.


CHAPTER I.


Tsmuazt, son of Abraham, was the father of
Adnan, who had a son called Maad; and Maad
was the father of Nizar, whose four sons, Rebeeah,
Medher, Ayad, and Anmar, reigned over the Arabs
in great glory for many years, and their descendants
continued to flourish and multiply till they amounted
to twenty thousand horsemen, when disturbances
arising among them, they separated and migrated
from the valley of Mecca and the holy sanctuary, ,
and many of them settled in a spot called Ibreem-
oob-mootemim, which was the furthermost point of —
Hijaz, and the first in the land of Yemen. And
they had a king called Rebeeah, a man much
respected and feared, and he was of the tribe of


2


Medher, a fair-raced people ; and he had five sons,
the eldest was called Nayil, the second, Taweed,
the third, Mohelhil, the fourth, Medher, and the
fifth, Adee; and their father was a stout and intre-
pid warrior, he conquered the whole country by his
bravery, and ruled over the wilds and the deserts.

Again the Arabs disagreed amongst themselves
and dispersed, and every division had its chief and
its leader. They carried away their property and
their camels, and among them was Harith, son of
Obad the Yashkirite, with the tribe of Yashkir,
and the chief Dibyan with the tribe of Dibyan, and
the chief Abd Shems with his tribe, and Jazeemah
with the tribe of Abs and Adnan, and Bahiej
with the tribe of Ghiftan; and it was Jazeemah,
King of the tribe of Abs and Adnan that attacked
Rebeeah, and having slain him, appointed Mohelhil
to succeed his father. But on the death of Mohelhil
all his cousins went away with their property and
camels, afraid of the surrounding Arabs, and settled
with the tribe of Abs and Adnan, and their chief
Jazeemah ; and among all the Arabs there was no
government better regulated than his, for he was
experienced in all affairs, and had ten sons who were
all hardy lions, bold, endued with great bodily
strength, and in war they were unrivalled; they
courted battles and plunged into slaughter, and their
` reputation was spread among the Arabs, and among
them were Amroo and Jancah, and Asyed ‘and Zo-


8


heir, and the rest of the ten brothers. But Amroo
was the eldest, and King Jazeemah hoped that
Amroo would reign at his death. But one day
Amroo went to the lake Zatool Irsad, early in the
morning, and with him was a slave called Nizah;
and Amroo had round his neck a chain of gold
studded with jewels and diamonds; and when he
came to the lake he stripped off his clothes, and
took off the string of jewels from his neck, and then
going down into the lake left them all with his slave.
When he sprang into the water and plunged in,
his body disappeared, and was borne away.

The slave perceiving that his master remained too
long under water, felt assured that his breath was
extinct; so he ran away to Jazeemah, and told him of
this dreadful catastrophe. He was in the deepest
grief, and he dashed his fist against his face for the
loss of his son Amroo. Over the whole tribe the
dismay was general, the affliction was universal,
and the lamentations deep. Many days and nights
they remained in this state, when at last King Jazee-
mah, wishing to relieve his mind from his anguish,
went out to the chase, and whilst he was thus
occupied, lo! there appeared a fawn, which he
eagerly pursued ; but as it launched into the waste
im full flight, he could not catch it. Still he hoped
to succeed ; but at last it entered a forest abounding
in trees, and waters, and thickets, and Jazeemah
stil] pursued it. And whilst he was struggling


4


through the branches, behold a man quite naked
stood before him ! He fled away in terror, fancying
that it was a demon; O King! exclaimed the man,
be not afraid, for I am thy son Amroo! If thou
art my son, cried the King, follow me and quit this
spot. Jazeemah issued from the forest, and the
man coming up with him, he gazed at him, and
lo! he was his son! He was greatly rejoiced, and
running up to him, O my son, said he, what has
happened to thee ! who brought thee to this place ?
and thou art naked! So he explained all that had
occurred to him, and the cause of his being snatched
away from the lake was a demon, who bore him to
this place. His father joyed in seeing him, and
clothed him in some of his own garments, and re-
turned with him to his tribe and companions, and
unbounded was the delight and satisfaction at the
return of Amroo. Acclamations were loud, and the
time passed happily away, and they forgot the evils
of fortune.

All the Arabs took refuge with King Jazeemah,
and paid him taxes and tribute, and there was not
one but obeyed him and submitted, save a single
Queen, who was called Robab. And this Queen
was very powerful, and had numerous armies and
slaves. She had subdued the heroes, and humbled
the bravest, and her tribe, was the most intrepid
of the Arabs, and they were called the tribe of
Reejan. And when they heard that King Jazeemah


5


was become powerful and had extended his influ-
ence, and that the Arabs gave him tribute in cattle
and camels; We, said they, will not give any one
even a rope’s end, and whoever demand goods of
us, nothing will we give them but blows and battle.

Upon hearing this, Jazeemah assembled his
armies and warriors, and the Arabs came to him
from all the vallies and the waters, and he marched
away with them in quest of the tribe of Reeyan, and
their Queen Robab, that he might send down
destruction and torments upon them, and leave their
property to be pillaged by the Arabs. Now when
the tribe of Reeyan saw those armies that were ad-
vancing upon them, they set up a loud shout, and
they thronged in haste from all quarters, and the
mountains trembled at the uproar. This tribe was
exceedingly numerous, and moreover, they had been
jomed by a great multitude who came to them and

settled round them, to be under the protection of
that tribe and their Queen Robab; so great was her
reputation, and so far famed her name.

And when the armies arrived and were all
established about her, they waited in anxious
expectation of the event. So the Queen summoned
one of her tribe, a man of great consequence, and
sad to him—I wish thou wouldst go to these ad-
vancing people, and see what they are resolved to
do, what place they come from, and what they want.
The man went away; and when he came up with the


6


troops, they stopped. Whither in such haste? they
‘cried; speak ere thou art a lost man! Arabs, said
he, I am come as a messenger to ye; I want to see
your chief. Tell me what is your object ; who are
you? how are you called? We are the noble tribe
of Abs, said they; and we are come to devastate
your lands, and plunder your property, and capture
your wives and families. Arab Chiefs, he replied,
shew me your King, lead me to him, that I speak
with him about the object of this expedition. ‘They
accordingly introduced him to the King, and he
kissed the ground before him. Jazeemah asked
what he wanted, and what brought him there. So
he told him that Robab had sent him. O King!
he continued, what has brought thee forth from thy
country ? What is the cause of thy departure from
home? He then informed him that he was come to
slay the people, and to plunder their property
Mighty King! said the other, may God for ever
confirm thee in thy possessions ! Why wouldst thou
act thus towards us ? On account of your refractory
conduct towards me, said Jazeemah, and the lan-
guage I have heard; for all the Arabs have
submitted to my rule, and obeyed my call, and give
me tribute and taxes, all but you, ye cowards! and
I have heard of your base designs. But I must
assail you without further preparation, and I shall
command these armies, numerous as the locusts, to


assault you, and to grind you like grain, and to


7


ride you like lions. Return then to her who sent
thee, and tell her what I have said to thee.

So the messenger returned with this answer ; and
when he reached Robab, he communicated all he
had heard to her. Away back to him, said she,
and tell him to-morrow morning to sally forth into
the plain, and to meet me in the field of battle
before these horsemen. If he subdues me, I will
submit to him and pay him tribute; but if I van-
quish him, I will grant him his life, and take his
ransom, and by this means we shall spare the lives of
the people, and be released from war and carnage,
and then return home to our country.

The messenger returned to King Jazeemah, and
informed him of the conditions Robab had proposed.
He agreed, and consented, and immediately he
came dbwn to the field, and he was like a furious
lion; he galloped and charged before the warriors,
and rushed in to the scene of blows and thrusts.
Queen Robab dashed down on him, mounted on a
raven-coloured steed, strong-sinewed. She charged
with him over the plain till the horsemen were
amazed. Then they began the storm and bluster,
the sport and exertion, the give and take, the strug-
gle and the wrestle, and every eye gazed intently
on them, and every neck was stretched out at
them. Just then passed between them two match-
less spear-thrusts. King Jazeemah’s was the first,
so roused was he by the terrors and calamities that


1


8


threatened him. But when Robab beheld the spear-
thrust coming upon her, and that death was in it,
she bent herself forward till her breast touched the
horse, and the well-aimed thrust passed without
effect. She then replaced herself on her saddle, and
dashed furiously at him, and attacked him: she
struck him with horror, and drove the spear through
his chest, and forced out the point sparkling at his
back. He tottered from his horse, and his senses
were annihilated. Then the Arabs assailed one
another, and the earth shook beneath them. Blows
fell right and wrong, necks were hewn off, and
hoary beards were stained with blood. The strug-
gle was intense; and all the Arabs in those vallies
were in universal commotion, like so many Genii.
Soon fled the tribe of Abs and Adnan and all
their allies, and sought their homes and abodes in
fear of death and annihilation; neither did they
halt in their flight and rout till they reached their
own camp; and when they learnt the extent of their
misfortune, and how many kings and chiefs had
been slain, the lamentations were general. Calami-
ties struck them all; they threw down their tents
and pavilions; and thus they continued seven days
and nights, when King Amroo seated himself on the
throne of his father, and the Arabs came to con-
dole with him, and congratulated him on his king-
dom. But he lived only a short time, and when
he died his brother Zoheir succeeded him, and


9


reigned in glory and power. His authority was
universally acknowledged, and the Arabian tribes,
far and near, obeyed and feared him. His subjects
were happy under his dominion, on account of his
great influence, and chiefs hastened to testify their
allegiance. As soon as he was established on his
throne he resolved on taking his revenge, and for
this purpose he assembled his armies and auxiliaries,
and demanded the presence of all the Arabian


princes.

In a short time his troops were all prepared, and
immediately he set out on his expedition against
the hostile tribe of Reeyan and their Queen Robab.
He stopped not till he entered their country. As
soon as the Princess was informed of this invasion,
she called together her adherents, who came from
all parts and from the mountains; but they feared
for their families, and their wives, and their cattle
and camels. They marched eagerly to the conflict,
and delayed not a moment till they attacked the
tribe of Abs: they rushed forwards with the inten-
tion to destroy them. The two tribes soon engaged.
Fierce was the combat and loud the clamour on all
sides. The battle raged; dreadful were the blows
of the sabre, and frequent the rush of darts and
javelins; numbers were wounded; every warrior
stood firm; but the cowards fled: patient were the
noble hearted, but the weak sought safety in flight.
Many drank the bitter poison of death. King


10


Zoheir encountered the queen of Reeyan on the
field of battle, whilst she was encouraging her
troops. The King furiously assaulted her, and
exclaimed, “ Revenge for King Jazeemah.” He
then hurled his lance and struck her on the chest,
and forced out the weapon between her shoulders,
and again cried out—O by the noble Arabs! Their
only reply was a loud scream, and the battle still


= continued. But when the tribe of Reeyan saw the


Princess dead, and perceived their attempts were
frustrated, they were alarmed. Then rushed for-
ward the tribe of Abs, and attacked them with
renéwed violence. The Reeyanians were routed,
and fled towards their habitations;—the Absians
pursued them, and spread desolation among them ;
slew them with their swords, and dispersed them
amongst their wilds and deserts, until they reached
their country, where they took possession of their
tents and plundered their property. Zoheir re-
turned home and rejoiced in the execution of his
vengeance. He divided the wealth and lands of
all that belonged to his enemies among his own
people, and all the spoil was given to the rich and
poor, to his slaves and his chiefs. Many of the
hostile leaders were put to death: all the Arabs far
and near were terrified at the extent of his domi-
nion, and the power of his arm.

At this period the Caaba and the holy Mecca
were visited, as at this day. Numerous were the


1]


pilgrims at the shrine of Abraham. Sacred were the
months of pilgrimage; and had a man even killed
his father at that period, his crime was never men-
tioned. Zoheir, after he had accomplished these
glorious deeds, wished to make a pilgrimage;
which he executed, attended by all the chiefs of |
his tribe. His admiration was great in performing
the ceremony of walking round the Caaba, and in
kissing the sacred stone. On his return home, he
was anxious to erect a building similar to the sacred
altar, whither pilgrims should resort, where tra-
vellers might be entertained, and the hungry fed,
and the fearful be in security; in whose precincts
no beasts of prey should be chased; no blood
should be shed; and a transgressor of my law shall
be instantly put to death with this sword, he ex-
claimed. These sentiments he expressed to his
tribe assembled in council. All were in dismay at
this resolution, but no one dared to disapprove or
make any answer. But an old Shiekh, who had
passed all his days in perusing ancient chronicles,
and was well acquainted with all the sayings of the
wise men, who acknowledged the unity of God, the
maker of the heavens and the earth, ventured forth,
and expostulated with Zoheir, tel'ing him the Caaba
was the mansion of the blessed Abraham, and were
he to presume to imitate it, a cruel death would
avenge the insult; and thus he addressed him :—

“ O great King, O Son of noble chiefs! hold and


12


“ listen to my words, and renounce the habits of
s“ the ignobly born. Mount not the’ horse of
s“ Outrage, for it will not rescue thee from the
‘‘ messengers of Death: and soon mayest thou ex-
“‘ pect him, should’st thou erect in the desert a
« mansion like the sacred shrine of the Caaba
‘¢ shouldst: thou establish similar rites and ceremonies
“and resemblances to Menah and Zengein and the
“ temple. Away, away, their land is the land of a
“ tribe superior to all mankind ; and from them shall
“ appear a noted man, the prophet of God, the torch
‘¢ of darkness, whose faith shall extend east and west
« with the death bearing-sword of a noble warrior.
& Away with what thou hast said, for thy God is swift
“‘ of vengeance.”

The King was not easily dissuaded, but at last
gave way to the argument of the Chief, and no
longer persisted in his resolution: he was moreover
induced to resign his plan in compliance with all his
Chiefs, who seconded the word of the Shiekh. In
this situation remained King Zoheir for some years;
when he became anxious to marry, and to take a
wife eminent for her beauty, and elegance of form,
and of a noble family. He made all enquiries on
the subject, and at last heard there was an Arab,
strong and mighty in arms, and a famous horseman,
called Amroo, son of Shedeed, and he had a daugh
ter whose name was Temadhur, whose equal was to
be found neither in the plains nor in the cities. Her


18


father was a severe man, and would let no one
address her, saying his daughter would not marry.
When Zoheir heard this, he longed for her as a
thirsty man wishes to have water. He pictured to
himself her perfections, before he had ascertained
her worth by enquiries. However, he did not send
to demand her in marriage, but made her father
some handsome presents, and evinced the greatest
fondness for him, making him one of his particular
companions, and thus gained his affections. He then
persuaded him to come and settle in his country,
expressing his great love for him; and thus he
never ate or drank but in his society. ~

The excess of his passion increased daily, to such
a degree, that he resolved to assemble a party of his
followers called the tribe of Ghorab, and instruct
them to attack the family of Amroo, and plunder
his property, but not to kill any one, or do any
personal injury. So by this stratagem he expected
to discover Temadhur among his prisoners, and then
have an opportunity of speaking to her. The tribe of
Ghorab were accordingly ordered on this expedition,
and instantly they set out, in number five hundred.
Without difficulty they seized the property, took
Amroo prisoner with his wife and family, and
plundered his camels and cattle, but refrained from
slaying any one. When the King heard what had
happened, he mounted his horse an order to behold
~ what he anxiously desired. He found them in dismay,


14


expecting assistance from the tribe of Abs. - The
family were looking at their flocks dispersed about,
but Temadhur was standing at the door of the tent,
blooming as the dawning sun, and her forehead bright
as its rays, and her cheeks were red as the piony,
her hair dishevelled, black as night. When Zoheir
saw this, his passion greatly increased; he cried
out, and instantly his people rushed forward and
furiously attacked the tribe of Ghorab: the women
fled, but Zoheir ordered Rebia, son of Jead, to hide
Temedhur under her veil, which was accordingly
done.

Thirty prisoners were secured belonging to the
tribe of Ghorab; they and their property were de-
livered up ; and when quiet was restored, the King
ordered a magnificent feast to be prepared, that he
might make merry with his tribe and followers. They
and the fatherof Temadhur soon assembled together,
and in less than an hour grief was converted into
joy; the wine was plentifully distributed, and the
uproar was great. The King soon became intoxica-
ted, and launched out into violent praise of Amroo
the son of Shedeed ; and he ceased not to extol and
laud his deeds till the tears came into his eyes, and
the wine disordered his senses. Then Amroo got
on his legs and addressed Zoheir :—-O mighty and
magnanimous King, I am your slave. My tongue
fails in description of your virtues. God has given
me nothing that I prize butmy daughter Temadhur,


15


from whom I have kept all suitors. I request of ye,
assembled Chiefs, that he may accept her as his
handmaiden.

As soon as Zoheir heard this, he rejoiced and was
glad; and the Absians answered, and we too will
beg King Zoheir to accept her, and to cause the
daughters of noble chiefs to wait on her. As soon
as Zoheir heard these words, he leaped up, and
taking the old man by the hand, most earnestly
entreated him to consent. He richly clothed him,
and made him handsome presents, and then said,
She shall be, O Chief, equal to the most elevated .
in rank, and highest in dignity. The marriage
canopy was instantly pitched, and there was no
further demur. The damsels advanced conducting
the concealed treasure. Her approach was at that
moment sweeter to him than sleep to the wearied
eyelids, and he beheld in her the stem of a tall reed,
and the rose of the soul. They were immediately
united ; on the second day Zoheir arose and thanked
his fortune, irritated as he had been. He made
presents, and distributed the gold and silver, and he
made Amroo’s people remain with him, that he
might treat them for seven days, when he made the
marriage-feast, slaughtering camels and sheep.

The King’s surprise and delight made him so
van and conceited, that at last he imparted to his
wife the stratagem by which he had obtained her
without a dower or settlement. When she heard


16


this, her soul revolted at the act. She was a shrewd
sensible woman, but she said nothing to him about it
all the next day; when intoxicated, he wished to caress
her, she repulsed him, and turning away from him,
said—Are you not ashamed of what you have
done? Do you pretend to liberality and generosity,
and thus seize the daughters of brave men by force,
and refuse them a dower?

These words irritated the Chief greatly, and he
answered, I have not been so avaricious; I had
recourse to this violent act, because your father
yielded not to my proposals, and repulsed all sui-
tors from you. I had therefore no other means of
dealing with him but by this outrage; and you
know, that had your father accepted my proposals
for marriage at first, then you would have seen what
I would have given you, and the dower I would
have presented. You have confessed the deed, she
replied, and you have won me by force; this is the
work of violence; but we are indeed more cunning
than you.

As soon as Zoheir heard these words he was
greatly enraged, and his anger exceeded all bounds:
he rose from his bed and exclaimed, Where have
you seen any folly in me? and where, as you say,
are you more sagacious than I am? Be not angry,
O King, said she; know that he who speaks too
freely will often have a bitter reply, and he who
contemptuously treats women, will get into difficul-


Fi


ties. Know then that I am the sister of that woman
you beheld, so beautiful and fair; you have not
succeeded with her, and have not obtained posses-
sion of her charms. She is more beautiful than the
sun and moon. I am not worthy to be her hand-
maid. I do not possess a particle of her charms.
On the face of the earth there is not her equal:
amongst the daughters of Arabia there is not her
like. By your show of liberality you deceived my
father ; he gave me to you ; but my sister’s name is
Temadhur, at the sight of whom every beholder is
amazed, and every heart is in raptures. But I am
called Khidaa; and between her and me there is a
vast distance, both in beauty and disposition ; but
it is now too late: had you not done this, £ would
not have informed you of what has passed.

The pleasing dream fled. How can I believe you?
said the King. If, said she, you wish to prove my
words, you have only to order some old woman to
go and look at my sister behind her veil, and then
the truth and mistake will be evident. No human
being can behold your sister, added he, but a mer-
chant, or a blacksmith, or an astrologer, or a
perfumer. You are right, she replied, for the
daughters of Arabia value the goods of a
merchant, a blacksmith, an astrologer, and a per-
fumer. Then, said the King, there is no intelli-
gence like the eyes, and no sight like the hearing
of the ears. I am myself an Arab, and I must

c


18


undertake the business myself. I will execute all
that is necessary, and will go to your house in the
form of a perfumer.

He slept till the day dawned, when he said to his
attendants, If any one should demand admittance
to me to-morrow, say You cannot enter today. He
undressed himself and took off his royal robes, and
habited himself as a poor man, and took with him .
some perfumes and drugs ; for he was greatly vexed
at what had passed. He departed from his tent, his
loins girt round, and his feet naked, and when he
was at some distance he quickened his pace.

But his wife Temadhur, as soon as the King was
gone, also rose, and threw off her veil, and putting
on the cloak of her husband, dressed herself as a
man, and leaving the tent, sought the tent of her
family. When she reached it, she sent for her
mother, and her father, and her brothers, and told
them all she had heard from the King her husband.
When her father and brothers heard this, they were
greatly surprised at her cunning and her disguise.
She kissed her father, and said to him, Do you and
my brothers withdraw instantly and conceal your-
selves close at hand; and when King Zoheir
arrives and comes towards us, with his cloak-bag
over his shoulders, we will let him in and detain
him ; do you also rush in, and instantly lay hold of
him, keep him fast, and do not let him go until
he makes good the marriage dower; or we shall


19


be a scandal among the Arabs. And if he abuses
you -for this, tell him it is a return for his acts
towards us, and the disgraces his stratagem has
brought on your daughter. On this, they retired,
armed themselves with swords, and lay concealed.
Temadhur took off her man’s attire, and put on the
robes of a secluded female, and drew her veil over |
her eyes, and blackened her eyelids with antimony,
and sat down, expecting Zoheir would arrive, conver-
sing in the mean time with her mother.

Zoheir soon appeared ftom amongst the tents,
and his eyes were like the eyes of a fox. Temad-
hur’s mother cried out, Enter, merchant ; have you
any perfumes that will suit my daughter? He
entered, and throwing down his cloak-bag off. his
shoulders, and looking towards his wife, said, Are
the perfumes for this damsel? Yes, said she. He was
much confounded, but asked her name. She said,
Temadhur. He then asked, Have you any other
daughter? Yes, said she, her sister, whose name is
Khidaa; but when King Zoheir demanded her in
marriage, we did not consent to it, and so gave him
her sister. He knows nothing about it, but we
-bope to marry her to one of the noblest chiefs.

The light became darkness in his eyes. He
thought within himself, verily I will carry off this
damsel, and her father and brothers shall die with
rage. And when he wished that they would choose
some of his drugs, that he might return, the father


20


and brothers rushed upon him like lions, seized
him, and bound him hand and foot. His wife stood
before him, and threw off her veil, and rejoicing in
her heart, O King, said she, what think you of your
situation and your artifices? Who of us is the most
cunning ?

The King was in despair, and considered himself
as dead; but when he saw his wife, his life and
spirits revived. Well, said he, what do you intend
by this? Your disgrace for your acts towards us,
replied she, and your boast in having got possession
of me by fraud and deceit; and we swear by God
and Abraham, we will not let you go, neither shall
you see me yield to you, or listen to you, or obey
you, until you grant me a favour, and swear by the
Holy Zemzen that you will give to my father and
brethren your protection, and confirm my marriage —
with a grant of camels and other beasts. Do this
immediately, or you shall for ever remain in durance.

When Zoheir heard what she said, he smiled at
what she had done, and was ashamed of his own
deeds. I will give you, said he, five hundred camels ;
so now let me go. It is not enough for one hour
that I have been your wife, said she. I will more-
over, continued he, add five hundred high priced
camels, That, said she, will be even little for a
single day. If, O Temadhur, cried Zoheir, you
must reckon up every hour of each night, and each
day, and buy them as at a market, you will take


21


from me all my property, both my he-camels and
she-camels. Upon that she smiled, and let him loose,
and they settled the business between them, viz.
that he should give them a thousand he and she-
camels, twenty horses, fifty male slaves, and fifty fe-
male. To this he swore by the God of the holy
shrine of Zemzem and Mekam. They then went
to dinner, and he remained with them until dark,
when he returned with his wife, her father and
brothers in company until they came to his tent;
there they seperated, King Zoheir retiring to his
wife; and as his love for her greatly increased by
reason of her conduct, he gave her vast possessions ;
but no one knew what had happened to him, and
things remained in this state until she brought forth
ten sons, all like lions ; of whom were Shas, Keseer,
Cais, Nakshel, Malik, Nooful, Harith, Khidash,
Warcah, Gandil, and afterwards one daughter,
who was Mootejeredah.

And it was a custom among the Arabs, that when
a woman brought forth ten male children, she
should be called Moonejeba, i. e. ennobled, and her
namebe published amongst the Arabs; and they used
to say that the wife of such a one is ennobled. Now
Mootejeredah, the daughter of King Zoheir, was
the beauty of the age, and in wit and sense surpas-
sed all the daughters of Arabia. And Fatima, the
daughter of Hewseb, was also a Moonejeba, the
wife of Zeead, the son of Abdallah, and she also


22


brought forth ten sons; they were called Rebis,
Amarah, Ans, Hafiz, Talib, Ghalib, Dinrak,
Amroo, and Zitak. Thus the children of Zoherr,
and Carad, and Zeead, became the chiefs of the
tribe of Abs, and their noble leaders, particularly
the family of Carad, who consisted of Shedad,
Malek, and Zakhmet-ool Jewad, who were all illus-
trious warriors. King Zoheir was established im his
dominions, and all the Arabs and Kings of the age
obeyed him, and sent him presents from every
quarter. And the tribe of Abs passed their time
in plundering and killing the chieftains, till all
Arabia was overawed by their power, and all the
dwellers of the deserts feared them.

Now the narrators of this History, Asmael, and
Zoheinah, and Aboo Obeidah state, that ten horse-
men of the family of Carad quitted the country to
seek their fortunes, and among them was Shedad
the son of Carad, and he was called the Knight of
Jirwet, for his mare was called Jirwet, whose like
was unknown. Kings negotiated with him for her,
but he would not part with her, and would accept
of no offer or bribe for her; and thus he used to
talk of her in his verses :

“ Seek not to purchase my horse, for Jirwet is not
“ to be bought or borrowed. I am a strong castle
s on her back, and in her bounds is glory and great-
“ ness. I would not part with her were strings of
“ camels to come to me with their shepherds follow


23 >»


<< ing them. She flies with the wind without wings,
<< and tears up the waste and the desert. I will keep
<<‘ her for the day of calamities, and she will rescue
<< me when the battle-dust rises.”

The party set out from the land of Shuerebah;
the ten were all reputed warriors and famed horse-
men; they were all clothed in iron armour and
brilliant cuirasses; their object was to obtain horses
and camels. They continued their journey till
they entered the country of Cahtan: they lay con-
cealed all day, and only travelled by night. At
length they reached the mountains of Aja and
Selma ; and there, between two hills, they discovered
a wealthy tribe, possessed of considerable property
and great riches; they were called the tribe of
Jezeela. Numerous were their tents, and their
dwellings, and their warlike weapons, &c., and the
camp was like the boisterous sea dashing its waves,
so numerous were their slaves, and attendants, and
their horses of various colours. It was a tribe under
no apprehension from the changes of fortune.

And when the Absians perceived their vast wealth
and prosperous situation, they feared to attack them,
so they accordingly quitted them and made for their
pasture ground, where they perceived a thousand
camels grazing, there being much grass in that spot,
and with them was a black woman, who was watch-
ing them. She was uncommonly beautiful and well-
shaped; her appearance was elegant and striking ;


. 24


and with her were two children, looking after the
camels and running about. As soon as the Absians
saw the camels, they attacked them, and hunted
them like hares with their spears, then drove them
away, together'with the woman and children; yet
keeping in the rear, ready to attack whoever might
overtake them; and they had not gone far ere the
people came after them, crying out, Whither would
flight secure you, you wretches? here are we in |
pursuit of you. Verily your feet have borne you to
your ruin and destruction. Upon this the Absians
fixed their spears, and gave the reins to their horses,
and met their assailants, pouncing down on them
like falcons. They stood firm of soul, and pled
their lances among them: blood flowed, and the
horsemen were stretched on the earth, where: they
left them as carrion for the wild beasts of the desert.
The tribe of Jezeelah fled, unable to resist the foe,
and retreated to their own country, their heroes
being slain and their property captured.

The Absians drove away the camels and cattle,
and returning home, they halted by the side of a
stream, in order to divide the property. But the
woman who was carried off with the camels had
made a great impression on the heart of Shedad,
and he longed for her in his soul; her form was
delicate, her eye inspired love, her smile was
enchanting, and her gestures graceful. As the poet
has said, “ In blackness there is some virtue, if you


25


<< observe its beauty well, thy eyes do not regard the
<c white or red. Were it not for the black of the mole
“on a fair cheek, how would lovers feel the value
“of its brilliancy. Were not musk black, it would
“not be precious. Were it not for the black of
“ night, the dawn would not rise. Were it not for
“the black of the eye, where would be its beauty ?
“and thus it is, that the black ambergris has the
“ purest fragrance.” He therefore took the woman,
and gave them the booty, that they might renounce
her. So he kept her to himself.

This woman's name was Zebeeba, and the two
children were her’s; the eldest was called Jereer,
and the youngest Shiboob. He remained with the
woman in the field, and the children tended the
flocks. Shedad visited her morning and evening ;
and thus matters continued till she became pregnant;
and when her time came, she brought forth a boy, black
and swarthy like an elephant, flat nosed, blear eyed,
harsh featured, shaggy haired; the corners of his
lips hanging down, and the inner angles of his eyes
bloated ; strong boned, long footed; he was like a
fragment of a cloud, his ears immensely long, and
with eyes whence flashed sparks of fire. His shape,
limbs, form, and make resembled Shedad ; and She-
dad was overjoyed at seeing him, and called him
Antar, and for many days he continued to gaze on
him with delight. But when Zebeeba wished to
wean him, he grumbled and growled exceedingly,


26 `


and the corners of his eyes became fiery red, so that
he appeared like a mass of crimson blood ; and this
was his condition till he was weaned. And he grew
up, and his name became known; but those who
had accompanied Shedad in the expedition, having
heard of him, all wanted to claim him as theirs.
So they all assembled and hastened to him, each
imagining he belonged to him, and gave him his
name; tillat last they disputed about him, and
almost drew their swords, and would have fought,
had not respect for King Zoheir prevented them.
The circumstance soon reached the King, who
ordered them to his presence; and it happened on
that day that he had many guests with him at
dinner; and whilst they were sitting down, Shedad
and his companions came and kissed the greund
in the presence of the King. He asked them what
had happened, and what was the cause of the
quarrel. They then informed him, and related all
that had passed between Shedad and the woman ìn
their excursion ; how he had taken her to himself,
and had given them the plunder; how she bare him
a son, whose shape and appearance resembled a
negro, and how they now all claimed the child as
their slave, because he was very stout and strong.

When Zoheir heard this adventure he was greatly
surprised, and he said to Shedad, I wish you would
produce the young slave that is the object of con-
tention, that I may see him. Upon that, Shedad


27


departed and brought Antar before him; and the
King beheld him, and lo! he was like a lion when
he roars. As soon as he saw him he gave a loud
scream, and threw a piece of meat at him ; but a dog
that was there got before him, and snatched up the
meat like a hawk, and ran away. But Antar fol-'
lowed him till he came up with him ; he was great-
ly enraged, and seized hold of him with all his
strength. He wrenched open his jaws, and tore
them in twain even to the shoulders, and snatched
the meat out of his mouth. When the King saw
this, he was astonished, and the Arab chiefs that
were present were amazed ; and exclaimed, what in-
genuity, what power, strength, and ability! O my
friends, said King Zoheir, contend no more about
such a wretch as this! but if it is absolutely neces-
sary that this business should be decided, I must
refer you to the Cadi Bashar, son of Codha’ah the
Fazarean, let him give sentence on this point, and
settle to whom this slave belongs. Tell him the
story, for he is the Cadi of the Arabs.

When they heard King Zoheir’s remarks, they
instantly withdrew their hands from their swords,
and mounting their horses, went before the Cadi,
to whom they explained what had happened. In
fine, the Cadi decided that the child should be the
property of Shedad ; for he was their leader, and
no one but him had any connexion with the woman.
You agreed to the partition, said he, and he affixed


28


his name to him; you have therefore resigned the
woman, and you took your share of the spoil and
plunder; besides, the~ child resembles Shedad.
Contend and be at variance no more, but return in
peace and quietness. Thug, as soon as the Arab
‘chiefs heard the Cadi’s sentence, they yielded ; and
when they reached their homes, they passed their time
in friendship and comfort. Soon after, Shedad made a
separate house for Zebeeba and her children, and he
gave her whatever she wanted, and consigned over to
her charge her twochildren, and also gave her particu-
lar injunction about her youngest son called Antar.
Now Antar was becoming a big boy, and grew
up, and used to accompany his mother to the pas
tures, and he watched the cattle; and this he conti-
nued to do till he increased in stature. He used to
walk and run about to harden himself, till at length
his muscles were strengthened, his frame altogether
more robust, and his bones more firm and solid, and
his speech correct. He then began to tyrannize
over boys of the same age, and beat his brothers ;
and when he returned from the pastures he amused
himself with the servants and women, and he would
eat nothing but what he liked; and whoever
offended him he would thrash with a stick; till he
tortured him, and all the tribe were his enemies.
He used to employ himself in tending the flocks,
and as he conducted them, he wandered about the
deserts and plains, and loved solitude and retirement.


29


His days were passed in roaming about the moun-
tains sides, sometimes riding upon the dogs, by which
he acquired courage and intrepidity ; and thus he -
went on till he attained his tenth year. One day he
was wandering over the’ deserts with the flocks, and
when the sun was burning hot, he left his people
and climbed up a tree and took shelter from the
heat, whilst the flocks grazed, and he watched them;
when lo! a wolf started from behind the trees, and
dispersed them. But Antar seeing how the animal
had dispersed the herds, he descended and ran after
him till he overtook him, and struck him with his
staff between the eyes; he made the oil of his brains
fly out from between his ears, and slew him ; he then
cut off his head and his legs, and returned growling
like an angry lion. And so thou wouldst devour
Antar’s flocks? cried he, addressing himself to the
dead wolf; but thou dost not know that he is a
savage lion. He put the head and legs into the scrip
he had with him; leaving the carcase, he returned
to the flocks, and thus spoke.—

s Oh thou wolf, eager for death, I have left thee
4 wallowing in dust, and spoiled of life, thou wouldst
<‘ have the run of my flocks, but I have left thee
“ dyed with blood—thou wouldst disperse my sheep,
“and thou knowest I am a lion that never fears.
«c This is the way I treat thee, thou dog of the desert.
<: Hast ever before seen battle and wars ?”

About evening Antar reached his dwelling ; his


30


mother took the basket from him, and there she
saw the wolf’s head and legs. She was quite con-
founded, but said nothing. She presented them to
Shedad, who only desired her not to let him stray
about. Do thou and he mind the cattle, and go not
far into the wilds, lest some foe meet thee. Zebeeba
promised obedience to the words of her lord, and
the next day she departed with her three children
to the pastures, whither they drove the herds to
graze among the plains and the hills. But Antar
rode about the country on the horses, and obtained
strength and agility by the exercise ; he drove them
over the steeps, hurling his reed spear at the trunks
of the trees; and his mother concealed these circum-
stances from his father, fearing he would beat him
or kill him. It was thus he became bold and hardy ;
his limbs were robust, his bodily powers increased,
and his mind was improved by courage and intre-
pidity. And when a camel would stray away, he
would cry out and make it stop, and he would


` - struggle with and subdue the mightiest of the herds;


and when he seized one by the tail, he tore it off ;
and when they resisted him, he would strike them
on the back of the head, or tear open their mouths ;
and thus he continued his feats tll all the servants
were afraid of him, and every one far and near
dreaded him.

Now King Zoheir had two hundred slaves that
tended his herds of he and she-camels, and all his


31


sons had the same. Shas was the eldest of his sons,
and heir to his possessions, and Shas had a slave
whose name was Daji, and he was a great bully.
Shas was very fond of him on account of his vast
bodily strength; and there was not a slave but
feared him and trembled before him: Antar how-
ever made no account of him, and did not care for
him. One day the poor men, and widows, and
orphans met together and were driving their camels
and their flocks to drink, and were all standing by
the water side. Daji came up and stopped them all,
and took possession of the water for his master’s
cattle. Just then an old woman belonging to
the tribe of Abs came up to him, and accosted
him in a suppliant manner, saying, Be so good,
master Daji, as to let my cattle drink; they are
all the property I possess, and I live by their
milk. Pity my flock and cover my nakedness; have
compassion on me and grant my request, and let
them drink. But he paid no attention to her demand,
and abused her. She was greatly distressed and
shrunk back. Then came another old woman and
addressed him, O master Daji, I am a póor weak
old woman, as you see; time has dealt hardly with
me, it has aimed its arrows at me; and its daily and
nightly calamities have destroyed all my men. I
have lost my children and my husband, and since
then I have been in great distress; these sheep are
all I possess; let them drink, for I live on the


32


milk they produce. Pity my forlorn state; I have
no one to tend them, therefore grant my request,
and be so kind as to let them drink.

As soon as Daji heard these words, and perceived
the crowd of'women and men, his pride increased,
and his obstinacy was not to be moved, but he
struck the woman on the stomach, and threw her
down on her back, and uncovered her nakedness,
whilst all the slaves laughed at her. When Antar
perceived what had occurred, his pagan pride played
throughout all his limbs, and he could not endure
the sight. He ran up to the slave, and calling out
to him, You bastard, said he, what mean you by
this disgusting action? Do you dare to violate an
Arab woman? May God destroy your limbs, and


- all that consented to this act.


When the slave heard what Antar said, he
almost fainted from indignation; he met him, and
struck him a blow over the face that nearly knocked
out his eyes. Antar waited till he had recovered from
the blow, and his senses returned ; he then ran at
the slave, and seizing him by one of the legs, threw
him on his back. He thrust one hand under his
thighs, and with the other he grasped his neck, and
raising him by the force of his arm, he dashed him
against the ground. And his length and breadth
were all one mass. When the deed was done: his
fury was unbounded, and he roared aloud even as


alion. And when the slaves perceived the fate of


33


Daji, they shrieked out to Antar, saying, You have
slain the slave of Prince Shas! What man on earth
can now protect you? They attacked him with
staves and stones, but he resisted them all; he
rushed with a loud yell upon them, and proved him-
self a hardy warrior, and dealt among them with his
stick as a hero with his sword.

Now among the sons of Zoheir there was one
whose name was Malik, and because he was of a
mild and gentle disposition, he was beloved of men
and women ; and his father Zohbeir adored him for
the sweetness of his temper, and gentleness of
his conduct. It so happened that on this day he
went out with a numerous train to hunt, and pas-
smg that way he heard some confused cries, and
perceived a great dust. On approaching the place,
he observed a number of slaves surrounding one
man, whom he discovered to be Antar; the blood
streamed from all parts of his body from the blows
they struck him with sticks and stones; yet he was
determined to die sooner than give way. When the
Prince saw this, his eyes filled with tears, and in pity
he cried out, God prosper thee for a noble slave ;
how hard are thy blows, how vast thy power! and
then, addressing the slaves, he said, Accursed be
your fathers, and your abandoned mothers! Do you
not fear the punishment and condemnation of every
one far and near? Why have you collected in such
numbers, and all conspired against one poor fellow,


D


34


and thus to vent your fury on one much younger than
yourselves? Away, or I will destroy you all, both high
and low, with this sword. He then went to Antar, to
learn what'was the matter, and he heard him growling
like a furious lion, and repeating these verses.

«© my soul! strive not to fly, thou cans’t not
« escape when death seeks thee; death is predestined;
“it will come in some shape or other. Endure then
‘‘ with the patience of one nobly born. Fly not from
“the fears of death, or thou wilt remain scorned
“ among the Arab chiefs.”

The Prince desired Antar to explain the business,
which he did, and told him all that had happened
between Daji and the old woman ; how he had struck
her, and thrown her on her back; how he hal
uncovered her person, and made the people laugh at
her. I then came up to prevent him; he struck me
in the eye and nearly killed me; but I seized him with
my band, and dashed him against the ground. I
broke. his bones, and then his slaves attacked me,
and wanted to seize me in revenge; but I thought
proper to defend myself: had you not arrived I
should have been killed.

When Prince Malik heard this, his admiration
of Antar increased, and. he was convinced he was a
_ hero, and that there was not such another alive.
Walk by my side, said he, I will protect you against
every one that exists under the heavens, against all
who eat bread and drink water. Antar bowed down


35


before him and kissed his feet: in his stirrup, and
walked on with the slaves. But when they came
nigh the tents, there appeared his brother Shas ; in
his hand was a flaming sword, and under him
a steed swifter than a cloud when it rains, and his
bosom was charged with fury and indignation, and
he was about to slay Antar. When his brother
Malik saw him, he was aware if he did not keep him
away from Antar, he would injure him. How is it
I see thee so disturbed ? said he. Know, said Shas,
this accursed Antar has killed my servant, and I
am come to cut his body in pieces with this sword.
You must not touch him, said Malik ; he who dares
to oppose him is a dead man. I have given him my
protection; I will not be separated from him ; sooner
will I forfeit my head.

Shas took no notice; but fixed hiseyes on Antar,
who was walking by the side of his brother. He
no longer heeded his brother ; but ran at Antar,
that he might put him to death-with tortures.
Then too, Prince Malik was enraged; he drew
his sword from the scabbard; the two brothers
soon became so violent that their disputes would
have ended in a battle, had not King Zoheir, who
had been informed of what was passing, instantly
joined them. Malik was abashed in the presence
of his father, and Shas also quitted his brother.
O my son, said Zoheir, give this slave to me and
to your brother Malik, and I will in lieu of him
give youtenof mine. - Upon that, Shas retreated


36


in shame from the presence of his father. Why did
you kill my son’s servant, said Zoheir to Antar, and
thus disgrace him? and Antar wept at these words :
he related what had occurred, how the servant had
thrown the woman on her back, and rendered her
an object of derision among the servants. The King
assured him he approved of his conduct, and turning
towards the Chiefs about him, This valiant fellow,
said he, has defended the honour of women; he will
shine a noble warrior, and destroy his opponents; and
then looking at Shedad, your son’s conduct reflects
credit on you; he added, his behaviour will remain
as a memorial to all generations; he has loathed
oppresion and violence, and has followed the Bin of
propriety and virtue.

Shedad on that day, when in the presence of the
King, was much alarmed about his slave Antar,
because he was considered as compromising all
about him. Take away your son, said Zoheir to
him, I give hfm to you; take care of him until I
demand him of you again, and be not at all annoyed.
From that day both King Zoheir and his son Mahk
conceived a great affection for Antar, and as Antar
returned home, the women and their daughters all
collected round him to ask him what had happened;
amongst them were his aunts, and his cousin, whose
name was Ibla.

Now Ibla was younger than Antar, and a merry
lass; she was lovely as the full moon, and perfectly
beautiful and elegant. She frequently joked with


37


Antar, and was very familiar with him, as he was
ber servant. As soon as she came up to him on that
day, O you base-born, she cried, why didst thou kill
the slave of Prince Shas? who can now protect thee
from him? Indeed, my mistress, he replied, I did no
more than he deserved, for he had insulted a poor
woman ; he threw her down, and made the servants
laugh at her. Thou hast acted most properly, said
Ibla, smiling, and we are rejoiced that thou art safe,
‘for thou knowest our mothers consider thee as their
son, and we look on thee asa brother, on account
of thy services. On this the women and girls
left him.

Now it was always Antar’s business to wait upon
all the women of the family of Carad, after he had
finished his duty towards Semeeah, his father She-
dad's wife, whose attendant he was. It was a custom
among the Arab women at that period, to drink
camel’s milk both morning and evening ; it was the
servants office to milk it, and cvol it in the wind.
Now Antar always performed this office for Se-

_meeah, Shedad’s wife first, and then for his aunts,
the wives of his uncles Zakmet-ool Jewad and Malik,
and for Ibla, the daughter of the latter. He con-
tinued to execute this service for a long time; but
one day he entered the house of his uncle Malik,
and found his aunt combing his cousin Ibla’s hair,
which flowed down her back, dark as the shades of
might. Antar was quite surprised, but Ibla ran


38


away as soon as Antar had entered and seen her, as
her sable locks waved to the ground behind her.
This increased Antar’s astonishment ; he was greatly
agitated, and could pay no attention to any thing;
he was anxious and thoughtful, and when by him-
self burst forth into the following strains,

« That fair maid lets down her ringlets, and she is
“ completely hid in her hair, which appears like the
“dark shades of night. It is as if she were the
“brilliant day, and asif the night had enveloped her’
“in obscurity. It is as if the full moon was shining
“in its splendour, and all the stars were concealed
“by its lustre. Her charms bewitch all around her,
«and all are anxious to offer their services; they
« liye in her beauties and loveliness, and they are
«imbued with sweetness from her perfections, and
« receive new spirit from her graces. Revile me not
“ for my love of her, for I am distracted for her,
“and live but as the victim of my love. I will
“conceal my affection in my soul till I can see
« that I am sufficiently fortunate one day to serve
‘¢ her.”

Antar’s anguish daily became more oppressive.
It now happened to be the time of the pilgrimage to
the holy shrine, and the worship of their idols; and
the women and children being left behind in the
camp, the warriors and chiefs came out for the feast
at a spot called Zatool Irsad, whence they departed
for the sacred place. Accordingly they all met, and


39


the children sung and danced. Ibla was amongst
them, richly dressed, playing and singing amongst
her companions. She was decorated with necklaces
and jewels, and her countenance was brilliant and
blooming-—more dazzling than the rays of the sun.
When Antar saw her in all her beauty and loveli-
nesa, he was overwhelmed with surprise, his tears
flowed, and he thus addressed her in verse :

“ The lovely virgin has struck my heart with the
“ arrow of a glance, for which there it no cure,
« Sometimes she wishes for a feast in the sand-hills,
“like a fawn whose eyes are full of magic. My
& disease preys on me, it is in my entrails. I con-
“ ceal it; but its very concealment discloses it. She
“moves; I should say it was the branch of the
“ Tamarisk that waves its branches to the southern
« breeze. She approaches; I should say it was the
« frightened fawn, when a calamity alarms it in the
“ waste. She walks away—I should say her face
“ was truly the sun when its lustre dazzles the be-
' “holders. She gazes—I should say it was the full
“moon of the night when Orion girds it with its
< stars. She smiles, andthe pearls of her teeth sparkle,
«c in which there is the cure for the sickness of lovers.
“ She prostrates herself in reverence towards her
« God; and the greatest of men bow down to her
«c beauties. O Ibla! when I most despair, love for
« thee and all its weaknesses are my only hope.
«“ Should fortune or my father assist me, I will


40


“ requite myself for its vicissitudes by my fearless
66 spirit.” .

When Ibla heard from Antar this description of
her charms, she was in astonishment; yet she still
continued to amuse. herself and converse with her
companions. Before the feast was over he was vio-
lently in love with her, and his affection completely
overpowered him. On the next day he came as
usual with the milk; but his heart and soul were so
pre-occupied and troubled, that he offered it to
Ibla before Semeeah, his father’s wife ; for his feet
went where his heart was interested. Ibla took the
cup from him and fascinated him by her charms.
Semeeah was very angry, and determined to com-
plain of him to his father; but Antar continued in
this state for days and nights, his love and anguish
ever increasing.

A short time after, a slave called Zajir, who be-
longed to Rebia, the son of Zeead, came to Shedad ;
O master, said he, your slave Antar does nothing
but injure your property: he ranges about the
country, and all day long he keeps the cattle away
from the water and the pastures, nding and dnving
them about, and reducing their flesh by incessant
exercise, and injuring the trees by spearing them ;
and when I order him not to do so, he abuses me
and beats me, and were I to go near him he would
kill me. ‘This made Shedad very angry. You tell
me the truth, my boy, he replied, for from the


4l


time I have directed bim to tend my herds, they do
not get fat, but have ulcers in their feet ; and this is a
proof that he rides them and drives them about the
rocky places, and thus they lose their flesh.

As soon as Semeeah heard this, she sought to
punish Antar, and told Shedad what had occurred ;
and complained that Antar had offered the milk to
Ibla before her. ‘This added to the anger which She-
dad already felt in his heart, but he waited patiently
till Antar returned from the pasture; he then seized
fast hold of him, tied him up, and beat him with a
stick till he took the skin off. His mother saw all
this, but did not dare to speak to her master, not
knowing the cause of this cruel treatment, but she
afterwards enquired of other women, who told her
that Zajir had complained of him, and that Semeeah
alao had complained of his having served the milk
to Ibla before her. Zebeebah treasured up all this
m her mind till the morning, when she went to
Antar, and told him the whole matter, how Zajir
had complained of him, and that Semeeah had stated
that she had been served with milk after Ibla. O
my son, said she, henceforward take care not to
offend her, but execute the office properly; and
moreover, do not cast thine eyes on Ibla, for she
will be thy rum. No sooner had Antar heard this
than he struggled with the cords that bound him,
and bursting them, started forward like a lion, and
in wrath exclaimed in verse:


42
“This day will I slay Zajir, the accursed. infa-


« mous slave. I will leave him in the middle of the
“ waste, a prey for the devouring beasts. W hen he
s is gone, my heart will be at rest, and my soul will
‘< be appeased. Who told him to trouble himself
“ about this business, and to endanger me? If I do
“not haste to the desert to slay him, my heart will
“ never be at rest, nor my eyes ever sleep.”

Then went he forth in search of Zajir ; he found
him in the pastures. Thou base-born, he cried,
thou son of an uncircumcised mother, thou instigated
my master to beat me. He said no more, but
seizing him by the small part of his belly, raised
him up, and dashing him on the ground, smashed
his bones to pieces. When he beheld him dead, he
recovered himself, and began to be alarmed; so he
went to the house of his friend Malik, the Prince
who relieved him when he slew the slave of his
brother Shas, and informed him of what had: passed.
The prince was astonished, but quieted his fears,
promising to get him out of the scrape. He left
him sitting in the tent, and went to the habitation
of Rebia. On his arrival he only found the women
of the family; he enquired for Rebia ; they answered
—He is gone by invitation to your father’s.
Immediately he repaired to his father’s house, and
the matter was just as he wished; for on his enter-
ing he observed the Chiefs of the Absian tribe, all
seated, and the family of Zeead and Rebia standing


43


with their slaves and attendants close to King
Zoheir. He entered, and made his salutation; and
as no one was seated, but all standing, Rebia said
to him, sit down in your place, for we are all stand-
ing up because you continue so. Do you wish I
should sit down ? said Malik ; and do you love me?
Yes, said Rebia, by the lives of all that are present.
Then, replied Malik, I will not sit down till you
have given me your slave Zajir. What makes you
so anxious, said Rebia, to have him? Because, said
Malik, I have observed him to be a good hard-work-
ing slave, and very laborious in doing his duty. Sit
down then, said Rebia, I will give him to you, and
if you wish, two more with him. Let all these as-
sembled Chiefs be witnesses to what you say, said
Malik. Yes, said Rebia, let the God who raised
the vaulted heavens, and levelled the expanded
earth, witness my grant to you, and that I will
never tell you of the favour rendered. Be witness
to it, O ye that are present, said Malik. Know
then, O Rebia, that Antar has killed your slave, and
has sought my protection ; do not therefore seek his
life.
When Rebia heard this, his affection was cooled,
and he was very indignant; he hid his head, and
felt ashamed before his assembled associates : great
was his wrath; and from that moment he cherished
in his heart a violent hatred against Antar. King
Zoheir then asked his son what had induced Antar


44


to kill the slave, and what was his intention and ob- -
ject? Malik related all that had passed. The King
smiled, and soothing the heart of Rebia, gave him
two strong healthy slaves, and he was pacified.

When the slaves heard what Antar had done,
there was not one but feared him ; and as soon as
the assembly had eaten and drank, they departed,
and in the evening Malik returned home rejoicing
in the good tidings that he brought. He filled the
heart of Antar with gladness, and placed victuals
before him ; they slept the whole night together,
and Antar repeated the following lines in praise of
the Prince.

“‘Q thou, on whose lofty spirit, my hope, to the
“exclusion of all the universe, depends! My anxie-
“ ties have weighed on thee, and my troubles have
“ been a burthen to thy noble mind! Thou hast
“ granted me favours—thou art my only refuge. O
*‘ thou who hast rescued me from my death, and my
“ perdition, all my life will I thank thee, till my
‘‘ bones disappear in the earth.”


45


CHAPTER II.


Tavs matters proceeded with Antar and Prince
Malik; but the anger of Shedad was only aug-
mented; at last he complained to his brothers
Malik, and Zakmet-ool Jewad, saying, O sons of my
father, and mother, my soul is greatly vexed, and
my anxiety is redoubled, and I know not what to
do, or what will be the consequence of the actions
this black slave. I fear that tomorrow he will
destroy some one of rank and power, and some dis-
turbance arise throughout the whole tribe, and our
blood will be- demanded and our persons pay the
forfeit. O my brother, said his brother Zakmet-ool
Jewad, thou hast hit the mark, and if thou dost
not take measures to put this slave to death,
he will certainly endanger our lives. However
wise a man may be, he is no match for him; but
after what has happened, we can never let him take
our camels and cattle to the pasture; we must,
waylay him and kill him, and thus let us re-
lieve ourselves from this misery. Let us wait
till he goes to the meadows, and there let us
destroy him in some secret spot; and when we
have effected our purpose, we will return. She-
dad approved his brother’s advice, and resolved to


46


execute it. In the morning Prince Malik came to
the tent of Shedad, and interceded for Antar;
Shedad acquiesced, and let him tend the cattle in
the meadows ; and forgot him for a time.

But onemorning Antar went as usual with thecattle
to the pastures, and they followed his steps, seeking
to kill and destroy him. On that day Antar was
riding about in the wide plains and deserts, and
finding himself alone, he recited some verses in
praise of Ibla ; he wandered far from the habitations,
and thought of his misfortunes; fast flowed his
tears, for the night before he had dreamt of Ibla,
and that he had kissed her within her veil. He then
addressed her in these verses :

« Ibla’ spirit appeared to me in my sleep, and
“thrice I kissed her within her veil. It bade me
“ adieu, but it deposited in me a flame that I feel
“ burning through my bones. Were I not left in soli-
“ tude alone, and could I not quench the fire of my
“ passion with tears, my heart would melt. But I
‘‘ do not complain, though all my fears are on thy
‘account, O thou perfect full moon! O daughter
“of Malik, how can I be consoled, since my love
‘‘ for thee originated from the time I was weaned ?
“ but how can I ever hope to approach thee, whilst
“ the lions of the forest guard thy tent ! By the truth
“ of my love for thee, my heart can never be cured
“ but by patience. O thou noble maid ! till I exalt
** myself to the heights of glory with the thrusts of


47


“ my spear, and the blows of my sword, I will ex-
<< pose myself to every peril wherever the spears
“clash in the battle dust—then I shall be either
“tossed upon the spear heads, or be numbered
“ among the noble.” |

He went galloping in different directions till he
came to a plain called the plain of lions, and here were
many ferocious animals and wild beasts. Here he let
the cattle graze, and Antar only came to this valley,
because he knew there was in it abundance of
grass of the height of aman. Now not a servant of
the whole tribe of Abs would ever enter or approach
this valley, because it was very extensive, and filled
with lions and tigers. As soon as Antar found him- .
self in it, he said to himself, perhaps I shall now find a
lion, and I will slay him. Thus, whilst the cattle wére
feeding, and he from a mound was looking round on
all sides, behold, a lion appeared in the middle of the
valley ; he stalked about, and roared aloud: wide .
were his nostrils, and fire flashed from his eyes: the
whole valley trembled at every gnash of his fangs—he
was a calamity, and his claws more terrific than the
deadliest catastrophe—thunder pealed as he roared
—vast was his strength, and his force dreadful—
broad were his paws, and his head immense. As
soon as he appeared in the valley, the cattle scented
him and fled away in terror, and the camels were
dispersed to the right and the left. No sooner did
Antar perceive this extraordinary movement, than


: 48


he descended into the valley that he might observe
what was the matter, brandishing his sword. He
there saw the lion, terrible in his strength, and
lashing his sides with his tail. Antar cried out to
him, and the mountains re-echoed to the cry.
Welcome, thou father of lions—thou dog of the
plains—thou foulest of the wild beasts of the deserts.
Now then, thou wilt exert thy power and thy might,
and thou wilt pride thyself in thy roar; for no doubt,
thou art the monarch and ruler of the brute creation,
and all obey thy commands—but, return to filth and
contempt, thou meetest now no ordinary man. I deal
death to the bravest, and render children orphans.
Dost thou think, foul-mouthed beast, now about
to die, that thou canst frighten me with thy roar
or alarm me with thy bellow? I will not condescend
to slay thee with an arrow or a sword, but I will
make thee drink of the cup of death from my single
~ arm; and ashe rushed towards him, he addressed
him in verse.

«I am the far-famed lion, the warrior whose ex-
“ ploits every one fears on the day of wars. I save, I
“ protect the property of my father Shedad, and I
“ punish the foe with the edge of my sword. When
« my hand wields the scimitar on the day of battle,
«every heart of the horsemen throbs with fear.
‘¢ Now will I meet thee in the waste, and make thee
« drink a cup of the vicissitudes of fortune. I heed
“ not death when I meet him, and I comprehend


49


“what every tongue can express. Now then I
“ will throw my sword out of my-hand—away then
“with thee—and I will destroy thee, thou-dog of
“ the desert, with my hands alone?”

Just at that moment Shedad and his Brothers
came up to kill Antar. They saw him address
the lion, and heard what he repeated: he sprung
forward, and fell on him like a hail storm, and
hissed at him like a black serpent—he met the
lion as he sprang, and outroared his bellow; then,
giving a dreadful shriek, he: seized: hold of :his
mouth with his hand; ‘and wrenched it open to his
shoulders, and he shouted aloud—the valley and
the country round ' echoed: back the-war:: he
stuck to him until he was dead, and then dragged
him by the legs without the valley; and having cut
down some wood, he took out his Zanad (wood to
make a light with); struck a light, and made a fire.
He waited antil it blazed; he then ripped up the lion,
took out the entrails, and cut off his four legs, and
threw them into the fire; and when he perceived they
were roasted, he took them out and ate thereof till he
finished it; he then ran to a fountain and drank till
he was satisfied; and having washed his mouth and >
hands, he went te a shady tree, where he -put the
hon’s head under his own-as a pillow, and wrapping
up his head in a part of his sleeve, he fell asleep.
His father and uncles were observing him:and his
actions, and as they saw all he-did, they were quite

E


50


terrified and scared. Verily this slave, said Zakmet-
ool Jewad, has not his equal; no one in his senses
would engage him. Malik also trembled. What
shall we do with this wretch ? said he. Great indeed
has been the deed he has done; none of us can harm
him; he would soon destroy us and tear out our
entrails, or do as he has done with the lion. Let us
return home, said Shedad, our honour still remains
safe, we must find some other means to kill him and
accomplish our wishes.

Thus Shedad and his brothers returned home,
all in astonishment at Antar, and the wonders he
had performed. In the evening, when Antar came
with the flocks and the camels, Shedad smiled upon
him and gave him a cordial welcome, and made him
sit down with him at dinner, whilst the other slaves
stood up. ` And whilst they were all talking, there
came a messenger from King Zoheir to Shedad.
King Zoheir demands your presence, O Chief, he
cried; he has sent me to require you to take with
you your warlike weapons, and your brothers, for
he is engaged in a business of importance, and
wishes to attack the tribe of Temeem, and has re-
solved on invading their country and destroying
their territory. Shedad on hearing this immediately
complied, and having assembled his brothers and all
their dependants he turned towards Antar. To-
morrow, said he, the warriors and horsemen are
going to march, and no troops will remain in our


51


habitations, therefore I consign over to you our
houses and our women; but take care when you
go to the pastures not to wander far in the moun-
tains. Be perfectly easy, my master, replied Antar,
about whatever you leave in my charge; should
the smallest thing be missing, let me, for the remain-
der of my life, be kept in chains and bondage !
Shedad thanked him, and promised when he re-
turned from the expedition, to give him a fine horse
to ride. In the morning the warriors mounted and
prepared for the engagement, and slung on their
swords and their javelins; they departed from their
habitations, and among the first shone King Zoheir,
like a noble lion.

The horsemen being now absent, the children,
and women, and slaves, male and female, were left
behind. Semeeah, the wife of Shedad, gave a mag-
nificent entertainment at the lake of Zatool Irsad.
Sheep were slaughtered, and wine flowed, and the
giris carried their instruments. Antar stood amongst
the attendants, and was in transports on seeing Ibla
appear with the other women. She was indeed like
an amorous fawn ; she was decorated with variegated
necklaces ; and when Antar was attending her, he
was overwhelmed in the ocean of his love, and be-
came the slave of her sable tresses. They sat down
to eat, and the wine cups went merrily round. It
was the spring of the year, when the whole land
shone in all its glory ; the vines hung luxuriantly in


52


the arbours ; the flowers shed around ambrosial fra-
grance ; every hillock sparkled in the beauty of its
colours; the birds in responsive melody sang sweetly
from each bush, and harmony issued from their
throats; every ear was enchanted; the ground was
covered with flowers and herbs; whilst the nightin-
gales filled the air with their softest notes. Then
the damsels beat the cymbal, and recited the follow-
ing verses :

« The shades have spread their canopy, and the
“ flowers spread their pillows; the streams roll along
“ their shores of flowers, some white, some red, some
“ yellow, some sweet-scented. See the waters gliding
“ through the gardens, and the trees and their
“ fruits resemble bracelets and chaplets: the birds
“ sing melodiously upon them in every variety of
“ note, the nightingale and the dove pour their
“ plaintive strain, and make every lover weep; the
“ gentle zephyrs whisper along, and the branches
“move in softest measure. The boughs dance in
“the groves, among the trees, in the graceful move-
“ment; the dew drops fall, and the flowers and the
“ trees are studded with its pearls, The season is
“ delightful; let it pass in enjoyment, and misfor-
“ tunes begone ! the opportunity is delicious, let us
“grasp in haste its sweets. Be merry, and wild
“ with joy, and let not a day pass without amuse-
“ ment.” | |

Then another set took the musical instruments,


53
and beating the cymbals with their hands, thus


sang : l | x

“The gardens sparkle with all they boast of
“lovely damsels; every sportive virgin is possessed
“of languishing glances, and enchanting move-
“ments; their beauty is perfection, they are loveli-
“ness itself; their elegant shapes glance like the
“ well-proportioned spears; their tresses float down
“their backs, like hranches of the grape-vine; they
“are slayers and piercers with their arrows and
“their darts; archers and strikers, the enchantresses
« of men.”

They now formed a dance and took off their robes :
the damsels danced whilst the servants sang, and
carried round the goblets of wine. Roses were
spread over their cheeks, and their bosoms heaved.
And Ibla joined her associates in the dance, and ex-
hibited her charms, and laughed. Fire shot from
their eyes, and the cups of wine were united to the
honey of their mouths. The imagination of Antar
was inflamed and overpowered in the sea of anxiety;
he hesitated whether he should violate the modesty
of love by the fingers of passion, when lo! ona
sudden there appeared a cloud of dust; and a vast
clamour arose, and in a moment there came forth a
troop of horses and their riders, about seventy
in number, armed with cuirasses and coats of mail,
and Aadite helmets, crying out, O by Cahtan! and
rushed towards the women. At the instant joy was


54


converted into grief, and smiles into tears: in a mo-
ment they seized the women and the virgins, made
them prisoners, and placed them on their horses
behind them. |
But when Antar saw this disaster, and perceived
that a horseman had carried off Ibla, and observed
her weep, and her cheeks turn from red to a deadly
pale, the world seemed contracted about him, and
as he reflected that he had no arms with which to
fight, he was greatly alarmed, but trusted to his feet.
He overtook the horseman in a moment who had
seized Ibla, for he happened to be in the rear; he
sprung upon him like a wild beast in its utmost
fury, and clung to him, and overpowering him,
threw him upon his head and broke his neck. Silent
was the warrior’s heart, for Antar had annihilated
him, and he took possession of his armour and his
steed. He mounted, and pursued the horsemen,
rushing down upon them like a torrent, and assail-
ing them with the most abusive and contemptuous
language. Hear, ye dastards! I am Antar the son
of Shedad—abandon your prisoners and the children,
or I will attack and destroy you. Return to your
tribe of Cahtan in disgrace and despair, or by
the father of mankind, by him who made man
to speak with lips and tongue, I will make your
heads trunkless. He soon came up with those in
the rear, and slew twenty of them; and when the


remaining horsemen perceived what had happened,


55


fifty more returned at a full gallop, pouncing down
like eagles; they saw their companions stretched
upon the sand, and immediately attacked him, but
he met them, fierce as a devouring lion.

“‘Here am I in the boisterous battle, and my
s power is well known; my sword and my deeds
“ testify to those that see me, that I pierce my an-
“tagonist, watchful as he may be. My shield, and
“then my spear, and my sword of Indian temper,
“were with me in my cradle, my two bosom
“ frends; and the earth where I stand reddens like
“ crimson leather, and blood flows thereon, its colour
“a deep scarlet. Give me pure wine to drink, or
“let it be mixed; give it me old, that I may ima-
“s gine it was made before the world. She comes
“ and offers me to drink in mantles of Judas flower.
“s Give me to drink, and let me hear the song that
“delights me. The sweetest of sounds to me is the
“ rattle of the Indian blades, and the clash of lan-
« csin the battle, on the day of spear-thrusts, when
‘the parties shout, and warriors are adjudged to
“ death: but the dearest of all my projects, the
“ darling object of all my desires of fortune, is, that
‘© I may behold Ibla at my heposal 3 in happiness
‘¢ and security.”

He rushed forwards to meet them, and harder
than flint was his heart, and in his attack was their
fate and destiny; he assailed the boldest of his
opponents, and his assault was the assault of the most
obstinate warrior. As soon as he distinguished the


56


chief of the party, he approached him, he plunged
at him—he grappled with him—his shout struck
him with horror. He pierced his bosom with his
spear, and forced it out through his back. When
his companions saw the effect produced, every heart
quaked with fear, and felt convinced that death and
destruction were at hand; and they said one to
another, it is a mere slave that has brought this
confusion upon us, a wretch, mean and worthless ;
what will be our condition then if the warriors come
to his assistance? Let us fly, otherwise our ruin
and annihilation are certain. So they jomed the
others, and fled away in disorder, abandoning the
women, and retreating in disgrace and despair.
Antar, as soon as they were dispersed, collected the
scattered horses, and a vast quantity of arms, &c.
He returned home, and the women and families
being all safe, thus he exclaimed. >

s These are my exploits when I stalk against the
“ foe, and they abuse me for my black complexion,
“which is my glory. I drive away the troops and
“ the noble warriors, and my colt as he rushes on
“ plunges into the battle. As‘to those who envy
- “me like fools, every one knows that virtue is ever
“ the object of jealousy. I am the offspring of my
“ day, the sword is my father, in it is my glory, the
“ one may’ be denied, the other is a fact. Never
‘© will I cease to hew down the troops in en till
‘“‘ every opponent is annihilated.”

He returned home, taking with him went: -five


57


horses and all the women and children. Now the
hatred of Semeeah was converted into love and
tenderness, and he became dearer to her than sleep.
They all came: home, but Semeeah enjoined all the
women not to disclose this event to any one, lest
their husbands should. blame them. Antar also
kept it all a profound secret. In a short time King
Zoheir returned from his victory over the tribe of
Temeen, and brought with him an immense booty ;
and both those that went and those that staid were
- greatly rejoiced.

The next day in the morning, Shedad went out
on horseback and sought his herds and flocks; he
perceived amongst his horses some strange ones,
and also saw Antar riding upon a black mare.
Whence, cried he, came these animals? and whence
got you this mare, that excites my wonder? Now
the mare Antar was riding belonged to the chief of
the Cahtanians, and the other horses were those the
horsemen rode whom he had slain; the spoil and all
he had collected were concealed at his mother’s. O
master, he replied, as I was tending the flocks
yesterday, there came some Cahtanians, and with
them an immense quantity of cattle ; they were much
fatigued and moreover frightened at the Arab
horsemen. I followed them, and finding these
horses separated from the rest, I took them and
brought them back. Thou wicked slave, said She.
dad, these are no horses strayed from their owners;


58
thou hast carried them off from beneath their riders;


it is on this account thou wanderest alone in these
wilds and rocks, and every Arab thou canst meet
thou killest him, and thou carest not whether he is
of the tribe of Cahtan or Adnan. Never wilt thou
leave off this conduct till thou hast excited feuds
among the Arabs, and slain heroes and horsemen!

Now in that age the Arabs were of two classes ;
from Yemen to India they were called the tribe of
Cahtan; and in Mecca and Hijaz they were called
the tribe of Adnan. Shedad laid hold of Antar, and
bound him with a rope. Here, said Shedad, thou
shalt remain tied up. Never again will I let thee
take my cattle to the pasture ; and he beat him with
the whip he had in his hand; and as he continued
to lash and thrash him, no good will come of thee,
said he; evil and abominations are rooted in thee ;
thou wilt breed dissensions among the Arab tribes,
and thou wilt make us a common tale among nations.
His father still beat him and abused him, and he
bore it all.

At last Semeeah came out, and seeing what was
going on, she wept bitterly. She sprang forwards
and threw herself on his breast, exclaiming, sooner
shalt thou beat me than him; he does not deserve
such ill treatment, O Shedad. But Shedad became
very angry with her, and shoving her away, threw
her down on her back. She rose up and cast her-
self into Antar’s arms, uncovering her head, and


59


letting her hair flow down her shoulders. This
excited Shedad’s surprise. What has happened to
this wretch, he exclaimed, that you feel so much
affection and tenderness, after having expressed so
much anger and indignation? Loose his bands, said
Semeeah, and I will relate the whole story to you.
Tell me, said he, and I will release him. Then she
told Shedad all that Antar had done; how he alone
had attacked seventy horsemen, and had driven them
back in confusion and despair, and‘had secured in
safety all their families and children. Then Semeeah
repeated these verses :

“O Shedad, hadst thou seen me, my face un-
“covered, and my person carried off behind the
“ warriors, and the women of Prince Cais in dismay,
“ no resource at hand, and their veils trailing on the
“surface of the earth. Ibla too! they mounted her
“behind a warrior, whilst her tears streamed down
“her cheeks. The slaves whom I encouraged, fled ;
“every one fled, all trembling in affright. Our
“ families surrounded us weeping in anguish and in
“ misery. Our camels were driven away, and every
“heart was distracted. Then Antar plunged into
“the midst of them; into the black rolling dust ;
“ the atmosphere was involved in darkness, and the
“ birds sunk motionless ; their horsemen fled through
“fear: this one was slain, that made captive; he
“protected us. After he had comforted us all, he
“pursued them, and the honour of them all was


60


“destroyed. O it is right I should respect him ;
“protect him; my honour he protected, and he
‘ preserved the honour of us all.”

Semeeah’s account of Antar’s actions. astonished
Shedad, and he rejoiced and was glad. It is sur-
prising, said he to, himself, he kept all this secret,
and his submission to be bound by me! `tis most
wonderful! Antar stood unconcerned, and listened
to Semeeah’s acknowledgments; he bore no resent-
ment, and praised her in these verses :

“& Oh ! is it from Semeeah that these tears flow in
“anguish, and from a heart in flames? Shall her
“ form shadow me? can blows harm me, and shall
& tears burst in torrents from her eyelids? When
“ her tresses hang dishevelled; she is like the rising
‘¢ full moon, veiled in the darkness of night. ‘The
<í property is thy property, the slave thy slave:
< and life, and every sense shall be exerted to save
“thee. Oh! when the troopers start forth, harsh-
*¢ countenanced, and the black dust rolls over them;
“‘then make use of me. If I do not disperse them
& in the clash of contending spears, may I never be
“permitted to drink! may the rain-drop never
“moisten me! The sword is in my hand, whose
«c blows fetch blood; but the swords of others have
< no power in their edge. Men are of two kinds;
< one whose heart is of brittle glass—the other whose
< heart is of rock.” `

When Antar had finished his verses, Shedad came


61


up to him, and released him, and begged his pardon,
for he was convinced that such wit expressed in
verse and prosè, could not proceed but from an ex-
alted warrior. At that moment came a servant from
King Zoheir, who saluted Shedad. The King, O
Chief, said he, sends his ‘salutation in to you, and
requests you will attend a feast he has prepared.
Shedad took Antar with him and went to the feast,
and the slave followed him till he reached Zohieir’s
tents, which he found resounding with cymbals, and
other musical instruments, and the victims were
slaughtered: and there were assembled the race of
Abs and ‘Adnan, and all the valiant heroes attached
tothem. Shedad seated himself amidst the noblest
chieftains, but Antar sat down among the slaves ;
and when they had eaten meat, and drank wine,
they conversed, and related all the circumstances of
the late affair. Antar heard all they said, and She-
dad praised his son Antar, informing the king of all
_he had done, and all he had composed in prose and
verse, and related the whole story. All this, cried
the King, greatly rejoiced at the courage and elo-
quence of Antar, I anticipated at the time he slew
the slave of my son Shas; I knew he would be the
refuge of every petitioner. Who can execute such
deeds or perform such acts! doubtless he will rise
superior to all ‘lis contemporaries. And he called
out to him, and: -ordered him into his- presence.

Antar kissed his hands, and presented him the cup,


62


and his heart was overpowered with joy and delight.
O Antar, exclaimed his frend Malik, the King’s
son—at your commands, said Antar, thou moon of
this assembly. I wish, said Malik, thou wouldst
recite to us some of thy verses. Willingly, my
lord, said Antar ; and he thus continued :

«& Glory is bound to the back of the steeds ; victory
s on the day of horrors, lives in the sword ; never
« rises the battle dust on the day of fight, but my
~ pliant spear assists me. How many sand-clouds

« have I penetrated, fearless of calamities, when the
« faces of black and white swoon in terror! How
<c many horsemen fly from the encounter of arms
« when the war-dust rises; they fly and are repul-
“sed: then rush I into the clanging war: my heart
“ and my chest are hewn out of the solid rock. O
“ thou lion-king, have thine eyes beheld the exploits
«of the horsemen of the desert, when the foe
“ attacked us to spoil us of our cattle? then I cut
“ down their chief on the desert: I raised him
“up on my nobly-serving sword: he was dashed
“from his saddle, and his cheeks crushed on the
“earth. I am thine,Othou King of all the earth, and
“thy fame shall be spread over every land. Ye
“ are the Princes of Jezeemah, and whoever presumes
“to resist ye, shall quickly be destroyed and be
« dismissed from this world. Come on then—it is
< the lion who never drew his sword, but that every
« hero dreaded its encounter. The lions fear, and


63


‘in their dens tremble at him; man also dreads
« him, and the dsemons of the waste. He shrinks
“ not from the warriors, numerous as they are. I
“ plunge into the war-dust, and the warriors charge
“against the combatants with swords that pierce
“through the throats. I swerve not from my pur-
“pose when I am resolved on it, till I accomplish
“every wish of my heart. I am indeed your slave,
“named Antar; to him the horrors of battle are
“welcome; he never faulters. Mayest thou, O
“ King, live for ever! His like is not among the
“kings of the earth or the desert May God ever
“ preserve for me my father Shedad, for he is a sup-
“port for me—nothing existing could recompense
“me for his loss, for he is my lord and chief. His
“glory is from the race of Abs, the seat of all
“honour and liberality.”

When Antar had finished his verses, King Zo-
heir and all present expressed the greatest pleasure.
The King called him to him, and giving him a robe,
_ thanked him. In the evening he returned with his
father Shedad, and his heart bounded with exulta-
tion at the honours with which he had been favoured.
And his passion for Ibla increased. _

One day Antar rode out on one of the horses, in
company with his brothers; they drove the herds till
they came to the pastures, and there Antar remained
to protect and tend them. Now Shiboob was an active
sagacious fellow, and had a persuasive tongue, but


64


he was the devil in the form of a:man. In running
he would outstrip a deer, and when he ran ‘after a
horse, he soon left it behind among the rocks. `

Antar had great ‘confidence in him at all times,
and feared him more than any human being. Now
it happened that the sons of Zoheir were assembled
together at the invitation of their uncle Asyed the
son of Zezimah, for in those days, people that loved
each other frequently met, and shunned those they
disliked. 'The Princes were riding out, and made
choice of an eminence. where they halted and pitched
their tents, and conversed till dmner was ready.
They ate, drank, and laughed and sung, and joked
away the time, whilst some oi the damsels sang the
following strain :

s Mix thy water in the cup of thy wine, and give
“me to drink, for truly I have mixed my tears
«with my blood. Let me drink of wine in the
« flower gardens to drive away sorrow, and quicken
“my joys. Every charm is combined in her form
“ that lives like the soul that flows through my limbs;
“ and whilst she bears the cup in her hand, she ap-
“pears kindling the flame of my love. In the
‘‘ noon-tide sun she dances, and her face is spotted
“like the full moon of night with the star of the
<< Gemini.”

They were seated and drinking: they were all
much amused and pleased, and the old wine had its
sway. Just then, Malik turned round his head and


65


sew Antar and his brothers feeding the flocks and
camels on a rising ground. Behold my friend Antar,
honoured amongst the inhabitants of deserts and
cities, said he to his brother, and he called to one
of his slaves. Go to Antar, said he, and invite him
to our party, that we may hear his discourse, and
our enjoyment be complete. ‘How can you look
upon this savage? exclaimed Shas, and think of
such an ungracious wretch, and thus raise him
amongst the chieftains of the tribe? On account of
his verses, his consequence and power are extolled,
and you bestow on him the highest dignity. But
indeed, I feel inclined to rush at him, and tear his
life out of his body, were I not afraid of the re-
proaches and reprimands of my tribe; and more-
over, I should be sorry to interrupt the amusement-
of my brothers and companions. Indeed, my brother,
your repeated admiration of him augments my aver-
sion to him.”

Thus were they talking together, when on a sud-
den, a dust like a cloud arose among them, and
there appeared three hundred valiant horsemen, like
lions of the forest; and under them were steeds
swifter than death. ‘They were of the tnbe of
Cahtan, on a marauding party, to plunder the tribe
of Adnan. And when they found these persons
seated and drinking among the hills, they said one
to another, Let us attack this party, that we may
capture them in an instant, and convey them away

F


66


to our country, for it is a wealthy tribe. Then
bending their heads over their saddle-bows, they
gallopped among them, shouting and halloomg—
O by Cahtan !

When the sons of Zoheir saw this, they were sur-
prised ; they hastened to mount their horses and to
gird on their swords. The foe poured down from
the summit of the hill; they all at once shouted
aloud—they rushed forward and plunged through
the dust, assailing the horsemen of Yemen, like the
ocean when it bursts and retreats. And when
Antar heard their yells and screams, he feared lest
the enemy would destroy them with their spears ;
and greatly was he alarmed for Malik and his
brothers. He called out towards his own brothers,
and.went towards the party, among whom was a
horseman whose name was Zatik, son of Maboob.
Antar pounced down upon him, and piercing him,
left him weltering in his gore. He then assailed his
commpanions, and gave a shout like thunder when it
roars, And there was not one that could see or
hear; fear and trembling seized them; they beheld
only Antar the lion! They fled, and the whole
troop was dispersed and routed, till they all disap-
peared over the extended plains.

Antar returned to the princes, and shouted out
to the horsemen that still remained assailing them ;
and as soon as they looked on Antar, an universal
terror shook their frames, and their colour instantly


67


changed; for they had seen him scatter heroes like
seeds of rue, and trample carcases under his feet,
leaving numbers dashed to the earth; and none
could oppose but those accustomed to plunge into
the battle dust. And as he engaged them he
roared out these verses.

“The heights of glory are not attained but at
“the point of the spear, and patience in the day of
“battle through the heaviest difficulties, and the
“challenge of every lion-hero, and long-bearded
“warrior, Ask my horse of me, when flashes of
“fire fly from his hoofs. I have a spear-thrust
“that deals the most excruciating pain, and raises
“me above all competitors; and my Indian blade
“cuts through the nocturnal calamities whenever I
“ draw it. I am the son of the black faced Zebee-
“bah that tends the camels. Iam a slave, but my
“ fury o’erwhelms the lordly chiefs in the battle.
‘ As to death, should I meet him, I will not shrink
“from him when he appears to me—it is a draught
“& I must inevitably take when the day of my disso-
« lution arrives.”

Then, diving through the dust, he overthrew
the horsemen singly, and in pairs, and infused the
most violent commotions into the hearts of the com-
batants. Thus, having driven away by his assaults

he fury of war, from the sons of Zoheir, they felt
relieved from their distresses. Inthe mean timea slave
had informed the King, who instantly mounted and


68


departed with his horsemen and troops; but the
news did not reach him till Antar had completed
the business, and had put his enemies to flight to
the right and left; and many were the brave that
remained on the field. The princes returned to their
tents, Antar preceding them like a lion, repeating
these verses : |
‘ I will not cease to exalt myself by my deeds, .
“ till I reach Orion in my ambitious projects. Here
« I care not for those who abuse me, fearful of.death
“ and separation from life. But I will reduce my
« foes and my railers by force, and I will be patient .
“under sufferings and in praise. I will strive to.
“ attain what I desire, till death snatch me away.
“J will arm my mind against worldly lusts, that I
‘may be considered noble-minded and faithful.
& Whoever would check me, let him look to himself,
“‘where’er he may be concealed. My complexion
“is no injury to me, nor the name of Zebeebah,
s when I exercise my courage amongst the foe. I
“ will work wonders and marvels; and I will pro-
“ tect myself from the tongues of the wicked.”
When Zoheir heard Antar’s verses, he thanked
him for his noble conduct, and joyed in the safety
of his sons and his people, expressing the warmest
attachment and affection for Antar. He then de-
manded of the prisoners, of what country they were;
they replied that they belonged to the furthest lands


of Yemen.


69


King Zoheir soon after gave an entertainnient in
his tents, rejoicing in the escape of his sons. He
sent for Antar and set him down by his side, and
gave him to drink of his most delicious wines, and
placed him high amongst all his comrades, investing
him with a superb robe, worked in gold, and girding
him on a trusty sword, and- mounting him on one
of his finest Arab horses. He took pleasure in
seemg him, and called him the Champion of the
Absians. From this day forward, said he to She-
dad, I will not permit him to attend your flocks ;
now that he has thus distinguished himself by such
glorious deeds; let him now run the career of vic-
tory with the warriors of his country. He was thus
separated from the servants, and attacked the
tribes and made predatory excursions against them.
And his brother Shiboob pointed out to him the
hordes, and places of resort, and the fountains ; and
he never went on any expedition but he succeeded,
and returned full of joy and content; so that his
father Shedad became enriched, and all the noblest
chieftains delighted in him.

He had now many friends, and many jealous
enemies; amongst the latter were prince Shas, and
Rebia. And when they saw what great things
Antar had done, their indignation against him
increased, and they resolved on his destruction. In
every society, the people, assembled round their
wine, repeated Antar’s verses, mentioned his actions,


70


and talked of his love for Ibla, and his discourses.
This continued some time, till at length it reached
the ears of Ibla’s father and mother, and when they
„heard Antar’s amorous poetry repeated, they ridi-
culed it, and would not receive him on friendly
terms ; but shewed their aversion to him, in every
way, and made him perform every menial office ;
for Antar, in their eyes, was only considered as a
slave. But when the talk about Ibla gained ground,
‘her mother ordered Ibla into the presence of her
father, and sent also for Antar. So, you love my
daughter Ibla, said she, and make verses upon her,
and cannot conceal your feelings. Ibla was stand-
ing by her mother, and when she heard her speak
to Antar, she smiled. This increased Antar’s con-
fusion, and he was much disordered, as it called
forth all his love.

O mistress, said he, did you ever see any one who
hated his mistress, particularly when his life and
death were in her hands! verily, I do love her, and
my only wish in this world is to be near her: her
form is ever before me, her name is ever in my
heart and soul: and I exalt in my verses, all that
God has granted her of beauty and loveliness.

When Ibla heard Antar speak in her praise,
her surprise increased, and Antar made great
progress in her heart. If, said her mother to
Antar, you are in earnest in what you say, let
us hear some of your verses in praise of her


7)


charms. Upon this, Antar baa’ down his head,
and thus spoke :

“ I love thee with the love of a noble born dese
“and I am content with thy imaginary phantom.
“Thou art my sovereign in my very blood; and my
‘* mistress; and in thee is all my confidence. O Ibla,
“my description cannot pourtray thee, for thou
s comprehendest every perfection. Were Ito say
“thy face is like the full moon of heaven, where
“in that full moon, is the eye of the antelope? Were
“I to say thy shape is like the branch of the Erak
“tree; Othou shamest it in the grace of thy form.
“In thy forehead is my guide to truth ; and in the
“night of thy tresses I wander astray. Thy teeth
“resemble stringed jewels; but how can I liken
“them to lifeless pearls? Thy bosom is created as
“an enchantment. . O may God protect it ever in
“that perfection! To be connected with thee, is to
“be connected with every joy, but separated from
“all my world is the bond of thy connexion. Under
“thy veil is the rosebud of my life, and thine eyes.
“are guarded with a multitude of arrows; round
“thy tent is a lion warrior, the sword’s edge, and
“the spear’s point. O thy face is like the full moon
“of heaven, allied to light, but far from my hopes.”

When Antar ceased, Ibla and her mother were
astonished, and their dislike towards him diminished ;
and Ibla regarded him with affection. And Ibla’s
mother said to Antar—I had no idea that you could


72


talk after this style, and speak with so much elegance
and propriety : by the faith of a noble Arab, you
are endowed with high and noble qualities. I intend
to night to speak to my husband, that he may
marry you to Khemisa, Ibla’s servant; who is
the prettiest of all the girls of the place. Never,
said Antar, will I be united to a woman who is
a slave, and not free born; and never but with
her my soul adores. May God, said Ibla, accom-
plish thy wishes; and may he grant thee the
woman thou lovest, and may thou live in peace and
happiness! Amen, Amen, Amen, replied Antar.

These verses were soon published amongst the
whole tribe, and men and women sang and repeated
them. It happened about this time that Rebia
gave an entertamment, to which he invited Shas,
and Malik, Ibla’s father and his son Amroo to come
and eat, and drink wine, and when they became
merry, the girls began to sing these verses. Do
you not see how that slave is talked of? exclaimed
Shas, how his name is renowned, and his character
and fame are celebrated ?

Thus they went on talking till Amroo became
exceedingly angry. Death, O Chief, said he to
Rebia, would be more tolerable to us than such
proceedings. I have frequently spoken to my father
to cast off this slave; but he says, the fellow is a
slave, and the son of a slave, he 1s of no consequence ;
and were we to drive him out of our tents, King


73


Zoheir would take him, and encourage him against
us, and then his avidity would only increase, and
we should injure ourselves ; for how can we presume
to oppose King Zoheir? And then again, he enrages
us by his verses. I have longed to kill him from
the moment I heard that he mentioned my sister in
his rhymes, let happen what may.

We have not invited you, said Rebia, to do any
thing of this kind; who is this slave, that you should
stain your sword with his blood? Let us consult
on other means of killing him. I will tomorrow con-
ceal twenty of the stoutest of my slaves, and will
order them to kill him in the rocky precipices. My
slave Bazam is the brother of Zajir, and he has
long wished to kill him; but I would not let him do
it, for fear of the reproaches of King Zoheir; but
now that his son Shas is with us, and takes a part
in the affair, we shall be secure from blame. ‘Then
said Shas, I will assist you in word or deed, were
even my father and brother and cousins to oppose
me; and I will persevere in this enterprize, even if
I were obliged to take a personal part in it; and I
too will engage twenty of my slaves in it, to kill him
by the cruellest death, and make an example of
him. They did not break up the entertainment
till Shas, Rebia, and Amroo had all three bound
themselves by oath; and they arranged the forty
slaves, all strong as lions, twenty from Shas, and
twenty from Rebia.


74


Now Shedad had a daughter, and her name was
Merweh, but not by Semeah ; and she was married
to a man called Jahjah, one of the tribe of Ghiftan,
and he was a celebrated warrior. It happened that
Jahjah had married his sister to one Magid, son of
Leith, also oue of the Ghiftan tribe; and when
the bridal festival was preparing amongst the
Ghiftanians, Merweh came to the tribe of Abs and
Adnan, with a party of women, to invite the females
belonging to her father, and her uncles Malik and
Zakmet-ool Jewad, and their relations amongst the
tribe of Carad, tothe feast. They accordingly ob-
tained their husbands’ permission to make the
visit, and their husbands went with them. In front
of thé howdahs they sounded the cymbals, and the
servants brandished their swords; and Antar was
among them, in attendance on Ibla and Semeah, and
the wives of his uncles. And when he assisted her to
alight and mount the howdah, he used to gratify
himselfin talking to her, and was mad in gazing on
her charms; and he was in hopes the journey would
be long. Ibla’s mother laughed at him, when she
saw him assiduously attending on her daughter.
Verily, said she, you love my daughter so much as
to compose verses on her, and in description of her
beauties. Yes, said Antar, by the God that has de-
corated the heavens, and raised them on high, and
has adorned them with stars, were I able, I would
make my eye her resting-place. They journeyed


75


on, and Antar walked before the hewdah of Ibla,
repeating these verses.

‘‘March the way of security. O thou, all my
“ hope, proceed, for he who encompasses thee is an
“ intrepid warrior, that smites with his sword when
‘the battle clashes. O Ibla, one look from the veil
“of thy eyelids is sufficient. Should I never at-
“tain my object in this world, the extended
“plains and mountains must press upon me.”

Thus they proceeded on their journey; singing
and playing, till the day was spent and darkness
came on, when they dismounted in a spacious plain
near a pool of water. They ate and drank, and re-
mained in that spot till it was day; and just as Antar
was ordering the slaves toraise the howdahs on the
camels backs, lo! a great dust arose, spreading ra
pidly over the valleys and the mountains. In an
instant there came forth a hundred slaves on horse-
back, and Arabs; at their head was a horseman
like an eagle, crying out,

“« This day will I be revenged; verily I am the
“ conqueror, and I will settle the business with my
“sword and my spear, on a slave of a tribe whom
“ the Absians regard not, but who listens not to
“one that chides him. How many men have I
“ trampled down in the dust. I am a valiant one,
“like whom there is no hero.”

As was before stated, Shas and Rebia had sworn
to destroy Antar, and having placed their spies and


76


scouts for that purpose, they stationed the forty
slaves, putting Basam at their head, just at the time
that Merweh, the daughter of Shedad, happened to
come by, and was returning home. The slave, with
his comrades of the tribe of Ham, followed the party
until they came to the valley of Ghifal, where they
resolved to lie in ambush for Antar: when lo! the
sound of horses’ hoofs alarmed them, and heroes
rushed upon them, crying out—“ Stop where ye are,
or your sculls shall fly. Tell us who ye are, and of
what tnbe of Arabs, before we pour down destruc-
tion upon ye.” On hearing this, Basam prepared
his people for the attack; O Arabs, he replied, we
are of the tribe of Abs, inhabitants of this country ;
but who are you, and why are ye halting in this
place? Slaves of a coward race, cried the chief, we
are in search of you, for amongst you is that ac-
cursed slave Antar, the’son of Shedad.

Now these were Arabs and horsemen of the tribe
of Moostalik, and their chief was called Vethab;
he happened to be out of the way when Antar
slew his brother, some time before; but when he
returned, they informed him of it. He went
forth to be revenged, exclaiming, Verily, a slave of
the tribe of Abs has slain my brother, but I will
destroy none but their King, and not return but
with Antar’s head. He thus met Basam, and all
this occurred. And after some explanation; know, `
O noble Sir, said Basam, our masters have sent us
in search of you, that we may together hasten to kill


7]


this slave, and waylay him : here he has halted this
night. If ye wish, we will slay him, said Vethab,
and we will give you his head; but if you please,
do you kill him, and give us his head. But swear
you will not betray us.

Upon that, they promised and swore, and took
engagements from one another. But Basam turned
towards his comrades. Let us hide ourselves here,
said he; but if ye perceive that they commit any
injury tothe property and families, we must then
assail them too, till some people come to our aid,
and thus we obtain our end in the death of Antar.
However, we must in the attack remain in the rear,
so that the women may not distinguish us, and know
that we are amongst the enemy. Do what you
please, said the slaves, and when the shades of night
were dissolving, the party under Vethab poured
down upon Antar like a cloud of waves, shouting
out, To arms! to arms!

Then began the women to scream and weep.
Antar cast his eyes towards Ibla, and she was bathed
in tears: he looked at her mother, and her grief
was great. Antar smiled, and presented himself
before Ibla’s mother. O mistress, said he, what
think you of these our enemies? verily they are
eager for their prey. O Antar, said she, my force
and spirits are exhausted ; in a moment we shall be
the prisoners of our enemies, and they will scatter
us over this desert. O my mistress, said Antar,
give Ibla to me in marriage, and I will disperse


78


your enemies at a single onset. I will reduce them
to annihilation; and I will give you their horses and
their armour as a dower. This is no time for
merriment, said she. No, cried Antar, By the God
of day, and the animator of souls: he that is God |
the merciful, and the Lord of victory, if you pro-
mise to marry her to me, I will make over to you
these horses, and slay their masters. Defend her,
said she, and she is yours. At the instant, he
turned round to Shiboob—Protect my rear, he cried,
this day. Be of good cheer, thou black-born, ex-
claimed Shiboob, for I will bear two-thirds of thy
troubles. Antar rushed forward and assaulted them;
roaring and shouting aloud, and again he attacked
them, and roared out. He encountered the first
ranks, and met them will all-potent thrusts; he
struck them in their chests, and in their eyes. He
slew the first, second, third, fourth, and fifth; and
behold, a horseman came down upon Antar from
behind. As he was blustering over the plain, and
just as he was about to transfix Antar with his spear,
Jo! an arrow pierced his heart, and threw him from
his horse. The terrible Shiboob dealt the deadly
blow. When the party saw the state of the battle,
they retreated from before him; but he marking
how the enemy were dispersed, came up to the
women, and said to Ibla, Check thy tears, thou light
of my eyes, the man lives not that has harmed thee !
and thus he spoke in verse :


“ Check thy tears, for if thy heart is distressed,


79


“the noble lion of the den will protect thee. O
« Ibla, fear not, indulge no alarms, for my whole
“ frame is labouring under the burden of its love;
“and I am a lion to whom the warriors in the day
“of contention bow in submission, and whom the
“ cowards dread. O Ibla, if persecution and absence
“must kill me, O that the bonds of meeting were
“ loosened for ever. Verily, I will defend thee this
“day, O thou my only hope, for I have a sword
“whoce blade cleaves the sculls. O Ibla, arise—
“ behold my actions, and my deeds under the battle
“dust, when every man is cut to pieces. Behold
“‘ my exploits when they attack and come on, and
“the supports of their tribe are destroyed. The
“foe wishes to take thee captive, O thou my only
“hope. O Ibla, palsied is the hand that would take
“thee prisoner. I will steep my sword in their
“ blood, and I will glut the birds, and the wolves,
“ and the Ghuols, with their carcases. Here let all
“the world know that every foe of mine shall be
“ overthrown under the dust of the battle.”

When Ibla heard Antar address her, she smiled
with teeth more brilliant, and whiter than pearls,
for she felt assured of his victory and conquest.
Again he returned towards the foe, like a lion, and
attacked them on the field of battle, scattering them
to the right and to the left Shiboob assisted him
m the rear with his arrows, and the dust rose and


filled the plain on all sides. The women were


80


praying for Antar, and invoking the God of heaven.
He was eagerly assailing the foe, like a lion, and
slew thirty of their horsemen. His horse being
completely exhausted, he dismounted and vaulted
on another charger; and whilst all this was passing
the slaves of the tribe of Abs looked on and gazed
in wild dismay and astonishment; but the chief
Vethab, when he perceived his companions and
those that were overthrown, cried out to the surviv-
ors, I alone am his match; and he rode away to the
field of battle, clothed in brilliant armour, a splendid
sword on his loins, and a spear in his hand, and he
thus exclaimed :

“ The viscissitudes of fortune, from the height of
“their mutability are launched against me, and every
‘‘ companion has abandoned me. The death of my
& tribe is at hand, from the arm of a slave who dis-
“ regards his fate. It is no wonder when fortune
“ raises up a poor wretch, that she should leave him
“in his infirmities a prey to the lions. O thou
“ vile slave, that hast outstepped thy sphere, a
‘¢ warrior, one whom no words can describe, is come
“ against thee. Away then with thy blind follies,
“ thou son of Zebeebah ; for how many heroes have
“ I destroyed at the moment of their attack.”

. He had scarcely finished his verses when Antar
answered him :

+ Thou wouldst abuse me, vile wretch, for that
“ I am the colour of that night, whose dangers I


81


“dare. If I am a slave, I have slain thy chiefs,
“and I have overwhelmed them with the vicissi-
“tudes of fortune. I am the assaulting lion: in
“the field of battle I rush inipetuously when the
“coward turns away in flight. The firm-rooted
“mountains are up-rooted at my vehemence, and
“let every one who dares to resist me, be certain
“ofdeath. How many heroes are punished as soon
“ as the lustre of my horse’s.front shines in the plain
“of war! their hands instantly relinquish their
“arms, and they tumble on the surface of the earth,
“ struggling with their limbs. How many warriors
“have I left stretched dead, gored with the spear
“thrusts! If thou art desirous to fight me, come on
“boldly to the hero who will make thee taste the
“food of death even from the tip of his fingers.”

He instantly assailed him, and struck him on the
breast, and driving out his spear between his shoul-
ders, he rushed among his comrades like unto a
valiant lion, and gored their sides and their bosoms :
and when they perceived that his assault was like a
vivid flame of fire, they fled over the plains and the
rocks. In the mean time, the slaves of Shas and
Rebia seeing what Antar had done to the tribe of
Moostalik, and how he was coming down upon
them with a loud shout, and also Shiboob, quick as
the flash of lightning, in his rear ; they turned their
backs and fled. Antar returned, the blood streaming
from his spear. The women joined him, thanking

G |


82


and praising him: and Ibla also came up to hin
and smiled upon him. God protect thee, said she,
thou black ‘in face, but fair in deeds—thou ornament
of men. He expressed his gratitude, avd having
replaced her on the howdah, and ordered the slaves
to collect the scattered horses and dispersed cattle,
and the spoils of the slain, he travelled on with the
women till they reached the tribe of Ghiftan, and
informed Shedad of all that had occurred with the
enemy. Shedad gave him thanks, and kissed him
between the eyes; he took him by the hand, and
his anger was soothed. And when they were at the
feast, Shedad. wished to place him among the
chiefs; but Antar would not consent; and he went
away and joined the slaves; and all the chiefs were
astonished at his modesty. They stood in awe of
him, and raised his dignity ; however, all the elders
and the youth came up to him, and made him sit
down with them to drink wine, and treated him with
all manner of kindness, and in return, he recited
various pieces of poetry, and they were greatly de-
lighted ; and for seven days they continued this ci-
vility and honour, and not a day passed but the
families made their acknowledgements to Antar.
And the feast being concluded, the tribe of Abs
sought their homes and their own habitations, and
travelled till they reached the land of Sheerebah and
Mount Saadi. When lo! loud cries and increasing
shouts, and shrill screams and clouds of dust, from


83


all directions assailed them. What: misfortune,
cried Shedad, what diasters have befallen us? They
hastened'away on their Arab steeds, and found their
wives prisoners, and their daughters dishonoured.
Loud and confused were their shrieks, and through
the dust glared the dazzling brightness of swords :
and the uproar of men was like the crash of
thunder : and there was no one in the tents but a
few men and the sons of King Zoheir, all covered
with wounds ; and though they were still defending
the property, they felt certain of drinking the cup
of death.

Now the cause of this terrible event was, that
Kmg Zoheir had gone forth, accompanied by his
warriors, against the land of Cahtan; for he was
informed that Mooteghetris was coming down upon
him with all his tribe; and it was Zoheir’s in-
tention to meet him at some distance, out of his
own territories, and thus to prevent him from in-
vading his country, and laying waste his lands. So
he left his brother Zembaa with a small body of men
and departed ; but chancing to miss the enemy on
the road, Mooteghetris reached the country of Zoheir
in safety, where he found the tents unprotected by
warriors. He rushed against them, and the noble
Absians rose to arms; and, violent was the conten-
tion between them, and many brave men were left
dead upon the plain, and the brightness of the
day became black. Numbers thickened upon the


84

Absians; loud and piercing were the shrieks of the
women, and slavery seemed their undoubted fate.
Temadhur was taken prisoner, and also Modehilah
and Mekdada and Jemana, and they were over-
whelmed in misery and disgrace. At that hour
arrived Antar and Shedad, and the horsemen of
Carad, and they amounted in all to forty warriors.

Cousins, cried Shedad, come on to these dastards!
then those brave fellows rushed forward, leaving the
slaves with the women and children. O son of
Zebeebah, cried Shedad to Antar, I wish to day to
see thee fight, that I may express my gratitude for
thy noble deeds. O master, soon shalt thou observe
what I do: he replied, Doubtless the chief of the
tribe is here. Thou art right, said Shedad. They
sought the enemy, and the whole plain trembled at
their shouts: they shook their lances, and the
women and servants shouted aloud, when they knew
they were Absians coming to protect them. They
attacked the right, and drove their left, and Antar
assaulted ‘the centre, plunging through confusion
and horrors; and thus he exclaimed :

« This day will I raise a battle, that shall hum-
“ ble the warriors of ages long past. I will make
“the blood to stream from their joints, when the
“sculls of the warriors leap from the blow of my
“sword. How many chiefs, when they see me eager
“in the fight, throw away their arms, and save
“ themselves by flight! Iam the bold one. As to


85

“ the fire of war, I kindle it, and hurl the tribes into
“punishments and death. Death, in the direful
“ combat, fears me, when the battle-dust rises; and
“the sand-cloud is like a blazing fire. My joy is in
“the encounter of heroes, when spears and swords
“clash in my grasp. How many battle-dusts have I
“ dived into, fearless of calamities! The joy of con-
“tests is my object ; it is all my desire. Verily, deeds
“will I perform unrivalled; deeds that shall be re-
“corded on leaves and books. I will raise the
“tumultuous din, and seas of blood: ‘tis in their
“crimson billows that my gladness abounds. I
“will make the atmosphere like the sable night,
“when the dust clouds-roll over the regions like a
“veil. No companion have I in battle but my horse
“and my sword; and they complain of my fury ;
“they exalt me; they subject death to me; and I
“am exalted above all mankind in my father. My
“ambition soars above Pisces; and my determination
“raises me above the Arab and the Persian.”

When Antar had ended, he shouted aloud to the
combatants, and rushed madly mto the midst of the
enemy, and overthrew them ; he drove them before
him over the plain: and the same did Shedad and
his brothers on the left, and made them retreat in a
shameful manner. After the flight, the Absians
returned, and among the first was Zembaa, the son
of Jazeemah ; they raised their terrible shout, and
they gladdened in the destruction of souls; they


86


pointed their lances, they cried out to their noble
steeds—spears clashed against spears. Antar alone
broke through the right, whilst Shedad and the
Absians destroyed the left ; then the horsemen again
retired in disgrace, and the plain seemed too confined
for them. Mooteghetris beheld his horsemen in
confusion and discomfited, and the left wing inter-
mixed with the night; that they were driven by
Antar like a herd of grazing camels, and that he was
roaring in their rear like the crash of thunder. Alarm-
ed at this state of affairs, he poured down from an
eminence with the people that remained with him,
assaulting Antar with his warriors; and they alt
bore patiently this dreadful encounter.

. Now Basam, the servant of Rebia, who had
followed Antar that he might destroy him on his
way to the tribe of Ghiftan, perceiving how he had
slain the tribe of Moostalik, and also their chief,
returned with his companions upon the day of this
battle; and as he marked Antar’s prowess on that
occasion, he envied him in his heart, and, secretly
designing to murder him, he assailed him, together
with the party of Mooteghetris.

Antar encountered the enemy, and flinched not ;
and his assault was the assault of a ferocious lion.
The storm of dust thickened, so that a father could
not distinguish his son. Just then, Basam aimed
his spear, and violently attacked Antar; for his
accursed spirit was aware how much credit he should


87


gain by slaying him. He approached him, and was
eagerly watching his opportunity, when lo ! an arrow
shot through the back of Basam, and passed out by
his chest ; and he who slew Basam, and made him
drink the cup of death, was the dreadful Shiboob.
Now Antar had recommended Shiboob to protect
Ibla: nor did he ever quit her till he perceived
Basam issuing from the tents, followed by some
Absians, whilst his brother was labouring to attain
the standards. Shiboob was alarmed, and quitted
Ibla, and ran after him. But Antar knew nothing
of all this, and when he saw Basam, he was just
about to do the deed, at the moment the arrow
struck him dead.

Now Antar was occupied in destroying the enemy,
and he stopped not till he came up to Mooteghetris
inthe fury of the fight; and he saw him-driving.
back the troops, and beckoning with his lance to
those who were flying from Antar like a flock of
sheep. His soul would not submit to flight; but he
shouted, and rushed forward like the sea when it
roars. And Antar received him as the parched up
ground receives the first of the rain: he challenged
him in a tremendous voice, and addressed him in the
harshest terms; he pressed upon Mooteghetris, and
closed upon him, and blocking up all means of
escape, he thrust his spear through his bowels, and
tore out his entrails; and when the horsemen saw


that he was dead, they were disordered and took to


88


flight; and the spears of the Absians played upon
the fugitives till the evening, when they returned
and collected the spoil of the cattle. Every where
the victory was celebrated with triumph, and all
united in praising Antar, and describing his heroic
deeds; how he had slain Mooteghetris, and had
annihilated his troops.


89


CHAPTER III.


Now Shedad exceedingly gloried in Antar; aware
that he had acquired new lustre by his actions, and
not a person remained to complain of him or abuse
him. He ran up to Antar and kissed him between
the eyes. But Antar kissed his feet, and he appear-
ed like the flower of the Judas tree,* so completely
was he smeared with the blood of the combatants.
Shedad’s affection for him increased, and he said to
his brother Zakmet-ool Jewad, By the faith of an
Arab, our education has not been lost upon Antar.
How should he not be noble, he replied, you being
the cause of his existence? and the Arab Cadi de-
creed him to you, and told you he was of your loins ;
do not reject him, for he truly belongs to you.

Antar, as well as Shedad, heard these words, and
he kept them secret in his heart; and he said not a
word to any one; but in a short time, when they all
repaired to their own tents, and separated each to
his own family, and each collected his own party,
_ Antar also retired to the house of his mother, and
Shiboob was driving before him what came to his
share of the plunder. And when the time of rest

* Cereis Siliquastrum, the flowers of which are of a very bright


purple colour, coming out from the branches and stem on every side,
in large clusters, and on short peduncles. `


90

drew near, he became sad and sorrowful, and the
house being entirely empty of people and neighbours,
O my mother, said he, I have heard words to day,
the meaning of which I cannot comprehend ; I wish
you would explain them to me, and tell me who is
my father, that I may know who brought me up. I
will inform you of all that, said she; so she then
told him how Shedad had met her in the desert,
and how all the ten had sought for her, and how he
had repulscd them, and made them agree to give her
to him, as his share : how they afterwards quarrelled
about him, and went before the Arab Cadi, who had
decided that he belonged to Shedad. Well then,
said he to her, O mother, if the Arab Cadi decided
that I was his son, and the ten have also agreed
that I was sprung from his loins; why does he not
call me his son, as every one else does? This would
cost him dear, said she, and he cannot resolve on
that, because he says you are a base-born ; and he is
afraid of the disgrace he should incur by giving you
the rank and honours of a son ; and the Arabs would
not consent to it.” ;

& I would not permit that to be the case, he re-
plied, for whoever would bring shame upon him, I
would soon reduce to annihilation. But if Shedad
still denies me my right and rank, I will use my
sword and spear upon him; and should I perceive
that the tribe dare despise me, I will level my scimitar
at the whole of them, and I will go to another tribe,


91


who may better understand my value; for how often
have I rescued them from. their dangers; and
liberated them from perils ! I will begin by striking
off the head of Shedad, if he does not acknowledge
my rank and condition; and so will I treat also
my uncle, if he does not give me Ibla in marriage ;
him too will I make to drink the wine of disgrace.”
For heaven’s sake, said his mother, do nothing of
the kind, for they will only hate you the more, and
you will gain nothing: but the men and women
Jove you, I perceive, on account of your noble
deeds, therefore proceed to no extremities, otherwise


you will increase their hatred and enmity against —-


you. But, my mother, added Antar, my aunt has
once promised to give Ibla to me in marriage, and
has engaged herself by contract to that purpose.
Hush ! said Zebeebah, talk not of impossibilities ;
this will never happen: how can a slave, without
connexion or rank, aspire to marriage with an Arab
woman ? particularly as you were brought up tend-
ing the sheep and the camels! O mother, said Antar,
I'll shew thee wonders; my soul pants for honour
and dignity, and with my sword will I dishonour
the necks of the Arab chieftains.”

Thus they continued to talk till morning dawned,
when King Zoheir returned. He could scarcely
believe that his family were preserved safe from
ignominy, for he had heard that Mooteghetris had
passed him on the road; and severe indeed was his
anxiety and affliction at having thus missed his foes


92


He marched therefore day and night till he reached
his own country, and found all his people happy
and secure. |

But when the tribe of Abs saw their king return-
ing with all his army and troops, the chiefs and
nobles went out to meet him, and having congratu-
lated him and prayed for his long life, they explain-
ed to him the destruction of his enemies, and all the
heroic acts of Antar ; how he had slain Mooteghetris,
and what noble feats he had performed. Verily,
said King Zoheir, we are ennobled in him above all
Arabs; we have not appreciated his worth, and
have not properly understood his greatness. Truly
he will become the champion of this whole nation, if
he live long, and all the horsemen will be under his
authority and command.

King Zoheir proceeded to his own tents, and
found his women exulting in the deeds of Antar ;
he afterwards entered his wife Temadhur’s apart-
ments, and found her also praising Antar in heart
and speech, as she exclaimed, O King, it is not
Antar, but a noble warrior; for he has done the
deeds of a hero. Thus was Antar’s dignity raised
in the eyes of King Zoheir. Were we to decree to
him our lives and our property, said he, it would
still be a small return for such exalted acts. He
soon after ordered some sheep and fat cattle to be
killed, and having directed the meat to be served
up and the wine to flow, he went out into the mid-
dle of the camp, and there erected a large tent of


98


velvet and silk, and placed im the centre a throne of
ivory inlaid. with burnished gold. ‘The horsemen then

presented themselves; Rebia and his brother attend-

ed, and each seated himself according to his rank:

Shedad also came, and all his valiant dependants. ;

Antar too entered, and kissed the ground, and

made obeisance, and prayed for a continuance of
Zoheir’s glory. He was going to sit down amongst

the slaves, but King Zoheir said to him, By the

Mover of the heavens, no one shall be my companion

to day but you, and no one shall eat and drink but

I and you. And he made Antar come towards

him. O King, said Antar, as he kissed his hand,

I am but your slave. Then King Zoheir got up

from his throne, and seated him by his side, and

talked to him: and all present had their eyes upon

him, and all his friends rejoiced; but Rebia and
Shas, and his uncle Malik were bursting with rage,

when they saw Antar raised to such honour, never

conferred on any one before.

Now the cups of wine were handed round, and
the delicacies were eaten with joy and pleasure;
and they appeared secure from the viscissitudes of
fortune, whilst King Zoheir conversed familiarly
with Antar, and joked.with him; he made him
arink, and kept him by him. And they continued
in this manner till the wine sported with the senses
of the guests, and all of them, and Antar too, stood
up, but the King prevented him; and when they


94


wished to depart, the King gave Antar a beautiful
robe, and mounted him on an Arab horse, and a
neeklace of burnished gold, studded with pearls and
jewels; he presented him also with an excellent
sword ; and Antar quitted the tents of King Zoheir
clothed in that superb robe and cloak, and mounted
on the Arab horse. But he soon dismounted, and
walked by the side of his father; and when they
entered the tent, Antar kissed his’ father’s feet, O
master, said he, why do you not grant me my due,
as others far and near have done? or bestow on me
what I so much desire? Tell me, said Shedad, what
you want, make known what you wish, that I may
be kind to you; I will not avariciously refuse you.
Now Shedad thought he wanted a camel to nde, or
a tent to live in, or a female slave to attend him.
But Antar replied, I request of you, O master, that
the rank and dignity of an Arab be appropriated to
me; and that you would acknowledge me as your
son, and yourself as my father, so that my rank may
be made known, and I become a chief; and in truth,
I will reward you as no one else can. I will reduce
the Arab princes themselves to your obedience,
through fear of my sword and my spear.

When Antar had finished speaking, Shedad’s
eyes started into the crown of his head, his affections
cooled, and his disorder of mind increased. Thou
base-born ! he cried, hast thou forgotton that thou
hast tended the camels and the sheep, and collected


95


the ordure of beasts amongst the mountains ? Thou
son of a slave, verily, the robe of King Zoheir plays
about thy loins, and his words float upon thine ears ;
thou hast indeed made a demand, and hast raised
thyself on high; and thou wouldst make me a by-
word with every one that should hear thee: nothing
have I for thee but a sword, and I will cut off thy
head. Upon this, Shedad drew his sword, as soon
as be had finished, and rushed at him, and all the
slaves ran away from him.

Now Semeeah, Shedad’s wife, overheard the dis-
pute, and came out of her tent, crying andlamenting.
She rushed instantly towards her husband, and
kissed his bosom, and took his sword out of his hand,
as she exclaimed—Never shall you slay him; me
shall you destroy before him. I have not forgotten
his virtues and noble deeds. Excess of wine must
have urged him to this fancy: therefore do not
punish him for what he has said: Semeeah did not
desist till she had soothed his anger, and he retired
to his tent.

But Antar was in the greatest agony; he was
ashamed that the day should dawn upon him, or
that he should remain any longer in the country ;
or that he should again look his father in the face.
He accordingly went out, and sought the residence
of Malik, the King’s son: his clothes trailed upon
the ground through shame, and his tears flowed
from the excessive pain he endured, for intoxication


96


had overpowered his judgment. So he sought prince
Malik, who was just then returned from his father’s,
and quite rejoiced at what had passed with respect to
Antar, and the robes and presents he had received.
At this moment a slave came in, and said, Antar
wishes to be admitted into your presence. “Let him
in, said Malik; and when he was introduced, Prince
Malik looked at him, and saw his tears flowing from
his tortured heart. He seated him by him, and
talked familiarly with him, and asked him what was
the matter, and what had happened to him. O my
lord, he replied, I demanded of my father the rank
and honour of an Arab; but he has abused me,
and beaten me, and wished to kill me, and has made
me a laughing stock among the Arab chiefs.

You have been wrong, said Malik to Antar, in
this sad affair; you have done that which would not,
at any rate, have induced him to acknowledge you.
“ Do not, my lord, continued Antar, reprove my
ambition, which often robs me of my wits and discre-
tion; but had I not been intoxicated, this would not
have happened, and I should have concealed my
wishes, and submitted patiently to my misfortunes,
till death had overtaken me. But in all circumstances
thou art my master. Ah! my lord, continued he,
how often have I relieved them from their foes, and
no one ever assisted me! Know too, that I love Ibla,
the daughter of my uncle Malik; and she drives
away the sleep from my eyelids, and in my sleepless


97


nights I am united to her; but my father Shedad
has cut off all my hope, and misfortunes upon mis-
fortunes overpower me. I only demanded to be re-
cognized as his son, that I might be united to her ;
but truly all hopes of her are completely destroyed.
No joy now remains for me, and the light of the day
is the darkness of night in my eyes. I have no home
but among the wild beasts and the reptiles.” His
agony increased, and he wept, and complained bit-
terly. Sorrows and afflictions were multiplied upon
him, and the tears rushed into his eyes, as he ex-
pressed his anguish and passion.

Had you informed me of your situation before,
said Malik, greatly distressed, and pitying him, I
would have sacnficed my person and property to
remedy it. But what was easy, has now become
difficult; Ibla will be concealed from you from this
day forward. I fear also that your father will con-
trive to kill you, and that no one will be able to
relieve you. But stay here whilst I tell all this to
my father. O my lord, said Antar, the only place
of rest for me is on the highways; and I must roam
about the whole day and the live long night; for
men have conspired to destroy me, such as Rebia
and your brother Shas. He passed the whole night
with Malik, aud at the dawn of day Antar mounted
his horse, and put on his armour and his cuirass.
He travelled on till he was far from the tents, and
be knew not whither he was going: sometimes he

H


' 98


took the left and sometimes the right, and again he
struck into the wilds and deserts, till it became
broad day. There he wandered about the rocks
and mountains, and accusing fate, he thus expressed


` himself.


“J rail against fortune that relents to no up-
« braider, and I demand security from the cruelties
« of fortune. She one day promises fair and excites
“ my pride, but truly I know all her promises are
« false. I have served man, and I have taken my
« relations as protectors against fortune; but they
« have acted like scorpions. Amongst themselves
« they call me the son of Zebeebah, but in the tu-
« multuous rush of horsemen, I am the son of
« nobles. Were it not for my love, one like me
« would not humble himself to such as they ; and
« the lion of the waste would not fear the foxes.
s Quickly my tribe will remember me, when the
« horsemen come charging amongst the warriors
« with their sword-blows. O that thy phantom
« would visit me, O Ibla, it would see the torrents
< of tears that stream from my eye-lids. But I will
“ forbear, that my railers may have pity on me ; and
« that my patience may soften their hearts. Thy .
“ station is a post in the centre of heaven, but my
« hand fails in attaining the stars.”

Thus he roamed from the high road without
friend or companion. The next day thetribe heard —
all that had passed between Antar and his father.


99


And early in the morning Prince Malik ‘sent for
Antar; but he was not to be found: he supposed
he would return by the evening : still he came not.
_ Now Prince Malik was sincerely attached to Antar ;
he was greatly distressed, and he did all he could to .
find him. He then acquainted his father with what
had passed. As soon as the King heard the account
from his son, he was much vexed, and reproached
him. O my son, said he, why did you not imme-
diately tell me of this, that I might have arranged
the business ? I concealed it, said he, in order not
to occasion any disturbance, and for fear of exciting
your indignation, for I have long seen my brother
Shas hates him as the vilest of men; and Rebia
will not raise his head towards him; and I gee also
that many of their friends detest him. But you
love him and are interested about him; and I could
not possibly tell you an affair you would not have
approved. In the mean time Antar continued to
wander over the plains of the desert, until the day
shone, when behold! there arose a great cloud of
dust, that darkened the country. Antar contem-
plated it for some time, and then perceived forty
horsemen, each bearing a quivering spear, and a
dazzling scimitar. He directed his horse towards
them, and they proved to be of the noble tribe of
Abs, and Ghegadh the son of Nasshib was their
léider. When Antar saw them he saluted them,
and they returned the salutation; O thou son of


100)


Zebeebah, said they, why art thou straying here?
I was hunting game, he replied, and when I saw
you, I made towards you in order to bear you com-
pany. And we, said Ghegadh, have always dis-
tinguished you from the other slaves, and have
always considered you in the light of a valiant
knight: and if you will join us, we will agree to
your sharing with us as a noble warrior. But how
can that be? said Antar. Know that a slave, said
Ghegadh, enjoys a half share with his masters. But,
said one of them, Antar truly deserves more than
two-thirds, and happen what will, he is a knight ;
and indeed not every one that is called a knight is a
knight. They at length agreed that they would
surrender to the slave a fourth of whatever plunder
they might take. .

In this manner they proceeded till they approached
the land of the tribe of Cahtan, where they saw
a great quantity of cattle, with some high-raised
tents and lofty pavilions ; many horses running about
and camels grazing, and the people unsuspicious
of a reverse of fortune. Here, my cousins, said
Ghegadh, is a rich tribe, and the people few in
number ; let us attack and despoil them whilst it is
dark, and we will quit their country in safety; be-
fore morning we shall be far away among the
wastes. They instantly shook their lances in their
hands, and drew their brilliant faulchions ; and as
they drove the camels and the horses from the tents


101

and the habitations, the men mounted to keep them
off from the women and families. But the sons of
Abs forced them back towards the tents and trampled
them down upon the ground, seizing their property
and spoil. Antar rushed down upon them, and
obliged them to fly. Do you, said Ghegadh to Antar,
drive away the cattle, and we will repulse all that
dare pursue them.

Antar drove away the cattle, and had proceeded
some way, when lo! a knight rushed out from the
ravines in the rocks, mounted on a dark coloured
colt, beautiful and compact, and it was of a race
much prized among the Arabs; his hoofs were as
flat as the beaten coin; when he neighed, he seemed
as if about to speak, and his ears like quills; his sire
was Wasil, and his dam Hemama, When Antar
cast his eyes upon the horse, and observed his speed
and his paces, and his uncommon beauty, he felt
that no horse could surpass them, so his whole
heart and soul longed for it. The Absians, indeed,
had plundered the horde and the country, but Antar’s
mind was occupied with the horse, so he galloped on
tll he approached the horseman; and when the
knight perceived that Antar was making towards
him, he spurred his horse, and it fled beneath
him; for this was a renowned horseman called
Harith, the son of Obad, and he was a valiant hero.

Antar galloped after him till sunset, and he found
himself far separated from his party. Harith then


102


turned about to him; and when he was quite close,
said Antar to him, O young man, by the faith you
profess and believe, will you not wait for me awhile
and grant me a favour? for I see you are a noble
horseman. Hear what I have to say, and give me
an answer ; I will be answerable for thy security.
O young man, said Harith, trusting to his pro-
mise, what do you want? I see you also are a va-
liant knight. Will you sell me this horse you are
riding, asked Antar, or will you give it me if you
are the owner of it? By heavens, young man,
said Harith smiling, had you accosted me thus at
first, I would have given him to you, with some
camels also, and you need not have acted thus;
but, Arab, did you ever see any one surrender his
horse and his armour in a plain like this, alone and
a stranger? and particularly a horse like this, whose
lineage is as well known as that of the noblest
warriors; for should his master be in difficulties, he
will liberate him; he moves and flies without wings ;
. and if you have not heard of his fame, I will tell
you—he is called Abjer, whom Chosroe and the Gre-
cian Emperors and the princes of the tribe of Asfar
have anxiously wished to possess. I was angry with
my own people, and repaired to this noble tribe. J
ate with them, and remained with them a long time.
It costs me much to part with this horse, but my
heart is attached to this tribe, and is greatly dis-
tressed about them. Iam no coward in the assault


103 -

of heroes; but I was afraid lest this horse might re-
ceive a blow that should injure him, and I there-
fore only followed you, in order to draw off your
attention till the men of the tribe might overtake
you and pursue you over the hills and the wilds,
and that I might point out to them your course ;
for you have invaded a tribe where there are only
women, and but a few men, unable to encounter so
fierce a foe; and I do not perpeive there is a single
feeling heart among you all.

Harith having ceased speaking, I much wish you
would sell me this horse, said Antar ; demand what |
you please from me, for I must be the purchaser of
it. O young man, said Harith, if you are indeed
desirous of a horse, that is in this age quite inva-
luable, I will not sell it but in restitution of all this
booty ; and then do not imagine you will lose by your
bargain. I swear by the God who knows all secrets,
I do not avoid fighting you from the fear of death,
for I am a warrior, and can defend myself; but I

" feared this horse would be injured. If you, young
man, wish to strike a bargain, and act like a man of
honour, as I am a guest of this tribe, and have eaten
with them, my wish is to ransom their property with
this horse; and had it not been for this mis/ortune,
I never would have parted with such an animal.

When Antar heard these words, he felt certain
that Harith was a liberal minded man, and there-
fore, wishing to be on a par with him in respect to


104


his honourable and generous conduct: Well! said
he, I will purchase of you this horse for this booty;
and I shall be moreover exceedingly obliged : here 1s
my hand in faith and sincerity.

Harith dismounted from the back of his noble
steed, and gave him to Antar, who mounted him
like a king of the land far and wide ; and he told
the slaves to conduct the cattle and women and
servants to their own country. Harith took them,
and went his way. l

Now Antar upon Abjer watched them till they
had disappeared among the deserts; and just then
came up the Absian horsemen, and Ghegadh at
their head, who, seeing Antar standing alone in the
plain, without any of the booty, cried out, thou son
of a base slave woman, where is the plunder?
I bought with it this horse, he replied, and I have
established your honour and credit in the land of
the tribe; because I saw the owncr was a man
of worth, and jealous of the honour of women,
gracious and liberal minded: I was therefore anx-
ious to equal him in propriety of conduct, and
would not leave behind us in this land, the re-
membrance of a fowl action, and be a scandal
amongst Arabs. It ts the most ignominious of deeds
to take prisoners free born women ; and besides
this, the spacious plain is open before us, and the
Lord God is the bestower of all things, and the
taker away ; he is the distributor of every thing ;


105


and God forbid he should send us back without a
reward.

Thou base born, cried Ghegadh, in reply to
Antar the lion-hero, We consigned them over to
your care, but you have been buying, bartering,
and selling, without asking our leave. What is
done is done, said Antar; I will make it good to
you elsewhere, if the Creator of all things pleases,
and you agree to the protection I have granted : but
if you wish to quarrel with me,.I will protect my life
with the force of this sword, and this well: propor-
tioned spear, and I will not live to forfeit my word.

Come on to this wretch, said Ghegadh inflamed
with rage, to his companions ; cut him in pieces with
your cleaving scimitars, and make him drink of the
cup of death and annihilation.

Upon that, Antar went to a little distance from
them, and dismounting from Abjer, tightened his
girths, and then mounting again, galloped and char-
ged about, crying out to them, you base born
wretches, to day will I shew you how I fight and
thrust. Away, away, to shame and disgrace—this
day you shall behold the furious lion. He thought
of his beloved, and thus exclaimed :

« I abuse fortune, that never softens at the voice
“ of the counsellor. I conceal my passion in my
& heart, but my tears disclose it. My tribe is leagued
éc with fortune to seek my blood, and they assault


106


“me with sword and spear. They have driven me
s from the mistress I love, and I am plunged into
“ the well of the water of banishment. To expose my-
“cherished life is indifferent to me; and though I am
“ separated from her, my heart clings to her. O my
“ God, let not my life be a life of ignominy! let not
“ my death, O God, be among the weeping crowd !
“ but my corpse! let the birds hover over it, and
“ let the crows of the desert drink of my wounds.
“ God regards the man who is hospitable to his
“ tribe, and who becumes among them a chief in
“authority. But when they see us invade their
‘ dwellings, every warrior on a swift-paced steed,
“ they promise us riches, and high-bosomed damsels
‘with well formed hips, and beautifully-shaped
“ haunches. I will seize them on my horse, whose
“ like exists not; aye, and the youth sold it like a
“ man of honour. Whoever of ye, oh tribe of Abs,
“ wishes my death, I will appear before him in the
“ plain of battle, and I will charge among ye on my
“ stern-faced steed, and I will rush at ye as the
“‘ lion of the wilds.”

When the Absians heard Antar’s discourse, they
all shrunk from the conflict, and consulting with
each other, said, Ghegadh, what stops you? and
what occasions this fear and consternation at this
black slave? O Ghegadh, said they, you have
advised us to make the attack, and still you hold


107
back from the assault and the combat; you are our


superior and our adviser, so come on. O my cousin,
said Ghegadh, much troubled, wise is the man be-
tween whom and Antar there is no contention. Ex-
plain this, said they, ere we endanger our lives in
a contest with him. I observed, said he, when he
dismounted to tighten his girths, his gigantic mien,
his brawny arms, his full formed legs, and his cool
undaunted eye. And I, said another, saw some-
thing more extraordinary than that. Whats that?
said they. Oneday King Zoheir gave him one of his
finest horses; he went up to it to put on the bridle ;
the horse would not take it, but was riotous, and
reared at him. At the instant Antar lifted him off
the ground up to the top of his head, and dashed
him on the earth, and smashed his bones. When
they heard this account of Antar, they trembled, and
were afraid. Do you go up to him, said they,
addressing Ghegadh, give him the plunder, and do
not make it appear that we are afraid of him, that
his avidity may not increase to our detriment, and
he say, “ I will not quit one of ye till I have slain
him and taken his spoil.”

So Ghegadh went up to him, O my cousin, said
he, are you not ashamed to engage in battle against
your cousins, when they were only joking and mak-
ing merry? O my cousins, said Antar, convinced
they were afraidef him, I would not do any thing
that could be thought wrong, but I have purchased


108


this horse, who will carry me against your enemies ;
and you know that when a person seeks to destroy
another, it is necessary to defend one’s self. Ghe-
gadh continued to speak flatteringly to Antar, till he
softened him and cajoled him. O Arab Chieftains,
said Antar, I have not forgotten your kindness, and
I am but your slave. I am grateful for all you
have done for me, and had it not been for you, I
should not be known among the Arabs.

It was not fear that dictated these words, but in
order to observe their sentiments towards him.

He has indeed purchased this horse, said Ghe-
gadh to his comrades, in order to destroy our enemies,
let us therefore grant it him. Be it so, said they
all. Thus Antar became possessed of Abjer, whose
equal no prince or emperor possessed. By way of
precaution, Antar kept away from Ghegadh and his
companions, who went on talking to each other.
How that base-born has succeeded to his wish, said
they, for verily that horse was worth his weight in
gold; we shall indeed be disgraced among the
Arabs ! Antar proceeded on before them and heard
all they said.

Now they continued their march till evening,
when they reached a spot abounding in frees and
streams; wide and extensive were the surrounding
plains. They dismounted and let their horses graze,
and seated themselves whilst Antar stood watch over
them, for their and his own safety. They did not


109


‘move from this spot till morning dawned, when they
‘mounted their horses and marched till evening;
when suddenly from the upper part of the desert
a great dust appeared, and through it they distin-
guished a lofty howdah, and on its top there was a
crescent of gold. The howdah was richly ornamen-
ted with velvet; in front were damsels and slaves,
and they wore robes of divers colours, and behind
were horsemen mounted on steeds all of different
colours, No sooner saw they this procession and
these fine garments, than they were sure it was a
bride in the howdah; but they knew not her hus-
band, nor any one connected with her. This is
our plunder, said they; God has sent it to us in
recompense for what has befallen us. They instantly
bent their heads over their saddle-bows, and violent-
ly assaulted the party, and got possession of the
howdah and all its accompaniments. But when the
horsemen that attended the howdah beheld them,
they attacked them, and man met man, and hero
assaulted hero; blood was shed and spilt, and the
horror was great: and in a moment the Absians
were assisted by the deeds of Antar, the devouring
lion, for his attack was the attack of an over-power-
ing warrior. And three score and ten were the
horsemen that accompanied the bride: he destroyed
sixty of them; and the rest fled, five to the right and
five to the left.

The Absians having taken possession of thehowdah


110


and the property with: the dispersed cattle, and a
vast quantity of articles besides, asked the slaves
about the bride, who was her husband, and who
her father ? “Arabs, said they, she is called Aminah,
the daughter of Yezid, the son of Handkalah, sur-
surnamed the Blood-drinker, the chief of all the —
princes of Tey; and her husband, to whom she is
going, is called Nakid, the son of Jellah, a warlike
and bold horseman, the protector of the race of
Marah ; and you have executed this villainous act
of violence upon us, and have ventured on this ha-
zardous enterprize ! !

They proceeded, and passed over the deserts and
the wilds, the lady weeping and lamenting at the
misfortune that had overwhelmed her. But when
Antar heard from the slave this account of her
father and her husband, he was convinced he would
come down on her account, and that a great battle
and slaughter would ensue between them, and he
wished the Absians should feel his power and weight,
for what he had heard them say about himself. So
he came toward them. God has granted you vic-
_ tory and safety, said he: and thou too, they an-
swered, he has also given thee cause to rejoice. You
are aware, said Antar, that this plunder is much
‘ more valuable and precious than the former ; let us
put it out in lots and divide it, and let us give to
each his portion, that he may defend it with his soul
amd body.


N11


You, Antar, took the first plunder for yourself
alone, said one, and do you demand your share of
the second? With respect to the first plunder, O
my cousins, said Antar, did you not give it me?
and it is not customary with chiefs to take back
their donations. The fellow, said Ghegadh, is right
in what he says ; divide the spoil, and give him half
of one of your shares. Arabs, treat me fairly, cried
Antar, and speak the truth. Ghegadh got into a
passion, What do you mean? said he. According
to our agreement, said Antar, which was settled be-
tween you and me, ôf all the plunder we should
take, I was to have one half of the whole; and all
of you the other half.

Rage filled the heart of Ghegadh. Thou son of
Zebeebah, thy avarice demands impossibilities; thou
art indeed mad, and a villain. Verily thou hast
not kept thy word; and O, had the day never
come that we met thee in this road! No one, said
Antar, is mad, but he who keeps company with
you, and agrees to your demands ; for ye are a set
of fellows of little justice, and great opression and
violence; the fact is, I will not take a jot less than
one half of the plunder, even were my soul to drink
of the cup of death. Come on, on to this black
slave, cried Ghegadh to his friends, who rebels,
and outrages us. Upon this they all jumped up,
and cried out against Antar, resolved to kill him,
and make him drink of the cup of annihilation.


112


Antar went apart from them for a while into the
rocky plain, then galloped, and challenged them’ to
the contest, thus addressing them ;—

s When my foe sues me for a debt, I settle the
‘‘ debt with the Redeinian spear :* my scimitar’s
“ edge shall extirpate ye all, and shall justly
« decide between you and me. I am exalted by
“ my sword and spear far above the minutest stars
“ and the two bears. Foul wretches! ye know not
& my power, but the inhabitants of the two hemi-
‘¢ spheres shall feel it. ‘The grasp of fortune has
“ not destroyed my strength, and the fingers of
“time have not been stretched out against me.
s Many a horseman have I left sprawling, his
« cheeks grovelling, his hands dyed in blood, whilst
« the birds of death hover round him, and the mag-
“ pies assemble over his corpse.”

His verses finished, he was about to attack them,
when lo! a dust arose and covered the whole coun-
try. Ina short time the cloud opened and disco-
vered three hundred horsemen, all clad in steel, and
the father of the damsel, the Blood-drinker, appeared
in front of them. He roared like a lion; his sword
was an Indian blade. Whither would ye flee, O
ye baseborn, he cried out—I am he, surnamed the
Blood-drinker, the Cahtanian.


Now the cause of the arrival of these men was


* Redeini—the name of the wife of a famous spear-maker.
Richardson.


118


this: out of the ten that escaped by flight from the
combat, five went to the father of the damsel, the
on of the land, and five went to Nakid the son of
Jellah ; but the residence of her father happened to
be the nearest. So he set off with three hundred
men, all stern lions, and he galloped on till he over-
took the Absians, as we have mentioned ; and it
was he who prevented the combat between the
Absians and Antar.

When Antar saw the father of the damsel coming
on—See where the heroes advance, he cried; now
protect your plunder, if ye are men of valour—no
portion is mine, neither great nor small, not a camel
or a sheep. I will quit you, and will neither be with
you nor against you. He spurred away his Abjer
from them, and mounted to the top of a‘high hill;
he took his feet out of the stirrups, and sat
cross-legged upon the neck of his horse, resting on
his dreadful spear, and there he remained contem-
plating the terrors of the approaching conflict.

The Blood-dmnnker cried aloud to his warriors; and
they rushed down upon the Absians, and men en-
countered men, heroes heroes; and blood was spilt
and shed.’ In a moment swords clashed, every heart
and feeling were roused; heads flew off like balls,
and hands like leaves of trees. The Teyans rushed
upon the race of Abs; also the Blood-drinker
assailed them in his courage, and released his
daughter. The Absians quitted their plunder, for

I


114


their souls could not stand firm ; and they fled over
the wilds.

Now when Antar perceived this defeat, he re-
placed his fcet in the stirrups, and raising his spear
from the ground, pounced down from the height
like an eagle, or a wild beast when it rushes from
its den; and he roared out to them in a loud voice
that made the mountains rebellow. O ye ignoble
dastards, I am Antar, the son of Shedad! And
he urged on Abjer, who started under him lke
a flash of lightning, or a tearing arrow: his eye-
balls turned red, and foam issued from his lips: he
shrieked aloud in front of the horses, and imme-
diately they shrunk back on their haunches, and
hurled their riders from their backs : and the heroes
were scattered over the desert and the wilderness. —
In less than an hour he drove them from the
plunder. As soon as the Absians heard the sound
of Antar from under the cloud of dust,—Verily,
Antar, the magnanimous warrior, will overcome
them, said they; may God assist him! This is in-
deed true intrepidity, and he deserves half the spoil;
for if the heroes drink the cup of death, the great-
est share will fall to him, for verily the eye of the
sun cannot be concealed. Thus their hearts were
purified towards Antar, and they all returned to his

When the Blood-drinker saw the Absians resume
the contest, he said to the people about him, The


115


horseman of Abs and Adnan are coming down, and
this day will they bring death and destruction upon
us ; and he let the reins hang loose and fled. The
Teyans spread themselves over the plains and the
desert, following him in every direction, whilst
Antar, having already slain about eighty men, ap-
proached the plunder ; and when all were fled, the
Absian horsemen came up, and there was not one
but praised and thanked him. So they took -up the
spoil, and the property, and the prisoners, and the
bride, and departed, seeking the land of the tribe of
Abs, and rejoicing in their victory and triumph;
-every one in astonishment at Antar’s intrepidity.
But as soon as the other five that fled informed
Nakid, the husband of the bride, the light became
dark in his eyes, and he shouted out to the tribe of
Maan—To horse! to horse! and ere an hour had
passed, five thousand valiant horsemen were ready,
and he marched at the head of them in hopes of
overtaking the race of Abs, and of overwhelming
them in perdition and death, and of rooting out
every vestige of them, so that not arecord of them
should exist. For indeed he was a warrior ferocious
as a lion, one of the thousand heroes in those days
of darkness. He travelled on night and day that
he might overtake the tribe of Abs before they could
reach their own country. Meanwhile they pursued
their journey, seeking their own lands, when a dust


116


arose behind them, and darkened the whole region -:
it opened, and discovered the Maanites headed by
Nakid. At this sight they were convinced of their
destruction and death, as they said one to another,
Verily the tribe of Maan have overtaken us! They
looked towards Antar, and they perceived him smil-
ing and ‘rejoicing at the arrival of the warriors.
Verily, said they, O my cousin, the foe is come up
with us, and today will our booty be torn away, and
our sculls will fly off. Know, my cousins, said Antar,
that death will not be wanting, neither will it in-
crease; but I have long wished for sucha day as this,
for I have not given up the tribe of Abs; my heart
is fixed on returning home; and this fortuitous cir-
cumstance has happened to us by the will of Him
who disposes life and death. Now is the flame of war
at hand, and sorrow and anguish are approaching.
Whoever among you is ready to fight, let him fight ;
whoever wishes to fly, let him fly; but for me, I
will drink of their cups, I will contend with their
heroes; and thus he continued in verse:
‘‘ This day the race of Abs shall behold my com-
“ bat, and my actions in the contest when I charge.
& I will seize their property: aye, and the double of
“it with my supple, quick-moving, death-bearing
“spear. Iwill destroy the brave in war with my In-
«“ dian blade, and I will drive down among them like
“ a devouring lion. I will rave among their horse-


117


“men with my determined courage, and I will
“< charge, and I will rush over them in the battle.
“Jam the Knight of Knights, the lion whom no
s“ human being can withstand. The lions in their
‘‘dens tremble at me, and in the wy of battle the
“ Ghuols fly from me.”

When Antar had finished, he encountered the
warriors with most penetrating thrusts and rending
blows. The Absians were obliged to endure it with
him, and to assist him in the horrors. Themessengers
of death were distributed amongst the conquerors and
the conquered ; the sharp-edged swords came in con-
tact with them, and the straight lances glided through
them. ‘The Absians repented of their firmness, and
fled over the plains, whilst alone Antar encountered
the whole calamity; and he stood firm, like one
resolved to avert shame and disgrace. He aimed at
the breasts of the heroes with over-powering assaults
and thrusts, that would have made the deep-rooted
mountains totter. _

‘ When Nakid saw the battle of Antar, and how
alone he stood against five thousand, and was mak-
ing them drink of the cup of death and perdition, he
was overwhelmed with astonishment at his deeds.
Thou valiant slave, he cried, how potent is thine
arm—how strong is thy wrist ! And he rushed down
upon Antar, that his bride might behold a proof of
his courage : and Antar, seeing that he was making at
hin, presented himself before him, for he was all


118


anxiety to meet him. O thou base-born, cried Nakid,
son of an uncircumcised mother! But Antar permitted
him not to finish his speech, before he asasulted him
with the assault of a lion, and roared at him: he was
horrified and paralyzed at the sight of Antar. Antar
attacked him thus scared and petrified, and struck
him with his sword on the head, and cleft him down
to the back, and he fell, cut in twain, from the horse,
and he was split in two as if by a scale; and as
Antar dealt the blow, he cried out “O by Abs!
O by Adnan! I am ever the lover of Ibla.”

No sooner did the tribe of Maan behold Antar’s
blow, than every one was seized with fear and dis-
may. The whole five thousand made an attack like
the attack of a single man ; but Antar received them
as the parched ground receives the first. of the rain,
exhibiting to them his power and his courage. His
eye-balls were fiery red, and foam issued from the
corners of his lips; wherever he smote, he cleft the
head; every warrior he assailed he annihilated ; and
as the warriors still pressed on him, he tore a rider
from the back of his horse, he heaved him on
high, and whirling him in the air, struck down a
second with him, and the two instantly expired.
“By thine eyes, O Ibla,” he cried, “ today will
I destroy all this race.” Thus he proceeded until
he terrified the warriars, and hurled them into woe
and disgrace, hewing off their arms and their joints.
At length the five thousand retreated from the


119


combat, for fear and terror had completely shaken
them, and more than nine hundred horsemen he had
slain, and gained an entire victory over them.

Just as Antar had nearly annihilated them, there
appeared a dust that darkened the whole land. In
an hour it was cleared, and there came forth a troop
of heroes; at their head was an horseman like an
eagle, mounted on an horse that moved like a cloud.
The rider was handsome, in the bloom of youth,
and every tongue cried. out, O by Abs! O by
Adnan! Now this knight was Malik, King Zo-
her’s son. And he was coming in search of Antar,
in consequence of the affair that took place between
Antar and his father, who, when he demanded the
rank and consideration of a son, wished to put him
to death. Now Malik was expecting Antar the
next day, but as he came not, he went and acquainted
his father the King with all that had happened.
Zoheir instantly sent for Shedad, who kissed the
ground. Why do you not grant Antar’s request,
and call him your son, as every one else does? asked
King Zoheir : Think you, Shedad, that amongst
the tribes of Cahtan and Adnan there is a more in-
trepid warrior than your son Antar, or a bolder heart
than his? O my Lord, answered Shedad, he is
indeed my son, and a part of my heart; but my
brother Malik said to me, if you acknowledge Antar
as your son, I will abandon myself to the Arab
tribes; therefore, on account of my brother Malik,


120


I have renounced him. ‘Well, then, said Zoheir, I
will have him return to his country in spite of his
foes. And he dispatched a slave to gain information
and to follow him. He waited until the slave re-
turned, and told him that Antar had associated
himself with Ghegadh, the son of Nashid, and at
that moment he was, single handed, engaged with
five thousand horsemen, and Nakid the son of Jel-
lah. Malik wept. May God, said he, prosper him,
for he has devoted himself to death and destruction ;
never will he fly or retreat; but by the life of my
father King Zoheir, I must aid him, and if he is
dead, never will I return till J have taken vengeance
on his foes, and made his murderers drink of the
loathsome cup. He set out, and appeared as we
have just mentioned, and rushed forwasd with his
troops as we have described.

But as soon as Malik and his people came for-
ward, and the men had recognized each other,
Antar felt his power expanded, for at that moment
the enemy had resolved to slay his heroes. But at
the sight of his friend Malik and his warriors, his
heart revived, and he exhibited the whole courage
of his soul; and he made a most desperate attack '
upon his antagonists, ‘and overwhelmed them in
total ruin.

When the tribe of Maan saw Antar’s destructive
force, and his sweeping blows, and that the Absians
were come to his assistance, their only resource was


121


flight, and retreat over the plains and wilds; for
they said to each other, When Antar was alone, we
could not resist him, What shall we do now, that the
tribe of Abs and Adnan are come to his aid? So
they took to flight and ran away in confusion, whilst
Antar and the tribe of Abs having pursued them for
three parasangs, returned for the scattered cattle and
dispersed horses. Antar dismounted from Abjer, and
running up to his friend Malik, wished to kiss his
feet in the stirrup, but Malik would not permit him,
and kissed him between the eyes, and rejoiced ip his —
safety. And there was not one of the Absians but
came up to Antar, and congratulated him on his
victory and triumph. Antar thanked them. They
halted there that night, and the next day they set
out seeking their own country: Antar riding by the
side of Malik, and relating to him all his adventures
with Ghegadh and his companions, and how he ob-
tained his horse Abjer. Malik informed him of all
that had passed between him and King Zoheir,
how he had sent after his father Shedad, and had
threatened him. Antar was glad, and foreboded
well, and felt convinced that his marriage might
take place as long as King Zoheir was on his side :
so that his love for Ibla increased. They thus pro
ceeded on their journey till they came near to their
homes; when Antar’s passion seizing him, he thus
exclaimed:

“ When the breezes blow from Mount Saadi,


} 22


< their freshness calms the fire of my love and
& transports. Let my tribe remember I have pre-
‘“¢ served their faith ; but they feel not my worth,
“ and preserve not their engagements with me.
« Were there not a maid settled in the tents, why
“ should I prefer their society to absence? Shmly
‘© made is she, and the magic influence of her eye
‘© preserves the bones of a corpse from entering
“the tomb. Thesun as it sets, turns towards her,
“ and says, Darkness obscures the land, do thou rise
“in my absence; and the brilliant moon calls out
“ toher, Come forth, for thy face is like me when I
“am at the full, and in all my glory! The Tama-
& risk trees complain of her in the morn and the eve,
“ and say, Away, thou waning beauty, thou form of
“ the laurel ! She turns away abashed and throws
« aside her veil, and the roses are scattered from her
“ soft fresh cheeks. She draws her sword from
“ the glances of her eye-lashes, sharp and pene-
“ trating as the blade of her forefathers, and with
& it her eyes commit murder, though it be sheathed :
& is it not surprising that a sheathed sword should
“ be so sharp against its victims! Graceful is every
s limb, slender her waist, love-beaming are her
“ glances, waving is her form. The damsel passes
“ the night with musk: under her veil, and its fra-
‘¢ grance is increased by the still fresher essence of
“ her breath. The lustre of day sparkles from
“ her forehead, and by the dark shades of her


123


“ curling ringlets, night itselfis driven away. When
« she smiles, between her teeth is a moisture com-
“ posed of wine, of rain, and of honey. Her throat
“ complains of the darkness of her necklaces. Alas!
“alas! the effects of that throat and that neck-
“lace! Will fortune ever, O daughter of Malik,
“ ever bless me with thy embrace, that would cure
“ my heart of the sorrows of love? If my eye could
“ see her baggage camels, and her family, I would
“rub my cheeks on the hoofs of her camels. I will
“ kiss the earth where thou art; mayhap the fire of
“my love and extacy may be quenched. Shall
“thou and I ever meet as formerly on Mount
“ Saadi? or will the messenger come from thee to
“ announce thy meeting, or will he relate that thou
“ art in the land of Nejd? Shall we meet in the
“land of Shureba and Hima, and shall we live in
“ joy and in happiness ? I am the well known Antar,
“ the chief of his tribe, and I shall die: but when
“ I am gone, history shall tell of me.”

Antar’s eloquence and intrepidity made the
Prince’s heart bound with joy, for not an Arab
amongst the neighbouring or distant tribes could
eqaal him. Verily, said Malik, the spirit of God
animates you, and inspires your mind; for you
have attained the full expression of words, and are
perfect in rhymes. They went on, passing over the
wilds and the deserts, until they approached their
own country, when Malik sent forward one of his


124


men to give notice of his coming. The messenger
preceded them, and informed King Zoheir of the
approach of his son, and of Antar the bold warrior,
at which being greatly rejoiced, he went out with all
his noble comrades, except Rebia and Shas, to meet
them : for these two were not pleased at the return
of Antar; and Malik also, the father of Ibla, would
not congratulate him. But Shedad mounted with
King Zoheir, and went to meet Antar, for his entrails
yearned after him. They went out thus, and did not
stop till they met the Prince and Antar ; and when
they came near, Antar dismounted, and hastening
towards him, kissed the hand of King Zoheir. But
the King bent down towards him and kissed him —
between the eyes, and congratulated him on his
safety. Think you, O Antar, said he, that we have
forgotten you since you quitted us in anger?
Could our homes give us any pleasure when thou
wert absent, and hadst abandoned thy country ?

O King, replied Antar, having kissed the King’s
feet, thou whose command is obeyed among the
whole nation of Arabs, O high minded Prince! I
swear by your unbounded generosity and your noble
mind, my departure was not the effect of passion ;

_ "I am but alowly slave and dependant; I did indeed
depart the night I had been with your majesty, for
my tongue had swerved from the road of propriety
with my father; my’ ambition aimed at impossi-

bilities, and I demanded what in fact only a fool


125


would have demanded. As soon as I was safe
from his vengeance, and his kindness and favour
were withdrawn from me, I could not, after such a
fault, do otherwise than change my home; till at
last my lord Malik interested himself so much about
me, and delivered me from death and perdition ; he
has also informed me what interest you have taken
in me: so that my situation is improved, and I am
reconciled to my master Shedad; and you have
loaded me with obligations, mountains could not
sustain. May you ever be under the protection of
God! Thus Antar went on talking with the King,
when, Shedad coming up to him, Antar ran towards
him and kissed his feet in the stirrup, thus saying ;

“© my Lord, I am come begging forgiveness;
‘¢ the slave is come like a criminal; the sword and
“warhorse would fail, should presumption ever
“‘ bear sway.”

When Shedad heard these words, and saw his
humility, and considered all he had done, and his
wonderful intrepidity, and truly Arabian nobleness
of soul; all his affections were excited, and his eyes
almost shed tears as he said in his heart, may God
curse every one who from this day forward would
renounce him, and may the sword despoil his hfe!
He kissed him between the eyes, and Antar walked
before his father, after he had saluted his uncles,
and his relations. The whole tnbe of Abs were
astonished at his noble conduct and courage, and


126


they said one to another, No one possesses what his
masters possess.

Now Antar felt no unworthy thought of fear
respecting his father or his uncles, and only the
passion that humbles warriors, humbled him.
Malik presented the plunder -to his father, and
pressed, him to accept it; and he divided the cuirasses,
and armour, and horses, and coats of mail among
the tribe of Abs who were with him at first. But
King Zoheir took Aminia to his own tent, saying,
This is a Princess, and the daughter of a King, it is
not proper that she should be bought and sold.
Thus they all departed home after the King had
made up matters between Antar and his family and
relations, and recommended him to their kindness.
The King soon after heard from Antar an account
of all his adventures, and how he had obtained his
horse Abjer. And when he looked at him he was
quite surprised at his qualities, and he said to his
son Malik, This horse has been made for no one
but Antar. And from that day he was surnamed
Aboolfawaris. | ,

Now Ibla’s father addressed his son, saying ; My
son, verily death would be preferable to this state
of things ; how is it that this slave of ours, one
whom we employed in tending our flocks, is now
raised far in dignity above us with our King? And
this it is that makes him so presumptuous with us
and your sister Ibla, and thus will our honour be


127


debased. There is nothing ‘else to be done, said
Amroo, but to marry my sister Ibla to one who can
protect her against him, and then let us depart from
this land; for King Zoheir and his sons are strong
in his favour. But, said his father, O my son, must
we leave this slave safe and well? No, by the faith
of an Arab we must contrive his death. So they
all retired to their tents, and were united to their
families.

Now Antar came to his mother Zebeeba. Why,
my son, said she, do you not by my side tend the
flocks and the camels? It would be more agreeable
to my heart than all this intrepidity and boldness,
which every day expose your life to perils and
dangers. Antar smiled at her sayings ; O mother,
he replied, thou shalt see in thy son Antar what shall
be registered and recorded.

Antar gave away to his father and his uncles all
the plunder he had obtained ; though this was not
his own idea, but at the instigation of Prince Ma-
hk. This Prince, when they were all established
in their tents, related to his father and his brothers
all he had seen Antar perform, and his undaunted
conduct. The King took great pleasure in what he
told of Antar, and being very desirous of hearing
allhe said both in verse and prose, ordered Antar
into his presence, and as soon as he arrived, he
made obeisance, and prayed for a continuance of
his power and beneficence. Zoheir and his sons —


128


welcomed him, and the King made him sit down
by him, and supplied him with wine ; and his kind-
ness for him increased. Aboolfawaris, said he,
I wish to hear from yourself, the account of your
expedition, and what happened to you, with your
comrades, for my son Malik has related some of
your hardy deeds, and has repeated some of your
poetry ; but there is no reporter of words and acts
like the actor himself. Upon that, Antar commenced
and told them all that occurred with Ghegadh and
his comrades, how he happened to associate with
them, and how he agreed to their proposal of giv-
ing him half of all they should gain, and how they
wished to kill him for buying the horse Abjer,
and how they gave up their design on hearing his
verses and discourse. Will you, said King Zoheir,
let us hear the verses you made on your mistress
Ibla, when you came nigh home ?

‘© When the breezes blow from Mount Saadi,
‘‘ their freshness cools the fire of my love and my
“ transport.” And he continued the repetition, till
he came to this part, “She is elegantly formed,
“and the soft magic of her eyes would arrest the
« bones of a corpse from entering the tomb.”

When Antar had finished, the King’s astonish-
ment and delight were unbounded at his eloquence ;
and he turned towards his brother Asyed, and said,
O my brother, I wish you would pay attention to
Antar, and write down all he says, that we may


129


be reckoned amongst the most eloquent Arabs for
poetry and propriety of conduct. They continued to
drink their wine, and the hours passed in mirth and
pleasure. But when Shas saw that his father became `
so exceedingly kind to Antar, his agony and dis-
tress of mind increased, and from the excess of his
indignation his heart was near bursting; however
he resisted till Antar accidentally left the tent for
awhile. When Shas being alone, turned round to
his father ; indeed, my father, said he, this black
slave, this baseborn, has brought indelible shame
upon us, and it is all on account of his love of
Ibla, the daughter of Malik ; and you also approve
his conduct; but verily the whole tribe will be
shocked with his wickedness when they hear his
verses. l

The King was exceedingly angry, and wrath ap-
peared in his countenance. My son, said he, what
say’st thou? Who is able to thwart the decrees of
Providence? Perhaps God has resolved to testify
in him his divine favours! And know, my son, the
most ignorant of men is an envious man. Now
Antar just then entered, and as he had overheard
all their conversation, he thus spoke :—

“ This flame is for Ibla, O my friend, her lustre
“illumines the darkest night. She blazes—her
s form is in my heart, and the fire of love is in my
“soul. Her gently waving form has kindled it
“like the branches whose motion refreshes the

K


130


“breeze. Her breath diffuses a lively odour, and
‘Sin her perfumes I pass the night in paradise.
“ She is a maid whose breath is sweeter tham
« honey, whenever she sips the juice of the grape.
s When I taste a coolness from her lips, she leaves
“in my moutha hot burning flame. The moon
“ has stolen her charms, and the antelope has bor-
“ rowed the magic of her eyes. O grant me thy
“ embrace, O light of my eyes, and save me from
“ thy absence, and mine own griefs. Be just, if thou
“ wishest, or persecute me; for in thee is my para-
“ dise, and in thee is my hell. No happiness is
“ there for me in my troubles, but my lord, who is
“ called the generous Zoheir. Wherever he goes,
“ death anticipates him ; and he destroys his foes be-
‘‘ fore he meets them. Let them not abuse him if he
“aid a solitary creature, who spends the live-long
“ night without sleep, and in tears. He is my sup-
` port and stay against those who, when they see my
“ exaltation, would trouble me the more. He is a
“ King to whose name Princes shall bow, and shall
“ point at him to pay their homage. He is the
“ asylum of all who refer to him to dissipate their
“ sorrows, as he relieves my griefs. May fortune
“ never deprive me of my King! May he ever live
«c in the purest joy and felicity!”

The King was so pleased with Antar, that he said,
O Aboolfawaris, whatever I can give you for your
poetry will be an insufficient return; even were k


131


to give all I possess; for my property will pass away
as if it had never been, but thy praises will endure
for ever. So he presented him two virgin slaves,
beautiful as moons, and two rows of large jewels,
and some perfumes, saying, Aboolfawaris, you have
often mentioned me in your poetry; it would be
disgraceful in me to let you go away from me unre-
warded, so calm thy heart and cheer thine eye; for |
by the faith of an Arab, I will not be separated
from you until you obtain every thing you wish,-
and accomplish all your desires. Did you belong to
me, I would admit you to my rank and connections,
in spite of the blame the Arabs might heap
on me.

Shas could not endure this, and rose up and
quitted the place, but Antar remained drinking with
the King till the evening, when he arose, and his
hand was in the hand of Prince Malik ; and they all
departed from the tents, and went their way each to
his own dwelling. Antar did not stoptill he reached
the habitations of the family of Carad, where he
perceived a very strong light : he understood it not,
but he went towards it and. entered his mother’s
tent, and asked what was the reason of this light at
such an hour. Know, my son, said she, the men of’
the camp are absent ; they are gone with your master
Shedad, and with him are also ten horsemen after
the cattle, m order that they may release them from l
some Arabs ; and the women are watching to this


` 1382
hour in the expectation of seeing you, that you may
relate to them all that has happened to you in your
expeditions; and Ibla the daughter of Malik is more
delighted than any of them.

When Antar heard the words of his ae he
joyed in his heart, and a smile lighted up his coun-
tenance. So he immediately arose and sought the
dwellings of his uncles, and entered the womens’
apartments. As soon as they saw him they arose
and received him, and saluted him. Semeeah kissed
him. O Antar, said she, you have been with.the
King from the beginning of the day, and we are
sitting up on your account. O my mistress, said
Antar, I knew,nothing of it, but had I known it, I
would not have tarried, had my legs been even tied
aud fettered ; and he thus addressed them :

“ Darkness hovers over, and my tears stream down
« in copious torrents. I conceal my love and com-
“ plain to no one. I pass the night, regarding the
“ stars of night in my distraction, andthe tears rush
“ violently from my eyes like a hail storm. Ask
“ the night of me, and it will tell thee that I am
‘‘ indeed the ally of sorrow and anguish. I live
«& desolate, there is no one like me; a lover without
-“ friends or a companion! I am the friend of sor-
“ row and desire. I am o’erwhelmed by them, and
“Iam worn out with patience and trials in my
“ grief. I complain to God of my afflictions and my
“ love; and tono one else do I complain.”


~ 333


Ibla heard these verses, and perceived his tears and
distress and his sorrow ; she pitied him ; and as she
remarked the violence of his tears, they mterceded
greatly for him, for she loved him for his courage and -
his eloquence; and as she noticed him with the flat-
tering soothing expressions,— W here, said she, is my
share of the plunder; or am I now of no consequence
or value to thee? At these words the sight of her
beauty and loveliness overpowered him. O my mis-
tress, cried he, by the light of thine eyes and the black
of thine eyebrows, to me the most sacred of oaths,
thy slave Antar has obtamed of plunder neither a
small nora large portion, but the whole I have
given to thy father and thy uncles. So he presented
her the two slave girls and the two strings of jewels
that King Zoheir had given him; and he added—
the perfumes thou hast no occasion for ; thy breath
is more delicious and more heavenly ; thy perfume
is sweeter and more luscious. So he divided the
perfumes between the wives of his father and his
uncles. And to his questions about his father and
his uncles, whither they were gone ?

“ Know, Antar, said Semeeah, that your master told
us that there is a horseman of Yemen, called Kats,
the son of Dibgan, and he is a horseman of the land
of Yemen, and under his subjection are the lands
of Senaa and Aden; he has at this time invaded the
land of Hejaz with forty horsemen: he is now on his
return, and with him an immense plunder, and he is


134
seeking his own country. Shedad enquired of the


peasants who gave him this information, where Kais
was to rest this night and sleep: they told him at
the lake of Jaree, in the country of Doom. Then said
Shedad, by the faith of an Arab, I will go against
him in the dark, and will attack him and take his
plunder from him, and will reduce him to shame and
disgrace ; and if there should be a thousand horse-
men, I will not permit the tribe of Cahtan to escape
with plunder taken from the land of Abs and
Adnan. He accordingly mounted, and took with
him ten horsemen, and he set out to follow their
track.” , |

When Antar heard this, he got up without delay,
and kissing the mother of Ibla, and also Ibla be-
tween the eyes—this is the kiss of farewell, said he,
for I know not whenwe shall meet again: and having
eased his heart by gazing upon her, he returned to
his mother, and put on his armour and his cuirass :
he mounted his horse, and taking Shiboob with
him, he departed in quest of his father and his
uncles. And when they had advanced some way,
said Shiboob to hin—O my brother, a female
slave of my master Shedad said to me—“ Tell your
brother Antar to be on his guard against his father
Shedad and his uncles, for they have resolved on
putting him to death. This Ibla heard from her
brother Amroo and her father Malik, and told Se-
meeah, and directed her to warn you of it: now I


135


have told you be on your guard.” Run on, father
of, the winds! was Antar’s reply. He urged for-
ward Abjer and they went on for some time till it
became very hot, when a horseman met’ them
coming from the centre of the plain. Antar marked
him, and behold he was one of the men that had
accompanied Shedad, and he was covered with
wounds. When they came nearer to him, said
Antar, Where is the plunder? O Aboolfawaris,
he replied, I have got these wounds which you
see in my body on account of it, for truly we sallied
out with your master Shedad at night-fall, that we
might overtake Kais, the son of Dibgan, and when
we came up with him, we saw him carefully
guarding his spoil. As soon as he perceived us
he started up, he shouted out and assaulted us with
the vehemence of a lion; first he speared me, then
after me your father Shedad; I have returned to
seek you and bring you; so if you wish to overtake
them, make haste, and if you rescue them ’twill be
noble of you.

By the faith of an Arab, exclaimed Antar, never
will I return till I have destroyed the whole party
with my sword, and have liberated my father and
my uncles; and I will not return but with the
whole plunder before me; so away home, and I will
revenge you. Aboolfawaris, he replied, I am not
able to retain my seat on the back of my horse. So
Antar ordered Shiboob to place him by the side of


136


a pool of water. Shiboob came to him and placed
him by the side of the lake, and tied up his horse,
where they quitted him, and proceeded over the
plains and deserts until the day closed, when they
came up with Kais and his prisoners that were
marching before him, Kais following them with his
comrades. As soon as Antar saw his father and his
uncles tied across their horses, he indeed kmew not
then the heavens from the earth, and he gave a
shout that made the mountains tremble. “ Ye
ignoble dastards! Quit your plunder. Come on!
Slaughter is the word !” ,

No sooner heard Kais the shout of Antar, than
he was alarmed and confounded ; he pricked on his
horse, and turned round upon Antar; but Antar
cried out to him—Son of Dibgan, who hast urged
thee against the warriors of Abs'and Adnan, whom
none shall attack but the eagles shall devour his
flesh ? Thou vilest of Negroes, cried Kais, thou
shalt soon see that I am a man not to be wearied in
the contest of spears ; and as he fell on Antar like the
fall of fate and destiny, he thus burst forth—

“J am renowned in every nation for the thrust
“ of the spear and the blow of the sword. I am the
«& destroyer of horsemen with the lance, when the
“ spears are mterwoven under the dust. How
‘‘ many contests have I waged on the day of battle,
s whose terrors would turn grey the head of
“infants! Long ago have I drunk the blood of


137


“horsemen, with which they fed me before I was
“weaned. This day will I prove my words when
“the blood streams from my sword. This foul
“wretch I will slay with the edge of my sword, that
“cleaves through the flesh before the bones. His
“ dwellings shall this eve be found waste and deso-
“late, and I will not swerve from my word: his body
“shall lie on the deserts, cut down, and his face
“thou may’st see grovelling in the dust.”

As soon as Antar heard this speech of Kais,
son of Dibgan, Silence, said he, may thy mother
bewail thee! and thus he replied to him.

s Verily, thy spirit has urged thee to abuse me,
“and thou hast spoken the words of a vile dastard :
“thou art ignorant of my exploits in every battle,
“ from the land of Irak to the sacred shrine: thou
“shalt have no time to reply, no justice but the
“sword ; for ignorance among mankind is a trait
“that conducts the ignorant to their death. This
“is the scene of conflict, and in it doubtless will be
* proved the skill of the coward and the base-born. -
“ Let him repent who has only shewn his vanity,
“and let him prefer flight to resistance. I am Antar,
“ and my name is far spread for the thrust of my
“ spear and the blow of my sword.”

When Antar had finished, equally impetuous was
his assault: he drew forth his scimitar, and struck
him between the eyes, and split his helmet and wad-
ding, and his sword worked down to his thighs,


138


down even to the back of the horse; and he cned
out—T hou wretch, I will not be controuled—I am
still the lover of Ibla. - Thus Kais and his horse fell
down, cut into four pieces !

When Shedad and Malik and his son Amroo
saw what Antar had done, they trembled and
were afraid, and from that day a dread of Antar
filled their hearts. But Antar rushed amongst the
remainder like a devouring lion. When the tribe
of Dibgan perceived the force of Antar’s blows, and
how he overthrew their chief, and split him and his
horse into four pieces, they wheeled about their
horses and fled. Antar pursued them, and having
slain twenty of their men, returned. He roared
even as a lion in his wrath ;—he took possession of
the plunder; he released his father, his uncles, and
the other horsemen, and they all rejoiced in their
delivery, except Malik and Amroo his son, who said:
—QOh! that we had fallen by the sword, rather
than be rescued by Antar, the slave of Shedad !
But they concealed their anguish, and appeared to
be stout of heart, and thankful to Antar, though, in
fact, their galls burst with spite. They drove for-
ward the plunder, and returned seeking their own
country, whilst Antar embraced his father and
uncles, and thus spoke.

‘© As I approach my friends, my transports in- -
“crease,.and on their account my cheeks are


“t bedewed with tears. This day I march towards


139


“them, and I am surrounded by the chiefs of my
“tribe. I have slain the son of Dibgan, a lion in
“battle, and with my Indian scimitar I have cured
“my pains. I have engaged to cleanse their hearts
“from sorrow. I have rescued my tribe, and that
“is my dearest reward. My companion, whenever
“T march by night, is my sword and my spear; and
“the Demons of the earth dread my vehemence.
<O Ibla, how many horsemen have I raised up on
“my double-edged cleaving scimitar in my strength!
“O Ibla, how many horsemen, in the midst of the
“war throng, as soon asI come, fling away their
“arms in fear of me! Ask every lion hero of my
“exploits; they will tell thee every lion is terrified
“at my violence. My tribe abuse me that I am
“black; but my deeds in battle are fairer than the
“dawn. If I wish, I will seize whole countries
“and subjugate them, and all the princes of the
“earth are within my grasp.”

Thus they travelled on till they came to the pool
near which Shiboob left the wounded man, and they
perceived that he was dead ; they were exceedingly
vexed. Verily, said Shedad, we have lost horsemen
more valuable than the plunder !

Now that plain was very extensive, and as even-
Ing was advancing, they halted till midnight, and
then departed, seeking their own country, where
they arrived in the morning: and they met King
Zoheir at the lake of Zatool-irsad, and with him


140


were his sons, and Rebia son of Zeead. As soon as
they saw the King, they hastened to him, and salu-
ting him, laid the plunder before him, and told him
what Antar had done, how he had joined them, and
liberated them from misery and destruction, and had
slain Kais, and dispersed part of the tribe of Cah-
tan. Confer this great obligation then, on thy son,
he so longs for, said Zoheir to Shedad, that you may
be rewarded by his great actions, and be ennobled
by his sword to after generations.

Rela, Shas, and Malik, Ibla’s father, and his son
Amroo, were greatly enraged at this; but Prmce
Malik, the friend of Antar, rejoiced.

He then divided the spoil in equal portions, but
out of respect for Antar would not take even a
halter. And Antar immediately presented the
whole of it to his father and his uncles ; and all the
tribe of Abs were astonished at his noble conduct
and filial love. Zoheir sacrificed camels and sheep,
and ordered a feast to be prepared, and as they ate
and drank, King Zoheir turned towards Antar and
said, recite, Aboolfawaris, some of thy verses; and
he thus complied.

« May fortune bring thee every wish of thy heart,
« live in peace, for every result will secure thy
“comfort ! This is the lake whose residence thou
« hast sweetened; and were it not for thee, its
“ rain fraught with exhalations would not fall upon
“us. Thou art present, and all its herbs are


141


“ green or yellow, and all their wonders and charms
“are expanded before us. The breeze of musk
“ wafts the essence of its flowers, and it smiles from
“east to west. © then, let us do it ample justice
“with wine; let us mix it till its banks o’erflow.
“ Let us drink with thee out of cups of joy, and
“let us hold up thy train, thou lord of honor!
“Thy countenance is decked in smiles, laughter
“lives in thy teeth, and there is a sword whose
“blows draw the blood of thy foes. O do not
“then reproach me if,I weep for Hima, when I
“ eall to mind the friends that dwell there, and its
“neighbours. In my heart is an ever burning
“flame, but I am ever in alarm about these dear
“ warriors and these tents. Over the extent of the
“ waste are marvellously rich canopies, and the
“ whole is ornamented with fine curtains of Grecian
“ velvet, painted with every surprising form, that I
“ am amazed at their starry brilliancy. My heart
“ was in agony the day they quitted Hima, but it
“ soon returned to hail its royal master. Should it
“be said amongst the people—Who is the most
“determined hero? What youth is ennobled high
“o'er the rest? We will say it is Zoheir, illustrious
“in his birth, towering above all men, who. can
“never attain his eminence. His exploits avert
“from us the obscurity of night, and all is
‘luminous, so that his star is one mass of onyx.
“ May he ever succeed in every enterprize; may
“ death ever march wherever his arniies march.”


242


These verses delighted the King. May God
never renounce thy mouth, or man do thee harm,
said he. By the faith of an Arab, thou art one of
the wonders of the world; and he continued to
praise and thank him; when lo! a great dust arose,
and there appeared a hundred horsemen, all clothed
in steel, headed by a Knight like a lofty date
tree on an elephant, on his head was a turban of
Kufian cloth, and over him a painted mantle of
Grecian fabric; beneath him was an Arabian steed ;
they came down towards the lake, and when they
reached it, the formost rank stopped short, and
their leader dismounted, and presented himself
before King Zoheir, bowing before him. His tears
began to flow, and with a heart rent with anguish
he thus addressed him.

s O thou, the defender and protector, be my
s defence and support against mine enemies. Thou
“ art the defender of orphans, and thy beneficence
“heals the wounded spirit. Fortune has over-
‘‘ whelmed me, my bosom bursts, and my soul is
“ full of grief. A perfidious minded oppressor has
“ overpowered us with his strength, and has
‘‘ violated our virgins. Wherever he goes, death
« precedes him, so he destroys his foes before he
‘‘ presents himself. Protect us from his violence
“ before all our women are dragged prisoners by
“ their hair.”


148


CHAPTER IV.


The suppliant had not finished his intreaties, ere
Prince Malik sprung towards him, and throwing his
arms round his neck, O my brother, said he, may
God never permit thy eyes to weep! What is it
that has called forth thy grief? Now this suppliant
was Prince Malik’s foster-brother, and his name was
Hassan the Mazinite. The King had taken the
mother of this youth a prisoner from the tribe of
Mazin; he was an infant at her breast, and as his
father was slain in the affair, King Zoheir carried
her away, and as Temadhur had just then brought
forth Prince Malik, she consigned her child to
her, desiring her to suckle the infant with her own
child. So she remained with her a long time, and
suckled and weaned her son and Prince Malik
together, till her sister, who had heard of her, came
to her and pressed her exceedingly to return home.
She asked permission of Temadhur, who granted
it, and gave her and her sister many very valuable
presents. She then departed with her sister for her
native land, and employed herself in educating her
son Hassan, until he grew up and his limbs
strengthened, for in him was the essence of the


144


noble tribe of Mazin. And he became a blazing
flame, and a fiery thunderbolt, and the tribe of
Mazin loved him for his courage, and they made
him the protector of their land.

And Hassan’s sudden arrival at King Zoheir’s
tent was occasioned by the following circumstance.
Hassan had a maternal uncle, whose name was
Nedjem the Mazinite, and he had a daughter per-
fectly beautiful and lovely, and her form was symme-
try itself. Hassan was in love with her, but he was
never able to address her, till a man of the name of
wef the son of Alkem, of the tribe of Terjem, pre-
sented himself one day to his uncle. He was also a
renowned horseman, and a valiant hero, rich in
property and cattle. And when he came, his uncle
invited him to a feast, and slew camels and sheep,
and poured out wine for him; and when the liquor
began to play about the head of Awef, he threw
himself at his feet, and demanded his daughter, and
won him by his wealth and riches. Hassan was
present, and when he perceived that if he remained
silent, his cousin would be betrothed to another, he
started up and eagerly exclaimed: O my uncle, do
not marry thy daughter to this man, for I am to be
preferred to him on account of my rank and consi-
deration: never will I permit the daughter of my
uncle to quit hertent fora stranger's, were my limbs to
be torn asunder ! Ignoble wretch, cried Awef, canst
thou presume to address, where I have already put


145


in a claim? for ioe ait membered amongst the
herd of orphans.*

Wert thou not in mine uncle’s tent, replied
Hassan, I would soon tear off thy head, and silence
thy existence. And if thou wouldst boast of thy
wealth, know, that all the property of the Arabs is
mine, and in the grasp of my hand; and if thou
wouldst domineer over me with thy courage, come,
let us to the field! that I may make an example of
thee amongst the horsemen.

At these words the light became dark in the eyes
of Awef; he instantly sprang on his horse's back, and
Hassan did the same; and they both rushed to the
plain, and dashed at each other, and the earth
quivered under the feet of their horses, and all the
tribe of Mazin sallied out in order to see what might
be the result of the battle and contention Naeema,
the daughter of Nedjim, was there with many other
women. And when Hassan observed his cousin,
and that she was viewing the engagement, he
instantly seized his antagonist and grappled him,
and pressing him hard, stopped all means of escape ;
then catching hold of the rings of his coat of mail,
he made him his prisoner, dashed him on the
ground, and almost smashed him to atoms. He
instantly dismounted to cut off his head ; but his


* Youny orphans did not inherit at the death of their fathers ; all
property belonged to the tribe ; aa laboured, they had
not Aike
L


146


uncle sprang towards hiin, saying, O my son let
him go, accept of my intercession, for he has eaten
of my meat and been under my protection. So
Hassan admitted his uncle’s interference, and par-
doned hifi. Awef quitted the tribe of Mazin, for
shame and mortification overwhelmed him; and the
event was spread among the Arab tribes, and every
one stood in awe of Hassan.

About that time a female slave came to Hassan.
Your uncle, said she, has been just saying to his
wife, Verily Hassan is a valiant and a brave fellow,
but he has not wherewithal to keep up an establish-
ment, and I fear, should I give him my daughter,
she will be reduced to penury and difficulties with
him. As soon 4s Hassan heard this, he assembled
all the men in whom he could confide, and took
them away, and he went in search of plunder from
some of the Arab hordes.

Now, amoiig the Arab tribes of Cahtan, there
was a Kirig whose name was Oosak, and he was one
ef the thousand warriors of that period of ignorance,
who could engage a thousand heroes at once. He:
had at his command an intrepid army ; but a famine
having wasted his lands, he departed with his troops
and his armies, and attacked the land of the tribe of
Mazin, amongst whom he settled. And it happened
that as he rode out one day, and was amusing himself
by the streams and the fountains, he rode on tll
he came to a pool of water, when it happened by


147


fate and destiny, from which there is for man no
retreat or escape, that in that day Naeema, the
daughter of Hassan’s uncle (who with her friends
was gone to procure a dower for her) came alao to
the lake. Oosak, as he looked at her and the
young girls employed in their games and amuse-
ments, distinguished Naeema, for her face was bril-
lant like the moon when it is full; and as she was
smiling, with her teeth like rows of pearls, and as
the weight of her haunches prevented her from
standing up, Oosak was quite surprised, and his
senses failed him. But the women turning towards
him perceived Oosak looking at them, so they all
surrounded Naeema. O brother Arab, they ex-
claimed, are you not ashamed of this action, thus to
come and stare at the daughters of warriors ?

Oosak smiled and laughed at what they said,
and called out to an old woman who was with them,
and asked her about the damsel. Whose daughter
is she? Whether she was a virgin or a married
woman? This is Naeema, the daughter of Nedjim,
said she, and is unmarried. When Qosak heard
this, his love and passion increased. He staid quiet
that night, but as soon as the day dawned, he sent
to Nedjim to demand his daughter in marriage.
But Nedjem refused him, saying—Verily, I have
but one daughter, and have affianced her to my ne-
phew Hassan, who is now on an expedition, seeking
a dower for her. I cannot therefore dispose of her,


148


for he is a horseman that would not put up with
such an affront, and also a man of a harsh disposition.
The me-<enger reported this to Oosak who swore
in his wrath that ke would not take her but as a
captive, and that he would pour down death and
destruction on the whole tribe of Mazin.

About that time arrived Hassan, bringing with
him immense wealth ; and as soon as he approached
the dwelling, he gave his uncle the marriage pre-
sent for ‘his daughter. He also made a partition
amongst the warriors of the tribe, and put aside five
hundred camels for the marriage feast, and be-
sought his uncle to have the ceremony performed.
His uncle then informed him what Oosak had done,
how he had demanded his daughter, and how
he had refused him. On hearing this the light
became dark in the eyes of Hassan. If Oosak dares
to molest me, said he, I will tear out his lips
and crush him to pieces, and I will drive him out of
our land, even against his will. I will repair to
King Zoheir, and will relate the affair to him, and
then will I come upon him with the warriors of
the tribes of Abs and Adnan, who heed not even
Chosroe Nushirvan.

Thus Hassan calmed the mind of his uncle, and
they made ready the marriage ceremony, and sacri-
ficed the camels and the sheep, and poured out the
wine ; and seven days they continued in mirth and
jollity ; but on the eighth day, as they were adorning


149


the bride with jewels and robes, and were about to
wed her to Hassan, intelligence reached them that
Oosak had resolved to make all the women his
slaves, plunder their property, and slay the men.


On hearing this, Hassan stood in front of his
party, as they were consulting what was to be done.
Hassan, said they, we are not able to contend
with Oosak, for he has assembled all the tribe
of Cahtan, and there comes with him the tribe of
Zerker, and the tribe of Anka; and he has sent to
Masood, the son of Moosad the Kelbian, and with
him also is Awef, whom you made prisoner, and
whose hair you cut off; and we have not that con-
fidence in ourselves to suppose that our means can
resist such accumulated forces. Upon this Hassan
went to his uncle. Uncle, said he, have patience
with me for ten days, and I will shew you what I
will do with those haughty boasters.

So he took with him an hundred horsemen, and
went his way till he reached the lake of Zatool Irsad,
and on seeing King Zoheir, he told him what we
have now related asthe cause of his coming. Antar
was present and heard all that had happened * to
Hassan, and being much interested about him, he
instantly arose and kissing the King’s haad—O my
lord, he cried, let me be deputed by you for
this service ; let me go with Hassan, and I will de-
stroy his enemy. Go, my son, cried Zoheir to
Mahk,—go to the assistance of your brother, and


150


take with you whomever you please of our warriors,
and Antar among the rest, and return not till you
have blotted out every vestige of Oosak.

The King then ordered the dinner to be prepared
for Hassan and his companions, whilst Malik was
employed in getting ready for the expedition,
and chose from the tribe a thousand experienced
warriors; and in three days Hassan and his asso-
ciates all mounted their horses with Prince Malik,
and Antar the impetuous horseman, and Shiboob as
his attendant; and Hassan was the happiest of men
in the assistance of the tribe of Abs. Thus they
marched on, clad in steel, and their bright cuirasses
sparkled on their bodies. And as they róde, said
Malik to Antar—O Aboolfawaris, recite to us some
of thy verses. Willingly, my Lord, he replied; and
thus spoke :—

“ I lust after the blows of the cleaving scimitars,
“ and I idolize the thrusts of the well made spears.
“ I long for the cups of death, when they are pure,
“‘ and they circle round the heads of the illustrious
“ brave. It is the blow and the thrust when the
& horses stumble among the death-bearing lances,
“ and the armies are in confusion, that please me
“ under the shades of the dust, like the wings of
« darkness, as the coursers storm over the earth,
‘‘ the barbs of the lances plunge into obscurity, and
< start from it like the sparkling stars. Faulchions,
“ gleam in it in dvery directian, like the flashes of


151


* lightning in the darkness of night. O by thy life,
‘‘ honour and glory, and eminence, and the accom-
“ plishment of hopes, and exaltation of fame are for
“ him who rushes into the combat magnanimously,
“ where alone in the height of glory are the highest
“honours. Let him thrust among the warriors and
“ the chiefs with a heart unmoved in the fall of sword
“blows. Let him brandish furiously his sabre and
“ spear in the boldness of his spirit, undaunted
“at calamities, Let him do justice to the lance of
‘‘ Cahtan in the contest, and let him stretch forth
“proudly his shoulders with the edge of the sci-
“ mitar. Otherwise, let him lead a contemptible
“life in ignominy, and when he dies, his friends
“ will not mourn over him. The beauteous virgins
“will not weep in anguish for any but the
“horsemen noble in the hour of trial. I am the
« hero well known in the field of battle, and I am
“the eager knight amongst my relations. I am
“ the assaulting lion, and the hero who defends their
* dwellings and habitations.”

O Aboolfawanis, said Hassan, verily you surpass
all the horsemen of the age in eloquence and con-
rage, and generosity and nobleness of mind. You
are in truth the jewel of the times. Antar thanked
hm, and they travelled on for three days, and on
the fourth day (for the Lord of Heaven had decreed
the glory of Antar, and that no one should exceed
him in prosperity) Antar happening to stray a


152


little out of the way, descended into a deep
valley: and lo! there were two horsemen engaged
m desperate combat. Antar urged on his steed,
and coming up to them, Stop, ye. Arabs, he cried,
and tell me the cause of your quarrel.. At the in-
stant one of them stepped aside, and came up to
Antar. Noble horseman of the desert and the town,
said he, I refer myself to you, for you are able to
protect me. I will take your part, said Antar, I
will protect you, I pledge myself to you . but ac-
quaint me with your story, and what has rendered
necessary this combat between you.

Know then, noblest knight of the age, said the
youth, that I and this horseman are brothers, of the
same father and the same mother ; he is the eldest,
and I am the youngest ; and our father was one of
‘the Arab chieftains, and he was called Amroo, the
son of Harith, the son of Teba, and Teba was our
ancestor ; and one day as he was sitting down, his
flocks strayed away, and one of his camels was lost,
and as he was very partial to it, he questioned some
‘of the herdsmen about it. One of them said,
‘Know, my Lord, yesterday this camel strayed away
from the pasture ; I followed behind it, and it still
continued to run away, and I after it, till I became
tired, and perceiving that it lagged behind, I
stretched out my hand and took up a stone, black
in appearance, like a hard rock, brilliant and spark-
ling. I struck the camel with it, and it hit the


153


camel on the right side and issued out on the left,
and the camel fell to the ground dead. On eoming
up to it I found the stone by its side, and the camel
was weltering in its blood.”

On hearing this, my ancestor mounted his horse,
and taking the peasant with him, went to find out
the pasture. They passed on till they came to the
camel, which they found dead, and the. stone lying
near it. My ancestor took it in his hand, and con-
sidered it very attentively, and he knew it was a
thunderbolt; so he carried it away and returned
home. He gave it to a blacksmith, and ordered
him to make a sword of it. He obeyed, and took
it and went his way; and inthree days he re-
turned to my ancestor with a sword two cubits long
and two spans wide. My ancestor received it, and
was greatly pleased when he saw it, and turned to-
wards the blacksmith and said, What name have you
given it? So the blacksmith repeated this distich :
“ The sword is sharp, O son of the tribe of Ghalib,
“ sharp indeed, but where is the striker for the
“ sword ?” And my ancestor waved the sword with
his hand, and said, As to the smiter, I am the smi-
ter ; and struck off the head of the blacksmith, and
separated it from his body. He then cased it with
gold, and called it Dhami, on account of its sharpness.
He laid it by amongst his treasures, and when he died
it came in succession to my father, with the rest of
the arms, and when my father perceived his death


154


was at hand, he called me to him privately. O my
son, said he, I know your brother is of a tyrannical
obstinate disposition, one that likes violence and
hates justice, and I am aware that at my death he
will usurp my property. What measures shall I
take? said I. He answered, take this sword and
conceal it, and let no one know any thing about it ;
and when you see that he takes forcible possession
of all my property, cattle and wealth, do you be
content, my son, with this sword, for it will be of
great benefit to you, for if you present it to Nu-
shirvan, King of Persia, he will exalt you with his
liberality and favours, and if you present it to the
Emperor of Europe, he will enrich you with gold
and silver.

When I heard these words, I consented to what he
-demanded, and took it out, in the darkness of the
night, and baving buried it in this place, I returned
to my father and stayed with him till he died. We
buried him, and returned home ; but my brother
took possession of all my father had, and gave me
nothing, not a rope’s end; and when he searched for
the arms, and saw not the Dhami, he asked me for it,
I denied knowing any thing about it; he gave me
the lie, and abused me most violently; at last I
confessed, and told him I had buried it in such
a spot; so he came with me hither, and searched for
it, but could not find it. Again he asked me where
I had buned it ; end when he sew me roaming about


155 i


from place to place, he rushed upon me, and cried
out, saying—Vile wretch! you know where the
sword is, and act thus to deceive me. He attacked
me, and sought to slay me. I defended myself until
you arrived, and now I demand your protection.
When Antar heard this, his heart pitied him ;
he left the youth, and turning to his brother,
sad, Why do you tyrannize over your brother ?
and do not divide with him the property your.
father left? Base slave, cried he, highly incensed,
look to yourself, and interfere not so arrogantly ;
and he turned upon Antar, thinking him a common
man; but Antar gave him no time to wheel, or
direct his reins, ere he pierced him through the chest
with his spear, and thrust it ten spans through his
back, and threw him down dead. And now, young
man, sail he, to the other, return to your family,
and assume the rank of your father, and should any
one molest you, send and inform me; I will come
and tear his life outof his sides. ‘The youth thanked
him and expressed his gratitude. Now my brothet
is no more, said he, I have no other enemy : and he
departed home. But Antar fixed his spear in the
ground, and dismounted from Abjer, and sat down
to rest himself; and as he was moving the sand
with his fingers, he touched a stone; on removing
what was about it, behald! the sword the youth
had been seeking. He still cleared away, and drew
it forth, and seized hold of it, and it was a sword


156


two cubits in length, and two spans wide, of the
metal of Amalec, like a thunderbolt. And Antar
was convinced of his good fortune, and that every-
thing began and ended in the most high God.

Antar mounted and pursued his comrades and
Prince Malik, bearing the sword in his hand. He
shewed it to Malik, and told him all about the youth
and his brother, and the sword ; of his having buried
it, and all that passed between them; and Malik
was greatly astonished, saying, This is a gift sent
you by the Lord of Heaven.

They marched forward, passing over the wilds
and the deserts that day and night; and the next

day at dawn, behold there was great dust, and when
- dispersed, five hundred horsemen appeared all
clothed in steel. Go and learn for us, said
Antar to Shiboob, what means this dust, and what
news there is beneath it. Shiboob quitted them,
and’ returned as quick as a bird on the wing, O son
of my mother, cried he, these are your enemies,
the army of Gheidac. But the circumstance that
occasioned the approach of this horseman was this:
it happened that Oosak had demanded assistance
of Gheidac, in his meditated attack on the tribe of
Mazin. |

Now there was blood revenge between Gheidac
and Antar, because Antar had killed his father,
and he had been brought up an orphan, but when
he grew up he became a valiant horseman, and


157


destroyed his opponents; and he was a blazing

thunderbolt, and overthrew knights and slew war-

vors. And when his name was spread abroad -
among the tribes, they gave him supreme command,

and he sat in the place of his father. He became

proud, and behaved haughtily to his people.

Now there was a man in the tribe called Codhaah,
and he hated Gheidac. O Gheidac, said he one
day, thou art a marked man; it does not become
thee to behave so haughtily towards the horse-
men, when thou hast not yet revenged the mur-
der of thy father: how canst thou presume to
boast over the brave and the valiant? And Gheidac
said, Who is the stout king on whom I am to be
avenged? Thy revenge is on Antar, son of Shedad,
said he. Then the light became darkness in his
eyes, and he cried out to the horsemen of his tribe,
and he ordered them to prepare for an expedition
to attack the tribe of Abs, and he swore he would
slay Antar, and make him drink the cup of perdi-
tion, and destroy the whole tribe of Abs and Adnan.
The tribe assented to his directions, and took with
them all their warlike instruments for the expedition.

Just at that time arrived Oosak’s messenger to
request Gheidac’s assistance against the tribe of
Mazin. So Gheidac gave up his former intention,
and went with the messenger of Oosak to perform
what he required of him, and he was marching on
this object when he met Antar and the Absians, and


158


Antar dispatched Shiboob, as we before stated.
This day, said Antar, I will unite Gheidac to his
father; I will curse his family and his relations. As
soon as Gheidac saw the tribe of Abs, and Antar the
destroyer of horsemen, his heart was overjoyed,
and he cried out to his party—'This is a glorious

morning; today will I take my revenge, and wipe
out my disgrace So he assailed the tribe of Abs
and Adnan, and his people attacked in his rear like
a cloud when it pours forth water and rains. And
the Knight of Abs, Antar, assaulted them likewise,
anxious to try his sword, the famous Dhami. They
all rushed forward, and horsemen encountered
horsemen. Cowards fled, and the weak-hearted
were disgraced; but the bold were firm in the
assault, and the equals in courage met each other in
the feld. The earth trembled under trampling of the
horses,—the heavens were obscured with the clouds
of dust,—the warriors were covered with wounds,
and the swords laboured in the cause of death;
exertion was alive, and all jest was at anend. Thus
they continued fighting till mid-day; and the impe-
tuosity of Antar was the impetuosity of a resolute
hero, When Gheidac observed the deeds of Antar,
the bold warrior, he roared like a lion in his den,
and he rushed down upon the lion Antar, who met
him, his heart undaunted in the midst of terrors, and
occupied him in the contest, and continually drew
him on, as a lion draws on weaker cubs, until having


159

weatied him, he shouted at him and struck him with
horror; then assailed him so that stitrup grated
stirrup; and he struck him on the head with
Dhami. He cleft his vizor and wadding, and his
sword played away between the eyes, passing `
through his shoulders down to the back. of the
horse, even to the ground: and he and his horse
made four pieces; and to the strictest observer,
it would appear that he had divided them with
scales.

Gheidac’s companions beheld their chief, and that
he was dead ; and they said one to another— Never
did we see such a blow; were not this slave endued
with the whole power of courage, he could not at
one blow have thus destroyed our chief. So they
took to flight and ran away, exclaitfring—May God
curse thy harlot mother! how fierce is thy blow !
how piercing is thy thrust !

Antar and the horsemen soon returned from.the
pursuit, having filled the earth with the dead, and
having collected the scattered horses, and all the
booty and plunder from the plains and deserts; as
they prosecuted their journey towards the tribe of
Mazin, Antar preceded the treops of warriors like
a noble Hon, and thus addressed them.

«I am he that makes the warriors drink of the
“cups of death with the sharp-bladed ghittermg
“Indian scimitar. I am the raiser of their dust,
“‘ amd the atmosphere is thick and darkly turbid with


160


“ blows at which cowards are humbled and ter-
‘“‘rified. I am the death that never rushes into
“ the fiery day of battle without a tongue to speak.
< I have slain Gheidac, because he was oppressive
“and insulted me, and soon will I send Oosak ‘after
“him. I charge right and left through their horse-
‘men, and dash through the midst of them. I cut
& down to the ground the warriors in the fight,
& whilst the horses stumble and slip over their
“heads. O Ibla, though they abuse me for my
“ blackness, yet the fairness of my exploits shines
“‘and flashes. O Ibla, the men of my tribe have
‘‘ witnessed my spear-thrust and sword-blow rag-
“ing among the sculls. I destroy the heroes
“& of war with my scimitar, and whole armies are
“extirpated at the edge of my sword. How many
‘‘ horsemen throw away their arms in terror of me,
“ when they behold me robed in black gore. My
& ambition is raised above the Pleiades, and the
“ fortune of my star is suspended from heaven.”
They marched forward without delay, until they
reached the tribe of Mazin, where they perceived
the glittering of spears, the glare of armour, the
flash of swords, and warriors engaged round the
tents whilst the women were earnestly encouraging
them to the contest and battle. Who is it that
fights with children and women? and who is it that
shrinks from his enemy and foes? cried the heroes.
When Antar saw and heard the cries-of the women,


161


ami the screams of the children from the crowd (for
he was particularly solicitous in the cause of women), |
the light was darkened in his eyes, and he knew
not the right from the left. Do you take your
warriors towards the quarter of the women, cried he
to Malik, and I will attack these horsemen who have
taken their property, and have dispersed them in
the plains and wilds. And he shouted forth in his
well known voice when incensed— Ignoble dastards,
he roared, I am Antar, the son of Shedad! He
attacked, and at his assault the mountaims tottered.
He rushed down upon the enemy, and at once
overpowered the warriors and destroyed the heroes,
driving away the enemy out of their tents ; and at
his second attack all the scene of action was ex-
panded ; he shouted in front of the horses and forced
them back upon their haunches; and when the
aorsemen crowded about him, he snatched hold of
one from the back of his horse, and grasping him
by his feet, and whirling him round as a sling. with
him he struck down a second, and the two instantly
fell dead. Thus the battle was raging among them,
when Antar heard the voice of Prince Malik, crying
out, O son of Shedad, haste to my assistance.”
Now the Prince was engaged with the party of
Moosead, the lord of the waters of ‘l'raeer ; he had
dispersed them, and was about to repeat his attack,
when Moosad came upon him roaring like a lion.
He was an experienced horseman: he attacked Prince
M


162


Malik, and pressed him hard; and when Malik
saw that his life was in danger he cried for Antar's
aid; who no sooner heard him than he turned
Abjer round, and like a ferocious lion rushed down
upon Moosad, who was about to gallop around and
charge at him ; but Antar gave him no time. Come
on! he cried: and he terrified him, and struck him
with Dhami on the chest, and he divided him down
to the girdle of his back, and hurled him down,
hewn in two. He then assailed the army of Oosak,
his heart undaunted at death.

And when the tribe of Mazin saw Antar’s
prowess, the hearts of the heroes were encouraged,
and they hastened to the combat; men met men,
and heroes heroes; blood flowed and streamed,
scimitars glittered, and spears goaded; armour was
riven; lives were plundered; the ground was
discoloured with blood ; the warriors were covered
with glory; the flames of war greatly raged ;
innumerable were the blows and the thrusts, and
the easy became difficult: the battle field boiled like
the boiling of cauldrons; mighty was every act,
and fate descended amongst them. The eagles
and vultures hovered round; cowards were over-
thrown, and the brave were overwhelmed : heroes
were slain on both sides. The horror of the scene
was tremendous, the universal cry among them,
was Death! Hands and arms were torn asunder.
Antar cut through the troops, and made heads fly


163


off like balls, and hands like leaves of trees. The
van cried out to the rear ; they roared against Antar
from afar ; but not one dared to approach the me
where he fought.

Antar eagerly sought after the plume that floated
above the head of Oosak, and he stopped not in his
attack until he was beneath the standard where Oosak
was waiting for his.people to bring him his beloved
Naeema : neither could he be roused till Antar came
before him and encountered him. Then ensued a
dreadful engagement. The combat lasted an hour ;
when nerveless sunk the arm of Oosak. Antar
seeing the.state he was in, clung to him and grap-
pled him; and drawing his sword from his scab-
bard, he aimed a blow at his head, but Oosak
received it on his shield. The sword of Antar came
down upon it and shivered it in two, and split his
vizor in twain, and it penetrated even to his thighs,
down to the back of the horse ; and the rider and
the horse fell in four parts ; and he cried out—O
by Abs! I am the lover of Ibla; never will I be
controuled ! I will not be restrained !

When the troops of Oosak saw this deed, they
were bewildered ; they became confounded ; and
they said to one another, this is no human being,
—every one that comes before him drinks of the
cup of death. So they wheeled about their horses
and retreated into the rocky deserts, whilst Antar
and the tribe of Abs and Mazin pursued them, and


164


having driven them away out of that land, they re-
turned to the scattered cattle and dispersed horses ;
and as they all came back to the tents, the tribe of
Mazin dismounted, and met Antar, and marched
by the side of his stirrup, celebrating his victory
and triumph till they reached their camp, where the
women and the men came out, and the tribe of Abs
were accommodated with the best spots. Hassan
was the happiest of them all with Antar and the
Absians. He prepared feasts and festivals and en-
tertainments, which lasted for seven days; and on
the eighth night Naeema was married to Hassan.

Early the next morning all the Arabs went to
their respective countries and homes, and the tribe
of Abs also departed; but all the tribe of Mazin, in
order to take leave of them, accompanied them a
whole day's journey, when Antar besought them to
return home, and he and Mahk pursued their
journey towards their own country, over wilds and
plains. And when they were nigh, Prince Malik
sent on a messenger to announce their approach.
All the tribe of Abs were extremely anxious about
that expedition, particularly King Zoheir, with
respect to Antar; because his enemies, and those
that envied him, exceeded his friends and well-
wishers.

Now Rebia the son of Zeead had a brother,
whose name was Amarah : he was one of the nobles,
but a great coxcomb, was very particular in his


165


dress, fond of perfumes, and always keeping
company with the women and young girls. About
that period, happening to hear much said about
Ibla, and what Antar had reported of her, and
repeated of her in his verses, a passion was kin-
dled in his heart, and from hearsay, he conceived
a violent love for her;:and as Poets term it, his
ears fell in love before his eyes. Amarah sent for
one of his female slaves, and said to her, Go to the
habitations of the tribe of Carad, and obtam some
account of Ibla for me, and learn if what Antar
says of her be true, or disbelieved amongst the peo-
ple, for if she has all the beauty and charms that
are attributed to her, I shall demand her in mar-
nage, and will be lawfully wedded to her. She
promised to obey him, and departed. She came to
the habitations of the tribe of Carad, and presented
herself to Ibla, pretending to come on a visit; $0
Ibla gave her a kind reception. Thus the slave girl
ascertamed the point about Ibla, and found her a
perfect miracle of beauty and loveliness. She re-
mained about an hour, and returned to Amarah.
Blessed be Ged, how great is his power, and how
fair are his works, cried she, as she entered the
tents, and in Amarah’s hearing; and he asked he,
what had occasioned her so much astonishment. O,
said she, it is that damsel, whose equal exists not ; for
the most high God has granted to her such beauty.,


166


and such charms, as he has never yet bestowed on
any one of the daughters of the greatest Kings.

At this his heart fluttered, he was agitated, he
instantly leaped up, and put on his best clothes, and
perfumed himself all over, and let his hair float
down his shoulders, and mounted a white-faced
horse, and set out for the habitations of the tribe of
Carad. He happened to meet Malik, Ibla’s father,
and his son Amroo, on the road. Amarah saluted
them, and said to Malik—Come along with me,
my uncle, for I have something particular to com-
municate. If you have any business with me,
replied Malik, you might have sent a servant to me,
and I would have waited on you. What I want of
you, said Amarah, must be done personally between
us. I wish to be nearly related to you, and am
mogt anxious to he connected with you. I am
a suitor with you, and am desirous of wedding
your daughter; and I have only done this out of
my anxiety for her on account of her shepherd,
who has disgraced her among the Arabs of the -
desert.

Thus Amarah continued his talk, till Malik’s
eyes wept tears of joy: his bosom was elated and
transported with delight. O chief, said he, my
daughter is your slave, and I and my son Amroo are
the most obedient of you servants—and he stretched
out his hand to Amarah, and promised his daughter


167

to him; and when they all returned home,
Amarah informed his brother Rebia of all that had
passed between him and Malik, son of Carad. I
shall not permit thee thus to connect thyself, said
Rebia ; have nothing to do with such fellows; for
if Antar hears it, he will not leave a single man
alive of. all the tribe of Zeead. And pray who's
Antar ? asked Amarah—have I not a thousand
slaves like him? and if the foul wretch presume to
interfere with me, I will shew him the valour of
Amarah the munificent ; PIH shew him what Tl do
with him. If you can effect the marriage tomorrow
morning early, said Rebia, give her father the
dower and marriage presents without delay, and in-
troduce yourself to her in the absence of Antar ; for
he is an uncontroulable horseman, and a man rough
and harsh in his manners ; but if you can gain her
whilst he’s away, there will be an end of it. Ama-
rah assented to the proposal of Rebia, and thought
his advice prudent; for he feared Antar would kill
him and make him drink of the cup of death and
dissolution.

So the next day Amarah mounted his horse and.
went to Malik to give him the dower and marriage
presents ; and just at that moment arrived a mes-
senger at the tents of the tribe of Abs, announcing
the approach of Prince Malik son of Zoheir, and
Antar son of Shedad, and all the noble warriors in
their suite. Every one mounted his steed to go


168


and meet them. And friends saluted friends.
Antar went home, and entered his aunts apart-
ments, and staid till morning with his mother,
whom he questioned about Ibla, enquiring whe-
ther she had mentioned him during his absence ?
God be with thee, my son, said his mother; talk
no more about Ibla, and that lovely form—if thou
art asleep, awake! Antar upon this instantly
jumped up—What king or prince, exclaimed he,
has taken her away! The chief Amarah, said his
mother, has taken her. Every thing is completed
but the giving of the dower and marriage pre-
sents. By the faith of a noble and faithful Arab,
cried Antar, to morrow will I slay that Amarah,
were he even concealed within the chambers of
Nushirvan, king of Persia; tomorrow will I -tell
the whole affair to my friend Prince Malik, and ask
his counsel.

He remained at home that night, but early in
the morning, he repaired to the habitations of the
Prince ! he entered his tent, and kissed his hand.
Malik received him kindly, seated him by his
side, saying—how hast thou passed the night,
Aboolfawaris? My night was the night of
thy most accursed foe, replied Antar. What
means this? said Malk; inform me whats the
matter, and be sure of success and triumph. An-
tar told him what Malik had done, and how he had
betrothed his daughter to Amarah ; but my lord,


169


I must indeed slay that Amarah, and the whole
race of Zeead, and I will depart from this land and
country. But why quit this land? said Malik,
greatly disturbed ; I am a foe to those who are thy
foes, and a friend of those who are thy friends;
have patience until we go out to the chase, and then
-will I speak to thy father Shedad, andwill urge him
to acknowledge thee as his son, and that thou art a
part of his heart. Then take Ibla from her father;
and if he does not assent, I will put my name on
her, and will keep off any suitor or wooer till the
ceremony is performed, and thou art in possession
of thy wife. |

At this, Antar’s grief and anguish were appeased.
So they mounted their horses and sought the habi-
tation of King Zoheir, whence they all went out
on a hunting party. And Amarah rode by the
side of Ibla’s father: he was dressed out in his
finest raiments, and his limbs were perfumed and
seented, and his hair flowed down his shoulders.
Go, Aboolfawaris, tomy tent, said Malik to Antar,
that I may speak with thy father Shedad. Antar
departed, and Prince Malik riding up to Shedad,
sad—How long will you reject your son Antar ?
does not your heart lean towards him? and do you
not yearn after him? all the horde envies you on
his account. Grant me this request, Shedad, and
let me make a noble entertainment, and let me raise
his head above a state of servitude, and you will see


170


what he will do in retura for such a favour. Who,
answered Shedad, whilst his wrath was evident in
his features, who is the Arab that ever did such a
deed before me? Do you wish that it should be
said of me that Shedad was captivated with a
Negro woman, even to desire to marry her, and she
bore him a son, and he acknowledged him as such
because he became a great warrior, and a destroying
hero. And who is he, said Malik, that havmg a son
that resembles your son Antar would deny him, even
were swords to cut his body in pieces ?—Accord-
ing to my opinion, you should glory in him. Let
the Arabs follow your example.— Good practices are
to be admired, even though they be new. My lord, |
we'll consult about this, said Shedad ; and he went
his way home ; Prince Malik also returning unsuc-
cessful, found Antar in the greatest anxiety—he
required what had passed with his father—Malik
told him.

Antar remained that night with Prince Malik,
but early next morning he mounted his horse and
went towards his mother’s tent, and as he was pas-
sing along the road, he met Amarah in the quarter
of the tribe of Carad. He had been that night
consulting with Malik, Ibla’s father, about the
marriage, and in the morning he was returmg home
followed by his attendants. He was riding in a
most affected, coxcomical manner ; and as soon as


he saw Antar he trembled, and was in great dismay;


171


however, he plucked up courage, and let his tongue
run glibly on. Son of Shedad, said he, where wert
thou last night? thy masters were seeking thee ; for
I was there with them, and having heard of thy
talent for [eloquence, it was my intention to give
thee a robe suitable to such as thou art.

On hearing this, the light became dark in Antar’s
eyes ; he came up to him—Amarah, he exclaimed,
I am not worthy of receiving a robe or present from
thee; but when thou enterest unto my mistress
Ibla, the daughter of Malik, verily, vile wretch, I
will wrench thy neck off thy shoulders ; I will curse
thy family and thy parents, and I will make thine
the most fatal of marriages; and Antar ran close
up to Amarah, and seized him by the waist,
heaved him up in his hand till he had raised
him above his head, and then dashed him on the
ground, and almost smashed his bones. Amarah
fainted with fright, and gave unfeigned signs of
cowardice and alarm.

Immediately there arose an uproar among the
tribes of Abs and Zeead, and soon appeared Prince
Malik at full speed; for as soon as he heard the
news, he was afraid some mischief would befall his
friend. He came up with his drawn sword and
joined Antar, who stood firm, with his trusty Dhami
in his hand. By the faith of an Arab of Medder,
said Miahk, verily Antar in the tribe of Carad, is


172


like a rare onyx amongst people who know not its
value or worth. Come on, Aboolfawans, he con-
tinued, now for the family of Zeead ! and he plied
his sword among them. Were the tribe of Zeead
in any other place, cried Antar, hastening towards
him, and kissing his hand, I would shew thee what
I would do with them in battle and war ; but I am
afraid of blame and reproaches; and least the noble
Arabs should say, that a slave of the tribe of Carad
put his cousins to the sword. Malik was amazed at
Antar, and his magnanimity ; and just then Rebia
came up at full speed with the intention of killing
Antar the lion-hearted hero, for he too had heard of
the event: so he mounted his horse, and came
greatly alarmed lest his brother should be killed
and buried; for he had previously told his brother
that hè did not wish him to interfere with Ibla, or
expose himself and family to danger with the slave
Antar. He rushed upon Antar, eager to destroy
him. Stop, Rebia, cried Malik, or by the faith of
an Arab I will not spare one of your people or
warriors. Matters were in this state, when lo! King
Zoheir arrived, with all his heroes of the tribe of
Abs and Adnan. The attendants cried out, hold !
stop ! fight not! ye have put in motion King Zo-
heir, the ruler of the age.

Now on that day King Zoheir had received intel-
ligence that the tribe of Tey were coming down


| 173

upon him on account of Aminah, the daughter of
the Blood-drinker, and with them were twelve thou-
sand horsemen. King Zoheir was therefore trou-
bled in his heart, and he kept it secret, for he
feared that death and ruin were coming upon the
tribe of Abs. At that moment also reached him
the account of Amarah and Antar; and he was
greatly alarmed that dissentions should arise amongst
the tribes: so he mounted his horse and came
to them. As soon as King Zoheir arrived, they
held back from the fray, and they presented them-
selves, both Amarah and his brother, whilst all the
people cried out unamimously—O great King, there
is no security for us in your country, unless you per-
mit us to slay this diabolical black slave, Antar ; for
he rebels and revolts, and no one but you can re-
strain him. O my cousins, said Zoheir, tell me what
is the matter, what has Antar done?

Rebia came forward and told him that Amarah
had demanded im marriage Ibla, the daughter of
Mahk, and what Antar had done to him. So the
King knew that Antar had been ill-used, and that
what they had told him about the marriage of Ibla
was only to deceive him: but observing how many
complained of Antar, he said, tell me what is your
intention, or what shall I do to him. O King, said
they, either kill him, or banish him from our coun-
try, or send him back to tend the sheep and the |
camels. As to killing him, replied the King, I cannot


174


submit to you, because he has eaten of our meat,
and our protection is on him ; and as to banishing
him or sending him back to tend the camels and
the sheep, that does not depend upon me—it is
Shedad’s affair.

So the King sent for Shedad; and when he
came—these people are much exasperated against
your son, said Zoheir, but you have the entire dis-
posal of him, therefore do with him what you please,
and I will be witness for you. I am quite bewi-
dered and distressed about this business, replied
Shedad, but my opinion is that he should return to
the care of the sheep and the camels, and repent of
his conduct. Call Antar herc, cried Zoheir, and
make the compact with him in my presence. Shedad
called for Antar, and he came. Thou wicked slave,
said his master, itis my determination that thou re-
turn to the care of the sheep and the camels, for I
will not irritate the whole tribe, and submit to thee.
I will not molest my brother Malik, and obey
thee.

When Antar heard his father’s orders, the tears
rushe | from his eyes, and he regretted greatly what
had passed. Do, said Antar, what you please, for
I am one of your servants, and a slave has only to
obey his master, though he torment and afflict him
every day of his life : and from this day will I never
mount a horse, and will never be present in battle,
nor go anywhere but by your permission. And.


175


King Zoheir and others witnessed for Antar, and
for his promise ; and this flame that had blazed was
extinguished ; and they all returned to their tents ;.
and his enemies, and those that envied him, ex-
ulted over Antar, particularly the family of Zeead.

And Now, my cousins, cried Zoheir, prepare your
warlike instruments this instant, to fight the tribe
of Tey, for they are coming down upon us with
twelve thousand horsemen, on account of Aminah,
the daughter of the Blood-drinker, in order to re-
lease her from slavery and indignity. They all
assented, and separated to prepare immediately.
But Antar was rejoiced and glad at hearing this
intelligence, for he knew the tribe of Abs would
be beaten and routed, and that they would be in
want of him. So he went home and entered his

mother’s apartment, and asked about Ibla. Ibla
= was with me just now, said she; and she said,
soothe the heart of my cousin Antar, and tell him
from me that if my father even makes my grave my
resting place, none but him do I desire, none but
him will I choose.”

Antars heart rejoiced and gladdened when he
heard what Ibla had said of him. He staid at home
that night, and the next day he took his brothers
Jereer and Shiboob, and went to the pasture, driv-
ing the cattle and the camels before him.

And King Zoheir mounted his horse with all
his warriors of the tribe of Abs, in number four


176


thousand, all armed and accoutered, and set out
to meet the tribe of Tey, leaving in the tents
for the protection of the property, three hun-
dred horsemen, with the sons of Shas and Cais, and
Rebia the son of Zeead. He traversed the de-
serts: and the tribe of Abs remained in safety one
night; the next day Antar conducted the cattle and
camels to the pasture, and Shiboob and Jereer went
out also with the cattle and the sheep, seeking the
pastures. No sooner had they quitted the tents,
but a dust arose that darkened the whole country.
It was a party of the ribe of Tey, who had passed
King Zoheir on the road, and reached the land of
Sharebah like a blazing flame.

What is your counsel now? O Ebereah, said Antar
_ to Shiboob. If you listen to my advice, said his bro-
ther, to-day you will obtain all you wish and desire,
and you will become the noblest of the tribe of Abs,
and be admitted to the rank and consideration of
of an Arab, and be reckoned one of the horsemen of
Arabia. My opinionis, you should take the camels
and the cattle, and ascend this eminence towards
Mount Saadi ; I will bring you your horse and your
armour: for I know that the tribe of Abs will be
routed, and will stand in need of you; and they will
come to you, and will intreat you : but do not mount
your horse, do not take part in the contest tll your
father admits you to his own rank, and acknow-
ledges you as a son, and as a part of his heart, and


18r


your uncle gives you his daughter in marriage, and
makes you a partner in his wealth—then descend
and destroy your enemies and those that envy you;
and thus, my brother, you will attaim the oee of
your wishes.

Antar heard this advice of Shiboob; and he dov
away the cattle and the camels, and ascended the hill
of Mount Saadi; whilst Shiboob went and brought
him his horse and his armour, and they all three
sat down to watch the result of the contest between
the tribes of Abs and Tey: but the Teyans at-
tacked the pastures of the Absians, and carried off
their camels and their cattle, with their shepherds ;
and the whole country and vicinity were filled with
them. Many of the herdsmen returned in flight,
and spread alarm among the tents, informing
the Absians of the arrival of the Teyans, and of
their attack upon them, and that their army was
like the tempestuous sea. They were amazed, and
confounded ; for they knew that King Zoheir must
have missed them on the road.

Shas called out to the warriors, and assembled
the men. Come on, my cousins, cried he, behold the
enemy, let us fight for our women and our tents, and let
us infuse fear and terror into their hearts, or they will
cut in among ye, and nothing will secure us against
the cup of death, but the blows with the sword.
They all mounted, the men were encouraged, and
rushed on to the combat; man opposed man, and

N |


182


hero encountered heroes ; blood flowed and streamed,
limbs were hewn off, and horrors were spread among
them for an hour ; when at length the noble Absians
were so hard pressed, that the Teyans overwhelmed
them, for there were twelve thousand of these, and
the Absians only three hundred. Shas and Rebia
and Amarah were wounded, and nearly dead. The
Absians abandoned their property and families, and
sought the wilds and the deserts, and the enemy
took possession of their country and lands.

Alas ! said Ibla’s father to Shedad, O my brother,
where is thy son? Let him come to us in such a
dreadful day as this, and liberate us from death and
misery. We cannot raise our heads towards Antar,
said Shedad; but were he present, our condition
would indeed be the reverse of this. Shedad.raised
his eyes towards the hill, and he saw Shiboob and
Jereer and Antar seated on the ground and contem-
plating the tribe of Abs, and their defeat. So he ran
towards them, and his brother Malik followed him—
Canst thou, in an hour like this, said Shedad, em-
ploy thyself in tending the cattle and the camels?
Behold! the enemy have succeeded in their attempts,
and have plundered our property and slain our horse-
men, and have threatened to capture our women
and our families.

What dost wish me to do? said Antar; I am in-
deed grieved at thy distress. O that I could rescue
thee from destruction and defeat; but I ama slave,


183


and am not capable of doing any thing, and am not
worthy yourconsideration ; I am indeed a poor slave,
and one who conducts cattle and camels to the pas-
tures, and one employed in milking, and picking up
wood, and tending cattle and sheep—am I not
for this contemptible and despised ? And he quit-
ted his father and his uncle Malik where they stood,
and went away from them.

Shedad was vexed at his conduct. What means
this indifference about us, said he? What do you
want of me ? Said Antar—Hast ever heard of any
one asking protection and countenance from a slave ?
And abandoning noble princes? Mount, descend,
and destroy the enemy, Antar! cried Shedad, and I
will grant thee all thy wishes and hopes, and I
will raise thee to the rank and honour of an Arab.
But what will be this rank and honour ? said Antar.
I will, said Shedad, recognize you as my son, and
as a part of my heart. O my nephew, descend and
drive away ‘the enemy from us! exclaimed Malik,
and I will acknowledge thee of our family.

Whilst all this was going on between Antar,
Shedad, and Malik, the Teyans attacked the tents,
and plundered the property and goods, and captured
the women and families, even the females of King
Zoheir’s family ; and his daughter Mootejeredah
and his wife Temadhur were both taken prisoners ;
and they seized Ibla, and Shereeah and Semeeah ;
and dreadful was the wailing of Ibla when they


184


threw down their dwellings to their very founda-
tions, and they left nothing worth a halter; for
they were Arabs, and greedy of plunder, and only
conquered for spoil; and there were men among
them who loaded their horses, and loaded themselves
with a good horse load besides; and in a short
time they left the whole country a barren waste,
driving away with them the females and the
families, as they departed over the hills and the
deserts. . |

Malik, Ibla’s father, looked towards the women,
and seeing Ibla was a captive among the warriors,
O my nephew, cried he to Antar, dost thou not see
thy beloved Ibla, and: wilt thou not defend and
protect her? If I mount this instant, Malik, said
Antar, and destroy this party, and release Ibla
from her affliction, wilt thou give her to me in
marriage? Yes, said Malik, by the God that
created her and beautified her. And he extended his
hand towards Antar, and swore by the God of
mankind, and said, If thou dost liberate Ibla, she
‘shall be thy wife forever: and Shedad admitted his
pretentions to honour and rank, and swore he would
not deny him again, were the foe to tear his body
to pieces.

Shedad and Malik having finished speaking, and
Antar having made them confirm their oaths,
Shiboob brought him his horse Abjer. Now mount,
O my brother, said he, for thou hast no more to say


185,


to thy father and thy uncle—Put to the rout these
hateful foes. Antar clad himself in armour, and
encased himself in arms ’till he was like.a tower, or
amass rent from the mountain’s side. He rushed
impetuously down from the height like a tremendous
lion, his heart harder than stone, and his soul more
buoyant than the waves of the sea when it roars.
He shouted with a voice so loud that the whole
country and vallies trembled at the shock—Ye
ignoble dastards, I am Antar the son of Shedad !
and he thus spoke:

“ Soon shall ye behold my deeds this day with
“ the foe in the field of spear-thrusts, and the battle
“fire; and my furious courage amongst the tribes;
“ so that in my sublimity, I will mount above the
“ Pisces. I plunge into the flames of war with the
“ cleaving scimitar, and I extirpate them with the
“ goring lance. I drive back the horses on their
‘“haunches from the lofty seat of my thin-flanked
“ Abjer, and with the blade of my sword Dhami,
_ at whose edge flow the waves of death over the
“enemy. This day will I exhibit my ardent soul
“ with my Indian sword, and I will meet the chests
“ of the horse with my thrusts. I will establish the
“ market of war in its field on the top of my steed,
“in the protection of my country. My sword is
“ my father, and the spear in my hand is my father’s
“ brother; and I am the son of my day in the
“ heights of the deserts.”


186


He bent his head over the saddle-bow, and made
his attack. First, he sought the horseman who had
captured Ibla; he was in the rear, and his assault
was the assault of fate and destiny. He wished to
pierce him through the chest, but he feared the-
point might touch Ibla, and she be slain with him :
so he wheeled his horse on one side, and came upon
his right like a ferocious lion, and shouted out in a .
voice like thunder when it bellows, and pierced
with his spear his right side; the point issued out
on his left, and he hurled him down dead, wel-
tering in his blood. Ibla was terrified at the
thrust of the spear, but she was unhurt. Antar
dismounted and came to Ibla. ‘ Fear not, thou
light of my eyes, said he, thou shalt behold thy
Antar perform to day, deeds that shall be narrated
and recorded.”.

Again he rushed upon the enemy like an outra- °
geous lion ; and Shiboob attended him shooting his
arrows, with which he transfixed the hearts of the
warriors. At the first attack he diapersed the
troops from the tents, and in the second he laid bare
the whole plain. He poured down upon them and
he destroyed them, and overwhelmed them with
shouts, and horror and death. He hewed off their
arms and their limbs, and put to flight both the
right and the left. And God prospered him in all
he did, so that he slew all he aimed at, and over-
_threw all he touched. How numerous were the


187 |


heroes he terrified! and at his shouts all the land
trembled.

Now the tribe of Abs distinguished his yoice
through the confusion and thick dust, and they said
to one another, “ he has indeed routed them.” They
returned from the mountains and ravines, and joined
the battle, and their hearts gained courage at the
sight of Antar, the lord of war. But when Shas
saw how Antar moved amongst the enemy, and
how he overwhelmed them in slaughter and destruc-
tion, his gall burst, and his hatred increased. He
turned towards his brother Cais, and said—dost not
behold the deeds of that foul Black, how he cuts
down the enemy with his sword? Verily, he has
discomfited them, and dispersed them among the
wilds and the plains, and his greatness will raise him
above us all. But I wish, my brother, to take him
unawares and kill him whilst he is engaged in the
conflict, and make him drink of the cup of perdition,
that we may be relieved from his foul influence; and
it will be said that the Teyans have slain him.

What mean’st thou, O.Shas! replied Cais; does
Antar deserve this of us, after having defended our
wives and our families? How can we be guilty of
such an act ? Had it not been for Antar’s sword, the
enemy would not have left one of us alive—not one
to tell the tale. My advice is that we should aid
him in the conflict, and drive away from us these
warriors, or we shall become a common proverb.


188


Cais continued to make such representations to
Shas, till he dissuaded him from his project. The
whole tribe of Abs then collected together, and
made one united effort against the enemy ; and
men encountered men, and heroes heroes, blood
flowed, limbs were hewn off, and the Absians
exerted all their powers to join the lion warrior ;
but it was impossible at that time, for Antar had
plunged into the midst of the Teyans, on ac-
count of their horseman whose name was Rebeeah,
who was the leader of the troops. He was eminent
for his bravery, and it was he who had wounded
Shas, and had destroyed many Absians, and had
dispersed them among the mountain sides. And
Antar continued slaughtering, and searching him
until he overtook him, and did not give him time to
turn or move his bridle, ’ere he struck him with
Dhami upon his breast, dividing him down to the
thong g that encircled his back, and he tumbled over
cut in twain.

When the Blood-drinker saw Antar smite the
-warrior, he was terrified and confounded, and said
to his troops about him, this is no mortal man; all
that have dared him, have drank of the cup of per-
dition. And as soon as he had released his daughter,
he placed her behind him, and sought the wilds and
the deserts, followed by the tribe of Fey and all the
‘troops that had survived. And they fled to the
mountains and the rocks, their standards reversed.


189


But the tribe of Abs pursued and drove them
before them full three parasangs from their country,
and then returned for the dispersed horses and the
scattered property. And they went back to their
own tents, Antar at their head, like the flower of
the Judas tree, thus exclaiming :

‘¢ I have abused fortune, but how can she humi-
“ liate such as me! I too that have a spirit would
“ cut down mountains. I am the warrior of whom
“it is said, he tended the he and she camels of his
“tribe. When I assaulted Kendeh and Tey, their
“ hands brandishing the long spears, with armies,
“that when I thought of them I imagined the
“ whole earth filled with men; and as their hardy
“ steeds trampled our lands, whilst you might see
“them talking and exulting, ‘twas then their
“ steeds fled away horrified at me, and the redoubled
“ thrusts that gored them as they sought the fight.
* The noble hero feels no fatigue ; him no challen-
“ ger need call to the combat. It was the slave
“ alone that drove back the horsemen whilst the
“ flame of battle was blazing,— then speeded away
“ their troops in terror of my arm,—light they
“ fled, burthened though they had been. Crushing
“ were the stamps and tramplings on their necks,
“ and the horse shoes dashed and pounded their
* skulls, How many warriors were laid low by my
“ sword, whilst they tore, in very rage, their hands.
s with their teeth. I rescued the maidens and


190


“ virgins, and not one did I leave but bereft of
“ sense. Mine is a spirit for every enterprize, high
« is my. fame, exalted is my glory.”

These verses excited surprize and admiration
among the chiefs, and they thanked him. But
Malik, Ibla’s father, and Shas and Rebia, and the
tribe of Zeead, cherished a flame in their hearts ;
they thanked him in appearance, but in their soul
their gall wassburst. When they approached the
tents the women came out to meet them, beating
the cymbals, and the slaves brandishing their
swords; and Ibla stood in front of them like a full
moon when it shines, as she cried out—May I never
lose thee, O thou defender of women, and destroyer
of every foe and enemy. At these words, Antar’s
grief and anguish vanished, and he thought that
in her presence he could slay a host of enemies.
The warriors then went down to their tents, and
no one but talked of Antar, how he slew, and
‘fought with the invaders; and they passed a night
of joy, glorying in the deeds of Antar the in-
vincible hero.

The next day arrived in haste King Zoheir with
his companions, for he had heard that his foe had
passed him on the road: he feared his family might
' be destroyed and cut off; and he could scarcely
believe he should find his family safe from tle
treacheries of the times; and as he approached the
tents he saw dead bodies scattered about, broken


191


scimitars and shattered spears, and his heart mis-
gave him. But when he reached the tents, the
chiefs came out to meet him: they saluted him,
and related what Antar had done. And when
King Zoheir heard this of the great Antar, he
said to his surrounding heroes—Verily by the
faith of an Arab, we are glorified in Antar above
all that inhabit the wilds. And Antar came out
to meet him; the King approached him, and
kissed him between the eyes—O Aboolfawanis, said
he, we are unable to reward thee for this act, even
were we to give thee all we possess in dominions and
property.

Then the warriors went to their tents, and the
King to his own pavilion. And his wife, Temadhur,
came up to him, and kissing his hands—O King,
said she, if you are wise and good, be kind fo
Antar ; for it is he that has protected your wife and
children. Thus was his joy in the deeds of Antar
augmented, and he slept at ease until the morning
dawned, when he ordered the sheep and camels to
be slain, and a feast to be prepared, and a magnifi-
cient entertainment to be made ready for all the
tribe of Abs and Adnan. The most highly ho-
noured were Antar and the horsemen of the tribe of
Carad. After dinner they began conversing, and
Shedad related to the King all his son Antar had
done: how he himself having acknowledged his
relationship and connexion, and his brother Malik


192


having promised him to Ibla, he mounted his horse
and routed the enemy, and dispersed them amongst
the wilds and the deserts.

This struck to the heart of Shas, and his soul
was filled with indignation and rage, and his whole
frame was ready to burst. Shedad, said he, how
could you take upon yourself to introduce Antar,
the son of a slave, to our tribe, and admit him to
our rank and our consequence? Now we shall
become a shame amongst the Arabs to the end of
time, and they will say the tribe of Abs has
associated itself with black slaves.

O Shas, said Cais, give up this envious disposition,
in which no one partakes with you. And King
Zoheir turned also towards his son Shas, and
rebuked him. O my lord, exclaimed Antar, stand-
ing up, the heart of Prince Shas is not inelined
towards me, I will therefore retire from you to
another tribe. Tears flowed from the eyes of Antar,
and King Zoheir and the tribe of Carad gazed at
him in astonishment; when at length the King
arose, and having kissed Antar between the eyes,
he thanked and praised him. Then turning
towards the warriors of Abs, he cried out—“ O ye
tribes of Abs and Adnan, and all ye that are here
assembled, ye all know the purity of my connexion
and rank, and my father and my mother, yet let
Antar be called as I am called, for he is, by the
faith of an Arab, my cousin, the antidote to all my


193


sorrow and my grief, and he who honours him,
honours me; and he who despises him, despises
me,—and he cried out—Welcome, welcome to my
cousin, thou reliever of sorrow !”

Among the first who succeeded Zoheir was
Prince Malik; he sprang towards Antar, and
embraced him and kissed him between the eyes;
and he likewise cried out—Welcome, welcome to
my cousin, the reliever of sorrow! When the
horsemen saw what King Zoheir and his son had
done, they could not avoid following the example ;
so they sprang towards Antar and embraced him,
and kissed him between the eyes, and admitted him
to the honour and rank of an Arab, and all cried
out— Welcome, welcome to my cousin! But Shas
was violently enraged ; he was‘nearly bursting with
passion ; he arose hastily and went to his tent. But
the warriors sat down and began talking and jesting,
anxiety and sorrow left them, and they were all joy
and merriment; they ate meat and drank wine till
night brought on the darkness ; and at the termina-
tion of the feast the King clothed Antar in a robe
worked with red gold, and girded on a trusty sword,
and gave him a pike of Khata, and mounted him
on an Arab horse, and called him the Champion of
the tribes of Abs and Adnan. And Antar returned
with his father and his uncles towards the tents, and
his glory and honour were exalted among all the
horsemen; the warriors of the tribe of Carad


194


rejoiced, but his enemies and the envious were
grieved, particularly the family of Zeead.

Amarah went home, and his regret and affliction
increased ; he laid himself down at full length, and
a fever and trembling attacked him, and his knees
and legs pained him, and he was fearfully indis-
posed. He sent for his brother Rebia, and wept
before him; O brother, said he, if Ibla escape
me, I shall die of grief, and no one will know of
my death. Amarah, said Rebia, verily you have
done a deed you ought not to. have done. We
must now consider this slave as our equal. From
the first, I never wished you to interfere with
Ibla, or connect yourself.with the tribe of Carad ;
and now that this vile slave has liberated her from
slavery we can do nothing with her, and cannot
succeed, unless her father indeed be inclined
towards you. To morrow I will go and see about
your business, and if I find that he still wishes for
you, it may be accomplished : otherwise make your
heart easy, Amarah ; for if he inclines towards
Antar on account of his courage, we will consult
how to destroy him, and annihilate his life ere he
actually obtain her.

Thus were his alarms and jealousies in part re-
lieved. He waited patiently till the next day, when he
dressed himself in: fine clothes, and perfumed him-
self, and sent for Malik and his son Amroo, who
attended him and complimented him ; and instantly


195


Amarah arose and received them with all due
courtesey. And Malik said to Amarah, what do
you wish of us? Most noble and excellent sir, I
only invited you to day, he replied, that I might
see whether your heart was pleased in marrying
that guarded pearl and concealed jewel to that
black slave, that feeder of camels and sheep, whom
the horsemen have preferred to their rank and
condition. Thus will your daughter be disgraced
amongst the noble Arabs. If indeed you do such
a deed, it will be impossible for us to remain in
this land. We only promised so to Antar, and
only. admitted him to our relationship and rank,
said Malik, when he assisted us in the battle and
conflict ; but we never thought he could escape safe
out of those perils, and rout such armies.

Well, said Amarah, to morrow when we repair
to King Zoheir, and when we are in full assembly,
Iwill demand your daughter; do you assent and
settle the amount of the dower, and when once the
dower is decided on, neither King Zoheir or any one
else can say any thing to the contrary: and I promise
you that the dower shall be a thousand he and she
camels, and a thousand head of sheep, and twenty
Ooshareeyi camels, and twenty horses of the noblest
breed, and a hundred silk robes, and fifty satin
garments spangled rich in gold, and twenty strings
of the finest jewels, and a hundred skins of wine for


i96 |
the marriage feast, and a hundred male, and as
many female slaves.

Malik overjoyed, agreed to this proposal ;
Amarah too, flattered himself he should succeed
in his expectations; and soon after Malik and his
son went home and tarried there till the morning.
The next day King Zoheir was sitting in his tent,
surrounded by the nobles of the tribe of Abs, when
Amarah and the family of Zeead presented them-
selves before him ; they had greatly enlarged their
turbans, and seated themselves according to their
rank on the left of the King, and Antar and the
Carad tribe were on the right, and the horsemen
took their places. O Chief, said Amarah, turning
towards Malik, do you think my rank mean, or my
‘connexion low? Are you not, said Malik, one of
our illustrious horsemen? We are now in the pre-
sence of King Zoheir, continued Amarah, and I
come to you as a suitor to your daughter, and I am
solicitous for your favour; therefore decide on the.
marriage dower and donation, and demand even what
the princes of the universe would fail in giving.

All this passed, and Antar sat still and heard it
and observed; and he was convinced his uncle
Malik favoured the Zeead fanily, and he feared that
if his uncle should decide on fixing the marriage
donation with Amarah, and should confirm it, Ibla
would pass out of his hands, and he would have no


197


more to say—in vain he would reproach and revile.
Thus roused by the urgency of the moment, he
started up, and turning towards Amarah, exclaim-
ed, “thou he goat of a man—thou refuse!—thou
villain! Dost thou at such a time as this demand Ibla
in marriage ?—thou coward, did not I demand
her when she was in the midst of twelve thousand
warriors, waving their bone-cleaving swords, and
thou and thy brother were flying among the rocks
and the wilds ? I then descended—TI exposed my life
in her dangers, and liberated her from the man that
had captured her ; but, now that she is in the tent
of her father and mother, thou wouldst demand
her! By the faith of an illustrious Arab, thou
dastard, if thou dost not give up thy pretentions to
Ibla, I will bring down perdition upon thee, and I
will curse thy relations and thy parents, and I will
make the hour of thy wedding, an hour of evil tiding
to thyself and thy posterity !”

O Antar, said Amroo, Ibla is our daughter, and
it is for us to command; no prince or chief is
empowered to oblige us to marry her to any one but
whom we choose and approve.

At these words the light became dark in his eyes
—his hand hurried to his irresistible Dhami—
he sprang from the ground on the back of his
Abjer, resolved to put Malik and his son Amroo to
death, and Rebia and Amarah too, and the whole
family of Zeead; and to carry off Ibla, and live

O


198


with her in the mountains ; but he thought of King
Zoheir’s kindness, and how he had transferred
him from servitude to honour and freedom ; so he
immediately changed his mind, and thus addressed
the Absians :

« When the family of Carad are ungrateful, and
“ the family of Zeead are violent in their acts, then
“ there is no blame or reproach to me, if I protect
« mine own honour and rights by arms or by stra-
“‘tagem. snot fire kindled from a Zanad when the
“stone is rubbed against the Zanad? Enjoyment
‘“‘is ever desired after absence, and approximation
«is wished for after separation. I have been mer-
« ciful to those who are not aware of the value of
“ my mercy, and my friendship has not been pro-
“ perly appreciated. But after this forbearance I
« shall act in another manner, till the towns and
<‘ deserts shall flow with my blood,.and my sword
‘‘ shall complain of fatigue in my hand, and my
<< joints shall murmur at the burthen of my belt.
“s Ye observed me well the day of Tey, and my
« deeds with my Indian spear ; and had my lance
<“ a tongue, it would tell ye of the splitting of ribs
“in the battle. How many challengers called tb
& me on the day of conflict, and hailed me, and I
& answered each antagonist. O family of Zeead,
& ye have opposed a noble lion that never flinches
‘‘ from the fight—artless in speech and deeds—with
“ a sword that cleaves heads and arms. Be on thy


199


“ guard then, O Amroo, on thy guard against him.
“ Let not thine eyelids be weighed down with sleep.
“ But had I not a chief who commands me, liberal
“in speech, and exalted in power, I would do
“ myself justice with my sword, and soon would I
“ shew the difference between virtue and outrage.”

When Antar had finished, the chiefs admired
his eloquence: King Zoheir went up to him, and
made him dismount. May God never renounce
thy mouth ! said he: may no one ever harm thee,
O thou protector of the tribes! And then turning
towards Malik, [bla’s father, he said—How is it that
you will not marry your daughter to a hero? You
engaged her to him when he liberated her from her
perilous situation! My lord, my daughter is in
my tent, said Malik, you may command her, and
marry her to whom you please; I will not oppose
your directions, and I will not swerve from your
orders, Then said King Zoheir, Ibla can belong
to no one but our defender, the brave Antar. So
they sat down and ate, and thus they remained till
dark, when they went home, each to his tent.


200


CHAPTER V.


Now then, said Amarah to Rebia, when they had
retired, now that Antar has vanquished me, and has
taken Ibla by force, I can no longer remain in this
country; I must go and roam about the wilds
and deserts. Cheer up, Amarah, said Rebia, let us
still contrive the means to overthrow him, and to
make him drink of the cup of destruction and
death. Rebia left Amarah and went home, and
sent for Malik and Amroo, and when they ar-
rived he said unto Malik, pretend to be good friends
with Antar; appear very kind to him, and do not
prevent his entering your tents. Sooth him with
gentle words, and when he comes to you, ask him
about the dower for Ibla; then he will say—what
do you wish? tell him you only demand a thou-
sand Asafcer camels, that your daughter may pride
herself in them above the high and low.

Know then, Malik, that these camels are in the
possession of Monzar son of Massema, the King of
the Arabs, and the lieutenant of Nushirvan ; and I
know that Antar in the greatness of his courage,
will go in search of them among the tribe of Shiban,
and he will expose his life to danger and death, and


20%


you will never see him again. Malik eagerly listened
to his advice; and it happened on, that day that An-
tar was out hunting; and when he returned in the
evening, his uncle gave him the kindest reception,
and ordered a slave to take away what he had
brought in; he introduced him into his house, and
gave him meat to eat, and wine to drink, and he
spent part of the night in his company. Antar was
much pleased at this reception and kind treatment,
and thought that his wishes with respect to Ibla
would be accomplished, for he knew not the plot
conceived against him. So they continued to shew
these civilities to Antar, and he was in raptures
in the enjoyment of Ibla’s conversation for ten
whole days.

On the night of the eleventh, Malik was more
than usually kind to him, and when the noble war-
riors had all separated for the night, and Shedad
had gone home, and also Zakhmetulgiwad and the
rest of the tribe of Carad: and no one remained
but Antar, his uncle Malik, Amroo, and Shereeah,
Malik’s wife, and Ibla, their daughter, Malik plied
Antar with wine till he made him drunk, when he
addressed him and said; Tellme, I pray you, what
you wish to be done for my daughter Ibla; you
have prohibited all suitors ; and do you intend to
take her by force without any marriage gift or |
dower, and will you bring disgrace upon us in
every part of the world? That can never be, said


202


Antar, were I even to drink of the cup of death and
condemnation. God forbid that this guarded pearl
and this concealed jewel should be thus sold to the
highest bidder. I am only waiting orders—tell me
what you demand, ask whatever you choose, that
I may grant her what will give her reason to pride
herself above the chiefs of the earth. Nephew,
said Malik, I will not make you engage for what ìs
beyond your power, and I will not demand of you
but what an Arab would demand; such as he and
she camels. I ask of you then a thousand Asafeer
camels, that my daughter may. boast of them ; for
in our tribe there are none; nor are there any like
them in Cahtan. Then will you and I obtain all
our wishes and our desires, and we shall destroy our
enemies and those that envy us,—this is all I ask
of you, and then will I make your marriage feast
out of my own property, and will give you what-
ever may be required of my own he and she camels ;
all our possessions shall be united, and we will live in
perpetual felicity. Malik continued talking with
Antar in this manner till he gave way and consented ;
and he knew not that the camels were in the king-
dom of Monzar, the King of the Princes of the
Arabs, and the lieutenant of Chosroe Nushirvan,
whose armies were innumerable.

Uncle, said he, I will give you these camels
loaded with the treasures of their masters; but give
me your hand, and betroth me to your daughter,


203


and thus shew me the purity of your intentions. So
Malik gave him his hand, and a fire blazed in his
heart. Antar’s joy was excessive, his bosom heaved,
and he was all delight—he started on his feet—he
took off his clothes, and put them on his uncle ; and
Ibla saw Antar’s arms, and smiled. What art thou
smiling at, fair damsel? said Antar. At those wounds,
she replied, for were they on the body of any other
person, he would have died, and drank the cup of
death and annihilation: but thou art unhurt by
them. Her words descended to his heart cooler
than the purest water, and he thus addressed her :

« The pretty Ibla laughed when she saw that I
“ was black, and that my ribs were scratched with
“ the spears. Do not laugh nor be astonished when
“the horsemen and armies surround me. The
“ spear barb is like death in my hand, and on it are
“various figures traced in blood. I am indeed
“ surprised how any one can see my form in the naey
“ of contests, and survive.”

‘He then departed to his mother’s tent, for he
was restless, and the words of Ibla were as
a blazing fire in his heart. He wakened his bro-
ther Shiboob, and told him to get ready his horse
Abjer—he did as he was bid; Antar clothed him-
self in armour, and stood like a tower. Where art
thou going? said Shiboob, that I may shew thee
the nearest roads. Well, said Antar, tell me the
nearest road to the land of Irak, for there are many


204


Arabs in that country, and their property and
camels very abundant ; with them is my object, and
what my uncle has demanded.

Shiboob trembled and was confounded at this
intelligence, for he knew the, country. Why not
stop till morning, said he, that thou mayst acquaint
King Zohceir and Prince Malik? for they may per-
haps be able to assist thee in this affair. Return
my brother, and expose not thy life to difficulties
and dangers. Away! away! cried Antar; not a
word; none but the Creator of mankind can aid
me; I must destroy my accursed enemies. Mine
be the dark and nightly course, after the man-
ner of mighty heroes; for if I travel by day they
will lay plots against me. Shiboob was convinced
he was right, and conducted him to the land of
Irak. And they continued their way over the
wilds and the deserts till the third hour, when
on a sudden there arose a great dust, and there
appeared a troop of horsemen like eagles, As soon
as they saw Antar, they closed their vizors and
waved their lances, and slackened their bridles and
fixed their spears: and when they came near to him
they cried out, down, down, from that steed, thou
dastard, strip off those accoutrements of war and
armour, or we annihilate thee! whither art thou
going over the plain? Here we have remained in
expectation of thee. As soon as Antar heard these
words, he shook his spear in his hand, rushed on,


205


and roared like’ a lion, and darted towards them
with a heart fearless of death and danger,—thus
speaking :—

‘“‘ Fortune insults me as if I were day and night
“her foe, the enemy seek me in every peril, and
« imagine I am unable to fight; but were they to
“ present to me the form of death itself as an anta-
“& gonist, I would imbrue its hands in the blood
“ of its own wounds.” ©

He attacked them, and his assault was like the
assault of the most furious lion: he rushed upon
their chief, when lo! he let fall his vizor from his
face and cried out, check thine arm, O Knight of
the age! sufficient is the mischief and danger, for
I am thy friend Harith, son of King Zoheir. Antar
threw down his spear, dismounted, and ran towards
him, and kissed his hand.

Now Harith was an undaunted warrior, in the
prime of youth, and eloquent in speech; he loved
Antar, and was much interested about him, like
his brother Malik; and the cause of his meeting
Antar in the deserts was, that he had been invited
to a feast by the tribe of Ghiftan, and was returning.
He met Antar, and the above passed. And when
he saw that death was hurrying from the ends of
his fingers, and that destruction was stamped upon
his spear, he let down his vizor, and Antar recog-
nized him, and dismounted and saluted him.

Why, my lord, said he, why hast thou acted thus ?


206


Thou hast endangered thine own life, and those
that were with thee. Harith smiled, and was surprised
at his humility, after such proof of his superiority
over him. God prosper thee, O Aboolfawaris, said
he, jewel of the multitude ! whither art thou bound,
and what great expedition hast thou undertaken ?
He who wishes, replied Antar, that his nuptial
ceremony should be performed, must expose his
. life to danger. Thou knowest what dangers and
what disgraces I have submitted to on account of
my cousin Ibla, in order that her father might give
her to me. He has demanded of me a marnage
dower, and a settlement, and I must bring what he
requires from Irak.

Terrified at Antar’s words cried Harith, what
is it thou sayst, Aboolfawaris? For God’s sake re-
turn with me, trouble not thyself about such matters,
and do not banish thyself from amongst us; our
property is not so small; and verily Iam astonished
how my father and brother could let thee depart
alone. I told no one of my departure, said Antar ;
My lord my uncle demands of me camels that we
have not, and are not in our tribe, and I have en-
gaged to procure them, and I have said yes: and
he thus continued.

“ Say not no, after thou hast said yes, for thou
s wilt be clothed in shame, and repent. Truly, no,
“ after yes, is foul; and base is the word, no after
& yes, When thou wouldst have a friend, associate


207


‘with a noble person, one who is chaste, modest,
“ and liberal; and when he says no toa thing, do
“thou also say no, and when thou sayest yes, let
“ him also say yes.”

Harith was surprised at his eloquence and virtuous
mind, and his admiration of him incrcased. If such is
thy business, said he, I will accompany thee and
assist thee in all thy difficulties. I cannot possibly
consent to that, replied Antar ; return with thy war-
nors to thine own country. So Antar bade him
farewell and departed over the wilds and deserts, and
Harith and his people returned, praising Antar’s
intrepidity and eloquence. Antar and Shiboob
proceeded on their journey, Shiboob ever shewing
the way, till evening coming on, they sought a pool
of water where they might repose from their fa-
tigues, and at length they reached a tent pitched
near a spring; and behold there was an old Shiekh,
with his back bent. ‘They made towards him.

'« An old man was walking along the ground,
* and his face almost touched his knees. So I said
“to him, why art thou thus stooping ? He said, as
“he waved his hands towards me, my youth is lost
“ somewhere on the ground, and I am stooping in
“ search of it.”

He welcomed them, and brought them a cup of
milk, cooled in the wind; Antar took the milk and
drank, and gave some to his brother, and came to


208


the door of the tent. The old Shiekh laid pillows
for them, and presented viands, receiving them in
the most hospitable manner. And when they had
finished eating, the Shiekh made bold to ask Antar
his adventures, and why he was travelling. So he
related to him all that had passed with his uncle
Malik, and what he had demanded as a marriage
dower.

May God disgrace and overthrow and destroy thy
uncle, and not save him! exclaimed the old man ;
for his only object in making this demand of thee,
is to annihilate and ruin thee. How is that, sard
Antar, how so? Know, Aboolfawaris, replied he,
that these Asafeer camels are only to be found
among a tribe called the tribe of Shiban, and their
chief is King Monzar, son of Massema, the lieute-
nant of King Chosroe, whose armies are innumer-
able, whose power is irresistible, and he rules all the
Arabs of the wilds and the deserts; and if thou
wert to carry off thcse camels, who is able to pro-
tect thee from King Monzar, or shelter thee? My
advice 1s, that thou shouldest return home, and not
expose thy lite to dangers and death. __

Antar remained that night in the tent, and the
next day mounted his Abjer, bade the Shiekh fare-
well, and thanked him. Shiboob attended him by
his side, and they sat out in quest of the land of
Hirah, and when they had advanced some distance,


209


Antar thought of Ibla, and his absence from
her, and what he had suffered for her, and thus
spoke :

“ In the land of Shurebah are defiles and valleys ;
“ I have quitted them, and its inhabitants live in
“my heart: fixed are they therem, and in my
“ eyes; and even when they are absent from me,
“ they dwell in the black of mine eye ; and when the
“ lightning flashes from their land, I shed tears of
“ blood, and pass the night leagued with sleepless-
“ness, The breeze of the fragrant plants makes
“me remember the luscious balmy airs of the
“ Zatool-irsad. O Ibla, let thy visionary phantom
“ appear to me, and infuse soft slumbers over my
“ distracted heart! O Ibla, were it not for my love
“ óf thee, I would not be with so few friends and so
“ many enemies! I am departing, and the back of
“ my horse shall be my resting place; and my
“ sword and mail my pillow, till I trample down
“ the lands of Irak, and destroy their deserts and
“ their cities. When the market for the sale of
“ lives is established, and they cry out, and the
“ criers proclaim the goods, and I behold the troops
“ stirring up the war-dust with the thrusts of spears
“and sharp scimitars—then will I disperse their
“ horsemen, and the foe shall be cut down deprived
“of their hands. The eyes of the envious shall
“ watch ; but the eyes of the pure and the faithful
“shall sleep; and I will return with numerous


210 `


‘‘ Asafeer camels that my love shall procure, and
€ Shiboob be my guide.”

As soon as he had finished, his tears flowed
abundantly. They travelled on till they reached
the land of Hirah, where they saw populous towns,
plains abounding in flowing streams, date trees and
warbling birds, and sweetly smelling flowers; and
the country appeared like a blessing to enliven the
sorrowing heart ; and the camels were grazing, and
straying about the land: and they were of various
colours, like the flowers of a garden; and there
were she camels, and young camels, and slaves and
attendants. And as soon as he saw them he was all
anxiety, quite out of breath with eagerness. And
he felt that his uncle had sent him on this com-
mission to insure his death and destruction, unless
his intrepidity should guide him through.

Ebe Reeah, said he to Shiboob, I well know that
this is a land great in power, and in no region is
there one to be compared to it. We have nothing
for it but prudence and daring fortitude in danger,
anda timely submission to power, that we may ob-
tain what we are in search of, and return rejoicmg
and successful. Hasten then, son of my mother, and
look after these Asafeer camels, and mark them,
whilst I let my horse Abjer rest himself. Shiboob
consented to what he directed, and leaving his
bow and quiver, disguised himself in the clothes of
a slave and feigned himself sick, Thus he went


211


towards the pastures, where he saw the camels like
young brides ; and when the slaves marked Shiboob,
they sprang towards him, welcomed him, and made
him sit down, and took out some of their provisions,
and made him eat, asking him whence he came, and
what had happened to him.

I am a slave of the tribe of Zebeed, said he, and
Shedad is my master’s name ; and he is a stubborn
cruel man, and had no compassion for his slaves,
male or female. So I have run away and have left
him, and my wish is to meet some one who will
protect me from him. Remain with us as long as
thou pleasest then, my cousin, said the slaves
pitying him, and be welcome! and thy time shall
pass pleasantly enough.

Very thankful was he, and remained with them
the rest of the day, and he told them all manner of
lies and deceitful tales till he had marked out the
Asafeer camels, and he saw they were the miracles
of the age; and when evening came on, the slaves
and attendants drove away the camels, and sought
their habitations and homes, and Shiboob went with
them. But when they came nigh to the tents, it
being now dark, he separated from them and gave
his feet to the wind, seeking the plain till he
was in the presence of Antar, who sprang up to
meet him, exclaiming--Tell me, O Ebe Reeah,
what news hast thou! Nothing, said Shiboob, but
that we are in a dangerous position, and under fate


212


and destiny, unless the Lord of Heaven is ou?
defender and protector.

O Shiboob, said Antar, is it not well known that
when a slave exposes his life to the abyss of danger,
he is exalted to the height of glory? They then
concealed themselves till morning dawned, when
Antar clad and incased himself in armour till he
appeared like a tower, or a fragment rent from a
mountain; and he went forward till he reached the
pastures, crouching along as a wolf after a sheep.

And when it was day, the Asafeer camels were
driven to graze, and behind every thousand she
camels were ten slaves to attend them, that the
males might not annoy them. The she camels
ranged about grazing, and the slaves began to amuse
themselves; for they were slaves of the King of
the Arab chiefs, and knew not what it was to be
attacked.

These are the Asafeer camels, said Shiboob, sO
make thy plan, and act as it seems best to thee. Run
on, said Antar, and occupy the road to Hirah, so that
their cries be not raised against us,ere we be far
away out of this country. As thou pleasest, brother,
said Shiboob. And he moved along on tiptoe over
the plain, till he came in the rear of the slaves, when
he seated himself on his knees, and emptying his qui-
ver of arrows before him, wajted their attack. As to
Antar, he urged on Abjer, and plunged amongst
the he and she camels, and cut off g thousand of the


213


Asafeer camels with his spear, crying out to the
slaves—Ye base born, drive away these camels, and
on before me! or my sword will be stained with
your blood.

When the slaves heard Antar, they were terrified
at his enormous bulk and gigantic shape, and the |
= rolling of his eyes, and the weight of his arms.
They drove the camels before him, and goaded them
on with the points of their spears, and they fled
away before them like eagles. And thus they pro-
ceeded till about the third hour, when behold a
great dust arose and darkened the land ; and when
it dispersed there appeared a. party of Arabs of the
tribe of Zakhm and Juzam, about twelve thousand
horsemen ; all hardy warriors, armed with sharp
swords and long spears, screaming out— Whither
are ye going, ye dastards—hence is there no escape
out of this land !

Now the cause of the arrival of this troop of
horsemen was as follows—The slaves that had es-
caped from Antar and Shiboob sought their homes
and habitations, and it happened that they encoun-
tered the train and equipage of Monzar on a hunting
party, attended by his- warriors and his troops; who,
turning towards his son Numan—Speed your horse
on a little, my son, said he, and bring me intelligence
of these shepherds. Now Numan was his eldest
son. So Numan directed his horse towards the
slaves, and enquired whither they came. O Prince,

P


i


214


said the shepherds, a black Knight, mounted:on a
black steed, and whose voice is the roar of a lion,
darted down upon us and seized a thousand of the
Asafeer camels, and carried them off.

No sooner had Numan heard this account of the
shepherds, than he cried out to the men and the
warriors that accompanied him, and slackening his
horse’s bridle, galloped after Antar, and twelve
thousand in number were the lion heroes that fol-
lowed him. And they halted not till they overtook
Antar, as we mentioned, and cried out as we
described. —

When Antar saw them, he smiled, for battle was
his joy and delight. O! thou black born, said
he to Shiboob, I want thee to guard the camels,
whilst I shew thee a day of horrors among these
miscreants. He then turned the camels into a
mountain cave, and received the warriors as the
parched-up earth receives the first of the rain; and
he penetrated through the thick dust with blows
irresistible and never failing. Whatever he struck,
he slew, and wherever he thrust, he hurled down ;
and for one hour he overwhelmed them in death
and perdition ; and the foremost shrunk back upon
the rear. crying out at him from a distance, for no
one dared to approach the spot where he was. As
to Shiboob, the slaves betrayed him, and refused to
drive on the camels.

But when Numan saw that his troops and men


215
fell back, and perceived how Antar was handling


them in the combat, his mind and senses were
greatlv agitated, and he cried out to them—May
God disgrace you among the Arabs!—are you
reduced to this by a single black slave, a mean,
paltry herdsman ? The horsemen, took courage, and
poured down upon Antar from all sides, but Antar
continually slaughtered them, always gaining upon
them, never flinching, though their numbers were
immense. Thus was he in the midst of dangers, when
lo! his horse stumbled, and throwing him on the
ground, rushed from out the thick dust and tumult,
his saddle unoccupied by his master Antar. Shi-
boob thought he was killed and trampled to death !
the tears flowed from his eyes, he gave his feet to
the winds, and he sought the wide desert, whilst
the slaves and shepherds cried out to the horsemen
and warriors, who pursued Shiboob from all
quarters; and they were seventy in number, all
after Shiboob, who depended on the power of his
muscles. The horses were straining themselves to
catch him, but they could not pass him, or come
up with him, from the grey dawn of day till the
sun became tinged with yellow. But when evening
came on, woe and dismay fell upon him, and just
as he was convinced of his ruin and death, he
reached a cavern in the hollow of a mountain, and
near it stood a swarthy youth tending sheep; before
him was a fire blazing; and he was sitting down


216


preparing his dinner, and his sheep were grazing
in front of him. As soon as Shiboob saw him, he
made towards him, O young man, he cried, help
me—I put myself under thy protection, for I am
a stranger, and I am exposed to peril and danger
in this land. I am nearly dead, and my enemies
have already slain my brother. Yes, by thy father,
said the youth (for his heart had compassion on
him.) I will indeed protect thee, and I will not
deliver thee up till I am myself slain. ` Enter the
cavern, and consider thyself secure from the deceits
of the wicked.

Shiboob entered the cave, where he had scarcely
concealed himself, when the horsemen also arrived,
fleet as eagles, shouting aloud—Boy, son of a two
thousand horned cuckold, bring out to us that
devil who has slain our horsemen, and staggered
our senses, that we may tear his body in peices
with the points of the spear, and hack him with the
blades of our scimitars. God curse him who gave
him birth! how strong are his muscles !

O Arabs, said the shepherd, grant him to me, I
pray ye, and accept of my guarantee for him, for I
have protected him, knowing nothing about you ; he
is under my security and protection. Thine is not
and never shall be any protection, cried they, so
bring him out, or we will slay thee together with
him ; for his brother has destroyed three thousand
ef our famed horsemen; he is indeed a very devil,


f


217


and we have experienced from him what we never
even saw from the Genii.*

When the peasant heard them he was fearfully
alarmed, for were he to oppose them, they would
soon destroy him. O Arabs, said he, do but remove
about seventy paces.from the cavern door, that I
may enter and bring him out of my protection.
Do so, said they; and they retired from the cavern,
and the shepherd entered, and perceived Shibcob »
trembling for his life. You have heard, young
man, said the shepherd, what has passed between
me and these men. My vows have been over-
ruled, and I have exposed myself to death and
annihilation. I can do nothing towards your
escape, but at the hazard of my own life; yet will
I not forfeit my protection. Had I but ten horse-
men of the tribe of Asad, they should not approach
you, no not one of them; but I am alone in this
wilderness and desert. So throw off your clothes,
and put on mine; take these provisions and this
wallet, sling it over your shoulder, and with my
staff in your hand, hasten out of the cavern, and
drive away the sheep, and when you come up to
them, say—O Arabs, I went into the cave, in order to
bring him out, but he will not stir, so come. along, and
E will shew him to you—they will dismount and enter
the cavern, and then do you look after yourself.


° This is one of the very few passages which occur throughout this
work, containing any allusion to supefmatural agents.


218


Shiboob thanked him from his heart for his kind
assistance: he slung on the wallet, and took the staff in
his hand, and went out of the cavern, and the darkness
of night concealed him from the eyes of observers ;
and when he came up to them he spoke to them as
the shepherd had directed him : they immediately
dismounted and went towards the cavern; but
Shiboob gave his feet to the wind, and traversed the
_rocky crags uutil he was far off among the wilds and
the deserts: and thus he secured his life from death
and destruction, and sought relief from the contents
of the wallet.

In the mean time the Shibanians entered the
cave, and dragged out the shepherd, thinking it
was Shiboob; they looked at him by the light of
the fire, and. they saw it was the shepherd dressed
in Shiboob’s clothes ; for he had preferred to expose
his life to death and torture, rather than discredit
his protection. Why hast thou done this deed, cried
they, and given up thy life to death and —
for the sake of a stranger ?

Arabs, replied the shepherd, he sought my pro-
tection, and I protected him. You came in search
of him; you would not accept my proposal, and I
was not able to drive you away. But if I have
enraged you, kill me at once, and I shall have
rescued him by the sacrifice of my life and existence,
and shall not have forfeited my word, or broken my
faith. Moreover between you and me, there is no


219


blood or revenge. I have indeed fallen into your
power; but if you will have the kindness to release
me, I will thank you in every part of the world, other-
wise do as you list, and decide as you judge best.
The Shibanians were astonished, and they could
not find it in their hearts to kill him. He indeed re-
joiced in his friendly act, and the preservation of his
duty ; so they let him go, and returned vexed and
dispirited. As to Shiboob, as soon as he was safe,


., he travelled on till morning, passing over plains and


deserts ; but what was most grievous to him was the
thought of returning to the tribe of Abs, and the tri-
umph of his foes and the envious ; particularly the
family of Zeead, and the ruffian Amarah, and Shas
and Rebia; then he wept for his brother Antar, in
these verses.

“ O Knight of the Horse, why, alas, has the steed
“ to mourn thee? why, alas, has the barb of the
“ spear to announce thy death in wailings? O that
“ the day had never been, that I saw thee felled to
“the earth, cut down—stretched out—and the
“ points of the lances aimed at thee! Could the
& vicissitudes of fortune accept of any ransom, oh!
“ I would have redeemed thee from the calamities
“ of fortune! Thine uncle has in his wiles and
“ frauds made thee drink of the cup. But may
“ thy cup-bearer, O son of my mother, ne'er taste
“of the moisture of dew! and thy cousin will
“mourn thee, and she belongs to thy foe, whose


220


“slave thou wouldst never consent to be. O
“ Knight of the Horse, I have no strength of mind
« __T have not a heart that can ever feel consolation
“for thee in my sorrows! and the war-steed
“amongst the troopers as he neighs will turn
& towards thee, mourning for thee, like a childless
« woman in despair.”

When Shiboob had finished these verses, he went
on passing over deserts and wilds, seeking the tribe
of Abs and Adnan, whilst his tears flowed in streams.
But as to Antar, when his horse stumbled beneath
him, he started on his legs, he brandished his
sword in his right, and supported his shield on his
left, and he made towards the warnors—he slew
them till he made mounds of dead, he overwhelmed
them with his shouts, bellowing out—“ O Ibla, by
thine eyes, will I slay this day these horsemen !”
and he rushed upon them like a furious lion, till the
blood flowed from all parts of his body. And in the
thickest of the battle he happened to step on a skull,
and his feet slipping from under him, he fell down
. at his full length. And they gave him not time to rise
ere they bound fast his shoulders, his arms, and his
ribs and his feet, and brought him before Numan.

He was all astonishment at the horror of his
make, at the immensity of his stature, and the
agitation of his eyes. Numan ordered them to tie
him across the back of his horse and convey him to
the King, that he mght do what he thought proper


221


with him. They obeyed his orders, and bound
him on the back of Abjer, and they all returned to
the land of Hirah. At the moment of their arrival,
King Monzar returned from hunting. When,
behold there appeared against them a lion of the
lions of Khifan. Now the wild beasts of Khifan
were proverbial; and he came upon them with a
- loud roar, and the fierce warriors attacked him.
Numan presented Antar to his father, and when he
looked at him, he was terrified and confounded.

What Arab art thou? saidhe. My lord, replied
Antar, I am of the tribe of the noble Abs. One of
its warriors, demanded Monzar, or one of its
slaves? “< Nobility, my lord, said Antar, amongst
liberal men, is the thrust of the spear, the blow of
the sword, and patience beneath the battle dust. I
am the physician of the tribe of Abs when they are
in sickness, their protector in disgrace, the defender
of their wives when they are in trouble, and their
horseman when they are in glory, and their sword
when they rush to arms.”

Monzar was astonished at his fluency of speech,
his magnanimity and his intrepidity, for he was
then in the dishonourable state of a prisoner, and
force had overpowered him. What urged thee to
this violence on my property, added Monzar, and
seizure of my’camels? My lord, said Antar, the
tyranny of my uncle obliged me to this act: for I
was brought up with his daughter, and I had


222


passed my life in her service. And when he saw
me demand her in marriage, he asked of me as a
marriage dower, a thousand Asafeer camels. I
was ignorant, and knew nothing about them; so
I consented to his demand, and set out in quest of
them; I have outraged you, and am consequently
reduced to this miserable state.

Hast thou then, said Monzar, with all this for- .
titude and eloquence, and propriety of manners,
exposed thy life to the sea of death, and endangered
thine existence for the sake of an Arab girl? ‘ Yes,
my lord, said Antar ; it is love that emboldens man
to encounter dangers and horrors; and no lover is
excusable but he who tastes the bitterness of absence
after the sweetness of enjoyment; and there is no
peril to be apprehended, but from a look from
beneath the corner of a veil; and what misfortune
can drive man to his destruction, but a woman who
is the root and branch of it!” Then tears filled his
eyes, and sighs burst from his sorrowing heart, as he
thus exclaimed :

s The eyelashes of the songstress from the
“ corner of the veil, are more cutting than the edge
“ of the cleaving scimitars ; and when they wound
‘‘ the brave are humbled, and the corners of their
‘‘ eyes are flooded with tears. May God cause my
« uncle to drink of the draught of death at my
“ hand! may his hand be withered, and his fingers
s palsied ! for how could he drive one like me to


223


“destruction by his arts, and make my hopes
“depend on the completion of his avaricious pro-
“jects. Truly Ibla, onthe day of departure, bade
“me adieu, and said I should never return. O
“ lightnings ! waft my salutation to her, and to all
“ the places and pastures where she dwells. O ye
“ dwellers in the forests of Tamarisks, if I die,
“mourn for me when my eyes are plucked out by
“the hungry fowls of the air. O ye steeds,
“mourn for a Knight who could engage the lions.
“ of death in the field of battle. Alas, I am an
“outcast, and in sorrow. I am humbled into
“ galling fetters, fetters that cut to my soul.”
When Antar had finished, Monzar was surprized.
at his eloquence and fortitude, and strength of mind
and virtue. Now Monzar himself was one of the
most eloquent of Arabs, and he was convinced that
Antar was sincere in his grief; but he knew
not the story of his life. Whilst Antar and Monzar
were conversing, behold the people ran away from
their presence. On inquiring what was the mat-
ter, O victorious and irresistible monarch, they
exclaimed, a savage lion has appeared among us, `
is destroying the horsemen, and dispersing the
brave heroes. Spears make no impression on his
carcase, and no one dares to attack him. Assault
him, cried the King, before he takes refuge in the
forest, and cuts off the road of the travellers, and
renders the ways unsafe, and we therefore be dis-


224


honoured. As soon as Antar heard this, his afflic-
tions were relieved. Tell your people to expose me
to this lion, said he to the King, and if he should
destroy me, you will be amply revenged, and your
dishonour be cleared up: for I have slaughtered
your troops, and destroyed your warriors; but
should I slay the lion, reward me as I deserve, and
do not refuse me justice. The King ordered the
cords to be loosened: the guards came up to him
and untied his hands, and were about to untie his
feet also; but he cried-out, Loosen only my hands,
leave my feet bound as they are, that there may be
no retreat from the lion. He grasped his sword and
his shield, and jumping along in his fetters, he thus.
exclaimed. `

“& Come on, thou dog of the forests and the hills t
“ this day at my hand will I make thee drink of
“ death. Soon wilt thou meet a Knight, a lion
« warrior, a chief tried in battle. O then, attack
« not one like me, for I am a chosen hero. Attack
‘“‘ the horsemen, thou dog of the waste, but whither
‘ wilt thou escape from me this day? Take this
« from my cleaving sword, that deals sorrows, deaths
“ and pestilence from the slave of a tribe, that braves
& death and woe, and never fails.”

Monzar was much astonished at his address to the
lion, and he advanced with his attendants, to behold
what Antar might do. And when they came near
him, they perceived it was an immense lion, of the


225
size of a camel, with broad nostrils and long claws,


his face was wide, and ghastly was his form; his
strength swelling ; he grinned with his teeth clenched
like a vice, and the corners of his jaws were like
grappling irons. When the lion beheld Antar in
his fetters, he crouched to the ground, and extended
himself out; his mane bristled up; he made a
spring at him: and as he approached, Antar met
him with his sword, which entered by his forehead,
and penetrated through him, issuing out at the ex-
tremity of his back bone.. O by Abs and Adnan!
cried Antar, I will ever be the lover of Ibla. And
the lion fell down, cut im twain, and cleft into two -
equal portions; for the spring of the lion, and the
force of the arm of the glorious warnor, just met.
Then, wiping his sword on the lion, he thus spoke.

“« Wilt thou e'er know, O Ibla, the perils I
“ have encountered in the land of Irak ? My uncle
“has beguiled me with his hypocrisy and artifice,
“ and has acted barbarously towards mein demand-
« ing the marriage dower. I plunged myself intoa
“ sea of deaths, and repaired to Irak, without friends.
“I drove away the camels and the shepherds
“ single handed; and I was returning home burn-
“& ingwith the flame of anxious love. I quitted them
& not till there arose behind me the dust of the hoofs
& of the high mettled steeds. I encountered on
“every side the war dust, and illumined it with
“ my thin bladed faulchion, whilst the horsemen


226


“ clamoured beneath it, so that I thought the thun-
s“ der had let loose its uproars. As I retired, I
« found that my uncle had deceived me with his
<“ frauds and stratagems. But I did not fal till
« my horse was exhausted, and faultered in the
«charge, and the crush of combats. ‘Then I dis-
* mounted and drove away whole armies with my
‘* sword, as I would have driven away the camels.
& I rushed upon the horsemen that fiercely scoured
‘“‘ the plain, piercing chests. and eye balls; but at
“ the close of the day I was wearied and made
“ captive ; for my elbows and my legs were depriv-
* ed of all strength. They dragged me toa noble
s“ prince, high and magnificent—May his glory
“endure! Then too, I engaged a lion, fierce in
“the onset, and harsh of heart, with a face like
“ the circumference of a shield, whose eve balls
“ flashed fire like hot coals. I rushed at him with
“ my sword. I met him in my fetters, so that Mon-
* zar might bestow on me what might gratify my
< uncle. and favor me with the desired camels.”

Monzar heard him, and beheld his acts. This
is verily a miracle of the time, and the wonder of
the age and world, said he to his attendants; his
intrepidity and eloquence and perseverance are
enough to confound the universe; with him I will
effect with Chosroe what is the object of my wishes,
and I will establish the superiority of the Arabs
over the Persians.


227


Now Monzar was an intelligent man, and very
regular in the administration of justice, and prudent
m policy. For this reason Chosroe had appointed
him King over the Arabs; and when he was present
in the palace of Chosroe, he enjoyed superior digni-
ties, and he was never stiled but as King of the Arabs.
And Chosroe used to treat him as a friend, and to
eat and drink with him; and when they were busy
in conversation, Monzar used to describe to him the
peculiarities of Mecca and the sacred shrine, and
their glory over the Deelimites and the Persians,
and used to recite to him the verses of the eloquent
men. And Chosroe, in his impartiality, was pleased
with him, and enjoyed his society, and loved to dig-
nify him with presents of gold and silver, for the
Chosroes of Persia were renowned for their love of
Justice and impartiality, and abhorred oppression and
violence, ruling mankind with liberality and gene-
rosity. He had over his head a bell of red gold,
and a chain attached to it on the outside of the pa-
lace; and whenever he touched the bell, the atten-
dants went out and complainants entered his
presence ; and he decided such matters himself.

Now it happened that Monzar, previous to An-
tar’s falling into his hands, had vistted Modaym,
and presented himself to Chosroe, and staid with
him some days, and he was honored with a rich
robe and various presents. One of the officers
envied him, and when he was alone with the King,


228


he ventured to say, Why do you so honour, O King,
this wild Bedoween, this worshipper of stone, and
raise his dignity so high? Whether he is absent
or present, he is a poor despicable wretch ; for all
the Arabs are but shepherds, and worshippers of
images; there is no religion and no faith among
them, and they are only ennobled by theft ‘and
-cunning, and robberies and rogueries.

This officer thus became jealous of the honours
‘enjoyed by Monzar, and his heart was estranged
from him. And he was one of the warriors of
Deelim, and was a leader of twenty thousand Per-
sians, and he was called Khosrewan, the son of Jor-
ham. He was always talking contemptously of the
Arabs, repeating falsehoods of them, till at last he
effected a change in the heart of the just King.

If, O King, said he, as he ended the conversation,
‘thou art desixous of thoroughly understanding this
man whom thou hast appointed over the Arabs,
and of having a proof of his ignorance and ill-
breeding, ask him to come and eat meat and dates ;
order the servants to give him dates from which
the stones are not extracted, and to place before
you dates ready stoned; and let there be instead
of stones, almonds, sugar plumbs, and skinned nuts,
and see what he will do. Chosroe complied, and
invited Monzar to ‘eat meat and dates; and he
ordered the servants todo as Khosrewan had recom-
mended. So after dinner, the servants produced


229


the plates of dates. Chosroe and the Persians ate
away and swallowed them, for there were no stones
to throw aside. Monzar looked at them, and
thought within himself—Most certainly to day
is a festival with them, for they are worshippers
of fire ; so I must eat like them, and must fashion
my manners to theirs. So Monzar ate, and swal-
lowed the stones; but one sadly puzzled him, so the
attendants burst out into a loud laugh; and Chosroe
also laughed. And Monzar was abashed at their
pleasantry. May your glory last for ever, O King,
of the world, said he. But the wrath and indigna-
tion of Monzar increased. What makes your attend-
ants laugh ? said he. You have eaten dates and
swallowed the stones, said Chosroe; ‘tis for that
we are laughing at you. I, O King, said Monzar,
imitated you and your companions, and I ate as you
ate, for I perceived you eating the dates and swal-
lowing the stones, and I wished to do as you had
done. Our dates, said Chosroe, are without stones ;
and instead of stones there are almonds and sugar
plums and peeled nuts, so that iwe eat them
without trouble or annoyanve. Why, said Monzar,
did you not give me some of what you eat yourself?
Still I am your guest. Yet this is a proof that I am
an object of ridicule to you, and you have only in-
vied me that you and your companions might
expose me. But I am still at all times your slave,
and indebted to your bounty for whatever you have


thought proper to do unto me.
Q


230


He remained some time longer with Chosroe, and
then returned to the land of Hirah, having asked
permission to revisit his family and native country.
And when he reached his capital, he wrote letters
to the tribes of Wayil and Bekir and Jelhema, and
he said in the letters—Attack Modayin, plunder
the people and the inhabitants, lay waste the villages,
and put to the sword the merchants of Persia, and
plunder the property of Deelem. Be afraid of no
man should any oppose you; but. slaughter them
and seize their property, and plunder them.

W aen these letters, in which the whole circum-
stance was described reached the different tribes,
they were greatly incensed, and sent Sewid the son
of Amil to plunder the inhabitants. And Handala
ransacked the stores and granaries, and seized the
property of the travellers; and Harith the son of
Joshem plundered the lands of Zilah, sparing
neither Ingh nor low. After this, confusion and
rebellion rose up in the villages, and the whole
country dreaded the Arabs. Many of the Persians
were beheaded, and the Persian merchants cried
out from all quarters against Chosroe. The day of
judgment seemed to haye come upon him, and he
was overwhelmed with shame. He desired his
minister Mubidan to write to Monzar an account
of all that had passed, and that he should punish
he Arab tribes, or he would disperse them among
the plains and the deserts.

So the minister wrote to Monzar a letter, in


231


which he said “ To him, whom we recognise as
King of the Arabs! ‘Truly the heart of the just
King is greatly irritated against you, on account of
the depredations committed by the Arabs on his
subjects. You must slay the rebels and offenders,
and chastise those that have oppressed the weak, if
you are obedient to the Persian government, and
attend to the orders of the imperial monarch ; and
peace be with you from the protecting fire!” He
folded up the letter and sealed it and sent it to
Monzar, and when it reached him he opened it and
read it, and wrote in answer to it these words:

“s To him whom we recognise as the just King!
Truly my character is despised amongst the Arabs,
my reputation is on the decline, my authority
amongst them is weakened, and my honour is
considerably discredited, since they heard what you
did to me about eating the dates. My power is at
an end, because they think I am an object of ridicule
with you; so they have therefore renounced their
allegiance to me, and have separated themselves
from my dominion. Such are the acts they have
committed, and they will not obey my commands.
-You must look after your own country, and mind
your own administration.”

When Chosroe received this answer, he read it,
and understood its contents. Verily, said he, these
vagabond Arabs have a design upon me, and this
dog of dogs would trample upon me. But if I do


232


not degrade and humble him, I am hot the King of
the age.

Who, O King of the age, said the satrap
Khosrewan, the original cause of all this trouble, is
this Monzar, that you should trouble yourself
about him? By your life, I am able to take him
prisoner, I will slay his horsemen, and will destroy
his allies. 1 will bring him and his children to you,
all bound with cords; and if you order me, I will
kill them all, and will bring you his sons and his
daughters, and most costly plunder.

Khosrewan, said Chosroe, you are the only
person. for this expedition, for it is all your
doing; so prepare, and march with the troops
under your command ; and if you conquer the King
. of the Arabs, kill him not, but bring him to me a
prisoner, that I may disgrace him and punish him,
and let him feel his own situation; and afterwards
I will grant him his life. Khosrewan accordingly
made his preparations in three days, and set out
with twenty thousand horsemen, armed with
gilded shields and cleaving swords ; and Khosrewan
was at their head, like a lion.

But King Monzar, as soon as he observed
Antar’s blow at the lion, and remarked his elo-
quence and his poetry, felt assured that he was a
distinguished hero and warrior, and he thought it
wiser to spare his life, and not put him to death : but
for the ends of justice he determined to keep him a


" 938


prisoner. So he detained him in custody ; saying, by
the faith of an Arab, I will not proceed to extremi-
ties with respect to this black warrior, for his equal
is not to be found in the whole world. Guard this
horseman, said he to his sons, until an answer
reach us to our letter from the Persian King ;
and we will then persuade him that it is this wretch
who has plundered the cities and killed his subjects,
and who has excited against us the Arab hordes.
This will give a strong colour to our excuses in all
points, and thus we shall gain our objects upon our
enemies. So Antar remained with the King impri-
soned and chained; and Monzar entered Hirah
and awaited the answer. -

It was about the beginning of the day when
Monzar mounted his horse and rode out to inhale
the news; when lo! a dust from the direction of
Persia appeared, and the whole country was
blackened and darkened, and from beneath it came
forth Persian horsemen, and the armies of Deelem.
Take your implements o: war, cried Monzar, ply
the blew and the thrust, and protect the families
and the women, or eternal will be your disgrace ;
for truly the offences against propriety in conversa-
tion, and the blunders of the tongue are the
calamities of man. And he sent for all the clans of
the tribe of Shiban, and all the Arab hordes; and
the Persian troops gave them no rest, but poised
their spears, and grasped their swords. The two


234


parties met, and attacked: blood abundantly
flowed, eyes were fixed, and were scared. Khosre-
wan advanced: he assailed the tribes of Arabia,
and his heart was overjoyed; he dashed towards
the standard of Monzar; he overset them, and he
destroyed the horsemen, and annihilated them.

Now Monzar had encountered the Persians with
only twelve thousand men, and the evening did not
close before four thousand of them were slaughtered,’
and the remainder returned, seeking safety in
flight ; the Persians pursuing them until the shades
of night surrounded them; when the Persians
dismounting to repose themselves, Khosrewan also
halted and shouted aloud; and when they had
pitched their tents and lighted their fires, he
ordered his satraps and generals to surround the
whole city of Hirah, and to guard the roads and
highways.

But Monzar, who entered Hirah iad and
discomfited, gnawed his hands from shame, and was
quite bewildered and beside himself. He sat down
attended by his three sons, Numan, Aswad, and
Amroo; and whilst they were consulting and
debating, in rushed a slave—O my lord, cried he,
that Absian warrior who is in my custody, when he
heard the uproar in the morning, asked me what
was the matter? We informed him what had
happened; then, said he, Conduct me to your King,
that I may point out to him the means of destroying


235


his enemies, even were they as numerous as the
sand of the desert. Produce him, said Monzar, let
us hear what he has to say, and let us release him
from his fetters. But Antar was that day thinking
of his cousin, and of his expedition to procure her
dower, and to seize the Asafeer camels, and his
falling into captivity, and his failure. ‘Then, as he
sighed from his overcharged heart, he thus
recited :

“ Tell Zoheir and Malik of me, tell Ibla of me
“in unvarnished language, that I seized the
“ camels flaunting over the plains, and that I felled
“down the armies on the day of terrors; say
“ that I was marching away with the property and
“& the beautous camels, when the stern faced horse-
“men of Sakhm forced them from me. My steed
“ hurled me on the battle field, and betrayed me,
“and subjected me to the thrusts of every shield-
“armed hero. Then I retired as a hostage, in
“ chains: and I have merited them ; and I moved
“along in them, like one overwhelmed with con-
“fusion. Had it not been for the assault of the
“ lion among them, and their cry to me—Aid us,
“O Antar! when I met hin, fettered as I was—
“they never would have acknowledged that I was
“the slayer of armies. When the furious beast
“ flew at me, I feared not. My sword cleaved the
“ body of the lion, and I forced it out through his
“thighs in an instant, and I wiped it on his skin.


236


“ They have cast me into a sea of deaths, anxious
“ for my destruction, but I tumbled him down like
“ one precipitated from a mountain's height.”

We have told King Monzar, said the attendant
as he entered Antar’s prison; he now demands you,
in order to hear your proposal. Antar got up and
went with them into the presence of the King, who
ordered the fetters to be taken off from his feet, and
the cords to be cut that bound his hands. Then
he sighed, and thus spoke.

« May God forgive me that my soul is hardened,
‘for my uncle beguiled me and exposed me to
‘© perils, and in his vile artifices has cast me into an
“ abyss of fire, whose flames encompass me. I am
“ become tortured of heart, fettered, my fingers and
“ hands bound round my neck. Few are there like
“ me in the day of the wood-entangled spears, when
“ heroes contend in the fierce charge: O King of
“ the world, thy sea is expansive as the glittering
“ sword among men and dæmons. When the
‘‘ warriors charge—then expose me to them and
“try my assault—my battle among them. Be
“ thou victorious, with Antar’s aid, and convert, my
“‘ lord, thy fears into security. Protect but my rear
« with a thousand lion heroes, and thou shalt view
‘‘ the wonders of my sword and my spear. Thou
‘© shalt see a lion driving away the horsemen with
“ a scimitar that surpasses the lightning’s flash in

“ brilliancy. Grant me the dower for my belaved


237


“ Thla, of the thousand camels, that have excited
“me to this enterprize. O Ibla, fear not the foe
“on my account, when they crowd about me, and
“ the war horses charge: for death is but my own
“ form —my own qualities, and there is no pros-
“ perity but what is attached to my bridle. I am
“the youth that fells the horsemen in my strength
“ —a youth whose equal exists not on earth. O
“ breezes! I implore ye by the pillars at Mecca, by
“ Zemzem—by the sacred plains and Mesdelifa,—
“when ye pass the land of Sheerebah, waft my
“ salutation to Zoheir and his royal sons, and say
“ to the sorrowing Shiboob, hast thou forgotten my
“‘ faith—renounced my vows? for thou art my
“foster brother, my stay, my support when my
“ friends betray me and persecute me—O Shiboob,
“ haste then, my brother, haste that thou mayst see
“what I have suffered, and what has befallen me
s —that thou mayst see a battle that will make
“ thee forget the past, and that thou mayst see, O
“ Shiboob, the boundless height of my glory.
“ For my ambition soars above the Pleiades, and
“my fortunate star sparkles with brilliant rays.”
The King was exceedingly surprised at Antar’s
bursts of poetry and strength of mind; and he was
convinced of victory with his sword and spear. O
Absian, said he, what is this I have heard of you to
day, when you heard the shouts and the attack of
the enemy? ‘Truly, my lord, replied Antar, my


238


gall was nearly bursting when I heard that you had
been obliged to fly from these cauldrons of dogs ;
this disgrace can never be erased from the Arabs.
What can men do, said Monzar, when double their
numbers attack them? and they are overwhelmed
by those who do not fear their carnage? Man,
said Antar, must patiently resist, and drink of
he cup of death as he drinks the purest water, and
not fly or run away. I am now in your power, and
I demand of you the marriage dower of Ibla,
my uncle's daughter; restore me my sword, my
cuirass, my arms, and my horse, and give me a
thousand men to defend my rear; and you shall see
what my courage and force will effect against your
foes. |
By the virtue of the Kaaba, said Monzar, O
Absian, if you perform what you state, and destroy
this army—all my property, my he and she camels
are all at your disposal. Not one of us shall
remain behind the tent wall, but we will exert our
- utmost energies against the foe, and we will strike
with our swords, and thrust with our spears. And
he ordered his horse and his arms and his cuirass to
be restored. And early on the morrow, a loud shout
arose from amongst the Persians, eager to plunder
the property and capture the women and the chil-
dren; but the Arabs went forth against them, and at
their head was Antar, the hero of conquest ; and he
cried out—Your hopes have failed, you cauldron


239


of dogs, you shall this day see Antar perform what
nations shall record. Then he cried, O Py thy
eyes, O Ibla, and thus repeated :

“ On the day of battle exquisite is the carnage.—
“ Come forth then against me, ye men of abomina-
“ tion—in me ye shall meet a Knight whose blow
« strikes life dead. I am the Antar of horsemen in
“ the contest, that makes armies and warriors drink
“ of ignominy, a draught from his hand with the
“ polished sword that glides through the ueck, in
“ the battle field. Soon will I plunge into the war
‘¢ dust till I encounter Khosrewan, and make him
“ drink of the cup of death ; I will make him taste
“ from my sword a draught, after which he shall
“ never taste of pure water. Ye shall see the horse
“ scattered o'er the wastes—the Himyanite chiefs
« shall be bound on their saddles. 1 am the lion,
« foremost in war, and mine arm is the horror of
“ warriors. Mine is honour and good fortune and
‘‘ glory, and my star is high above the brilliant
“ Arcturus.”

He then received the attack of the horse as the
parched up ground the first of the rain; and his
thrusts were the thrusts that blinded vision, and
equalled fate and destiny. He overthrew heroes
and destroyed warriors, and in an hour blood was
flowing and streaming, and bowels were ripped open.
When the Persians observed these dreadful deeds,
they advanced from all quarters. The voice of


240


Antar was like the thunder’s peal, and his thrusts
more rapid than the flash of the lightning; and the
Arab warriors, encouraged at his steadiness, felt
convinced of victory after defeat; but as soon as
the Persians saw these descending misfortunes, their
hearts regretted what had passed, and the land and
the region appeared too confined for them. The
whole country was blackened in their eyes, their
avidity was frustrated in the capture of the sons and
daughters.

Affairs continued in this position till mid-day,
and they toiled in the battle fiercer than a blaze of
fire. And when the heat oppressed the warnors,
the Persians gave way, and sought refuge in their
tents, and gave a loose to their despair. Many
were the horses deprived of their nders. Their
chief, Khosrewan, stood under the standards, and
the delay seemed tedious, for he was expecting that
his companions would return with the captives and
the spoil; when, lo! they indeed returned, but
in flight. O my lord, they cried in reply to his
questions, the Arabs have vanquished us—we have
seen a prodigy among them—and if you do not
come down upon that chosen horseman, not a head
or tail of us will survive ; for he fails not where he
aims ; he succeeds in whatever he undertakes; and
if he attacks a whole troop, he disperses it; if he
assaults a horseman, he overthrows him, and his
voice is like a crash of thunder ; the moment a man


241


hears it a universal ague seizes him; and he is like
a lion when he assaults, and he drives away the
warriors before him like a flock of sheep.

As Khosrewan heard this he was greatly enraged,
and fire flashed from his eyes. Whence comes this
horseman, he exclaimed, to this country? and to
what Arabs is he related? ‘Then starting from
beneath the standards he sought the place of
slaughter, and the scene of attack. In his hand
he bore a long mace with which he assailed the
troops; he dived through the dust,, and the
heroes trembled at his mace, as the dust rolled
over his horse.

Now Monzar was directing his sons to move be-
yond the precincts of Hirah, when the form of
victory and triumph appeared to him in the odour
of that black lion. He sat down in his tent, and
seated Antar by him, for he was dearer to him than
all bis family and relations; he congratulated him,
and gave him to eat, and there was no end to his ©
attentions and kindness; and as he engaged to him
every favour, he said, if I knew your heart would
be gratified by remaining with me, I would send a
messenger to your King, and would offer him my
friendship, and I would direct him to take Ibla
from her father, and send her to us, whether he
will or not. But I fear you will not allow me to
do, what your heart would not sanction.

I cannot possibly remain here, replied Antar ;


242 .


every day appears a thousand years to me; but F
swear by all your munificence towards me, were even
my heart to burst with the fierceness of my love
and passion, I will not quit this country til I
have accomplished your wishes in destroying your
foul enemies: to-morrow, by the grace of God, I
will rout their army. ‘To-morrow I will go out to
the field of battle; I will challenge Khosrewan ;
and I will invite him to terminate the affair, and if
he engages me, I will make him drink of the
cup of death; and afterwards I will put to flight
these troops of horse over the plains and the
deserts. When they had finished eating and
drinking, and their conversation about the battle
and the contest, they retired to rest and sleep. As
soon as the morning dawned with a smile, the
horsemen rushed on anxious for the fight and the
conflict; and as Khosrewan was preparing to
proceed to the field, lo! from the Arab army there
came forth a man between the two ranks, and stood
conspicuous amidst the two armies, and both parties
gazed at him. He was like a strong battlement,
quite immersed in steel; in his hand was a sparkling
blade, and he had a long spear slung over him, and
under him was a steed of the colour of gold,
indefatigable in labour, as an Arab poet has
described.

“« Praise a yellow steed of the colour of gold, for
‘he is of the horses noblest in pedigree; his rider


243


“ shall outstrip every warrior in the beauty of his
“ shape and paces. He may be in the evening at
“ Tekmet, and in the morning at Aleppo.”

And he gallopped over the plain to and fro, and
he disclosed a countenance like that of a Ghoul;
the warriors and heroes marked him: and lo! it
was the illustrious chieftain and intrepid warrior,
Aboolfawaris, Antar the son of Shedad; and he
came forth to put an ‘end to the Persian contest,
and to slay their general; and thus return to his
family and country with wealth and riches. He
dashed into the centre of the army ; he disdained
the common herd, and would not condescend to
challenge them. He burst on the right, and dis-
comfited it; and slew threescore and ten—he
rushed on to the left, and forced it in confusion on
the right; he returned again to the centre, seeking
carnage and bloodshed. He was mounted on a
mare, for his horse Abjer, wounded the day before,
was still unfit for the day of encounter. And when
he was in the centre, between the two armies—he
thus spoke.

“ Relieve my pains—ease my sorrows. Sally
“ forth, aye, every lion warrior. Taste a draught
“at the edge of my sword, more bitter than the
“ cups of Absynth. When: death appears in the
“ crowded rankg, then challenge me to the meet-
“ing of armies. Ye Persians, I heed ye not, I
“ heed ye not. Where is he who wishes to fight


244


“me, and wants to make me drink the liquor of
“ death. Bring him forth, let him see what he
<< will meet from my spear under the shades of the
“ war-dust. I swear, O Ibla, he shall eat of death.
“ By thy teeth, luscious to the kiss, and by thine
‘ eyes, and all the pangs of their enchantment, and
“ their beauty, were thy nightly visionary form
“ not to appear to me, never should I taste of
“ sleep. O thou my hope! O may the western
‘ breeze tell thee of my ardent wish to return
“home. May it waft thee my salutation, when
‘the sparkling dawn bursts the veil of night.
s May God moisten thy nights, and bedew thee
* with his rain-charged clouds. May peace dwell
« with thee as long as the western and northern
“ breeze shall blow.”

When Antar had finished —behold Khosrewan—
he appeared on the plain, and he was mounted on
a long tailed steed, marked with the new moon on
his forehead, and on his body was a strong coat of
mail well knit together, the workmanship of David ;
and armed with an impenal casque and a glittermg
sword ; and under his thighs were four small darts,
each like a blazing flame. And when he came
forth on the field of battle he roared aloud, and con-
temptuously of the Arabs. Antar assailed him: high
arose the dust about them, so that they were hid
from the sight. They exhibited most extraordinary
prowess ; they separated, they clung to each other,


245


now they sported, now they were in earnest; they
gave and took, they were close, they were apart,
until it was mid-day, and both had severely toiled.
But whenever Khosrewan attempted to assail Antar
and strike him with his mace, he ever found him
vigilant and on his guard, and aware of his intent.
So he darted away from him in order to gallop over
the field, and would exhibit all his manœuvres and
stratagems; but Antar kept him employed, and
wearied him, and prevented his executing his de-
signs, so that the chieftain’s wrath became intense.
He snatched up one of his darts, and. shook it and
hurled it at him—it flew from his hand like the
blinding lightning, or descending fate. Antar stood
firm, and when it came near hiin, he met it, and
dexterously turning it off by his shield, it bounded
away, and fell upon the ground far off. Khosrewan
snatched out a second dart and levelled it at him ;
but Antar sprang out of its way, and it. passed
harmless. He aimed a third ; but Antar rendered it
fruitless by his dexterity and his persevering activity.
He hurled the fourth, but it shared the same fate
as the others,

When Khosrewan saw how Antar had parried
the darts, his indignation was extreme. Again he
took up his mace, and he roared even as a lion roars
—then stretching himself out with it, he hurled it,
backing it with a howl that made the plains and
the air rebellow, Antar threw away his spear

R


246


and met the mace and caught it with his right
hand in the air; then, aiming it at Khosrewan, he —
cried out, take that, thou son of a two thousand
horned cuckold! I am the lover of Ibla, and am
alone- the Fhoenix of the world. Khosrewan saw
him grasp the mace in the air, and was horrified,
for his strength and force were exhausted. He re-
treated, and attempted to fly from his antagonist, for
he was now convinced of his destruction. He moved
round his shield between his shoulders; but he felt
that his fate was nigh at hand, for the mace fell
upon his shield more forcible than the stone of a
sling ; furiously it rattled on the Persian chief, and
hurled him off his saddle to the distance of twelve
cubits, and broke his ribs and snapped his spine.
Every warrior was intensely agitated at this sur-
prizing deed; and when the Persians saw it they
were bewildered ; they rushed upon Antar, agonized -
as they were at this calamity, and exposed their
lives to certain death. The Arabs received them
with undaunted courage at the points of their
spears; and their spirit was exhilarated by the acts
of Antar. ‘The two armies ‘assailed, and the earth
was pounded under the trampling of the horses.
The horsemen and the clans encountered, clouds
of dust thickened over their heads. And their
fury increased, till they were like the waves of
the: boisterous ocean. Spears penetrated through
hearts and waists, heads were flying off, blood was


247


boiling, cowards were scared, the courageous full of
fire; the King of Death circled round the cup of
mortality ; and the commands of the Most High
were executed upon them.*

Antar, the ferocious lion, felt his heart assuaged
in the midst of slaughter, and in the concussion of
heroes and warriors. He exhibited terrors amidst
the concourse of heroes, and scattered whole armics
over the plains and the mountains. King Mon-
zar cried out aloud to his troops, and they ex-
posed themselves to the enemy : roused afresh was
the flame of war ; it fiercely raged, and its sparks
flashed ; the dust blackened the whole land, so that
both earth and heaven were veiled. The ground
tottered under the hoofs of the noble steeds, until
the sweat even moistened their entrails. Blood
flowed from the throats of the chiefs. Antar strewed
the brave on the earth, and souls complained of
their sufferings to him who knows the secrets of the
world. Heads were hewn from the branches of their
bodies; and the Persians saw in the deeds of Antar
that day, what terrified them, and magnified their
horror. They fell back in flight upon the plains in
agony at their dispersion and discomfiture, and
complaining of what had befallen their nobles and
their chiefs. The Arabs in their rear drove them
on to their fate, and truly their desires and wishes
were accomplished. As they exulted in the realiza-


# Aios Ò slerislo Barn.


248


tion of their hopes and expectations, they crowded
round Antar to thank and praise him, and he
stood hefore them like one immersed in a sea of
blood. ‘Then as he recollected the horrors he had
suffered, these verses boiled in his heart, and he |
thus exclaimed :—
« Ask, O Absian maid, my spear and my sword
s what they did on the day of the battle of the Per-
* sians. I steeped them, whilst the spear gored
“through the horse, in the blood of the foe mixed
‘‘ with bitter Absynth. I dispersed the army that
« bellowed out their thunders, and beneath it flashed
“ the lightning of their swords, mounted as I was
“ona noble Arab charger, that flies when the
& sword blades crash in the fight; he neighs for joy
«c whilst the spears are directed at him, that vibrate
s like speckled serpents. I urged him into the sea
“ of deaths; he snorted, and plunged into the
‘“‘ tempestuously roaring waves. How many horse-
« men, O Ibla, at the edge of my faulchion have torn
“ their hands with their teeth in repentance ! but I
‘¢ felled them down on the battle plain, that the wild
“ beasts and eagles and hovering vultures might
& drink of their blood. I must love the tribe of
‘© Abs, were they even to shed my blood unre-
“ venged,—such is my love for thee, thou daughter
“of noble chiefs! I will endure the burthen of
<6 grievances, and sorrows, and captivity, and shew


‘that I am a warrior and the son of a warrior.


249


“‘ May the peace of God be with thee, O Ihla—soon
“ will I come to thee with my trophies! ”

Antar having finished these verses, the chiefs and
the warriors were astonished at his eloquence, and
they repaired with the spoil and plunder to the pre-
sence of King Monzar, who started up to meet
Antar, kissed him between the eyes, and could only
congratulate him on his safety, for he was con-
founded at such instances of his bravery. Horseman
‘of the day, he cried, protector of Abs and Adnan !
all that the Persians have left this day be thine, O
Knight of the time and age ! for thou hast earned it
by thy sword and thy spear. Thou hast brought
peace and comfort to the Arabs. Let this plunder
be a grant from me to thee, together with the Asa-
feer camels ; and moreover, out of mine own will I
bestow immense wealth on thee; but I cannot per-
mit thee to wed the daughter of thy uncle any
where but here with me in this land, and I will fulfil
all thy wishes and thy desires; for I am resolved .
to send letters to the tribes, and to assemble the
hordes from the waters and the springs, and make
ready for war against the just King.

O my lord, expel that thought from your mind,
cried Antar, for by the life of the eyes of Ibla, to
me the strongest of oaths, I alone will stand thee
in stead of the whole race of Arabs—never will I
cease from the blows of my Indian sword till I have
not left in your presence one of your enemies alive,


250


not a cuckold of them. Morcover, ‘ts my intention
to put you in possession of the throne of Nushirvan.
Monzar expressed his thanks, for he knew he could
perform what he promised, from what he had ob-
served of his intrepidity in the black rolling dust.
Thus they entered Hirah, and rejoiced in their
victory and triumph; and Antar went to the habi-
tation that was prepared for him. Monzar retired
to rest; but he was greatly disquieted, and feared
-Chosroe and his stratagems.


251


CHAPTER VI.


On the next day when Monzar was seated on the
throne of his kingdom, and the horsemen of his clan
were around him, they consulted and deliberated,
and they were unanimous that the Arabs should be
written to, dnd precautions be taken against Nushir-
van. And when they had come to this resolution,
an attendant entered, and kissing the ground, said
—O King, excellent tidings for you in the arrival
of your Vizier Amroo, the son of Neefeela! Now this
vizier was one of the oldest men of the age, for he
was four hundred years old ; he was well versed in
history, and acquainted with every event, and he was
one of the wise men who had predicted the mission
of Mohammed the seal of Prophets and delegates ;
and he generally resided at Mecca, expecting his
appearance, that he might be directed by his light.
When Monzar heard of his arrival, he was rejoiced
and delighted at.the good news. In a short time he
presented himself, and saluted him. Monzar sprang
up to meet him, congratulated him, and saluted
him. O Chief, said he, you are come just at the
very moment you are required, for I am over-
whelmed with anxiety ; and for its removal I depend


252


first on God, and then on you. I am quite discon-
solate at the state of my affairs, and I have repented
of what I have done, and I wish for you, O Vizier,
to bear some of my burthens.

And when he had informed him of all that had
passed between him and Chosroe—You have in-
deed acted wrong, O King, said Amroo, in this
business ; verily as soon as I heard the news, I came
as fast as I could from the land of Mecca and the
sacred shrine, fearful lest your country should be
laid waste, and the Arab chiefs destroyed by the
hands of the worshippers of fire, and you would
be thus involved in disgrace and in misery. Indeed,
I have recommended to you a thousand times
not to make the fire-worshippers your enemies,
until you should hear that Mecca is illuminated
with the light and appearance of the chosen Prophet
to be sent from Adnan, for thea will the temples of
fire be extinguished, and the palace be rent: but
now you have only to bend to error, and take care
to obey the orders of this monarch, even should he
outrage you. For you have slain his satrap and
cut up his horsemen; so beware of his deceits,
Moderation is now most advisable; renounce writing
to the Arabs, but have patience till I go to Mo-
dayin, and observe its mbabitants, and mark the
state of affairs. I will visit their minister, Mubidan,
and request him to give up this point, and direct
him to avert from us the ill-will of Nushirvan.


253


Your advice is most judicious, said Monzar ; act,
O Vizier, as it seems fit to you ; I will oppose nothing
you say. So Amroo went to repose himself; and
then Mongar reported to him the deeds of Antar,
how he had slain Khosrewan, and destroyed an
army of twenty thousand horse, and had given vic-
tory to the Arab warriors after their defeat and
fight; the Vizier was astonished at Antar’s acts,
and intrepidity, sò superior were they to any thing
hitherto known in deserts or towns.

On the third day the Vizier Amroo mounted his
horse and repaired to Modayin, having first recom-
mended Monzar to treat Antar with attention and
kindness, and to prevent him from returning to his
own country. He traversed the deserts and culti-
vated places till he reached Modayin, when he
presented himself to Mubidan, the Cazi of the
worshippers of fire, without ceremony and without
permission. Mubidan rose up in haste to meet him,
and received him with the highest honour and distine-
tion; he made him sit by him, and spoke to him m
the most friendly manner, saying,—What has
induced you to visit me? What has made you
trouble yourelf about me? I was not at hand when
these events took place, said the Vizier, and I was
mot present at these occurrences; I was at Mecca,
and in those parts; but as soon as the news reached
me, and l heard how King Monzar had eaten the
dates with the stones, I was convinced that troubles


254


would arise between them. I came at full speed,
for I feared some great disaster, and I wished to
settle the business ere I died. But I did not arrive
till all was over; so I have hurried to you, in order
to arrange matters, fearing that these human consi-
derations would bring about unnecessarily disagree-
able consequences. Therefore, O Chief, be benevolent
as long as kindness is in your power, and be not
revengeful on account of a difference in religion.

Mubidan was pleased from his heart, and the
flame of his anger was extinguished. O Amroo,
said he, before you arrived, I had resolved to arrange
this business: the army has returned routed, and
its chief has been slain; but I have not reported
this circumstance to the just King, fearful that blood
would be shed, and men be slaughtered. I have
also my anxiety about events which have lately oc-
curred, and I wish to relieve the heart of the King
of some of his burthens; for governments sicken
as men sicken, and they have no other physician
but their Viziers ; and these are acquainted with the
evils and the remedies.

What is it, cried Amroo, that has troubled the
heart of the just King; for he is the ruler of all the
tribes! You know that the Emperor of Greece,
answered Mubidan, has always been accustomed to
send to Chosroe a vast quantity of goods, and precious
stones and metals and jewels, and male and. female
European slaves, and other objects, in short, that the


255


tongue fails in describing. At this present time a Gre-
cian chref is come with the treasure, and in his suite
are five hundred horsemen of his nation, and ten
priests, and five monks; he presented himself before
Chosroe in his palace, and spoke to him by an interpre-
ter saying—O mighty King, I am indeed come with
the wealth and jewels and rich presents, such as fire
cannot consume, and beautiful virgins and slaves ;
but I must make one stipulation with you, viz. that
I will not deliver them to you, unless you have
a horseman that can vanquish me in the field of
battle. : |

Now the cause of the arrival of this Chief, continued
Mubidan, and of his appearance before Chosroe, was
this extraordinary circumstance.—He had quitted
the Isles of the Sea, in order to visit the holy shrine
at Jerusalem, and the fountain of peace ; and when
his pilgrimage was terminated, he heard a good re-
port of the cities of Syria, so he repaired thither,
-and resided there some time; and one day being in
the presence of Harith, in the course, he exhibited
his horsemanship and intrepidity, far superior to!
the other horsemen. Harith having remarked his
extraordinary prowess, sent for him and presented
him with a robe, and exalted him in rank above the
nobles of bis court, accommodated him in a house
suitable to his station, and supplied him with pro-
visions. |


And Harith for a long time engaged him against


256


the warriors, and he overcame every antagonist im
force and ability, and in course of time he conquered
all the armies of Syria, who acknowledged his intrepi-
dity and superiority, and yielded to him the highest
honours, so that Harith greatly rejoiced in him; and
he said, this is indeed the sword of Jesus; and he
resolved to present him to the Roman Emperor.
So he wrote to the Emperor, and mentioned what
feats this Chief had performed. Keep him with
you, said be in his letter, and prevent his re-
turning to the Isles of the Sea, in order that you
may obtain, through him, what you wish and desire
from the Arabs and the worshippers of fire; and
he sent his letter by a messenger.

On the next day Harith dispatched the Chief with
aparty of his attendants to wait on the Emperor.
The messenger travelled with the letter till he
reached Antioch, and being admitted to the pre-
sence, he delivered him the letter, which he took
and read, and having understood its secret meaning,
was rejoiced in the Chief. He even went out to meet
him with all the nobles of his court. and ministers
of the kingdom. So when the Chief reached the
suburbs, he was greatly surprised, as were all his
companions, for he thought this meeting of the Em-
peror was accidental, not being aware of the letter
Harith had sent forward. The Chief dismounted
and crossing his face before he spoke, kissed the
earth in the presence of the Emperor, who, much


257


surprised at the courtesy of his manners, desired
bim to remount his horse, and taking him by his side,
they all returned together to Antioch, every one
gazing on the Chief,and astonished at his gigantic
shape and stature, till they arrived at the city,
when all their anxiety and trouble being at an end,
every one returned home. And there being no one
present, the Emperor sat down, and made the
Chief do so likewise by his side, and invited him
to tell his adventures, and offered him riches and
possessions.

O most beneficent monarch, said the Chief, I left
not my country in search of wealth, but the reason
of my departure was to seek the reward of virtue
and meritorious acts. I have reached your pre-
sence, and my wish is to exhibit my prowess before
the inhabitants of this land, that I may attain the
object of my desires. The Emperor showed the
warrior every possible attention.

Now the name of this Chief was Badhramoot ; he
remained three days as the Emperor’s guest, on the
third he appeared on the plain, and the horsemen
came out against him; but they retreated from before
him inshame and disgrace, and he remained galloping
about like a demon. For three days he continually
exhibited himself on the course, till he had marked
all the troops of the Emperor in the combat; and
when the Emperor perceived his superior skill, he
was much surprised, and wished to detain him with
him, that he might, through him, be victorious over


258


his enemies; and amongst other things he thought
of marrying him to his daughter, and of sharing with
him his dominions.

One day Badhramoot came to the Emperor
and found him sitting down, and all his treasures
before him; he was selecting the best metals and
jewels, and was putting them in cups, and was
sealing them up, and was packing them up in
boxes, and was preparing them for a long journey
by land. Badhramoot was much agitated and sur-
prised at this. To whom do you intend sending
this treasure ? he asked. To Chosroe Nushirvan,
the lord of the crown and palace, replied the Em-
peror, for he is the King of Persia and Deelem, and
the ruler of nations. O monarch, this King, is
he not of the religion of Jesus the son of Mary ?
the chief asked. He is the great King, he replied,
and he worships fire; and he has armies and allies
whose numbers are incalculable, and on this account
I send him tnbute, and keep him away from my
own country.

At these words the light became darkness in
Badhramoot’s eyes. By your existence, O King,
said he, I cannot allow any one to adore aught but
the Messiah, in this world. We must wage a sa-
cred war, and have a crusade against the inhabitants
of that land and those cities. How can you sub-
mit to this disgrace and indignity, and humble
yourself to a worshipper of fire; you who are the
Emperor of the religion of the Cross, and the Priest’s


259


gown? I swear by him who withdrew a dead body .
from the earth, and breathed into clay, and there
came forth birds and beasts, I will not permit you to
send these goods and presents, unless I go also
against those people, and fight them with the sword’s
edge. 1 will engage the armies of Chosroe, and
exert my strength against them ; if I am slain, then .
you may stand to your covenant.

Rid us of this affair, exclaimed the Emperor ;
avert and withdraw from us the supremacy of
Chosroe and his armies; but do not open upon us a
gate which we shall not be able to close: and if you
wish to make a journey to the land of the King, go
with these presents, and when you are in his.pre-
sence, tell him your own story— examine the extent
of his dominion, and his horsemen, and the number
of his troops, and his allies. Ask him to let you
fight his bold warriors—whatever you desire, he
will grant you; and when you have engaged the
horsemen and succeeded in your attempt, then in-
form me, that I may shew you what I can do. But
if you find that his power is too great, conjure him
so spare this land and realm. |

Badhramoot agreed to this proposal, and he depart-
ed with the presents, and he arrived at Modayin,
his heart free from fear. He went to Chosroe and
presented his letter, and said through an interpreter,
O most glorious King, you know that Kings will
not submit to tribute until they have been van-


260


quished in battle. I am now come with all this
property as presents to you ; but I wish to avert
this disgrace from the Christians, and I will engage
your warriors in your presence. If they slay me in
the combat, my blood is rightfully your’s; but if I
am superior to all your heroes and combatants, then
relieve us from tribute, and do not expose mankind
to difficulties and hardships, for in all religions it is
tyranny and oppression to shed blood.

All this being interpreted to Chosroe, his anger
and indignation, though considerably excited, were
softened by the mildness of the Chieftain’s represen-
tations. He pondered the subject some time, and
then, being convinced that he had only made a
reasonable demand, he turned towards his satraps
and said— Take this Chieftain, and conduct him to
a mansion suitable to his rank, with his suite, and
provide them with every thing to eat and drink,
that we may comply with his requests; let the
property be left with him, that we may likewise
fulfil his intention: to-morrow we will go to the
plain to view the combat of the horsemen, and we
will not receive the presents but on your terms.

Accordingly the satraps conducted the Chief and
his suite to a spacious mansion, and left all the
property with them. The next day the armies
mounted and repaired to the plain, and all being
assembled, Chosroe mounted his horse, surrounded
by the standards and ensigns; and when the


261


two parties were drawn up, the Chief came forward
like a huge camel, his priests and monks attending
' him; he urged on his horse into the field of conten-
tion, and the brave heroes were rushing upon him
from all sides; but Chosroe issued orders to his
people that they should draw lots, and thus pro-
ceed in rotation against him, and whoever should
conquer him should receive all the presents he
brought with him.

When the combatants heard this, they retired
from the scene of combat and drew lots, and the lot
fell upon the first of the generals named Shirkan,
æn of Tirkan. He sallied out against the Chief;
but the Grecian warrior waiting till he came close
to him, drew his foot out of his stirrup, struck him
on the breast with his foot, and hurled him on the
ground. The whole body of horsemen were
confounded, and their limbs trembled within them.
Again they drew lots, and the lot fell upon a
sturdy warrior, one of the worshippers of fire: he
fought with various arms, and he was indefatigable
in the combat: he rushed at him armed with a
mace, roaring like a lion; he opened wide his arm
as he came near to him, and endeavoured to strike
him and knock him down; but the Chief struck
him with the but-end of his spear; and dashed him
to the earth ; he had already drawn out the barb
from his spear; and there was not a combatant that
came forward but ke stretched him on the ground :

S


262


and hefore the close of the day he had vanquished
a hundred valiant warriors. Then Chosroe sent
for him, and received him kindly, and gave hiya
a robe. By the burning of fire and its flames, said
he, you have earned all this property from. these
vile miscreants.

Chosroe then returned, and he was greatly
enraged with his own troops; but the Chieftain
was rejoiced, and he reposed that night in security.
The next day he returned to the contest, and
Nushirvan also mounted his horse, and the combat
was the same as the first day; and the Grecian
quitted not the scene of action till he had overcome
- more than a hundred warriors, many with their ribs.
broken, suffering the pangs of death and perdition.:
And Chosroe was exceedingly wrath with his troops.

Thus continued the Chief to engage the heroes
of Persia for fifteen days, and he excelled them all ;
and the armies of Chosroe were disgraced. In —
affliction he passed the night, and he rose up to
grief and gloom. Matters were in this situation,
when lo! Mubidan entered. O Vizier, cried Chos-
roe, watch over us in this important affair; behold
what is befalling us with respect to this experi-
enced Greek, for verily, he will tear our empire in
pieces with his intrepidity; and we are unable to-
rid ourselves of his power. I wish to write to
Khosrewan, to come to us with his horsemen.


against this Grecian devil.


263
Refrain from such expressions, O King, said


Mubidan, for you may still accomplish your wish,
and degrade and hold in contempt this Chieftain,
and the affair terminate to your glory and success.
How can that be? said the King, and what do you .-
propose? My opinion is, said he, that you write
to your Lieutenant, King Monzar, the ruler of the
Arabs, under whose command are all the tribes, and
order him to send you a few of his slaves, and they
will subjugate for you this obstinate Chief, and will
accomplish what you covet and desire; for the
Arab horsemen are the horsemen of victory and
conquest ; they only are brought up in plains and
rocks, in battle and slaughter ; in such emergencies
the horsemen of Hijaz are most renowned; but our
horsemen, O King of the world, are only famed for
magnificent entertainments.

The King laughed, and said—How can this be
brought about, Mubidan ? Monzar is irritated against
us by what has happened between me and him,
owing to the satrap Khosrewan, who is now gone
against him with his troops and forces, and I have
no intelligence of him. Live for ever, O King of
the world, said Mubidan ; but for your Satrap, the
fire has received his soul, and its smoke and its
flames have consumed him. His army is returning
routed and beaten. I have kept this circumstance
asecret from you, but now the fire has made me
hink it proper to disclose it to you.


264


O Vizier, said Chosroe, greatly disttessed—In this
extremity, what is your plan; how can I possibly
send to Monzar, now that he has retit in pieces my
honour, and slain a satrap of my government ?

O King, said the Vizier, the honor of your Em-
pire is in his hands—he alone can save it; for he
possesses a warrior of the race of Adnan, who would
encounter every horseman and hero you possess.
Then informing him of all that concerned Antar
from beginning to end—It would, in my opinion,
be right, added he, to send to King Monzar a robe
arid presents, and direct him to produce before you
this lion horseman, for he will surely destroy you
Chief, and will remove this distress and affliction
from your heart. But, said Chosroe, I fear Monzar
will not obey my orders, and he will suppose that
dismay has stricken us.

Be assured, O great King, said Mubidan, that
Monzar is terrified at your wrath and your ven-
geance, and just now his Vizier Amroo, the son of
Nefeelah, came to me, and asked me to intercede
with you, and request you would pass over what
he has done, and forgive his improper conduct.
Well, said Chosroe, do what you think proper ;
perhaps the difficulty may be removed. Order this
horseman into our presence, and promise him on
our part all manner of riches. So Mubidan de-
parted, and having acquainted the Vizier Amroo
with what had occurred on this important point,


265


he desired him to write to Monzar, and tell him
what had passed, ordering him to bring Antar into
the presence of the King at Modayin.

The Vizier wrote the letter, as follows—* To
him whom we acknowledge as King Monzar, King
of the Arabs, Ruler of the tribes Lakhm and
Juzam and Shiban! Know, O King, that the busi-
ness on which I came has been effected, and all your
projects are accomplished. Moreover, I have pro-
mised Chosroe, the monarch of the world, that
Antar shall overcome this Grecian Chief, and shall
relieve his heart from his present distress and afflic-
tion; come therefore hither without delay, and be
there no other answer to this letter but placing your
foot in the stirrup.” —He folded and sealed the let-
ter, and dispatched it under the wings of a bird, and
they remained expecting the result. But the Chief,
as soon as the day dawned, sent some of his peo-
ple and horsemen to demand of Chosroe permis-
to go out to the plain that he might again engage
in his presence his armies and his warriors. 5d
Chosroe mounted, and all his people and horse-
men also came forth: and the Greek overpowered
the heroes of Persia, who combatted with him even
to the close of the day, when they returned; and
the glory and honour of the Persians were tar-
The next day the two parties mounted and were


266


drawn up in order; and the Grecian fought, and
galloped, and charged, and sought for the comba-
ants and antagonists, when lo! a horseman from
Deelem, Bahram by name, the son of Johram, en-
gaged him, and he was a warrior rapid as a burning
flame, and he fought with different sorts of arms,
indefatigable in war. He was the son of the uncle of
that Khosrewan whom Antar had slain, Antar, the
destroyer of horsemen! On that day he fought on
the plain, and he wore a Davidean cuirass, solid
and firm, that blunted the javelin’s point, and in
his hand he bore a pike with which he gave the
blow of death, He was also girt with a cleaving
faulchion, and under his thighs were four short
javelins. He assaulted the Chief with all his force,
and engaged with him in the comhat.

Their engagement at first was sport and play,
but it ended in impetuosity and fury. They
continued their labours and exertions till mid-day,
and the Greek having experienced Bahram’s might
and strength, at length put forth all his powers and
energies in the contest; and the pike of the Chief
was without a barb, as he had agreed on in the
presence of Chosroe Nushirvan. But he stretched
his hand over the pommel of his saddle, and plucked
out a barb like the tongue of a serpent, and
fastened it on the end of his pike, and rushed
upon Bahram in his rage; he extended the barb


267


towards his chest, and he gave a loud shout; but
Bahram struck it with his sword and clipped it
off. The Greek threw away his pike, and drew
forth his sword from the scabbard, and they
engaged with their sabres till both were near par-
taking of the draught of death. Then the ranks
closed upon them, and the | eelemites rejoiced in
their warrior, and their expectations were raised
high. The warriors ceased not the battle and the
contest till the end of the day, when they separated
unhurt; and neither had marked his adversary.
So they retired, and each related to his companions
the circumstances of the conflict. Chosroe sent for
Bahram and gave him a robe. |

Early next day Chosroe mounted, attended by
the Persians, and Turcomans, and Deelemites, drawn
up in ranks on the plain of battle, The Grecian
Chief came with all his suite, and charged and
galloped over the plain. Bahram came down upon
him, and they dashed at each other and charged to
and fro, and ranged over the plain, extending their
long spears till every eye was sickened: then they
commenced the battle, and continued till sun-set,
when they again separated unhurt. But Chosroe
was greatly distressed, and he ordered the Magi to
make a circuit of the fire in his presence, and to
throw aloe of Comorin into it, praising the unity of
the adored King: so they did as he ordered. And
the Chief performed the same ceremony, and his


268


priests and monks recited the Gospel, and marked
themselves with the Cross, and both parues reposed
in blasphemy and heresy.

The next day at dawn the horsemen were ready
for the contest, when lo! a dust arose and obscured
the land; and there appeared coming forth a
hundred horsemen, all sturdy Arabs, armed with
long spears and sharp swords, mounted on noble
coursers. King Monzar headed them, and by his
side was Antar. The Vizier and Mubidan went
out to meet them with a party of satraps and
horsemen, and the troops on all sides crowded te
look at them. Mubidan related to Antar all that
had passed between the Grecian and Bahram.

O Vizier, said the lion Antar, assure the just
King, whose beneficence and liberality are well
known, that I will encounter this Grecian, and
Bahram, and all the warriors of Persia, ‘Turkistan
and Deelem, and will not leave a man in Modayin.
Mubidan smiled, for he was convinced he could
execute what he said, observing the immensity of
his bulk, and the horror of his form, and the roll-
ing of his eyes, and the muscular powers. of his
arms.

O Horseman of the age, said he, should you not
execute your engagement, and not slay this hero of
the Cross?—If I do not fulfil my agreement, eried
Antar, drag me by my feet through the temple of
fire, and make a sacrifice of me. Mubidan smiled,


269


and he introduced him to the officers of Government
who wore golden bracelets on their arms, and af-
terwards to those who wore crowns on their heads.
King Monzar dismounted, and all his horsemen, and
then entered the apartments of the Nobles, and the
Viziers, and Satraps, and Grandees, and Dignitaries-
Antar was in amazement at what he saw, and the
people also stared and gazed at him ; and this con-
tinued till they came before Chosroe. Monzar
stepped forward and saluted him, and prayed
for a continuance of his glory and power. Then
Antar too paid his homage, and thus spoke:

s May God avert from thee the evils of fortune,
“ and mayst thou live secure from calamities !
‘s May thy star be ever brilliant in progressive
« prosperity, and increase in glory! May thy
“ sword be ever sharp, and cleave the necks of
“thy foes, O thou King of the age! May thy
‘‘ renown be ever celebrated in every land, for thou
“ art just and beneficent. So mayst thou ever live
“ a Sovereign in glory, as long as the dove pours
« forth its plaintive note.”

Chosroe was stonished at Antar’s eloquence, and
was confounded at the height of his person, and
his prodigious form, and the rolling of his eyes,
and the strength of his arms. O King of the
world, said Mubidan, this is he who has slain your
satrap Khosrewan, and destroyed his army of
twenty thousand bridles, and he is come now to


270


take away the life of this Greek, and to remove’
every grief and sorrow from your heart, and no
doubt he will slay all that are with him. Should
this be the case, said the Monarch, we will pardon
his fault, and ennoble him with gifts. Let them
repose: treat them with all kindness and hospitality.
And he sent for King Monzar, and gave him a robe.
O King of the Arabs, said he, the error was mme
at first, and his who raised this rebellion amongst
you ; but the fire has’ destroyed him in your pre-
sence. The heart of Monzar was delighted at these
words, and his joy was great.

And when Mubidan wished to pitch tents for
them that they might repose till the next day—
` By the Holy Shrine, exclaimed Antar, I will not
eat meat with you, or drink wine with you, until I
have slain this foul-raced Greek, and made him
drink the cup of death: for he has moved the heart
of the just King. So he prepared his arms and
his cuirass, and sprang from the ground on the
back of his horse. Mubidan informed Chosroe of
what Antar had said, and he went forth with all
his Viziers, Satraps, Princes and Deputies, to see the
result of the combat between the two warriors.

Mubidan also repaired to the Grecian Chief, and
said—Know that Chosroe has in his justice acted
towards you with the greatest impartiality, and he
has loaded you with favours, and he has only found
amongst his people, Bahram, that can contend with


271


you; and the King observes even his inferiority.
But as he does not wish that his reputation should
be lost, his Vicegerent over the Arabs is arrived
this day, and with him a warrior selected from
the heroes of Arabia, who says he will meet you
and make your companions and comrades groan for
you. So prepare; and if you kill him or overcome
him, return to your master with all the property
you have brought with you.

Badhramoot was overjoyed at this; his bosom
swelled, and he was in extasy, and he said—Let
Chosroe order out this angry horseman—this day
will I haste against him, and make him drink the
cup of disgrace. And Mubidan added—Let the
persons of your faith bear witness for you. Antar
understood not what they were saying— Prepare fot
battle, he cried; and immediately the Greek let go
the bridle, and assailed Antar the son of Shedad.
Antar was like a furious lion, as he thus spoke:

“« This day I will aid King Monzar, and I will
‘exhibit my powers and my prowess before
s“ Chosroe ; I will break down the support of Greece
“from its foundations, and I will sever Badhra-
‘¢ moot’s head with my scimitar. -I will exterminate
“every lion hero with my sword: let him vaunt,
“let him boast, let him scoff. Is it not known
“ that my power is sublime on high!—Is it not
“ among the stars in the vicinity of Jupiter? I
‘Sam he whose might is uncontroulable in battle.


272


“I am of the race of Abs, the valiant lion of
“the cavern. If thou art Badhramoot, J am
<“ called Antar among men. It was easy for me to
s vanquish the armies of Chosroe in the contest,
& and soon will I overthrow Ceesar’s self with my
“spear. Hear the words of an intrepid lion, reso-
“lute, undaunted, all-conquering. I am he of
“whom warriors can bear witness in the combat
“‘ under the turbid battle-dust. My sword is my
« companion in the night-ehades, as are also my
< Abjer, and my lance and my spear in the conflicts.
« Night is my complexion, but day is mv emblem ;
& the sun is unquestionably the mirror of my deeds.
« This day thou shalt feel the truth of what I
‘“‘ have said: and I will prove that I am the Phoenix
“ of the age.”

Then Antar rushed down upon the Grecian like
a cloud, and the Greek met him like a blazing fire-
They engaged like two lions; they maddened at
each other like two camels, and they dashed
against each other like two mountains, so that they
frightened every eye with their deeds. A dust
rose over them that hid them from the sight for
two hours. The Greek perceived in Antar some-
thing beyond his capacity, and a sea where there
was no rest: he was terrified and agitated, and ex-
claamed—by the Messiah and his disciples! this
biscuit is not of the same leaven—this is the hour
of contention; and now is the time for struggle and


273


exertion. So he shouted and roared at Antar and
attacked him with his spike-pointed spear, and dealt
him a furious thrust; but Antar eluded it by a
dexterous movement, and struck him with the heel
of his lance under the arm, and made him totter on
the back of his horse; and he almost hurled him on
the ground : but Badramoot with infinite intrepidity,
sat firm on his horse's back, and gallopped to the
further part of the plain. Antar waited patiently till
he had recovered, and his spirit was renewed, when
he returned upon him like a ferocious lion, and
recommenced the conflict.

King Monzar was highly gratified at the deeds
of Antar, and felt convinced that he was only spar-
ing him, and dallying with him, and that had he
wished to kill him, he would have done it. But
the Monarch was perfectly astonished at Antar’s
courage; and turning to his attendants, said to
them—By the essence of fire, this is indeed horse-
marship and intrepidity. Never have I remarked
such but in an Arab! And he advanced towards
the field of battle that he might observe what pas-
sed between these dreadful combatants, and that
he might see how the affair would terminate.

Now Bahram, when he perceived that Antar was
superior to himself in strength, and was mightier than .
the Greek in the conflict, felt assured that he would
obtain the promised reward; so he was seized with
the disease of envy, which preyed in flames upon


274


his heart and his body, particularly when he heard
that Antar had slain the son of his uncle ; then he
resolved to betray Antar, and make him drink of
the cup of perdition. So he waited till both were
involved in dust, when he drew from under his
thigh a dart more deadly than the misfortunes of
the age; and when he came near Antar, he raised
his arm and aimed at him the blow of a powerful
hero. It started from his hand like a spark of fire ;
but Antar was quick of mind, and his eyes were
continually turning to the right and to the left, for
he was amongst a nation that were not of his own
race, and that put him on his guard, and he instantly
perceived Rahram as he aimed his dart-at him; and
then casting away his spear out of his hand, he.caught
the dart in the air with his heaven-endowed force
and strength, and rushing at the Greek, and shout-
ing at him with a paralysing voice, he struck him
with that very dart in the chest, and it issued out
quivering like a flame through his back ; then wheel-
ing round Abjer, like a frightful lion he turned down
upon Bahram; but Chosroe, terrified lest Antar
should slay Bahram, cried out to his attendants—
Keep off Antar from Bahram, or he will kill him,
and pour down annihilation upon him. So the
warriors and the satraps hastened after the dreadful
Antar, and conducted him to Chosroe, and as the
foam burst from his lips, and his eye-balls flashed
fre, he dismounted from Abjer, and thus spoke :


275


. © May God perpetuate thy glory and happiness,
“ and mayst thou ever live in eternal bliss! O
“ thou King mighty in power, and the source of
“ justice on every occasion! I have left Badrah-
& moot prostrate on the sands—wallowing in blood.
“ At the thrust of my spear he fell dead, and his
“ flesh is the prey of the fowls of the air. .I left
“the gore spouting out from him like the stream
“on the day of the copious rain. I am the
“‘ternble warrior; renowned is my name, and I
“ protect my frend from every peril. Should
“ Cæsar himself oppose thee, O King, and come
“ against thee with his countless host, I will leave.
“ him dead with his companions. ‘True and unvar-.
‘“‘nished is this promise. O King, sublime in
“ honours—illustrious and happy, thou art now.
“ firm refuge; and my stay in every crisis. Be
‘kind then, and grant. me leave to go to my
« family, and to prepare for my departure: for my
“ anxiety, and my passion for the noble-minded, .
“ brilliant-faced Ibla are intense. Hail for ever—
“be at peace—live in everlasting prosperity, sur-
“ rounded by joys and pleasures !”

Chosroe again marvelled at his eloquence, and
clothed him with an imperial robe, and presented
him five Arab horses, with saddles of burnished gold, .
studded with pearls and jewels. He then addressed .
Mubidan, and said—Deliver to this warrior all.
that came with the Greek, whether merchandize or


276


beautiful maidens ; and he knew no bounds to his
generosity, addino—Bring him to me to-morrow that
I may exalt him with favours, and that I may make
him one of our Viceroys of the age. Do ye want any
thing further? cried he to the companions of the
Greek ? Does any one wish for the combat and the
conflict ? If so, let him hasten to the field of battle.

No more talk we of war and contention, said
they all; we only came to this country with the
Chief to be witnesses of this event and conflict ;
and verily, O King of the age, we have experienced
évery justice from you. So they departed, and
turned away their steeds, and traversed the plains
and deserts, hardly crediting their escape.

Chosroe repaired to his palace, and Mubidan had
charge of Antar’s affairs: he conducted him and
Monzar to the house of the Greek Chief, where
were the treasures and the presents. He opened
all the trunks, and presented to Aboolfawaris all the
pearls and the jewels and the precious stones.
Antar rejoiced and smiled, and exclaimed—O what
joy! where are thine eyes, O Ibla? but by the
faith of an Arab there is not in all the treasures of the
King, one atom of her, no not one grain. And as
he regarded the maidens of Greece and of Europe
-and the Cophtian slave girls, his joy was increased,
and he blessed the termination of his expedition ;
and he kissed Mubidan’s breast and beard, and he
praised him in these words :


277


*« Thou hast granted me favours, and I must
“ publish my gratitude; thou hast accomplished
<t my every wish for happiness. I will thank thee
“ as long as I live, and if I die, my bones in their
“ grave shall praise thee.”

Mubidan was truly gratified at Antar’s praises.
Renowned hero, said he, we do not mean that you
should be content with this small gift, for this
is not our property. You shall soon behold our
beneficence; this is the wealth and these the
jewels, the blue-eyed Greek, whom you. killed and
made to drink of the cup of death and disgrace,
brought with him. But we would not have
consigned this most precious property, and these
maidens who resemble the constellations, but to one
who should vanquish and debase him: and verily,
you are the irresistible one, that has done that, and
the property becomes your property, and you have
obtained it by your actions. He then ordered the
slaves to spread carpets in a splendid mansion, and
to arrange the vases and ewers; and they did as
they were ordered ; they laid out the dinner tables
before Monzar and Antar and their companions.
And when Antar observed the variety of delicious
meats, of mutton and pigeons and thrushes, and
the quantity of doves, and the profusion of sweat-
meats, he turned towards Monzar, and said—My
lord, are these various viands their usual victuals ?
are they at all times accustomed to such luscious

T


278


things? for I see here no camel’s flesh. What art
thou talking of? cried Monzar ; think no more of
the inhabitants of the wilds and deserts, and those
that drink camels milk night and day; habituate
thyself to the inhabitants of towns and cities, for
thou must live in the vicinity of great Kings.
So Antar ate till he was satisfied; the glasses
passed round, and they killed the jovial hours in
mirth and merriment: and when the female slaves
knew they were the property of Antar, they came
to offer their service, and whenever he got up or
sat down, they surrounded him: but he would not
take the least notice of them, for no one but Ibla
was in his heart.

O Aboolfawaris, said Monzar, thou dost not
delight in, or seem to look ‘on thy slaves with
pleasure; or feel sensible of thy high dignity. Re-
move all painful reflections, or thoughts of thine
own country, for thou hast risen to the rank of
princes; and were the Chieftains of thy nation to
see thee, how they would envy thee! Antar heard
this; he sighed from his sorrowing heart, and tears
flowed from his eyes. O my lord, said he, I swear
by your existence, all this grandeur has no value,
no charm in my eyes; love of my native land
is the fixed passion of my soul, and he thus
continued :

< The fresh breeze comes in the morn, and when
“ it blows on me with its refreshing essence, it is


279


“ more grateful to me than all which my power has
“ obtained in nightly depredations—than all my
“ property and wealth. ‘The realms of Chosroe I
“ would not covet, were the phantom of my love to
“ vanish from my sight. May the showers of rain
“ ever bedew the lands and mounds of Sheerebah! -
“lands, where the brilliancy of the veiled full
“ moons may be seen in the obscurity of their sable
“ ringlets—where my heart chases among them, a
“ damsel whose eyes are painted with antimony,
“ more lovely than the Houri. Thou mayst see
“ in her teeth a liquor when she smiles, where the
‘¢ wine cup is studded with pearls. The fawn has
“ borrowed the magic of her eye, and it is the lion
“ of the earth that chases its prey for her beauty.
“ Lovely maid—delicately formed—beauteous— en-
“ chanting ! and at her charms is the brightness of .
s the moon abashed. O Ibla, the anguish of
‘© absence is in my heart—thou mayst see the shafts
“ of death driven through my soul.: O Ibla, did
& not thy visionary form visit me by night, I should
s“ pass the night in sorrows and restlessness. O
« Ibla, how many calamities have I endured and
« have plunged into them with my highly tempered
«s faulchion, whilst the charging steeds and un-
‘daunted warriors dive into the ever perilous
“ ocean of death.”

Monzar was greatly surprised at Antar’s fluency
of speech, and the force of his love and passion, and


280


he began conversing with him about what occu-
pied his mind; and thus they continued till it was
dark, and sleep came upon them. So they passed
the night there. In the morning came Mubidan to
them, accompanied by a troop of slaves. He com-
plimented them, and enquired about their night's
rest, and how they were pleased. Mount your
horses, he continued, to go and compliment Chosroe,
for he is prepared to go out hunting and amuse him-
self. As to me, said Antar, I have no other desire
but speedily to return to my family and my country,
that my friends and companions may see me, and
the Asafeer camels I have with me as a marriage
dower for my uncle’s daughter.

Mubidan smiled at these words, and knew his
wish and object. O Aboolfawaris, said he, your ex-
pectations shall be gratified with respect to the Asa-
feer camels, all laden, and many others besides ; and
you shall not return to your native land, ‘ere you re-
ceive them all piled up with burthens. Antar express-
ed his thanks, and with Monzar mounted, and they
all accompanied Mubidan, till on perceiving Nushir-
van, theyinstantly dismounted. Antar presented him-
self, and attempted to kiss Chosroe’s feet in the stir-
rup, but the King not only prevented him, but stoop-
ed towards him and kissed him between the eyes;
and never had Nushirvan conferred such a mark of
distinction on any one but Antar, the destroyer of
heroes, on account of his having vanquished the


281


‘Greek warrior, and having removed distress and
affliction from his mind. He ordered some noble
Arab horses to be brought before Antar; and the
satraps delivered to him some of the finest breed, all
glittering with housings of burnished gold. Antar
‘mounted, and Chosroe kept him by his side and
treated him as a companion, and conversed with
him, aud enquired about his night’s rest, and his
love for his tribe and friends. They continued
their ride till they reached the hunting spot; but
no one entered that place except Nushirvan, when
he wished to hunt and amuse himself; and guards
were stationed over it on all sides, fearful that any
one should enter; and as it was filled in all quar-
ters and directions, the wild beasts and deer ran
away from before them; and as the horsemen
advanced, the birds took to flight from every part ;
the warriors gallopped and the heroes raced their
steeds, and they spread abroad in all direetions.
When Antar observed this sport, he urged on his
horse with the other riders, and pursued a herd of
deer with great eagerness, and at length overtook
them; he gallopped among them, and stretched
many of them on the plain, and he was much amu-
sed and pleased. But whilst he was thus occupied,
behold an horseman pounced down upon him like
an eagle, and as he came up to him, he opened wide
his arm, and stretching himself ovt, struck Antar a
violent blow ; it fell between his shoulders ; it stag-


282


gered him, and almost laid him prostrate; but he
recovered himself; he was however tottering from
the back of his horse, when—Take that, thou Hed-
jaz dog! cried the villain; and if thou hast any
breath of life in thee, come on and fight, for I must
slay thee, thou vile black, as thou slewest my cou-
sin Khosrewan, and the Greek, and made them drink
of the cup of death and disgrace; and thou hast
obtained possession of all that property and those
beauteous slaves, and thou art exalted in the pre-
sence of Chosroe.

Now this horseman was Bohram, the Chief of
Deelem. He conceived against Antar a deadly hatred
and envy, which consumed his heart and his body ;
and when Chosroe ordered him not to get into any
disputes with Antar, warning him against his su-
perior powers, Bohram went to his own people,
and said to them—If this slave depart i in safety with
all his spoil and plunder, our honour will be debased
among the tribes of the Cross and the Priest’s
gown, and no one will have any respect for us.
From that time he indulged to such a degree his
envy against Antar, that he watched him till he
thus caught him alone in the hunt, and traitorously
assailed him. But he knew not that Antar was a
warrior, fixed as the mountain’s roots; and as he
still saw him firmly seated on his horse, he grasped
his sword and advanced at him ; but Antar, recover-
ing from the violence of the blow, wheeled round his


283


horse and waited till he recognised his foe: then he
sought him as a bird of prey the weakest dove, and
his assault was the assault of the fiercest lion! and
thus he addressed him :

“& The Almighty has exposed thee to a lion
“warrior, that thou mayest fall subdued by my
“ sword, O thou, sprung from the worshippers of the
“‘ sunbeams, and from those who adore the blazing
“flames. Fate will repay thee, for it has devoted
“ thee to the fight with me, and to the horrors of
“my strength. Despair; all thy hopes are frus-
“ trated, founded on the crush of’ thy mace and the
“ warnior-yell. Thou art indeed like the moth,
“ that when it sees the flame, imagines its safety is
“ in its destruction. Stand firm then to the spear-
“thrust of him whose force thou hast sought.
“ Thou wouldst insult a lion, powerful in every
“combat. Take then the spear-thrust from the
“ hand of one to whom the dsemons of the desert
“‘ have bowed in submission, and from whom they
“« implore the aid of God.”

Then he came down on him like a cloud, and he
aimed a slight thrust at him with the heel of
his spear, and broke his mbs, and threw him from
the back of his horse the distance of, two spear’s
lengths. The warriors of Deelem beheld the deed,
and thought he was dead and in a state of annihi-
lation ; and they all rushed down upon Antar, crying
at him in their various dialects. But he met them


284


like a flash of lightning, and he began driving at them
and repulsing them—his eye-balls turned red, they
appeared like crimson blood —he grasped his never
failing Dhami in his hand, resolved not to leave a
Deelemite alive. Just then came up Chosroe with
his visiers and satraps, and they cried out to the
Deelemites in Persian, for they had heard what
Bohram had done: and the Deelemites withdrew
from the combat, saying, this black slave has
brought disgrace upon us, and has slain our Chief!
Tis false, said Mubidan, ye foul wretches of Deelem,
your Chief is the aggressor; but he ought in duty
to have treated him kindly, and have waited on
him himself, for he has done for us what no human
being could do, and if he has slain hea Chief, he
is not to blame. —-

Mubidan then requested Antar to advance, who
related all that had passed hetween him and Boh-
ram; and Chosroe believed his words, for he was
aware of the folly of his servant. He then ordered
his satraps to seize the Deelemites, and bring them
before him to strike off their heads. They seized
them all, and pinioned their shoulders and bound
their arms. But Antar, seeing Bohram's attendants
thus disgraced, dismounted from Abjer, and ad-
vanced towards the great King, and kissing the
earth before him, begged him to pardon them,
saying, O my lord ; pardon is becoming in you, and
most suitable for such as you—here I kiss your


4


285


noble hands, praying you to forgive them this
crime, for to-morrow I intend to return home: my
objects and wishes with respect to you are accom-
plished, and I do not wish to be mentioned after
my departure, but for virtuous deeds ; and let it
not be said of me, I went unto a tribe, and left it
in disgrace, and clothed with shame.

Chosroe admired Antar’s benevolence and gene-
rosity of soul; he granted his request, and released
the Deelemites. At mid-day he returned from the
hunt, and repaired to a garden unequalled in any
city of the world, and in it was collected all that
the lip or the tongue can covet. It was a superb
palace, like a fairy pavilion—ninety cubits in
length, and seventy cubits wide, built of marble
and red cornelian; in the centre was a fountain
filled with rose water and purest musk, in the
middle of it was a column of emerald, and on its
summit a hawk of burnished geld; its eyes were
topazes and its beak jasper ; round it were various
birds, scattering from their bills upon Chosroe and
all that were present, musk and ambergris. The
whole edifice was scented with perfumes, and the
ceilings of the palace glittered with gold and silver.
It was one of the wonders of the period, and the
miracle of the age. When Antar entered, his
mind was bewildered at the pictures and colours he
_ aw, and he thus expressed himself.

s A Palace—greetings and peace be on it—Time


286


_ has spread its beauties over it. A Palace—the
& roofs of cities might stand beneath its roof. On
“it are the directions for the paths of virtue.
<“ Strong are its columns, gilded are its walls;
“ mankind may glory in its magnificence. Over —
“ its gates have jewels and pure unalloyed gold
“‘ disposed their honours; there is nothing further
“to be desired. On it are the wonders of every
“ species of miracle; the senses are bewildered in
“ describing it; beautifully perfect is every elegant
& device: nothing can exceed its excellence. And the
“ King shines above all Kings ìn his acts and his
 justice—May days and years endure for him !”
At the upper end of the gardens there was
raised for Chosroe, a throne of burnished gold and
pillars of green emerald, and pedestals of silver that
sent forth refulgent rays in the darkest night.
‘Round it were stools of ivory and ebony inlaid with
brilliant gold. Chosroe seated himself on the
throne, and ordered Monzar and Antar to sit by
him: thus exalting him high above all that were
present. The attendants and suite also sat down ;
every one took his place; and they were no sooner
arranged than the dinner tables were served with
various dainties, and a profusion of fruits and
sweatmeats. Chosroe advanced, and all that were
present, and partook of the repast. But Antar’s
eyes were in confusion. He sat down on his knees,
and bared his arms, chueking the things into his


287


mouth, but never moved his jaws: he gorged him-
self like an hungry Arab, and roared like a wild
beast, to the great amazement of Chosroe, who
supplied him with every variety that was before
him: and Antar devoured them, as he asked Mon-
zar the name of each. So they brought him meats
of all kinds till he had crammed his stomach; then
raising his head up he thus spoke :

“ Hail, O King, whose bounties, in his age, stand
“in lieu of the rain. O thou, the Kiblah* of
$f petitioners—O crown of glory—O full moon of
“this period—O thou planet Saturn. O thou
“ whose seat is raised above Pisces—O thou the
“ refuge of all that sorrow—thy station is on high
“far above the world—it is a rain-cloud that
“ bestows its showers on mankind. When he fights,
“all the world fear his assaults, as if a lion
“ were by his side. He is the seat of justice in his
“ age—liberality and equity reign in his realms.
“ O ye dwellers in the land of Abs, I have received
“ from Chosroe and his munificence, what cannot be
“described or enumerated—no day can suffice to
“ detail an account of such goodness. The King
“ has attained the heights of virtue by his glory ;
“ and happiness dwells in his palace. With him I
“am firmly established in honour, and in his
“& gardens I have beheld a fountain whose waters
“abound like his favors, and the liberality of his


* The point to which the Arabs turned their faces in prayer.


288


“palm. His garden contains every flower of every
“ species, and brilliant are their charms. The birds
sin every note sing as if they were praising his
“bounties to us. He is a King! whenever he
« charges in the day of battle, the lions of the war
& are astonished at his greatness, Victory is among
« his companions, and glory and honour are his
“friends. Amongst nations then will I speak my
“gratitude for his favours, and I will engage the
‘‘ horsemen on his side.”

When Antar had delighted the King by his ji
quence, the slaves presented him the wine, and
they poured him out wine that was like fire, and re-
sembled the rosy cheeks of a mistress, till the liquor
played with his wits, and refreshed all the pleasures
he had enjoyed. Antar looked upon this jovial
feast as a dream: for his heart and soul were at
home, and all his desires centered in Ibla. After
some time Chosroe addressed him, and asked him
questions, and joked and laughed with him, en-
quiring about his country and its habitations. Antar
related all that had passed with his uncle Malik and
the tribe of Abs and so forth; and when the King
was certain that his affection for Ibla was unshaken,
and that his love could not possibly admit of increase;
—I am truly surprised, O Absian, said he, at your
forbearance and your reserve, your grievances being
of sucha nature. O my lord, said Antar, I swear
by the existence of your munificence, that is un-
bounded, and the liberality of your hands, that can


289


‘never be forgotten, [am a dead man among the
living! O Aboolfawaris, added Monzar, abandon
the expressions of ignorant Arabs, and recollect that
you are in a place, where decorum and civilty are ex-
pected. Fill your glass and drink, and listen to the
voice of the songstress who would soothe the afflicted ;
and enjoy the happy hours. Ah! said Antar, how
delightful would be all you say, were my heart at
ease, and thus he exclaimed.

s Wine cannot calm my heart, sickness will not
“quit my body—my eyelids are ever sore—tears
“ever stream in torrents from them. The song-
“ stress would soothe my heart with her voice; but
“ my love-sick heart loathes it. ‘The remembrances
“of Ibla draw off my mind from her song, and 1
“ would say to my friend, this is all a dream. In
“ the land of Hedjaz are the tents of my tribe, and
“to meet them again is forbidden me. Amongst
“ the tents of that people is a plump-hipped damsel
“that never removes her veil, and under her veil
“are eyes that inspire sickness, and the pupils of
‘her eyes strike with disease. Between her lips is
€ the purest musk, and camphor diluted with wine.
«© My love and madness are dear to me, for to him
“ who loves, sweet is the pang of love. O daughter
“of Malik, let my foes triumph in my absence;
“let them watch or sleep. But in my journey I
“ have encountered events that would turn children
& gray in their cradles. Pleasuses have succeeded


290


“ to difficulties, and I have met a monarch whom
“ no words can describe—a King to whom all the
“creation is a slave, and to whom fortune is a vas-
“sal, whose hand distributes bounties, so that I
« know not whether it is the sea or a cloud. The
“ sun has invested him with a crown, so that the
“ world need not fear darkness. The stars are his
“ jewels, in which there is a moon brilliant and lumi-
‘‘ nous, as at its full. Mankind is corporeal, and he
“ is spiritual. Let every joint and every member
“laud his name. Live for ever, Prince of the
‘horsemen, long as the dove pours its plaintive
‘€ note, live for ever !”

Chosroe was greatly pleased and surprised at
these verses, for he was himself eloquent in the
Arabian dialect. Were I to give you my kingdom,
O Absian, said he, it would be a small gift in com-
parison with your deserts, for what I can grant is
but transitory, like all other things; but your com-
mendations will endure for ages. Oblige me, and
demand of me what may gratify you, that I may at
any rate make you some compensation for your
praises. Indeed, said Antar, I have fallen by your
bounty into a sea that has neither length nor breadth,
and I shall not return but with what will raise my
glory amongst my countrymen ; but I really do wish
my uncle’s daughter, Ibla, had on her head a tiara
like this, for it would set her off finely ; but I know
it is very ill-bred in me to make such a request.


291


Chosroe laughed and smiled at Antar’s remark ;
he spoke to one of his satraps, who rose up, and
in a short time returned, and with him were four
slaves bearing a canopy of silver; on the top of it
was a hawk formed of burnished gold, its eyes were
of topazes and its feet emeralds. This canopy,
Aboolfawaris, shall serve your uncle’s daughter to
sit in on the night of her marriage with you, and in
this tiara shall she be wedded to you; and he took
the tiara from his head, and untying his girdle and
mantle and his coronet, he laid them down in the
pavilion, desiring Antar to accept them all. Antar
advanced towards the King, kissed his hands, and
thus addressed him :

“ O King of the universe, I thank thee for the
“ vast gifts thou hast bestowed upon me; thou hast
“ granted me favors I cannot bear; thou art the
“ most beneficent of all that tread the earth! thou
“ art the man to whom all Kings bow in the day of
“battle; every Arab and every Persian. But thy
“ slave still lives in the agony he endures from his
“love, his weakness, and his passion, He lives far
“ from his friends, for whom he thirsts ; and languish-
«ing for Ibla, he lives restless in torments.”

The King’s astonishmeut increased. Absian, said —
he, oblige me by demanding what more you want ;
I request of you, said Antar, the renewal of the ap-
poimtment of King Monzar. I will do it, Antar,
said Chosroe ; and he directed it to be written


292


thoughout the imperial dominious, that Monzar
should not be removed from his government of Mas-
sema, and had he even a blind daughter, she should
be the ruler thereof. Have you any other want,
said he, delivering the letter to Antar. I have no
other wish, said Antar, but to return to my country
and home. :

When those that envied and hated Antar among
the Persians, on account of the presents and honours
he had received, saw this, they conspired to destroy
him, and carry off his property. Now Chosroe
had a famous wrestler, called Rostam, and he was
eelebrated for his pugilistic skill through various
realms and cities. Antar’s enemies went to him in
order to instigate him against Antar, saying—Know,
most expert of men, that this insignificant worth-
less black slave has received Chosroe’s tiara, and iMm-
mense wealth, and is returning with it to his own
country. Rostam sprang up like a lion, and pre-
senting himself to the King without asking per-
mission, kissed the ground—O great King, said
he, if you have any consideration for me, let not a
slave of the desert be more dignified than I am. You
have made him one of your associates. I am the
pugilist of your throne, and therefore let not that
head be raised above me.

Antar heard and saw, but understood not what
was passing. Rostam, said Chosroe, abandon this
envious disposition, or thou wilt die of anguish. I


293


wish, said Rostam, he would present himself before
you, and then I will prove to you he is not worthy
your esteem. I will slay him with this mace, and
will unite him to the tribes of Aad and Themood.

On hearing this the King was greatly vexed.
Do you comprehend, said he to Antar, what he
says, Aboolfawaris? Ihave not understood what he
said, but I can perceive that he is very jealous, and
that his head is like the head of a camel, said Antar.
Let me hear what he wants, that I may comply with
his request. This man is my wrestler, said Chosroe,
and is come to try his strength with you in wrestling,
and prove your powers in the combat. Is he not
one of your warriors, asked Antar, and those with
him are they not your men? Yes, said Chosroe.
I forbade his interference with you, but he will not
be dissuaded. Well, said Antar, I cannot allow my
arm to be extended to his injury, and my heart
will not allow me to hurt him on account of your
bounty and favour, and great kindness towards me :-
not that this unwillingness on my part originates
in fear, or in any inferiority to him; but that the
Arabs should hear of me, and accuse me of mak-
ing troubles and dissensions; nor that the noble
Arabs may say of me that Antar, the son of Shedad,
presented himself to Chosroe, and partook of his
food, and then slew his subjects in his presence.
Aboolfawans, said the King, much agitated, if you
wrestle with him, will you kill him? Yes, said

U


294


Antar, for he only seeks to wrestle with me, that he
may destroy me; and you know, O King, that
wrestling is one species of warfare ; and justice and
propriety are required in it! and if one antagonist
prevails over the other antagonist, he abuses and
reviles him, but should his antagonist be angry at
him, he kills him.

Listen to me, said Chosroe to Rostam; do not
provoke this man. I fear for you, lest he overcome
you, and if you do not behave properly to him, he
will tear out your life from between your ribs I
must wrestle with him, said Rostam ; if he kills me,
let my blood and property be his, and esteemed
duly won among these warriors. Strip off your
clothes then, said Chosroe, his countenance inflamed
with wrath, and prepare for the combat. I will tell
him that he may engage with you, and that your
blood will be fairly his. So Rostam took off his
garments, and was stripped from his shoulders, that
were harder than a rock, and his twisted arms were
like columns.

Arise Aboolfawaris, said the King, and wrestle
with him, and if he plays the fool with you, slay
him, and hasten his death, and mind not the conse-
quences ; you are not answerable for his blood.

Antar sprang on his legs, and threw about his arms
and twisted his skirts about his waistband; and as
he was about to begin, Aboolfawaris, said Chosroe,
you have not stripped, or put on the short breeches, '
as every pugilist does. By your existence, O King `


295


of the age, replied Antar, I never in my life wrestled
with short breeches, and never will I wrestle but in
the clothes of a horseman. Chosroe was greatly
troubled. By the burning of fire, he exclaimed,
Never, in the course of my life, have I seen a man
wrestle as a horseman, without breeches. To day,
said Antar, you shall see what I will do with Ros-
tam in the presence of these warriors. l
Antar went upto Rostam. Rostam bent himself
like an arch, and appeared like a burning flame. He `’
rushed upon Antar with all his force, for he looked
on him as a common man, and he did not know that
Antar, even in his youth, used to wrestle with he
and she camels in the plains and the rocks. 'They
grasped each other with their hands, they butted with
their heads, they assaulted with their whole might,
like two lions or two elephants. Then Rostam
stretched out his hand at Antar’s waistband, and
clung to it, and attempted to lift him up in his arms,
but he found him like a stone fixed in a tower, and
he tottered before him. Then he repented of what
he had done, and of having provoked Antar. He
slackened his hold,and he ran round him for an hour,
in the presence of Chosroe and his attendants. He
then sprang behind him, and thrust his head between
his legs, and attempted to raise him on the back of
his neck, and to dash him on the ground ; but Antar
knew what were his intentions and his secret designs :


so he closed his knees on Rostam’s neck, and almost


296


made his eye-balls start from their sockets, and near-
ly deprived him of life. Rostam was terrified, and
wished to escape from between his legs, but he could
not ; every attempt failed; Antar was like a block
of stone growing on a desert or a mountain. Antar
siezed him by his breeches, and clung to him, and
raised him up in his hands like a sparrow in the
claws of a bird of prey, and walked away with him
among the multitude, wishing to wrestle quietly
before the King. But Rostam, when he saw his
life was in Antar’s hands, like a young child was
abashed and mortified before the warriors and sa-
traps, and the great King. He clenched his fist, and
struck Antar on the ear. Antar soon recovered
from the blow—he returned to the threshold of the
palace, and dashed him on the ground, and smashed
him to atoms. Then presenting himself to Chosroe
he thus spoke. |

«& Death has resolved he should die slain, and
« should be subdued and disgraced by me. Curses
‘¢ on his hands! It was his arrogant folly that
“ pointed out the road by which he should be
‘“‘ destroyed. Had thy eyes beheld my deeds in
“ the combat, where the spears tears the hands of
“the lancers, thou wouldst have feared for the
« extinction of his days when he outraged me in
“this lengthened action. O King, who has en-
“ joyed every glory, listen to my story and the
“ account of my honours. He sought in every


4


297


“ way to increase his fame by his deeds; so I left
“him after that reduced to infamy. Truly he
“ hastened the time of his own fate, and his destiny
“ was at my disposal. God ordained his death for
& his acts, and determined it should be executed by
“ my hand. Hail, then, O King! live for ever in
& protected happiness that may never fail thee.”

Then was Nushirvan quite confounded at his
powers. O King, said Antar, I swear by the two
eyes of Ibla (to me the most sacred of oaths), that
when I raised him on my hands, my only intention
was to bring him before you and wrestle in your
presence: but as he transgressed the fair laws of
battle, there was nothing for him but death.
Chosroe believed what he said, and ordered Ros-
tam’s property to be confiscated, and to be trans-
ferred to Antar, and he gave him a written
assignment of his possessions and fiefs.

And when the day was spent, Monzar hemmed
the signal for rising: Antar got up, and asked
Chosroe’s permission to commence his journey:
the order being given for his being supplied with
the finest steeds, and all their golden accoutrements
and rich housings. They went to the house that
was set apart for them ; where Antar found treasures
of wealth, and horses and mules, and he and she
camels, and other goods no words can tell. Antar
asked whence they came: -Aboolfawaris, said Monzar,
this is the property of Rostam: and they reposed


298


till morning; when Mubidan came and compli-
mented them, and as he was going with them to
Nushirvan, I wish, my lord, said Antar to the
Vizier, that you would introduce me to the temples
of fire.*


* The
Continuation of this History has
À not yet been received in Eng-
land. Ep.


December, 1818.


London : Printed by W. Bulmer and Co
Cleveland-row, St. James’s


ANTAR,


. A BEDOUEEN ROMANCE.


TRANSLATED FROM THE ARABIC,
BY


TERRICK HAMILTON, ESQ.


ORIENTAL SECRETARY TO THE BRITISH EMBASSY AT
CONSTANTINOPLE.


PART THE FIRST.


VOL. II.


LONDON:
JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE-STREET.
- 1820.


LONDON :
PRINTED BY T. DAVISON, WHITEFRIARS.


To the BINDER.


The Binder is particularly requested to place
signatures Xx, Y, 2, half-sheet aa, and quarter-
sheet B8, of Vol. I., immediately after the title-page
of Vol. II., so as to precede sheet 8 of Vol. II., which
will connect the first volume with the second.


DESCRIPTION OF THE TEMPLE. 299


The Sixth Chapter continued.


————— said Antar to the Vizier, Indeed, my
lord, you have overwhelmed your slave with fa-
vours and kindnesses, no tongue can describe; still
I have one wish that you would allow me to view
the Temples of Fire, that I may behold their mi-
nisters and treasures, and the service required in
them. There let me observe its blazing, and how
the officers supply the flame; so that, on my return
home, I may be able to relate to my friends what
I have seen in the Temples of Fire. O Aboolfa-
- waris, replied Mubidan, I cannot possibly conduct
you to the Temples of Fire, because you scoff at
them. But if you are verily anxious to enter,
purify your thoughts towards the adored God,
and prostrate yourself in worship. I swear by the
Almighty God, added Antar, that I do not visit
` them but with the purest views; for I am aware
they are one of God’s miracles. Upon this, Mu-
bidan led him to the Chief Temple, where he be-
held a magnificent building, of yellow brass, raised
on pillars of steel, with precious stones in the in-
terstices—the wonder of the age, to astonish the
wisest of men. It had three stories, and to each
story were three portals, and to each portal were
VOL. I. x


$00 DESCRIPTION OF THE TEMPLE.


slaves and servants, stationed over the edifice. An-
tar gazed at these men with glittering forms; and
round the waists of each were leather coverings in
the form of short breeches; and they were stand-
ing at the doors of the Temple, some near and
some at a distance. In their hands were pokers of
steel, with which they raised the flame, heedless of
the God of the two worlds, and uttering Magian
words, that ravished the soul: whilst their Sheikh,
seated on a bench of skin, chaunted in his own
tongue. The fire blazed before him; the fuel was
of aloe-wood; towards which they all addressed
their prostrations, saying, “I and you, we laud
the adored God.” Mubidan accosted him with
salutations, and prostrated himself before the fire,
and walked round it, whilst Antar followed in great
astonishment and surprise at all he did. However,
he imitated him in every thing he observed him do;
at which Mubidan was extremely pleased, seeing
him thus walk round, and offer up his prayers.
Ever, O Aboolfawaris, said he, may you continue
your adorations to the fire, night and day; in it
have I ever found my safety and prosperity. Never
may any injury assail you! may no foe ever harm
your person! My lord, replied Antar, where can
we ever find a fire like your fire, for you kindle it
with aloe-wood and perfumes; thence proceeds a
delicious vapour, and thence issues this fragrant
essence, that exhilarates the heart. But our abode
is a barren waste, where nought is to be procured


ANTAR’S. ADMIRATION AND REMARKS. $01


but the dung of camels, and branches of green
wood, whence proceeds a smoke and smell, to blind
the sight and distract the brain, and to confuse the
senses. Mubidan laughed, and felt convinced that
Antar would never relinquish the worship of statues
and images. After this, they quitted the Temple
of Fire, and the fragrant odours, more exquisite
than ambergris. Just then the recollection of Ibla
occurred to his mind, and his imagination being
agitated with his passion, he thus spoke: .
_ “ The logs of aloe sparkle in the fire, and the
“ flames blaze high in the air; the sweetness of its
“ vapour refreshes my heart, when it is wafted
“ with a northerly wind. Its brilliancy and flame
“are like the face of my beauteous Ibla. But,
s O fire, blaze not—burn not—for in my heart is
‘¢ a flame more furious than thee! Sleep has aban-
“ doned my eyes by night, when I behold my
“ friends in the wings of darkness. Delightful
“ would be to me the abode of my tribe, were I
“ even poor, and not worth a halter. Ina distant
“ land, I should feel no more anxiety for the song,
‘ though all its cities were in my possession. The
“ smoke of the herbs at home, when it is scented
“ even with camel’s dung, is sweeter to me than
“ the aloe-wood, and more brilliant to my eyes in
“ the obscurity of night. O my lord, my anxiety
“ increases to see my friends: so permit me to de-
“ part; thou art my stay and my support; be mer-
“ ciful, and compassionate my situation. I have
x2


302 DISPLAY OF THE KING'§ TREASURES.


“ no succour in the world but thou, towards the
‘* success of my projects. So grant me my request ;
“ and mayst thou ever live happy; mayst thou
« live long, and glorious, and great, in every feli-
& city and every honour.”

After this, Mubidan conducted Antar to the
treasuries of the Persian monarch, where he opened
chests full of the precious metals, and jewels, and
pearls, and articles, that confounded the sight, and
amazed the senses. Come, Aboolfawaris, said he,
what do you want? What the king, in his munifi-
cence, replied Antar, has already bestowed on me,
is sufficient for me. An Arab only prides himself
on the number of his horses, and his he and she
camels, and I have already obtained endless abund-
ance; but to show my obedience, I will take
these three strings, and this chaplet of jewels, for
the daughter of my uncle, Ibla. But as he cast
his eyes around, he beheld a pavilion, whose like
no king of the world possessed. It was called the
Hemisphere, and it was a load for forty camels.
It first belonged to Shedad the son of Aad; it
descended to Pharaoh, and afterwards to Nimrod,
the son of Canaan; and it continued to descend
from King to King till it came to the Emperor of
Greece. At that time Chosroe and Cæsar reigned
over the whole earth—and the Euphrates divided
them. The Emperor ruled over the countries of
Europe and the Christian tribes, and Chosroe Nu- —
shirvan ruled over the Arabs and the Persians.


PAVILION CALLED THE HEMISPHERE. 303


But at all times the Emperor was obliged to pay
tribute to the Monarch of Persia, for his orders
were obeyed in every land. But one year the
Emperor went to visit the Persian king; and as
amongst all his riches he had nothing to offer as a
present but this pavilion, he gave it to him; and
by the command of Chosroe it was pitched at
Modayin, and it occupied in its immensity half the
land of Modayin. The Persian king was greatly
astonished, and every beholder was amazed ; for it
was of network, formed of plates of gold and silver
and emeralds; and there were painted on it all that
God had created—cities, villages, towns, trees,
birds, countries, waters, and rivers. And Chosroe,
as he looked at its beauties, was so overjoyed, that
he relieved the Emperor from the capitation and
tribute for ten whole years. It remained in the
treasury of the King till Antar came with Monzar
to Modayin, and slew the Greek warrior, and en-
tered the treasury of the Persian Monarch: and as
he looked at the pavilion, he said to Mubidan, I
wish to have that pavilion, that I may present it
to Ibla on the night of my marriage. Mubidan
smiled, and ordered the slaves to remove the pa-
vilion to the house; and they did as they were bid:
and as they were quittmg the treasury, said Antar
to Mubidan, Know, my lord, that when I entered
the temples of the Fire, I asked of it a favour; I
know not whether it will grant it, or whether it
will detain me longer, and withhold it. What was


304 ANTAR’S ANXIETY TO RETURN HOME.


thy wish, horseman of the age? said Mubidan. I
requested, replied Antar, a speedy return to my
family and country. Know then, said Mubidan,
if the Fire consent to thy prayer, to-morrow, at an
early hour, preparations shall be made for the
journey. Upon this they proceeded to the King’s
palace. He received them most graciously, and
seating Antar near him, inquired after his health,
and what he had received. Verily, said Antar, the
tongue fails in describing what I, your slave, have
received from your bounty and munificence; and
I have nothing further to demand, but a return to
_ my family and country. But the King, turning
towards Mubidan, threw him a roll of leaves, and
said, Put aside all that is noted in this roll, pro-
perty and jewels, for Aboolfawaris Antar. I have
written to the treasury for. money—to the wardrobe
for superb stuffs—to the armoury for cuirasses and
arms—and to the keeper of the women for male
and female slaves; and let the whole be given over
to Antar, in addition to the confiscated property,
and with what he has chosen, and the pavilion
called the Hemisphere; so that no blame or re-
proach be attached to me, but the reproach be on
you alone. His departure must still be delayed
three days: and when all is prepared for his jour-
ney, inform me, that I may also go forth to bid him
farewell, and do towards him as he deserves at my
hands.

Early next day Antar started up, and having


RECEIVES MAGNIFICENT PRESENTS. 305


kissed the ground, he and Mubidan went forth.
The latter sent for the treasurer, and told him what
quantity of money the king had assigned to Abool-
fawaris Antar; and he said, I have the Great King’s
order for a hundred thousand imperial dinars, and
a hundred thousand Dakyanos dinars, each dinar
of the value of seven, and four hundred thousand
dirhems of silver to distribute; and five hundred
embroidered velvet robes, and a thousand silk vests,
of the royal manufacture, as presents; and, more-
over, four thousand pieces of light silk for khelaats,
to give away; and be all this property ready, in
chests and on mules. Mubidan called for the
armourer, and told him what the King had ordered
respecting pavilions, tents, and cuirasses, and arms,
for Aboolfawaris Antar, saying, I have received the
royal signet to assign over to Aboolfawaris Antar
twenty of the grandest pavilions, and pavilions de-
nominated Quarter Globes; and four thousand com-
mon tents, and four thousand cuirasses, and four
thousand breast-plates, and every thing of that de-
scription, according to the list; and all with their
respective cases and camels, Mubidan sent for the
keeper of the women, and communicated the orders
of the Great King respecting Aboolfawaris Antar,
saying, I have received the royal signet to consign
over to Antar four hundred white male slaves, with
their clothes and accoutrements, and their horses
and their trappings; and four hundred strong black
slaves, fit for battle and war, with their Chief Abool-


306 HIS DEPARTURE PREVENTED.


mout, with all their horses and their accoutrements,
and their breast-plates, and cuirasses; and four
hundred Georgian female slaves, and four hundred
fair European slaves, and four hundred Copht, and
four hundred Persian slaves, and four hundred
slaves of Tibah; and let every slave be mounted
on a mule, and under every slave let there be two
chests of rich silk.

And Mubidan having directed his deputy to
prepare all he had enumerated in three days, Antar
and Monzar, and the heroes that were with them, °
withdrew, preceded by* servants loaded with pre-
sents, and khelaats, and money. But when the
three days had expired, the slaves came forth with
their burthens, and prepared the camels and the
mules. And just as Antar was setting out, behold
Mubidan came towards him, and takmg him by
the hand, conducted him to Nushirvan. As soon
as Antar entered the hall of audience, he kissed
the ground. The King directed him to be seated.
Aboolfawaris, said he, I have heard from King
Monzar that you slew in his presence one of the
lions of Khifan, your feet being fettered, and only
your hands at liberty.—Now this event is thus ex-
plained :—When Bahram, the Chief of Dilem, saw
that Antar had acquired such an increase of wealth,
all that the Greek had brought with him from the
Emperor, and all the property of the wrestler Ros-
tam, and presents and donations which were in


Mubidan’s possession, the disease of envy fell upon


BAHRAM’S WICKED PROPOSAL. $07


him, and preyed upon his heart and body. He
presented himself to Chosroe, and exclaimed, O
most noble Monarch, the Kings of the world have
not received from you what you have bestowed on
this black slave; and he is a worthless, insignificant
wretch! He slew your satrap Khosrewan; he routed
his army of twenty thousand horse; and the Kings
of the age will say of you, that your munificence is
only the result of your fear of his sword and spear.
The Emperor will also be enraged against you,
because he has slain his warrior, and made him
drink of the cup of death and perdition; and he
will demand of you blood and revenge. My opinion
is, you should seize this wicked slave; take back
all the presents you have made him; and detain
him in slavery and bondage. Slay him, and make
him drink of the cup of annihilation. The King
was exceedingly wrath; And what, he exclaimed,
shall be my excuse with the Kings of the world,
when they shall say, Nushirvan gave a Bedoween
immense wealth, then betrayed him, and took back
all he had bestowed on him? I shall be called a
miser. Renounce such a project, O Bahram! If
you fear the reproaches of Kings, returned Bahram,
send for this slave into your presence! tell him you
have heard from King Monzar that he slew a lion
of Khifan before him when his feet were fettered,
and his hands alone at liberty. He will say, Yes,
O King! Then say you wish to see him combat


308 ‘HE PLOTS ANTAR'S DESTRUCTION.


with a lion. Let loose at him your lion, that you
have brought up and named Khemees—huge as an
elephant: a beast, your armies and your horsemen
dare not face. Should he slay that ferocious lion,
he will have merited at your hands the wealth you
have bestowed on him. Should the lion destroy
him, all your property will revert to you. ‘Ihe
Kings of the wilds and the deserts will hold you
excused, and no reproach be attached to your name.
The Monarch hung his head towards the ground ;
and after a little reflection, he exclaimed, But should
Antar slay the lion, and make him taste of the cup
of vengeance Should Antar slay the lion,
said Bahram, interrupting him, then let my blood
and my property be legally his. Chosroe joyed in
his heart, and ordered him to be seated; and Mu-
bidan was directed to produce the hero. So he
repaired to his dwelling, and, preventing his de-
parture, conducted him to the presence of the Great
King. When Antar entered the audience-chamber,
he made his salutation, and kissed the ground. The
King ordered him to sit down; and after talking
familiarly with him for a while, I have heard, he
continued, O Aboolfawaris, from King Monzar,
that you engaged a lion in his presence, your legs
being fettered, and only your hands at liberty. I
am very anxious to see you thus contend with a
lion which I have brought up, and named Khemees ;
huge as an immense elephant—of amazing strength


THE LION KHEMEEE. _ $09


and fierceness. O my lord, cried Antar, have you
only sent for me to meet a lion? He is the veriest
dog of the wilds and the plains. By your life, O
King of the age, I was thinking that you could
only have called on me in some great crisis, or
against a vast army, in order that I might destroy
them with my sword. But if it be only to encounter
this brute, come on, as you please! The Monarch .
was struck with wonder at the strength of his heart,
and commanded the lion to be brought forth. A
concourse of people went out; and having bound
the beast of the forests with chains of iron, and
five stout warriors holding each a link of the chain,
they dragged him out. His body was of enormous
length, his make broad, his chest wide, his nostrils
flat, his mane yellow, and flashes of fire shot from
his eyes. Each fang was a horror, and his claws
terrors. At the sight, the King’s indignation against
Bahram increased; but turning towards Antar,
_ Now, Aboolfawaris, he cried, descend; let me be-
hold your contest with this furious lion, Antar
instantly sprang up; and tucking the skirts of his
garments within his girdle, he grasped his sword in
his right, and his shield in his left hand, and, thus
armed, stalked towards the lion, his heart harder
than rock; and, as he thought of Ibla, he thus
spoke :

« O lion, stand firm—flinch not, attack me, for
“I fear thee not—assault me, I will not shrink
“ from the fight with one like thee—I dread thee


310 SLAIN BY ANTAR.


“ not. If thou thinkest thy face stern, I am also
“ fierce of aspect, but no coward. ‘This day thou
“ shalt lie prostrate—thou shalt be humbled low
s in the dust.— Receive the blow from the arm of
“ Antar, and lie deeply dyed in thine own blood.”
The mind of the King was rapt in astonish-
ment at these verses; and he felt more and more
the intrepidity of Antar, who stood in front of the
lion, and, shouting at him, began to draw him on,
as a ferocious lion does a weaker animal :—some-
times he assailed him on the left, sometimes from
the right; and the lion knew not which way to
turn in the presence of Antar, who, at length, cry-
ing out “O by Abs! O by Adnan! I am ever
the lover of Ibla!” struck the beast with Dhami
between the eyes, and the sword continued to slide
through his body till it issued out between his
thighs. Antar cut him in twain before the Hall of
Audience as if he had divided him with a scale;
then, coming forward, he prayed for the conti-
nuation of the Monarch’s glory. ‘ Never be thy
hand paralysed!” cried Chosroe: ‘ may no one
ever harm thee, O Aboolfawaris, thou ornament of
every assembly! for thou art indeed an undaunted
lion, and a victorious warrior! and thy enemies are
overthrown.” He instantly ordered Bahram to be
seized and his head to be struck off, and his pro-
perty to be given to Antar—money, furniture, and
slaves; and though Antar wished to intercede for
him, ‘ By the burning of the Fire, O horseman of


DEATH OF BAHRAM; 311


the world !” exclaimed the King, “he is a villain.
«“ It was he who persuaded me to order this com-
bat: but I only consented to his suggestions, that
all his possessions might devolve on you; and I
now grant you all his wealth. Take them, and
depart, but do not reproach me for my offence.”
The officers struck off Bahram’s head, and loaded
Antar with every article he possessed. Monzar
rejoiced at Antar’s accession of wealth; for he had
been the cause of raising the honour and credit of
the Arabs among the worshippers of Fire. Thus
Antar departed from the land of ‘Modayin with
boundless riches and incalculable wealth. The
Great King also mounted, with Mubidan and all
the Satraps, to take leave of Antar: and when they
were at some distance from Modayin, and had
plunged into the barren desert, Antar dismounted
from Abjer, and, moving towards the King, kissed
his feet in the stirrup, and begged him to return
with his attendants, thus addressing him: _

« O thou whose station is sublime—zin thy be-
« neficence above the height of Sirius and Aries !—
« thou art the king like whom there is no king,
* and whose munificence is renowned over hill and
“ dale. O thou, my hope! thou hast overwhelmed
& me with favours. O thou whose largesses re-
& semble the beauteous rain-cloud! thou hast be-
« stowed gifts on me whose extent I cannot count;
& so liberal is thy hand, O thou, my life and my
s hope! thou art the man to whom all kings must


$12 ANTAR QUITS MODAVIN.


“ submit; and in thy justice thou hast surpassed
“ all thy predecessors.”

Do not imagine, exclaimed the King with aug-
mented delight, that we have been able duly to re-
compense you. What we have given you is perish-
able, as every thing human is—but your praises
will endure for ages. He then kissed Antar be-
tween the eyes, and bade him adieu, giving him as
a last token a rich robe: and begging him to visit
him frequently, he departed.

Monzar and Antar travelled side by side, tra-
versing the rocks and the deserts in social converse,
_ and reciting verses day and night until they reached

Hirah: and the day of their arrival was a general
festival. ‘The flags and standards were waved over
their heads; and the Arabs were amazed when
they saw the immense wealth that accompanied
Antar. Monzar lodged Antar at a magnificent
mansion, and made a splendid entertainment and
feast for all classes. Antar, after a stay of three
days, on the fourth morning resumed his journey.
Monzar presented him a thousand Asafeer camels
and five hundred loads of the rarities of Irak, and
fifty noble steeds, of the most generous breed, with
their armour and coats of mail, and a hundred
female slaves and two hundred strong male slaves;
and the chief of all the slaves was Aboolmout. O
Aboolfawaris, said Monzar, will you take an escort
to protect you and conduct you home? What say
` you? exclaimed Antar; is one like me in want of


TAKES LEAVE OF MONZAR. 3138


a tax-gatherer? can one like me fear even a count-
Jess host? Were even whole armies to assail me,
I would meet them! Were even Death to encounter
me, I would engage him! O my lord, he added,
I only consider all this wealth as proceeding from
you. I am now one of your freedmen and your
slave—for when you had power over me you
gave me liberty, and when I was a prisoner you
released me. May your sword be ever drawn in
conquest against your foes! and may your mu-
nificence ever flow towards your suppliants! And
as he kissed the ground he thus continued :

& O great and renowned Monarch, be glorified !
s for no one can ever vaunt himself superior to thy
“& glories. As to liberality, thy hand has grasped
“it all: as to rain, thy palm bestows it—and thy
“hand calms every woe. How many hast thou
“relieved from sorrow, whose pains vanish as soon
“ as thy countenance appears! The copiousness
“ of generosity flows from thy hand in eternal
“ streams; and one may see thy fingers ever sup-
“ plying, ever showering. The armies of battle
“are thy drawn sword, and wherever it moves
“ against the foe, it vanquishes. May the glory it
s desires never fail it, and may the world ever be
“ at thy command! May thy lord ever grant thee
& every favour, and mayst thou avert and subdue
“ all thy enemies! May the projects and efforts of
“ man ever fail against thy enterprises, and may
“ glory ever belong to the grasp of the hand ‘and


314 PURSUES HIS JOURNEY.


“ the fingers of King Monzar! He has attained
& every honour, every virtue, every excellence,
& every felicity, and universal liberality.”

Most marvellous! exclaimed Monzar: this is
indeed the man who has so -nobly treated me, and
raised me to the highest dignity with his laudatory
poetry. Antar embraced Monzar, and bade him
farewell: whilst Monzar, dismounting from his
horse, took off all his clothes, and put them on
Antar, giving him also every thing else he had
with him on that day, and then returned home
with his attendants. But Antar traversed the de-
serts and the wildernesses, his slaves marching be-
fore him with all his property: and he rejoiced in
the accomplishment of his hopes, except when the
greatness of his anxious love afflicted him; and as
he approached the land of Hijaz his passions were
roused, and he thus spoke:

Ts it the breeze from the heights of the land of
“ Shurebah that revives me and resuscitates my
& heart, or is it the gale from the tamarisks? Is
« it the flame that consumes me for Ibla, or is it
‘“‘ the lightning’s flash from her dwelling that de-
‘‘ prives me of my senses? O thou spot where she
& resides, may thy hillocks be ever inhabited by
« the families, and may thy plains be ever crowded
+ with friends! Have thine eyelids been seen to
“ watch at night, as my eyelids have watched ever
“ since I quitted thee? And has the turtle-dove's
& moan filled thee with sorrow in thy sleeplessness,


HIS 8ONG’ OF EXULTATION. 315
“ as the turtle-dove’s moan has distressed me? I
“ departed from thee not uneasy, or much in
“anguish; but my uncle has outraged me, and
“ coveted my death. He has exposed me to a sea
“ of dangers, but I plunged into it with my glitter-
“ing two-edged blade. I have cut through the
“ neck of fortune, and the nocturnal vicissitudes
“ and the nightly calamities have trembled. My
“ good fortune has seated me in a mansion of glory,
‘man and genii could never attain. I have en-
“ countered in Irak horsemen that may be accounted
“as whole tribes when the battle rages. I am
“ returning with the wealth of Chosroe and Cesar -
‘‘__with he and she camels, horses, and slaves;
“ and, when I reach home, my enemies shall weep,
“ as one day they laughed when Shiboob announced
“ my death. They indeed sought my destruction
“ ir a distant land; but they knew not that death
“ was—my sword and my spear !”


VOL. I. Y


$16 HIS ARRIVAL AT ZATOOL MENAHIL.


CHAPTER VII.


ANTAR continued to pass over the plains and wilds
antil he arrived at a place called Zatool Menahil.
Now Antar, whenever he approached a halting-place,
always sent a slave forward, lest any one should be
concealed there. Accordingly he despatched a slave,
who on reaching the spot saw it already occupied by
five black slaves, of the colour of pitch and night;
and with them was a magnificent howdah, on the
summit of which was a golden crescent. Within
was a person weeping and sobbing from a wounded
heart, and screaming out, Woe unto these dastard
slaves! Where are thine eyes, O Antar, that they
might behold me? And thus she continued her
lament :

‘¢ Where are thine eyes, O knight of men and
& genii? Oh! that thou couldst see me in the infamy
« of despair with wretches who respect no protection.
s“ No—no, and have no mercy! O that I had never
« lived in this age of traitors, who only see in thee
& my misery and dishonour! Why has God pro-
s longed my existence now the lion is gone, who
& ever protected the country and the women? May
“© God ever bedew his grave with plenteous showers
“ that fail not! for, in truth, he was a knight and


DISCOVERS TIBLA. 317


«a hero that could vanquish with his fingers the
“ beasts of the desert, and destroy the warriors in
“ the day of battle, whenever he appeared in the
“ plain of contention.”

Antar arrrving at that moment, was greatly sur-
prised at this address; and hastening up to the
slaves, Ye aceursed wretches! he exclaimed, whose
are these tents? Who is it that intends to halt here?
Who is this that is crying and weeping, and is call
ing on the name of Antar? Go to thine own work,
replied one of them: Away! away! or thou wilt
soon be a corpse—Away to the desert, before the
Nocturnal Evil overtake thee, or the Depredator
of the Age take thee prisoner, and seize thy arms
and thy horse, and join thee to his other captives.
Antar’s whole heart and soul throbbed at such lan-
guage; his agony and anguish were intense, when
lo! the stranger raised up the veil of the howdah,
and a damsel appeared, exclaiming, O my cousin |
art thou among the living, and I in the power of
the foe? Antar gazed earnestly, and behold it was
Ibla! She had thrown herself on the ground, and
was endeavouring to rise, but she could not stand,
so exhausted was she by her grief. At such a sight
Antar’s distress and affliction augmented. What
_ means this'dréadful event, this calamity? he cried:

Who is it that has forced thee to this desert ?
Whence come these slaves with thee? He instantly
rode towards her ; the slaves raised a loud scream,
but Atitar roared’ like a lion: he slackened the bridle

Y2


$18 SHIBOOR ANNOUNCES ANTAR’S DEATH.


of his horse—he encountered the first, and pierced
him through the chest, driving his spear through
his back—he transfixed a second through the mouth,
and forced out the weapon at the back of his head—
a third he pierced through the right side, and im-
pelled his spear out on the left—and when the other
two perceived the effects of his thrusts, they fled to
the wilds and the deserts.

Now the occasion of this extraordinary event was
as follows: when Shiboob returned from the land
of Shiban, and quitted his brother, he launched into
the deserts and escaped. Day and night he mourned
for his brother, until he reached the country of the
tribe of Abs, where he announced the death of
Antar. On entering the tents he bared his head
and tore off his clothes, raising loud lamentations
and screams; and the weeping and the wailing were
universal. Shedad rent his garments, and was cla-
morous in his sorrow and affliction; he threw down
his tent, his brother Zakhmetool Jewad didthe same,
and all their friends and associates; and there was
not one but wept bitterly. The same did also the
sons of King Zoheir; and they assembled together
and came in a body to Shedad, and when he saw
them he thus mourned the death of Antar :

“ The affliction is extreme! fixed is it in my heart.
& Its intenseness blinds me—Evil is let loose upon
« me—Murdered is the hero of the brave, Antar !
‘© Alas! the misery and wretchedness that have fallen
“on me. He is gone—how long will my tears flow


SHEDAD’S GRIEF. 319


“ in sorrow for him! How long shall I endure this.
“ torture! O expedition in a luckless hour! How

“ fatal was that marriage to him! Alas! alas for
“ him, whose person has vanished from us; buried
“ low beneath the earth in the place where he

“ fought. Let the heavens weep his loss and death

“ in tears! May its showers be exhausted for ever !

“ Let the beauteous stars fall at his fatal end! Let
“ the air be darkened, and the sun be eclipsed ! Let
& the full moon be veiled also in her station through

“ grief, and may she ever be involved in obscurity !

« Abandoned are the steeds and the camps by the

s“ Absian youth; his dwelling has forfeited its pos-

“ sessor. O race of Abs! ye have lost a chief—

« How many were the heroes he slew! How many

“ the captives he rescued! He was the prostrator

* of horsemen in the entanglement of spears, and
‘‘ on the day of battle how many heads laid he low!

« He was an intrepid lion in the day of contention——
“ the smiling, and the stern champion of his tribe.
“« Woe to the Absians! now that he is gone, soon
& will ye encounter misery; and the grim-visaged
‘¢ warriors will plunder ye. Gone is he who pro-
“ tected the women from the foe! Hereafter never
<< will the trampling hostile steeds quit the dwellings;
“ he used to fell them down with his sword and
“ spear, and make them drink cups of death. Noble
“ and magnanimous was he in every act; high-
“ prized was he among men. Oh! I will weep for
“ him as long as the west wind blows, in tears that
‘‘ shall stream and shall moisten the sands.”


320 MALIK QUITS THE ABSIANS.


Prince Malik repaired to the tents of his father
King Zoheir, his tears streaming from his eyes; and
as he sobbed aloud, he sent for Shiboob, and made
every inquiry of him: O King of Kings, he ended
by saying, truly Ibla and her father have brought
ill luck on Antar, and the whole tribe of Abs. But
when King Zoheir inquired for Malik, Ibla’s father
(for he wished to speak to him about this affair), he
was told that he and his son had been long absent,
and none but the women were in the tents. For
Prince Malik, and the companions that loved Antar,
ever reproached and abused them, saying, Why did
_ ye resolve on exposing the protector of the tribe to
an ocean of deaths and dangers? You have now left
the Arab hordes to plunder us in every plain and
wild; and by the truth of Lat, and Uzza, and the
great Hibel*, every one that comes near us may slay
us, and make us drink the odious draughts of death.
So Malik, seeing how matters stood, determined to
pass some time in roaming about the deserts, and
not to remain with his family an object of scorn and
disgrace. Accordingly he took with him fifteen
horsemen and departed, with the view of gaining
some spoil among the Arab tribes. They set out,
and traversed the deserts and the sands, until they
reached the land of Kenanah, where water failed
them, and their thirst became intense. Truly, my
son, said Malik to Amroo, thirst grievously afflicts
me; gallop on, and descend into yonder valley.


* Three idols of Arabian idolatry.


MEETING OF AMROO AND VACHID. 321


Amroo galloped away into an extensive plain, wa-
tered with gushing springs. On one side of the
valley was a hovel, and at the entrance was a spear
fixed in the ground, and a horse ready saddled.
He halted, and, as he looked attentively around,
there issued ferth an old woman, who screamed at
the sight of a stranger, exclaiming, What makes
thee stop at the dwelling of the outrageous lion,
thou son of infamy and disgrace? O mother of
horsemen, he replied, I thirst, and J am conte hither
in quest of water. What people are ye? We are
of the tribe of Kenanah, said she, an honourable and
trust-worthy race; our habitation is in this spot, for
the lion only dwells in his lair. But whilst they
were thus conversing, lo! a youth started out of the
hovel, and shouted at Amroo. He wasa horseman
of consummate bravery, and an intrepid hero. His
name was Vachid, son of Mesaar, the Kenanian;
and being just then displeased with his tribe, he had
removed to this place. He stared at Amroo, and
seeing him talk with his mother, he became like one
frantic. Tell me who thou art? he roared. Amroo’s
eyes shot fire. Check thy wrath, young man, he
replied, for we are of the tribe of the noble Abs,
horsemen of destruction and sudden death. Thow
son of infamy and disgrace, cried Vachid, to one like
me dost thou speak thus? to me whom the lions of
the forest dread? Dismount and be humbled, before
thou art extended a corpse on the earth. Amroo
was highly incensed. But Vachid vaulted on his


$22 '  VACHID SUBDUES THE PARTY.


steed, snatched up his spear, and drove at him like
a lion: he assailed him, and tearing him off his
saddle, dashed him down at the door of the hut,
roaring and bellowing. The old woman pinioned
his shoulders, and Amroo was almost dead.

Now Malik, alarmed at his son’s long absence,
-~ went in search of him, aecompanied by the others,
until they came to the valley, where they perceived
the. flowing streams, and, not far off, the horseman
on the back of his steed, and Amroo bound with
cords. Alas! my son, exclaimed Malik. His eyes
rolled in horror, and he rushed down on Vachid,
who received him as the parched ground the first of
the rain. He shouted at him, and driying the heel
of his spear against his chest, threw him on his back.
He immediately plunged into the midst of his com-
panions, and hurled them to the earth; three only
were unhurt; and they all delivered themselves up
to him, seeing death flash from his eyes. Vachid
bound some, and as his mother secured the re-
mainder he thus spoke :
_ © When I degrade every horseman in the day of
“ battle, I defend my wife with my Indian blade.
“ Noble is the youth that braves every evil, and
“ knows that man is not eternal; that clads himself
s in armour during the meridian heat, and wanders
& during the nights and the thick darkness. Ask
s* the Absians of me, O Amimah! mark my conduct
“ towards them, and laud the glories of my birth;
“+ I gave them to drink of bitter-flavoured blood


k DEMANDS THEIR RANSOM. 323


s with my hand, when they came complaining of
“ thirst; I cut down the chiefs of the party ; blood
4 gushed from their wounds, and they were strug-
“ gling with their hands on the ground. Who
“ refuses such water to those who scour the wilds
« where dwell and prowl the demons? I am the
“ night, though I am not black; I am the ocean,
“ though I do not foam. Kenanah is my tribe, the
£ door of every virtue; they are noble, high-minded,
“ and proud; and I have a spirit no other knight
“ ever attained—I am exalted above the Sun, and
‘© Moon, and the Great Bear.”

Vachid passed that night rejoicing in his triumph
over his enemies; but at the dawn of day, being
resolved to demand a ransom from his prisoners, lo!
fifty horsemen of the tribe of Kenanah joined him,
wishing to make peace with him; and he showed
them the captive horsemen of Abs; and treating
them kindly, he marched back with them, the whole
party driving the Absians before them, till they
reached their own country, where he was received
with great joy. Having pitched his tents, and
erected his standards, Vachid reposed that night with
his family; but early next day he summoned Malik,
son of Carad, and the captive warriors, and de-
manded of them a heavy ransom in he and she
camels, threatening and menacing them with his
vengeance. O Arabs, cried Ghayadh, do not ask
of us beyond our means, for we are poor Arabs, and
the greatest of us all is only master of what his


324 ASKS IBLA IN MARRIAGE.


sword and spear can procure. Know, too, that we
only quitted our country from poverty and want;
not one of us possesses any he or she camels, I assure
you. I know very well, replied Vachid, when the
Arabs are taken prisoners and are in difficulty, they
always talk after this manner. But by the faith of
an Arab, if you do not guarantee to me all your
property, and hasten with all your he and she camels,
I will bring annihilation down upon ye all; not one
of ye will I spare. Whilst Vachid was thus ha-
ranguing, up came the old woman, who recognizing
Malik among the captives, My son, said she to Va-
chid, do you mark that prisoner? Yes! he replied.
By your existence, she continued, he has a daughter
called Ibla, whose equal in form and beauty the
heavens do not shadow. Take my advice, demand
her in marriage, and release him from bondage.
Arab, cried Vachid, addressing Malik, know that I
was determined on killing you; but I have just now
heard from this old woman that you have a-daugh-
ter called Ibla, lovely and beautiful; and she has
described her charms in the most extravagant man-
ner; I therefore desire you to marry her lawfully
tome. Malik, now considering his escape as secure,
eagerly replied; Arab, you deserve her more than
any one else, but we have in our family a thousand
rivals, and they will not permit me to wed her to a
stranger. Malik then related to Vachid all that had
passed about Antar, and all the extraordinary cir-
cumstances that had occurred ; how he had exposed


MALIK ACCKDES TO HIS REQUEST. S25


Antar to extreme danger in sending him to procure
camels for the marriage dower; how he was assured
of his death, and that he was reduced to dust. But
there is still another man in the tribe, ealled Amarah,
who loves her; and I fear, continued Malik, he will
oppose your pretensions. This is but a juggle, cried
Vachid ; I shall instantly set you free that you may
execute this engagement; but not one of your cousins
will I release until your daughter is mine: and be-
ware, for if you are not as good as your word, they
shall be laid low headless. Well! said Malik, I will
satisfy you. I swear to you, that I will perform
every thing I have promised. Let my son Amroo
and myself depart; my companions I will leave in
bondage. I will only be absent ten days, and if I
fail in my word, cut off the heads of my cousins,
and make me responsible for their blood, and I will
pay their families the compensation-money*. May
God never comfort thee! exclaimed Ghayadh, it is
solely on thy account we have fallen into this state
of captivity and torture, and our expedition will
terminate in the forfeiture of our lives. Cousin,
cried Malik, reproach me not; itis to save you that
I have promised my child; and my heart consents
to abandon my tribe and my brethren merely that
I may preserve you and myself. However I will
not let Vachid release one of ye tll ye engage your-
selves most solemnly to keep the whole a secret from


è Diyet-—in those days it amounted to ten camels.


326 RETURNS TO THE TENTS.


the Absians. Who would be such a fool, exclaimed
Ghayadh, as to tell it? Who will venture to confess
that one horseman has thus reduced us to disgrace,
and has thus tied us up like so many mules? Soon
after, Malik and Amroo departed for the tribe of
Abs. Vachid followed him three days after, taking
with him a troop of noble Arabs; but when they
reached the tribe of Abs, they concealed themselves
among the rocks, that Malik might have time to
visit his daughter and his family. Malik having
thus given his hand and contracted the marriage,
and imagining that his affairs, though once in a
luckless state, were now in proper train, set out for
the land of Shurebah and Mount-Saadi; Ghayadh
having enjoined him not to delay his return. . He
and his son Amroo hastened over the hills and the
sands; but they did not feel secure until they had
reached their country, where, under cover of the
night, they skulked among the tents, and found all
the families in grief and affliction on account of
Antar. Malik repaired to his own tents, near which
he perceived a newly-made grave, his daughter sit-
ting by it drowned in tears, in the deepest affliction,
and clothed in black. ‘The tears flowed in torrents
down her cheeks, and she was tearing the flesh off
her wrists with her teeth, and beating her bosom
with her hands ; and, as she dashed her head against
the grave, she addressed it in these words :

s O grave, my tears shall ever bedew thy earth!
“ my eyes have renounced sweet sleep! O grave,


HIS PEIGNED GRIEF AT ANTAR’S DEATH. $27


“ is there any one but my cousin Antar in thee, or
“ is his sepulchre in my heart! Alas, alas for thee !
“ felled to the ground art thou, and the groans of a
“ distracted mourner survive. They slew him bar-
“ barously, and his foes exult when they see my
“ agony and misery on his account. O, by God!
“ never will I surrender myself to another, were he
“ to come with a thousand charms.”

Malik now feeling assured of Antar’s death, dis-
played all his artifice and hypocrisy by expressing
his grief and distress; and, as he entered his wife’s
apartment, O my cousin, said he, what misfortune
is this? on whose account is all this lamentation and
wailing? Your nephew Antar! she replied: ac-
counts of his death arrived during your absence ;
and there is not an individual in the whole tribe but
abuses you; never will you escape from the perils
that surround you. Upon this, Malik made show
of still more vehement sorrow ; he rent his clothes,
and exclaimed, By the faith of an Arab, we rather
deserve their prayers, for many of us are slain, some
are now captives, and now that I am returned, I
find you in this afflicted state. Never can we
deliver ourselves from these troubles but by emi-
grating. He then repaired to his daughter, and
kissing her head, My child, said he, let not this sad
affair prey upon thy mind, moderate thy grief and
distress: and whilst he pitied her, she blushed for
him. She sprang up from the tomb, and starting
off from him, Away! she cried, no one slew my


328 HE OVERHEARS SHEDAD’S SORROW.


cousin but thou ; thou wast the man that exposed
‘Aim to an ocean of perils ;. truly will thy treachery
soon share the evils thy arm has brought on him.
Her father made no reply, but hastened to the tents
of Shedad ; and as he drew nigh, he heard Shedad
sobbing and sighing, and in tears, thus giving vent
to his sorrow: -

“ O my eyelids, let your tears flow abundantly,
“ weep for the generous, noble horseman; a knight
“in whom I took refuge when my efforts failed, at
“ my up-risings and my down-sittings. My brother
“ exposed him to a sea of death in his malice, and
‘* the hearts of the envious exult. He planned his
“ murder, and he has abandoned me. No more
‘ will my honour and my engagements be respected.
‘© He behaved cruelly to him in exacting the mar-
“ riage dower, and he now refuses to do him justice.
‘© He was the drawn sword of the race of Abs,
s cleaving through armour above the skin. He
“ used to fell the foe in every land, till the warriors
“ cried out for succour. Prostrate, fallen, bowed
“to the earth is ke now, beneath the shadow of
& lances and the waving of banners. Now he is
“ gone, the Absian dames are in sorrow, dashing
‘‘ their hands against their cheeks in fear of slavery;
« dishevelled is their hair, streaming are their tears
& over their fair necks decorated: with’ chains’; siph-
« ing they mourn the hero.of Abs in sobs of sorrow,
“that give pleasure to the envious. Grieve they
‘must ever in tears from their eyes for'him who


MALIK’S PERPLEXITIES. 329


“ was the illustrious knight. May God destroy
“ Malik, son of Carad, and make him suffer what
“ the tribe of Themood endured !”

Having listened to this lament, Malik entered z
he tore off his garments, and renewed his sighs and
his tears. Indeed, my brother, said he, we also
require your prayers. And he attempted to kiss
him; but Shedad turned away from him. Away
with this deceit and hypocrisy, said he. Who but
you sent my son to Irak? But there are who will -
demand his blood at your hands, and will requite
you for his death. Malik shrunk away, and hot
coals were burning in his heart, as he sought for
pretexts to cover his guilt. He laid not down that
night before he told his wife what had happened to
him in his expedition; how he had betrothed his
daughter, and had by her means rescued his life
and soul; but that his cousins were still detained as
hostages; and how he had engaged them to keep
the whole affair a secret. Upon this they resolved
en emigrating, and Malik concealed himself, on ac-
eount of his companions whom he had left in cap-
tivity, and lest Amarah or Rebia, on hearing what
he was doing, might mar his project; for these were
again bent on their former plans, the moment they
heard that Antar had fallen. Amarah indeed was
in eestacies, and whispered to himself, “‘ now then will
Ibla be mine.” So taking with him Oorwah, son of
Wird, and ten other horsemen, he departed on a
plundering expedition for a marriage dower, from


330 PREPARES TO DEPART WITH HIS FAMILY:


the land of Yemen. Malik no sooner heard of
Amarah’s departure, than he made his preparations
for migrating. But the three days had scarcely
elapsed, when a slave arrived from Vachid, to inform
him that his master was already at the springs of
Zeba, accompanied by forty horsemen, concealed
hard by. Return! said Malik, return to him, and
tell him we are on our way. And at night Malik
struck his tents, and loaded the camels. What
means this ? inquired Ibla. Whither, my father, are
you going? We cannot possibly remain here any
longer, replied Malik, for the ‘very stones cry out —
against us, and all the families are convinced that
you and I were alone the cause of Antar’s destruc-
tion; but I swear by the life of your eyes, that
I only despatched him for these Asafeer camels in
order to raise your dignity amongst the high and
low, and now our relations- consider us as enemies.
It is my wish, therefore, to absent myself until this
is somewhat blown over, and then we will return
again home; but should we remain long here,
Amarah will come and demand you in marriage;
you do not like him, and I have no excuse by which
I can elude his pretensions; besides, I cannot ever
force you to a marriage with any one, not the object
of your choice. No one but Antar can my heart
ever love, said Ibla; and, moreover, what can that
wretch Amarah do? And thus she recited :

“ O heart, be patient under the agonies I endure.
“ But how can my tears cease to flow! no balm is


THE PARTY JOIN VACHID. $31


& there to soothe them. How can my tears be.
“ soothed away! ever must they flow for the loss of
“ him who shamed the brilliancy of the loveliest.
“ High exalted are his-glory and his exploits: noble
“& is-his birth, permanent in the pinnacle of honour.
“ He who dwells in every life, he, the eternal
“ Cupbearer, has made him drink of the cups of
“death. Oh! I shall weep for him for ever, as
‘s long as the dove pours forth its lament on the
‘ boughs and the leaves. O Aboolfawaris! I have
“ not a breath of life remaining: Oh! then, how
“can I be patient under my transports s and my
s passion ?”

Her sorrows burst forth anew, but her father
regarded her not. About midnight they de-
parted, traversing rocks and deserts, and before
morning they had quitted the country. When
King Zoheir heard of it, Wherever he goes, may
death overtake him! said he. God grant he may
never return, and never be seen or heard of more!
How diabolical are his malice and hypocrisy! how
detestable his art and deceit! By the faith of an
Arab, had we not been related, I would have or-
dered him to be put to death, before he could have
escaped. But wherever he goes, his punishment
will overtake him for his conduct to Antar. |

In the mean time, Malik travelled on till he
reached the Springs of Zeba, where Vachid was
concealed with his prisoners; their feet bare, their
bodies naked, and their heads uncovered: misery


VOL. L. Z


$32 IBLA DRLIVERED UP TO YACHID.


and diagrace were their lot. At day-break arrived
Malik, with his loaded camels, and slaves, and all
his property. His male slaves led the camels. Ibla
was mounted on a howdah, and many attendants
walked by her side. Vachid, the moment he saw the
cavalcade, recognized them: he sprang out of his
concealment ; he slackened his bridle, and grasped
his spear, followed by his horsemen; and when they
came close to Malik, they saluted him, whe, in an-
swer to their inquiries, told them what had passed.
Salute your spouse, he added. I have faithfully
brought you the object of your wishes. Soothe her -
heart, and then, perhaps, she will return your
affection ; and if you request any thmg of her, she
will not refuse you. bla was seized with horror
at hearing these words. Who are these people?
cried she; whom is my father addressing with so
much respect ? who is this horseman? O my sister,
replied Amroo, we owe him our lives: he had
taken us prisoners, but has released us ‘out of re-
gard for you; and we have married you to him.
He is your husband, and your protector; and it is
our intention tu make his country our home; for
he is a man of honour, and he is one of the Chiefs
of the tribe of Kenanah. He then informed her of
their imprisonment and distresees; and that some
were even detained in captivity as hostages for her
marriage. We, he continued, are bound to him
by solemn engagements, and now we have fulfilled
his wishes. Ibla’s agony was severe indeed: she


HER ANGUISH AND INDIGNATION. 833


tore off her garments, and screamed in the fulness
of her grief, hepelesa of rescue. Who is he that
demands me in marriage of you? ske cried. The
die is cast, he replied; receive him—deny him not; _
he has not his equal—no one is to be compared to
him. And as he was about to return to the horse-
men, Ibla flung herself on the ground, weeping and
sobbing. She cast the sand over her head, ex-
claiming, Alas, O Antar! may God destroy him
who destroyed thee! Now thou art gone, how in-
_ finite is my. misery. O by the Arabs! O for that
high-minded Chief! O for that renowned hero!
And in the midst of her tears and sighs she thus
complained :

‘“‘Copiously flow my tears; disease arises in my
“ frame; a fire is kindled in my bowels and my
“ liver. No support have I against my afflictions,
<“ I have lost all patience, and anguish consumes
“my body. Is there any hope for me in my
“* agonies, now that fortune has betrayed me in the
« hero of the Battle of Lions—the cleaver of skulls,
“ and of ribs, and of armour—the scatterer of hos-
s tile armies over the universe? Flow then, my
€c tears, in grief for him; increase, that I may see
“my tears moisten every spot of rust. Mayst
“ thou, O Wild Beast, be drowned in the water of
“my tears! O my tears, never be ye exhautsted $
“ever be ye multiplied. My dishonour in the
“ deserts shall never be accomplished by my con-

z2


334 VACHID TRIES TO CONSOLE HER.


‘sent. But patience! never, never more will I _
& complain to any one.” |

‘Whilst Ibla was thus speaking, Vachid stood
gazing at what God had given her of beauty and
Joveliness ; and his heart was pierced by the arrows
of her glances. Her brother would have beaten
her, and driven her back to the howdah ; but Vachid
kept him off, for he began to pity her. Keep off,
he cried, for truly her heart 1s overcharged with
affliction ; her distress and sorrow are great. Have
patience with me till we reach home, continued he,
addressing Ibla in a softened tone; I will appoint
slave-girls and free-born women to attend on thee.
And he attempted to kiss her between the eyes,
and raise her into the howdah. But she struck
= him violently on the chest, and threw him on his
back. Avaunt, she exclaimed, thou vilest of Arabs!
basest of all that ever: struck a tent-peg in the de-
sert: thy marriage with thine own mother is nearer
at hand than with me. Begone: never mayst thou
be respected! never protected! When her father
and brother heard these words, they stood abashed
in ‘the presence of Vachid. Amroo ran. towards
her, ‘and, raising his arm, with a stick beat her over
the shoulders, saying, Is it in such terms you re-
ceive your husband? he is indeed a noble Chief.
And he drew forth his sword, and beat her with
the flat part of it. Paralysed be thy hand! stif-
fened be thy limbs and joints! thou foulest of men,


. HER DESPAIR INCREASES. 835


exclaimed Ibla, sighing deeply. Strike me dead at
once, if thou art a horseman, and put off the gar-
ments of infamy and disgrace; for truly thou art
degraded among the Arabs in every plain. Ye
have all been taken prisoners by these horsemen,
and have ransomed your lives by a shameful bar-
gain, sacrificing a poor girl, helpless and ignorant.
May God pour down on you all the miseries of the
age! At this her brother was still more exaspe-
rated ; and. he beat her with his whip till he made
the blood flow. He then replaced her in the how-
dah. Mind not what she says, said he to Vachid,
who also mounted his horse, and led her camel by
the bridle. But the prisoners being released, set
off on their. way home. Ibla, in the mean time,
made the plains re-echo to her shrieks; and Vachid
thought he should never reach his tents: whilst Ibla
continually called on the name of Antar, looking
out to the right and to the left, and weeping till
evening came over them; and she remained three
days without food or sleep. On the fourth day she
-was quite exhausted by. hunger and watching, and
excess of grief. Often did she invoke her father -
and her brother, exclaiming, O God, send down
enemies upon them, and dreadful calamities. ‘Thus
she continued, till one morning a great dust arose,
and darkened the land; when lo! there appeared
thirty slaves like eagles, and they came down like
-voracious hawks. ‘They no sooner marked the


howdah, and the party with their camels, than they


838 ABOODDEGI OVERTAKES THEM.


fixed. their spears and let go their bridles, whilst
their Chief directed himself towards the howdah,
crying out, Oh what a glorious morning! I am the
Nocturnal Evil, and the Depredator of the Age.
Now this slave was called Abooddegi, son of Nabih
the Kelbian, born in some of the corners of Yemen,
of a tribe named the tribe of Riyan. His constant
practice was to carry off the Arab maidens: he
acknowledged no protection, and made no distinction
between right and wrong. He only stayed three
days in one country, during which time he over,
whelmed it with blood and massacres; for he was
one of the prodigies of the time. The maiden whom
he made captive he kept for three days to himself,
and then consigned her to his slaves, who, when
they had glutted their barbarity, seized all she had,
murdered her, roasted her, ‘and devoured her, They
afterwards departed for another country, Such was
their usual conduct towards the women of Arabia ;
and their leader was surnamed the Nocturnal Evil,
the Depredator of the Age. As soon as he beheld
 [bla, and the horsemen of Kenanah, he darted to»
- wards her, followed by his slaves like black eagles.
Vachid stared ; his eyes became like burning coals,
Remain with your daughter’s howdah, said he to
Malik; tell her to mark my deeds in the field of
battle: long have I wished to meet this warrior,
He galloped away, grasping his spear, and assaulted
the slave in the boldest style. But he found him
a tempestuous sea. The contest became general ;


VACHID KILLED: MALIK CAPTURED. $67


warriors attacked warriors, and horsemen encouny
‘ tered each other. Steel clashed against steel, and
the close and the distant met. Vachid fiercely en,
gaged the Chief, and a furious conflict ensued,
-= Vachid, fearing Malik would regard him with the
eye of inferiority, exposed himself to every peril:
he exerted every energy to attain victory and glory;
he poured down his thrusts with the utmost veher
mence, and he imagined his enemy must fall be,
neath his blows. But his hopes were unavailing ;
for the slave at length struck Vachid’s lance, and
made it shiver into four pieces; he pierced him in
the chest, and ‘forced his spear out behind his back,
Vachid fell prostrate on the earth. When Ibla’s
father beheld this ‘frightful accident, rage and in,
dignation possessed him; and exclaiming to Ibla,
Ah! what a wretch art thou! he and his son
mounted, wishing to keep off the Nocturnal Evil
from the women. But they were seized with the
greatest horrors. ‘The slave shouted at Malik in a
voice like a peal of thunder; and quickly turning
round his spear, he struck him with the butt end—
overthrowing him, and nearly killing him: he theg
drove at Amroo, his eyes rolling like burning coals,
Amroo delivered himself up without difficulty, cry-
ing out, Young man, may God preserve thee!
Pity thy prisoner! take the women and the fami,
lies; but spare us the terrors of the combat. So
the slave pinioned him, and tied down his arms;
and having treated Malik in the same manner, he


388 MALIK ESCAPES, AND MEETS SOME ABSIANS.


sprang on his horse to assist his companions. Ibla
rejoiced over her family, and her sorrows were re-
lieved : but ‘the unhappy girl was distracted, not
knowing what to do, so overcome was she by fears
and terrors: but whilst she was conversing with her
mother upon this subject, Wretched woman, ex-
claimed Malik to his wife, come to me, and unbind
me, for I am nearly dead. Let us mount these
scattered horses; let each of us take one; and let
us escape. His wife accordingly alighted, and un-
bound him. Ibla did the same for her brother.
Malik and Amroo mounted two horses; and taking
each a female behind him, they sought the wilds
and the plains, considering themselves now beyond
every danger. In the mean time the slaves were’
employed in combating the Kenanians. But Malik
and the rest were traversing the rocks and deserts,
happy in their deliverance from the enemy, when
on a sudden there appeared ten horsemen like
eagles, preceded by a string of camels, which they
were goading on with the spikes of their lances.

_ Now these were horsemen of the tribe of Abs
and Adnan, headed by Amarah and Oorwah, who
were returning from their expedition into the land
of Yemen, exulting and victorious. Amarah’s sole
anxjety was to reach home, that he might again set
eyes on Ibla’s face. At that moment he heard
Malik’s shouts: he immediately advanced ; and as
they came nigh they recognized each other. Ama-
tah dismounted, and hailed Malik and Amroo, who


18 AGAIN ATTACKED BY ABOODDEGI. 389


were in such fright and alarm they with difficulty
discovered their friends. Amarah gazed at the
brilliant Ibla, and lo! her complexion and her face
turned from a bright red to a deadly pale. He was
amazed. What means all this, my cousins ? said he.
O Amarah! replied Malik, hasten to your prize:
hurry over the plains before the troop of horsemen
overtake us, and you fall into the misery and dis- -
tress into which we also fell. Malik now recounted
his adventures: how he had betrothed his daugh-
ter to Vachid, and what had occurred on the jour-
ney, He also described the slave and Vachid, and
their intrepid conduct, so forcibly, that when he
finished his narrative, an universal trembling seized
‘Amarah and Oorwah. Just at that moment arose
a great dust; loud shouts struck them; and lo!
the blacks rushed on them—the terrible slave at
their head, roaring out, Whither, ye dogs, have ye
escaped ? Behind ye, close, is the Nocturnal Evil,
and the Depredator of the Age! Having secured
Malik and Amroo with cords, he went to aid his
comrades, and attacked the people of Kenanah, who
amounted to forty horsemen, .as we before stated.
It was not even mid-day when he had slain thirty-
five of them, and hurled them to destruction. The
other five escaped over the plain by the speed of
their horses. After this the victors turned back in
quest of the howdah, but they found no one in it;
for. their prisoners had fled. The slave galloped in
pursuit of them, and sent forth a shnek that would


e


340 AMARAH PREPARES TO FIGHT.


have split a rock; for he was in the fiercest agony
of rage. He hastened after the fugitives, followed
by his companions, till they perceived the party ;
who no sooner discoyered them, than they were
horror-struck. O my-cousin, said they to Oorwah,
the slaves have overtaken us; and the Nocturnal
Evil and the Depredator of the Age is at their
‘head, Let us turn upon them: let us die like
brave men: let us not live like cowards. Amarah,
© Amarah, cried Ibla, this is the moment for energy.
and exertion. He who once opposed you on my
account is dead, and crushed to the earth: had he,
indeed, been alive, never should I have been a
captive in the hands of enemies: greatly would it
have grieved him to have seen me in this state of
distress, In short, there is now no one but thee
to assist me. Exhibit before me this day a proof
of thy bravery, of which thou boastest so much:
let me see how thou canst fight these black slaves.
At these words, all the pride of an Arab sprang
into the heart of Amarah; death itself appeared
indifferent to him. By the life of thine eyes, O
thou joy of my heart, O thou dispeller of my sor-
rows, replied he, this day will I exhibit before thee
all my prowess in its true blaze; and thou shalt
learn that all I have said of myself is true. So he
summoned up his courage, adjusted himself pro-
perly, tucked up his skirts, twirled his whiskers,
and folded up his hair under his turban, drawing it
off from his stioulders. He then pulled forth his
spear, and set out on a full gallop, exclaiming,


ALL TAKEN BY AROODDEG!, SAl


This assault, O Ibla, is for thy bright eyes; and
he went off among the foremost, accompanied by
Oorwah, who cried out, Do you look out on the right,
Į will to the left. But Amarah recited these verses ;
“© To-day I will exhibit my prowess and my
‘$ courage: the warriors and the horsemen shall
“ stand in awe of me. I will plunge into a sea of
“ blood, in quest of glory, and the heroes shall
‘behold my impetuosity and my thrusts. Jbla
“ shall mark the deeds of a ferocious lion. Now
& that it is all over with that infernal black, I shall
“ be glorified ampng the Arabs, and they shall
‘¢ acknowledge my valour in the field of battle.”
Amarah had not finished his speech, when one
of the slaves gave him a blow that upset him, and
laid him sprawling on the ground, Aboqddegi
attacked Oorwah, and shouted at him in a voice
like thunder: his assault was that of an eagle; and |
a vigorous contest ensued, would turn an infant
grey. Abooddegi darted close up to him, so that
their stirrups grated: he seized Oprwah by the
breast-plate, and, dragging him towards him,
wrenched him out of his saddle, and held him
suspended in his hand. Dismounting, he pinioned
him, and bound his arms tight. The conflict con-
tmued till the sun turned pale; and the slaves
having slain alt that remained of the Absians, the
Noeturnal Evil hastened up to Ibla’s father and
his son, and, wounding them severely, threw them
on the ground. He reposed in that spot for: the
wight, with his slaves and prisoners; but at day-


342 ; OORWAH CORSOLES AMARAH.


break they departed: Ibla ever in tears and grief,
and the men tied on the backs of the horses,
plunged in infamy and disgrace. Do not be so
distressed, said the Nocturnal Evil, to calm their
sorrows ; rather rejoice in your safety. I shall-not
demand of you money or camels: but whoever has
a beautiful daughter or sister, let him send her to
me for three days and nights. Then will I set him
at liberty. But whoever does not consent to these
my terms, will instantly be my victim. Hast thou
ever, O my cousin, said Amarah to Oorwah (for
Amarah was bound by his side, stripped and ex-
posed), hast ever heard of a more iniquitous fellow
than this base slave? ‘Thou, indeed, wilt be able
to escape: Malik, also, and Amroo: they will all
get well out of this scrape. But I, poor I, must
die under stripes and tortures. How so, thou foul
mustachioed fellow? cried Oorwah. Oh! continued
Amarah, you will give him your lovely sister Selma,
and Malik will surrender that woman of women,
Ibla; and the unhappy Amarah will die in misery
and wretchedness. I am sure there will be no
occasion to touch me once with a sword or a spear; —
for were I but to see him alone with Ibla, my death
and dissolution would be instantaneous: indeed, I
should expire of anguish. Ibla cannot be otherwise
than of ill omen to him, said Oorwah, as she has
already been to others before him. To whomso-
ever she is affianced, his mother will weep and
mourn for him. Whoever takes her will forfeit
his property, and have his throat cut. You_have


IBLA’S JOY IN ANTAR'S SAFETY. 343


observed how we travelled over hills and dales, and
how we obtained these camels; but as soon as we
beheld her face, misfortunes were let loose on us, `
and miseries came down upon us. Whilst this was
passing between Amarah and Oorwah, the Noc-
turnal Evil sent on before him five slaves; and
consigning over to their care Ibla’s howdah, Hasten,
said he, to the spot of Zatool Menahil; pitch our
tents there ; for there I intend to remain three days
with this lovely damsel. After which, mark what
I will do to these wretches when I have taken away
their property, and received their ransom. The
slaves rode forward, and Antar met them, as we
have already described: some of them he slew;
the rest he put to flight. Antar was now wholly
wrapped up in Ibla, frequently asking after her
health ; for misery had impaired her charms. . She
was bewildered at the sight of her beloved: her
tears flowed profusely. At last recovering, she thus
‘addressed him :
“ All my misery—all my grief is past, now that
“‘ we have met: after so long an absence. Time
“now happily announces the existence of one who
s had been trampled beneath the dumb grave.
‘* Now the eyes of the age are illumined, after a
‘6 period of darkness, and I am returned to Ife
“ after my death. O Knight of men and Genii!
« O thou that excellest every warrior in glory !
«“ my eyes gladden at beholding thy liberality, and
“‘ the beauty of thy truth. I will implore God ever
“í to exalt thy glories, both morning and evening.”


344 ANTAR REJOICES IN 1BLA’S AFFECTION.


She concluded by relating to Antar what had
happened to her with the foul slave and Vachid :
how the latter had taken her father and brother
prisoners, and how they had ransomed themselves
by sacrificing her. As Antar listened, he wept.
In return, he detailed to her the horrors he had
undergone : what had happened to him with Chos-
roe, and all that had passed in Persia: how he had
extricated himself from his troubles: and he de- -
scribed the riches he had brought with him. Now
her soul seemed to revive after death. O my
cousin, said she, by my life that is in thy heart,
bear me away, and return to the nation that has
loaded thee with favours. Leave my father and
brother with this adulterous slave; let him treat
them as he pleases: return no more to the tribe of
Abs. Antar smiled at her expressions of love, and
rejoiced in her faith and constancy.. Hail to all
that can give thee pleasure, he replied; dismiss
from thy mind whatever can pain thee ; for by the
life of thine eyes and the black of thine eye brows,
I will subdue all the world for thee. I will make
thee supreme over the high and low. Then calling
to his attendants, whom he ordered to halt there,
Protect my cousin, said he, the mistress of all this
wealth. ‘This day I will give you the joyous rpeo-
‘tacle of the destruction of her enemies. And he
advanced to meet the horsemen. The Nocturnal
Evil was following fast his companions, whom he
had sent forward to pitch his tents; and so happy
was he, he thought he should never arrive; when


THE SLAVES DESCRIBE ANTAR. 345


lo! two of his slaves came towards him ata full
gallop, not daring even to look behind them. What
has befallen you in this desert ? he exclaimed : where
are my Absian damsel, and your other comrades ?
Our comrades, they replied, are already a prey-
to the birds and the eagles. But a black, not even.
like a negro, has taken possession of your maiden.
His look terrifies the senses: his face is that of a
Ghoul. When he strikes a skull, he cleaves it;
when he thrusts at a horseman, he annihilates him.
He hears not what any one says; to no human
being does he deign to reply. His thrust is his
address ; his blow is his answer. At hearing this,
-Abooddegi hissed like a serpent; he roared and
bellowed, Does one like me fear man, demon, gemi,
or the devil? and he instantly gave the rein to his
steed; and, poising his spear, he departed, in order |
to clear up this mystery; and as he pursued his
way; he thus exclaimed :

“<< Were I afraid of the conflict of man, I should
“ not be called the Nocturnal Depredator. Haw
“can I fear man or genii, I, who have a heart
“ harder than mountain rock? [I dwell alone in
& the wilds and the wastes, to chase the lions, the
“ inhabitants of gloomy haunts. How many nights
“ have I passed where the Ghouls watch with me,
“ and tremble at my shadow! How many horse-
4“ men have I left felled to the earth, gnawing their
4 right hands and their left! Faith has no charms
“‘ for me; no pleasure has a guest in my favours.


346: ABOODDEGI MEETS ANTAR,
(d


_« To break a piece of bread is even hard to me, as
“ I fear my evening repast may be but scanty.
“ I have no connexion with men, and they evince
“ their enmity to me on that account throughout
“ the world. I have no protection among man, for
& treachery is the sole rule of my conduct. No
“relative have I but my spear and my sword;
& those two in the contest are my paternal and
“ maternal uncle. On the back ofa steed was I
“ born by night. How then shall 1 fear nocturnal
& calamities !”

He continued his course over the plains till he
met Antar the valiant lion, Who art thou, he
cried, that hast slain my companions, and hast
seized my Asbian maid? To-day thou shalt die;
to-day thou shalt fall into annihilation! Thou das-
tard—thou offspring of an uncircumcised race, ex- ;
claimed Antar, since when has Ibla been thy slave ?
By God, thou foul Arab, had it not been for my
absence in quest of a marriage dower for her, thou
wouldst have waited long for such an opportunity.
Away with thee! thy success is but a dream. He-
roes have turned grey for her; and every one, on
foot or on horseback be he, has failed in his attempts
on her. Come on: let us to the field this instant:
_ Now to the battle of swords; and know, that this
will be the most inauspicious of days for, thee.
Antar immediately assailed him: he galloped and
charged with him, and commenced the conflict.
As soon as Ibla’s father beheld Antar in full con-


ANTAR REPROACHES HIS UNCLE; 347 :


test with their common foe, Protector of Abs and
Adnan, he‘ cried, release us from this demon:
make him drink of death, nephew ! for he is a per-
fidious wretch; and hadst thou not arrived thus
opportunely, Ibla would have been rendered infa-
mous among the Arabs for ever. O that thou
hadst never been born, nor Ibla ether! exclaimed
_ Oorwah ; for she brings ul luck on every one that
seeks her. By Heaven, said Amarah, she is not

too dearly purchased by the loss of lives or the ©
sacrifice of souls, or by the cleaving of skulls and
heads. This misery, this disgrace we endure, are
all on her account. But still never, oh never ! shall
I be able to command one embrace or one kiss.
Yet I think it is only on account of this black slave
that she is so ebdurate. Whilst they were con-
versing, Antar was engaging his antagonist; and
a battle ensued between them that would have
daunted the boldest warriors. And they continued
the combat until’ Antar, observing his adversary
flag, pressed on him, wearied him, and terrified
him; then, extending his spear, pierced him be-
tween the breasts, and forced the barb out through
his shoulders, crying out, O by Abs! O by Adnan !
I am ever the lover of Ibla! He hastened towards
the captives, and liberated them, expressing his de-
light at meeting his uncle Malik. Rejoice at this
deliverance from death, he exclaimed, but know
that all your late sufferings are only a just punish-
ment for your past conduct. You promised your

VOL. L. | AA


$48 GIVES ALL HEIS WSBALTH TO 4tBLA 5


daughter to me hypocritically and decettfully : you
despatched me to the land of Irak in search of her
dower, and you exposed me to a sea of perils and
dangers. In the meantime, you affianced her to a
horseman of Kenanah: but God has at last re-
warded your treachery and insult. Do not reproach
me, dear nephew, replied Malik; your brother
Shiboob returned home, and, announcing your
_ death, deprived us of every hope of seeing you
again. And Mahk recounted all their adventures,
from the return of Shiboob to the encounter at
Zatoul-Menahil.

O Aboolfawaris! exelaimed Amarah, every one
gains his own in time. Praise be to God that you
came off victorious, and thus saved us from death.
Antar thanked him, and conducted them to his
tents, where they halted; and as they beheld his
countless profusion of wealth and jewels, their
minds were stupefied, their eyes were scared, and
their senses bewildered. Nephew, said Mahk,
whence is all this property, this wealth, these
tents, and these pavilions? doubtless some of the
noble Kings of the land have stopped here. Unele,
replied Antar, all this wealth belongs to your slave,
Antar. You demanded of me a thousand Asafeer
camels; I have brought them loaded, by the great
King their owner, with gold and money. Having
conducted them to the tents, he ordered his slaves
to slay camels and sheep, and to prepare a feast;
whilst he sat down to relate to them all his adven-


AGAIN HE GIVES VENT TO HIS GRIEF. 371


“ lion was there his power. I have lost the knight
“ of war, the invincible hero: my heart is on fire.
“ I have lost all resignation for a prince who taught
“ the Arabs on the day of combat with his. spear.
“O Cais, depend on me; for in my heart is a flame
“ of fire that consumes it, and my forbearance I can
“ no longer persist in. Rise with me; let us seek
“ vengeance speedily, for death is sweeter to my
“ heart than honey. Reproach me not for my wars
“ —I love them: I will hear neither word nor re-
“ buke. Night ts my complexion, and the lions of
“ war know me. The coat of mail is my strong
“ tower, and my heart is hewn out of a rock. War-
“ riors are reduced to contempt by me in the day of
“ combat, as the Arabs can witness for me. Woe,
“ woe to my heart, for what it has lost. Death,
“ now Zoheir ts no more, is my noblest aim. O
“race of Abs, haste ye to vengeance against the
“ tribe of Aamir, and fear not death. Exert your-
“ selves with me, for you have a slave that has felled
“ mto disgrace every knight of the plains and the
“ mountains. How many tribes are there in whose
“ blood I have dyed my sword in the day of battle!
t How many the heroes I have laid low! How
‘¢ many valleys has it tinged! How many lions have
“ bowed to me! How many multitudes have I ex-
“ tirpated ! death can bear me witness. Khalid!
“ soon will I leave him stretched on the face of the
“ earth, and his women as childless mothers shall
“ mourn him. To-morrow will I annihilate ye, tribe


372 SUCCESS OF REBIA’S INTRIGUE.


“ of Aamir, quick with the point of the spear, and
“ the edge of my polished sabre. I will capture
“ your women; I will leave no vestige of them; I
“ will plunder your cattle, your property, and your
‘ camels. I am Antar, whose qualities are well
« known; the destruction of warriors, undaunted at
& death.” .

When Antar had finished his verses, he went to
his own dwelling, where all his regrets were re-
newed. But Cais was resolved on immediate de-
parture; and he set out with the tribes of Abs and
Fazarah, and the Arabs of that land and country.
Antar also wished to go and aid him; but Malik,
the brother of Cais, came to him: O Aboolfawaris,
said he, stay at home, and do not follow my brother
this time, for he would ill-use you, and perhaps even
reject you, and make you ashamed on account of
that miserable Amarah, and his despicable brother-
How so? said Antar. Malik upon this related to
him about Harith, and told him all the news;
how Hadifah had written to him requesting his as-
sistance, and last night Rebia hinted that the expe-
dition would not be offered to you, and it is he who
has concerted this plan. Then he described to him
Harith’s intrepidity and prowess, and how the Arabs
boasted of him, even above you, said Malik.

Antar was exceedingly annoyed at hearing this:
Go you, however, and join your brother, and tell
him that Antar thanks him, and begs his pardon for
all hc has done. May the praise of God be on the


TAIS DEPARTS WITHOUT ANTAR. 378


man who assists him, and can serve him instead of
me in this expedition ; and if he can take his revenge
on Khalid, son of Giafer, praise be to the only and
Omnipotent God ! but, if he does not subdue his foe,
then will I go against him alone, and will do unto
him and his, what shall be for ages recorded. Thus
Malik taking leave of him, astonished at his magna-
nimity, said, O Aboolfawaris, were I not afraid of
being a scandal among the Arabs, and of their re-
proaches, for refusing to seek vengeance for my
father, I would not follow him on this occasion. At
last he departed, and his tears streamed copiously.

The camps, and horsemen, and troops, all fol-
lowed Cais: his army amounted in all to twenty-
five thousand men, all bold horsemen. Every one
of them thought that Antar only staid at home to
have his fill of Ibla, whilst Amarah headed all the
warriors, brandishing his spear in his left hand, quite
delighted at the absence of Antar on this expedition.
But Antar, as soon as Prince Malik quitted him,
returned home; he took off his warlike weapons,
and entering the tents, his tears burst from his eyes,
and he was absorbed in an ocean of reflection; when
lo! the wives of his uncles came to him, and con-
gratulated him on his safety. He paid them great
respect, and received them with honour and atten-
tion; and they thus addressed him :

“ Had we known of your arrival in the night,
“ we would have hasted to you on the crowns of
“ our heads. We would have given you the most


874 IBLA AND THE WOMEN VISIT ANTAR.


“ honourable reception. O youallnenous one ! the
s life of our existence !”

Ibla and her mother were among the women ; so
Antar was much pleased, and his heart was filled
with joy at seeing his beloved: He inquired about
- her health, &c.—to which she replied, Nothing has
happened but what you have heard respecting King .
Zoheir and his son Shas—every one is acquainted
with that. But we have been expectmg your arrival,
and that you would take vengeance on them; but
we see all the men are gone, and you remain at
home. Daughter of my uncle, said Antar, the party
' have obtained one who will seek their retaliation
without me : they rejected me; I wished to accom-
pany them, but they refused me. He told her what
Prince Malik had imparted to him, at which the
women were greatly surprised, saying Ay! that is
the foul plan of the rogue Amarah and his iniquitous
brother, for King Cais never did any thing but by
the advice of Rebia. Well, cousin, said Ibla to
Antar, pray where is my shure of all this spoil? or —
am I no longer an object of value or consideration
with you? By the faith of am Arab, said Antar,
my share has been five hundred he and she camels,
of the camels of Sewda, and the mountain of Vol-
cano, and they are all blue-eyed, with black hair and
bodies. So tell your black slaves to drive them out
to-morrow morning, and mix them with the Asafeer
camels, and excuse the trifle, for I was on Asyed’s
business. Then he told her all that had accursed


MET BY THE WHOLE TRIBE. ` 358


the truth, O Malik? he asked. Yes, by the Ruler
of empires, replied Malik. They all started up,
and mounted their horses. ‘They were soon scat-
tered about; they seemed like a torrent, all ex-'
elaiming, Welcome, joy ! begone, sorrow ! and they
sallied forth to meet Antar. The news soon reached
King Zoheir. Well! said he, this is the most won-
derful of all events: it must be noted down, and
wnitten, as unheard of amidst the Arabs or the
Persians. By the truth of Lat, and Uzza, and
Hibel*, we must all go and meet him, and twitch
the noses of his enemies, and rejoice the hearts of
his friends. So he went forth, accompanied by his
sons, and the whole tribe of illustrious Arabs.
Antar, having separated from his uncle,: stayed
behind till near midnight; when he set out, con-
versing with Ibla, the most beautiful of human
beings, and feasting himself with looking on her
until it was daylight; when, riding close to her,
O my cousin, said he, know that your father is
gone forward to announce our approach, and
to tell King Zoheir to come out and meet us. ©
I wish, also, to precede you, and to meet them
nearer home; for I now feel secure about you
against all the treacheries of fortune, and the ca-
lamities of night. Having then given orders to
some slaves to protect her, and to keep off the
road, fearmg that the dust of the horses might


© Three idols of the Arabian idolatry.


354 UNIVERSAL JOY.


molest her, he departed, and the whole earth was
too confined for him in the expansion of his love
and joy. He travelled on ull mid-day, when lo!
a great dust arose, and the horsemen of Abs and
Adnan advanced : before them. marched the slaves,
flourishing their swords, and damsels playing on
cymbals, and the standards floated over their heads.
First was seen King Zoheir, like a lion starting
from his den, and over his head waved the eagle
banner. The instant Antar beheld him, he dis-
mounted from Abjer, and the delight of this meet-
ing made him forget all his past troubles: and as
they drew nigh, they expressed their satisfaction in
one acclaim. Oh what a glorious day! was the
universal shout. Antar stood before the King,
kissed his hand, and prayed for his eternal glory
and happiness. And as he advanced towards Prince
Malik, he thus exclaimed :

“ The age has removed its vizor from that ra-
“ diant form, glorious in perfect brilliancy, spark-
« ling in splendour; so that darkness is illumined
“ by it; like an hitherto unseen youth, glowing in
‘“ beauty, moving towards sublimity in matchless
“ lustre, and dashing to the earth all that would
“ rival him, like birds shot by the arrow of the
_ “archer. Victory has firmly linked its banners to
« his stirrups, to fell all thy foes with the waving
“ spear—O thou phcenix of this age ! thou illustrious
« hero of the period! thou attainer of all glory !”

O Aboolfawaris, exclaimed Prince Malik, may


a


ANTAR'S BOUNTY. 355


God qurse the world when thou art gone! And he
besought him to mount his horse. The noble Ab-
sians all surrounded him, whilst in reply to King
Zoheir’s inquiries, he related his adventures, His
mother and his brothers wept, and sobbed, and
clamoured at the ecstacy of meeting, and in the ex-
cess of their happiness after all their past alarms
and afflictions. When Antar had spoken to them
all, his slaves arrived conducting the camels, headed
by the fierce Aboolmout, who in front of the blacks
galloped cound them to the right and to the left.
The whole land was involved in dust. In the rear
came Ibla’s litter, all of silver studded with pre-
cious stones; before her marched the imperial
steeds and beauteous slaves like the Houris of Pa-
radise, encompassing the lovely full-moon of Ma-
jesty, as she approached. Antar dismounted from
Abjer, and girded his loins with a zone of gold
brocade worth a hundred thousand dirhems. He
directed the slaves to lead aside some camels and
mules that were laden with wealth, and also ten
fine coursers of unrivalled beauty, with their chests
and baggage, and presented them to King Zoheir ;
and kissing the ground before him, he begged his
acceptance of them. The King received them, and
before each chest stood a slave-girl, either Grecian
or Abyssinian. ‘To all the horsemen he distributed
robes and money, and gave them slaves and youths,
so that there was not one but partook of Antar’s
bounty. King Zoheir was amazed and in the


VOL. I. | BB


356 IBLA LOST.


greatest astonishment at the quantity of goods.
By the truth of the holy Kabaa, said he, Antar
must have glee impoverished the King of
Persia; and he desired all the Absians, to whom
Antar had given something, to make a suitable
return. To his father Shedad he presented abund-
ance of silver and gold, and many stout slaves ;
but the remainder with the Asafeer camels he de-
livered to Malik, his uncle. Thus they separated,
and every one sought his own tent. But Amroo,
Ibla’s brother, made the camels that conveyed his
sister kneel down—he lifted up the curtain of the
litter—but Ibla was not there !—


END OF VOL. I.


, LONDON:
PRINTED BY T. DAVISON, WHITEFRIARS.


LIFE AND ADVENTURES


OF


ANTAR.


CHAPTER THE EIGHTH.


Amnoo cried out; he screamed; he wept; he sharply
questioned Antar. Alas! said he, from the mo-
ment I parted from her I know not what has hap-
pened. ‘The women and slaves were instantly sent
for :—not one could give any information respect-
ing Ibla. Then was Antar’s grief and anguish
most severe—his tears flowed rapidly down his
cheek. But the heart of her father was replete
with gladness; and all Antar’s enemies exulted in
secret. King Zoheir and his son Malik soon learned
. what had happened, and their hearts felt what the
heart of man never felt before. This event lay
heavy on them all. The horsemen mounted their
steeds, and scoured the country in every direction,
till, darkness coming on, they returned without
gaining any intelligence. Be comforted, be con-
VOL. II. B


2 REBIA FALSELY ACCUSES ANTAR.


soled, said King Zoheir ; let it be my business to
clear up this mystery. O King, continued Antar,
I am alone to blame, for I left her with those who
knew not her worth. I was induced too hastily to
come and meet you, fearful that the dust of the
horsemen would distress her. After this, he re-
paired to the habitation of his mother, who threw
herself into his arms and wept for joy.

But Oorwah and his companions, on their re-
turn home with Malik, Ibla’s father, acquainted
Rebia with all that had happened to Amarah —
how Antar had rescued him and his comrades from
captivity and disgrace. Our grand object, said
Rebia, is the destruction of Antar; and all my
exertions shall be directed to that point. I will
demand of no one but of King Zoheir himself ven-
geance for my brother’s untimely fate: he shall
deliver Antar over to me, that I may kill him and
bring down perdition on him, for he must have
been the cause of Amarah’s death. The next day,


as King Zoheir and his sons were sitting in their


tents, Rebia presented himself, accompanied by his ’


brothers. Having kissed the ground and made
_ obeisance, he explained the extraordinary disap-
pearance of his brother when in company with
Antar; saying, No one, O King, slew him but
Antar. I therefore demand of you his person,
that I may kill him with my own hand. King
Zoheir was convinced that this representation was


only founded in fraud and hypocrisy. Cousin, he


AMARAH FINDS IBLA ALONE. 3


replied, let Antar alone in his grief: he is now
under great affliction for the loss of his uncle’s
daughter. But if his guilt on this subject should
be ascertained, I will either deliver him over to you,
or I will slay him with my own hand. When Rebia
heard this, he departed overwhelmed with shame.

The cause of Ibla’s disappearance was the fol-
lowing.—Soon after Antar had quitted Ibla in the
morning, in order to meet King Zoheir, sleep came
upon her by the visitation of Fate and Destiny:
in the same manner, too, the women and slaves all
fell asleep on the backs of the camels. Ibla awoke,
and, finding herself in the midst of an extensive
plain, she said to her female attendants, Let me
alight and relieve the weariness of my limbs. The
slaves assisted her to descend, and over their eyes
immediately fell a heavy sleep: the camels passed
on, and they left her behind. But, whilst Ibla re-
mained thus abandoned, lo! a horseman rode down
towards her, exclaiming, “‘ Hurrah! by the Arabs!
Fortune has at length awakened from her sleep,
and is recovered from her supineness—she has
given me what no human power could command.”
This horseman was Amarah: for when he beheld
Ibla clothed in all those rich robes and garments,
he roamed among the rocks and the plains; and as
he continued straying, sometimes to the right, some-
times to the left, he thus exclaimed :

“ I wander, and my heart is the captive of

B 2


4 HE CARRIES HER AWAY,


« Hope. I long to facilitate a meeting, but it is
“ arduous. I weep for my dishonour, yet am I a
“ noble chief, and warriors consult me. Were
“ it not for the vicissitudes of Fortune, Fate would
“ not have distressed me —a slave would not have
“ succeeded, and a Chief be humiliated. O daugh-
“ter of Malik! my love draws me towards thee
“ with strong ties, and [ am thy captive; I mad-
« den, and | complain of my passion in the deserts ;
“and within my ribs is a raging flame at this
“ separation.”

Thus Amarah raved till he came near home,
when his agony and anxiety became intense. In
the night he chanced to pass over the track of the
camels, and thus he discovered Ibla. As soon as
he saw her, he recognised her ; and he felt as if all
his hopes were accomplished. But still fearing that
Antar would annihilate his existence, in a moment
he snatched her up violently from the ground, and,
placing her behind him on his horse, he launched
into the deserts. What! Amarah, thou mine of
filth and infamy, cried Ibla, dost thou dare to
make the daughter of thy cousin a prisoner? thou
foul-mustachioed wretch! I have caught thee, he
replied; and now I shall not perish in the sea of
love for thee. By the faith of an Arab, never, as
long as I breathe, shall Antar see thee more. All
his wishes and desires being thus realised, he urged _
on his steed, and sought the land of Yemen, the


HE MEETS A PARTY OF HORSEMEN OF TEY. 5


country of the Cahtanians, in order to request the
protection of Meljem the son of Handala, King of
the tribe of Tey, and remain under his shadow.
He had travelled on till mid-day, when, lo! a
dust arose, and thirty horsemen appeared, who, as
soon as they drew nigh, surrounded Amarah. This
party was of the tribe of Tey, and their Chief, a
noble horseman, called Moofrij, son of Hamam.
And as they closed on Amarah they perceived a
damsel weeping and wailing, and most sumptuously
attired. Congratulate yourselves on this plunder
and spoil, said their leader to his comrades; doubt-
less this damsel is a daughter of some great King,
and this miserable fellow has carried her off. Come
on— let us rescue her: if he resists you, kill him.
At the word, they made towards Amarah. Dis-
mount, young man, they exclaimed, and wait on
this noble horseman, Moofrij, son of Hamam. This
order soon convinced Amarah that he had fallen
into a scrape; and though he was willing to secure
himself, and bargain for his life with the property,
yet his love for Ibla checked him. <“ Daughter of
Malik, said he to her, dismount, that I may drive
these antagonists away from thee, even though I
may drink of the cup of death. But if this should
prove the termination of thy meeting with me, I
swear by the God that created and beautified thee
that no human being after me shall possess thee.”
Amarah, cried Ibla, may God never let thy native
soil flourish, nor suffer thee to escape from the


6 “HB. AND IBLA TAKEN PRISONERS,


perils of fortune, thou son of infamy and disgrace.
Ibla had not finished her speech before the horse-
men surrounded them on all sides; and Moofnj
attacked at their head. Ibla looked round to the
right and to the left, shooting arrows from her eye-
lashes. Moofrij marked the beauties of her form:
his heart throbbed. But one of the horsemen
assaulted Amarah, and, wounding him, took him
prisoner, and secured him with cords, a miserable,
contemptible wretch! What Arab art thou? thou
foul-mustachioed fellow ! he exclaimed. I am the
Chief Amarah, the brother of Rebia son of Zeead,
of the noble race of Abs, he replied. As Moofrij
listened to this, his senses fled away with joy. Woe
unto thee, that wanderest over these deserts, thou
son of infamy and disgrace! he cried; for be-
tween us there exists an ancient feud. So he
fastened him across his horse, and carried him
away towards his own country. My cousins, said
he to his friends, a rich spoil is fallen to my share,
namely, this damsel; but the ransom that may
arise from the captive, that be yours. It is for you
to command, O noble Chief, they replied. They
travelled on till it was dark; and when they had
dismounted to repose and sleep, Moofrij demanded
of Ibla what man demands of woman. She re-
pulsed and reviled him. Keep off, touch me not,
cried she, or thou diest, as many others before thee
have done; for my husband is,a man men cannot
resist—a warrior warriors cannot withstand; and


BEATEN AND ILL-TREATED. ci


never will his endeavours to discover me cease. To
whom dost thou allude, unhappy girl? said he. I
mean, replied Ibla, Antar, the son of Shedad. As
soon as he heard this, his indignation redoubled ;
he seized on a whip, and beat her till he made
her groan with pain. He left her; and, having
reposed till morning, he resumed his journey : and
in a few days they reached their own country, and
their families rejoiced at their return. Moofrij de-
livered Ibla over to his mother. As to Amarah,
he handcuffed and fettered him, and beat him
with a stick three times a day—morning, mid-day,
and sunset; saying, Ransom thyself, thou filth !
Moofrij was continually with Ibla, importuning
her to marry him; but she ever rejected his pro-
posals, weeping and shrieking at him: and, as this
continued a long time, he became greatly enraged
at her, and beat her with a stick till the blood
came; when his mother, hearing her screams, ran
in and took her away from him. ‘O my son, said
she, you torment yourself about one that regards
you not, and you have given your heart to one
who will not keep it. Apply to the daughters of
your uncles, and fix not your affections on one
who has no inclination for you. Let her be your
menial servant—for there are certain people who
will not give way but when they are disgraced:
others there are, who, being nobly born, yield to
mild treatment.” His mother’s remonstrance had
its effect. He complied; and, stripping her of her


8 AMARAH REQUESTS HIS RANSOM.


rich garments, clothed her in a coat of undressed
leather: and Ibla became his mother’s slave-girl by
day and by night, and her employment was to draw
off the milk and to milk the buffaloes. ‘The old
woman also always spoke to her in the harshest
manner, that she might stand in greater awe of her
son. ‘Thus Ibla passed her days in such servile
offices, and her nights in weeping and wailing, and
interrupting the repose of the house, and ever call-
ing on Antar. The ruffian Amarah often heard her,
and his heart was rent with anguish—anticipating
death and every thing dreadful. Now Amarah
had despatched one of Moofrij’s slaves to his bro-
ther Rebia, to tell him what had happened; and
the slave hastened away till he reached the dwell-
ings of Abs and Adnan. But Rebia had about
that time gone down to the valley of Thaklan, in
consequence of King Zoheir’s having said to him,
You can establish no charge against Antar; so de-
part, make inquiries, investigate the affair of Ibla’s
disappearance, and we will punish the criminal ac-
cording to his actions: for I will not deliver Antar
up to you—lI will not leave him to your discretion.
This was the cause of Rebia’s removal from the
tribe of Abs; and he set out with his brothers in
high dudgeon, his heart greatly inflamed against
Antar. He came and settled in that spot, and two
hundred tents of the tribe followed him: but they
were scarcely established when Moofrij’s slave ar-
rived and informed Rebia of his brother Amarah’s


REBIA RESOLVES TO RESCUE HIM. 9


situation, and demanded his ransom. At this pro-
posal he flew into a violent passion. He instantly
assembled his brothers and adherents, to whom he
related the whole story, explaining the cruel pre-
dicament in which Amarah was placed. Verily,
said he, we shall be disgraced amongst all the
Arabs on account of my brother's affair with Ibla ;
for it is an unheard-of injury. But, should we
decide on ransoming him with our property, this
disgrace will for ever cling to us; and it will be
said, the family of Zeead, unable to liberate their
brother by force of arms, ransomed him with money
and effects. It is my opinion we should set out
with these two hundred horsemen, and cast our-
selves amongst the hot coals of the Teyans. Let
us exercise every energy, that our enterprise may
succeed; and if we can lay hands on any of Moo-
frij’s property we will seize it, and rescue my bro-
ther from his misery: but if we cannot thus effect
our purpose, we will secrete ourselves in the coun-,
try; there we wil] watch him day and night, until
some one may fall into our clutches with whom
we may procure his exchange. However, let all
this be kept concealed from King Zoheir; for
should he hear it, he may bring charges against
us, saying, your brother has offered violence to the
wife of a man and the daughter of his uncle, and
you dared to demand reparation for his blood. It
is, indeed, a severe calamity that Amarah has
brought down upon us. Most true, said one of


10 ANTAR’S SORROW AND ANGUISH.


his brothers; we are in difficulties, so do what you
think best; consult on the state of our affairs;
haste away before the transaction become publicly
known, and we become a tale in the mouths of men
and women. Upon this they secured the slave, the
bearer of the intelligence, and quitted their homes,
seeking the mountains of Aja and Selma and the
habitations of the Teyans. Oorwah was of the
party. And they pursued their journey, traversing
the plains and the wilds.

But Antar had despatched Shiboob to gain some
authentic information about Ibla. He remained in
anxious expectation of his return, whilst a flame
of fire blazed in his heart, as he frequently ex-
elaimed, Alas, alas! I feel a grief that cauterizes
my very soul. Oh for some news! Oh that I could
enjoy one look at her face! And, as his afflictions
completely subdued him, he sighed and groaned,
and thus spoke :

“& My tears stand in drops on my eyelids, and
«“ short is the sleep of my eyes. For love there is
“ no rest—no comfort when the railers advise. We
« met—but our meeting quenched not the flame.
s No! it did not cool the boiling heat. How long
“shall I mourn for the mate that grieves me?
‘¢ Tears and lamentations avail not. I have im-
“ plored a peaceable life from Fortune, but her
« favours to me are like the boons of a miser. I
“am dying, and the most extraordinary forbear-
“ ance aids me not in my calamities.”


SHIBOOB RETURNS. il


Thus Antar passed a long time in the greatest
agony and affliction, never eating or drinking, ex-
cept in the society of King Zoheir, till Shiboob
returned. Antar, the instant he saw him, started
up. My soul is on fire at your long absence, he
cried. Have you gained any information of Ibla?
or, after this long absence, have you returned in
vain? O my brother, replied Shiboob, I am not
come without intelligence: I have news for you
that would cure even the deepest buried disease of
the heart. After I had passed through various cities
of Yemen, I came to Sana and Aden, and encoun-
tered numerous difficulties until I reached the tribe
of Tey. It was there I found Ibla in the power
of Moofrij: there she attends on the camels and
the sheep. He has clothed her in garments of raw
leather, and makes her serve in the meanest offices
day and night. His mother too threatens her, and
treats her harshly in her speech: so that she weeps
both when she rises and lies down. She calls on
your name, and seeks her wonted succour from you
both night and day. Antar listened, and trembled.
He shook with fear, and the tears gushed from his
eyes. Well, Shiboob, said he; but what was the
cause of her falling into the power of Moofrij ?
How came he, of all people, to obtain possession of
her? Son of my mother, replied Shiboob, the cause
of all this is Amarah ; in whose mind are ever har-
boured evil and deceit. Shiboob then related all Ama-
rah’s contrivances. His envy at last overpowered


12 HAVING DISCOVERED IBLA,


him, he added, at the sight of that vast wealth that
you had with you. He turned aside into the de~
sert; but his love for Ibla was so violent, that he
followed your traces, and watched her after you
had quitted her in the morning. Fate and destiny
overcame her. He seized her; and though he was
desirous to vanquish her, Moofrij overtook him in
the desert. He tore her away from him, and re-
duced him to a most pitiable state. Antar’s heart
was almost bursting as he listened to this narrative.
Brother, said he, how did you obtain this informa-
tion? Know, continued Shiboob, that when I
quitted you, I made the circuit of every tribe and
horde, and made inquiries of every one I met,
whether on horseback or on foot, until I came to
Aja and Selma and the waters of the tribe of Tey.
With every family I passed one night, saying to
myself peradventure I may learn something. On
the last night of my stay I slept in the dwelling of
Moofrij, and my place of rest was close to that of
one of his slaves called Moobshir. He invited me
to converse with him, and was very kind to me;
and to his questions about my connexions, Son of
my aunt, I replied, I am of the tribe of Jalhema,
of the family of Saad, son of Khoozrej—and this
is the family of Hatim Tey. So he complimented
me. But when all was still and quiet, and every
one asleep, the voice of Ibla struck upon my ears.
She was loudly wailing, and exclaiming through
the calmness of the night, Oh for the joys of Mount


REPEATS HER DISTRESSES, 13


Saadi and the land of Shurebah! and she was
expressing her regrets at being separated from her
native soil, and her loss of friends ; adding, O pro-
tector of the tribe of Abs, how often have I called
on thee! Where is the path by which I can give
thee news of myself and meet thee, O son of my
uncle? for torments distract me. My eyes are
ulcered with weeping, O son of my uncle! Thy
foes triumph, and watchful are the eyes of thy
enemies. It was the very moment of meeting,
when separation closely followed its traces; and
thou hadst but just arrived from Irak, when we
were again scattered over the globe. Woe to me!
my lot is nothing but tears and sighs. What a
misery it is to put on raw leather for a garment !
Cruel is this grievous state. Hasten then, son of
my uncle, thy arrival; rescue me by thy exertions,
that laid low the lions of the caverns. Let me hear
thy shouts in the tumult of spearsmen and swords-
men. After this doleful effusion, my brother, she
sobbed and sighed so bitterly, it might almost be
said that she was dead, and that her soul had de-
parted. Again she sighed from her sorrowing
heart, and thus spoke :

“ My anxious love is vehement, and my tears
‘< flow profusely, and they ease the anguish of my
« pains in my frame. Ask my burning sighs, that
“ mount on high—they will tell you of the flaming
“ passion in my liver. By your violence you over-
s power my weakness: I have not forbearance or


14 AND RELATES HER STORY TO ANTAR.


“ resignation to endure it. O bird of the tama-
“risk! all the livelong night, drooping, he mourns
s“ for his mate that is gone and returns not. This
“ is thy sorrow, and to-morrow thou art relieved :
“ but, alas, what is the state of the captive of love
“and anguish! O western breeze, blow to my
“ country, and give information of me to the fierce
« lion, the hero of Abs, and their champion when
“ start forth the foreheads of the horse and war-
‘rors in multitudes! How oft has he protected
“ me with the edge of his sword—he, the refuge
“ of mothers fearful of being bereft of their chil-
“dren! Here I dwell, hoping for a relief from
& my agonies at his hand: to no other will I com-
“ plain.”

(As Shiboob repeated these verses, streams flowed
from the eyes of Antar.) I immediately turned,
continued Shiboob, towards the slave near whom I
was lying; Son of my aunt, said I, why is this
damsel grieving ? does she not sleep? does she pass
her nights generally thus? Young man, replied
the slave, she is a foreigner, and she is a captive:
it 1s thus she passes her mornings and her evenings.
Her name is Ibla, daughter of Malik, the Absian.
I soon contrived to draw from him the whole story:
how Moofrij happened to meet Amarah and her:
how he took Amarah prisoner, and carried her
home; and when he demanded of her what man
demands of woman, how she used the most oppro-
_brious expressions towards him—threatening him


THE INDIGNATION OF THE TRIBE. 15


with her cousin, a fierce lion, who had raised him-
self from the state of a slave to that of a Chief:
how Moofrij upon this treated her most vilely —
stripping her of her clothes, and overwhelming her
with cruelties: how also he behaved in the same
manner to Amarah—handcuffing and fettering him
until he should ransom himself with money and
camels; and that he had sent to Rebia to rescue
him from misery. At hearing this, O son of my
mother, sweet sleep abandoned my eyes, and I
anxiously waited for the dawn of day, that I might
hasten to you, and return with my intelligence. .
But on my way I met the family of Zeead, travel-
ling towards that tribe. I turned out of the road,
so that they did not see me: and this is what I have
seen and heard during my absence. Antar listened
to all these details. At last he swooned, and though
alive he seemed lost to all feeling, so violent was
his rage against Amarah —so vast his love for Ibla.
I must be revenged, he cried, on that family of
Zeead : I will deprive them of their sweet slumbers.
He instantly summoned his father and mother;
and as he informed them of all these extraordinary
events, they began to weep and wail; and soon was
the circumstance known among all the family of
Carad. The next day Antar hastened to Prince
Malik, and informed him of the discovery of Ibla:
upon which he conducted him to the tents of King
Zoheir. O my lord, exclaimed Antar, bursting into
tears in his presence, let this be a judgment on


p


16 ANTAR DETERMINES ON DEPARTING.


them for their false accusation of me respecting
their brother’s blood, after I had kindly liberated
him from that Nocturnal Evil and the Depredator
of the Age. When King Zoheir had heard all this
infamous transaction, greatly exasperated against
Amarah and Rebia, he exclaimed, May God curse
the family of Zeead! Truly have they committed
a most dastardly act; for their brother has carried
off Ibla, the daughter of their uncle by birth, and
has brought indelible disgrace upon her, according
to the usages of Arabia. They even dared to de-
mand vengeance of me upon Antar, guiltless and
. nowise implicated. O Aboolfawaris, he added, do
what you please. Observe what will be their fate.
The Lord God has driven them to their ruin. I
am convinced they will be subdued by their foes,
and that not one of them will return home. I will
stop till I hear of them: then let us all march to-
gether, and let us ease our hearts upon them; and
never will I trace my way back till I have rescued
Ibla with the sword, and have slain Moofrij, son of
Hamam. Antar thanked him for his kind inten-
tions. O Aboolfawaris, said Prince Malik as they
were returning, what have you resolved on doing
after this conversation? My lord, replied Antar,
I cannot wait here after what I have heard of my
cousin Ibla; I must absolutely be gone in quest of
her, were I even to die on her account. It is
my determination to set out this very night: but,
as I do not wish to impose difficulties on any


HE DEPARTS TO RESCUE IBLA. 17


human being, I shall this time depend entirely on
myself. I will not put the King to any trouble,
nor harass him by an expedition with me. I re-
quest, therefore, you will keep this affair secret.
No, Aboolfawaris, cried the Prince, I will not suffer
you to go on this adventure alone. I will accom-
pany you. I too will expose my life in the libera-
tion of Ibla. All I beseech of you, by my life that
is yours, is to wait a little; perhaps my father will
go forth to the chase, and leave the tents unoccu-
pied: then let us avail ourselves of the opportunity,
and consult what measures should be taken, so that
my father may not impede us, or prevent our de-
parture. Antar assented to his wishes. He went
to bed, but his eyes were suffused in tears, watching
till the day dawned; when in rushed Prince Malik.
Come, Aboolfawaris, he cried, prepare for the jour-
ney; acquaint the family of Carad; take with you
your uncle Malik and your father Shedad. Shiboob
was accordingly despatched to summon Shedad and
Malik, with his son Amroo, whom he desired to
make ready for an expedition, as they had been all
insulted ; whilst the Prince hurried to his own tents;
and ordered the slaves to call out the horsemen and
his adherents. And the day was not illumined, or
the sun risen high, before the horsemen started from
their dwellings, and assembled, to the nuinber of
two hundred noble warriors, clothed in steel, in
front of whom stood Antar, on Abjer; and Shiboob
went ahead. But Antar’s imagination was totally:
VOL. II. c


18 HIS GREAT ANXIETY ON HER ACCOUNT.


occupied with the idea that Ibla was calling on his
name, and he was in the severest inquietude about
her. I am at hand, he cried, O daughter of my
un.le, I am at hand. I have heard your cry. I
am going to annihilate your enemies. And turning
to Prince Malik, Truly, my lord, he said, it is very
absurd in me to set out to the assistance of my
foes. This is the most grievous circumstance of
all; for I am aware, that though they become vic-
torious by my means, they will not let me be quiet.
But it is on Ibla’s account I act thus. Some poet
has observed, “ Had I a heart of pity and com-
“s passion for myself, I would not pass the night
‘“< grieving in the agony of love. It is extraordi-
“ nary, that from thine eyes I feel no arrow, but
“ still my heart is pierced with shafts. I am kind
“ to thy friends in my love, though they are my
“ foes; and on account of two eyes, a thousand
“ eyes are respected.” Again turning to Prince
Malik, he said, On Ibla’s account I will submit to
these pains. And thus he continued :

“ I endure torments from my relations that fa-
“ tigue me, and I conceal from them my passion
“ and my transports. When they. question me, I
& say, Kill me, for I am an oppressive tyrant.
“ They insult me, and seek to separate me from
“ my beloved; and she is my hope and my object.
“ They long for my death. It is their sole wish to
“ see me felled to the ground in the day of battle.
‘“ But when the foe comes upon them, they entreat


SELMA JOINS MOOFRIJ. 19


“ my aid, and are inclined to love me. I will have
“ patience till I obtain my desire, and I will punish
“ the enemy by my resignation to insults.”

May God never abandon thy mouth! exclaimed
the young Prince, highly gratified at these verses ;
may no one ever harm thee! Thus they travelled
on, traversing the deserts and the rocks on the
backs of their horses.

In the mean time, Moofrij was expecting the
ransom, and importuning Ibla morning and evening.
It so happened, that the story of Amarah and Ibla
became so well known throughout the tribe of Tey,
that Selma the mother of Vachid at last heard it.
(Now she was clothed in mourning for the death of
her son.) She no sooner learnt the captivity of
Amarah, than she mounted her camel, and took
with her a party of slaves, bent on revenge, that
the flame now blazing in her heart might be ap-

. On reaching the tents of Moofrij, she pre-
sented herself to him. She blushed, and wept. She
demanded of him vengeance for her son, requesting
him to deliver Amarah over to her, that she might
slaughter him with her own hand, and drink his
blood—that perchance the fire in her entrails might
be quenched. O aunt, he replied, I will have ven-
geance for your son. But I will not have done
with these boors of Absians till I have received
their ransom, and taken their Chiefs, and have
massacred them all at the tomb of thy son, that his
grave may be watered with their blood. I will also

c2


20 HER TREATMENT OF AMARAH.


drag before thee in chains their black, Antar: di-
rect me to punish him as it may please thee, and
make him drink of the cup of perdition. As to this
Amarah, I have only demanded his ransom as a
stratagem. Some one of his brothers will probably
come with the ransom, accompanied with a party
of their Chiefs: I will seize them all. Their black
slave will hear of it, and he will haste to rescue
them: him too will I capture, and deliver over to
you. The heart of Selma was overjoyed. Oh,
cried she, I long to torment this prisoner we have
already in our power, until the others arrive, and
fall into our hands. Do as you please, said he.
At the word, she started up like a lioness, and
snatching up a whip, she went to Amarah. She
beat him like a fury, and in her madness tore off
his skin with her teeth. O mother of men, cried
Amarah, I have ransomed myself with money and
camels. How, cried she, you filth, how have you
ransomed yourself? do you imagine that you will
be delivered from death and destruction? By the
faith of an Arab, were all the wealth of the whole
tribe of Abs to be proffered, it should not release
you from your tortures: I will positively slaughter
you as I would a sheep. She then discovered to
him who she was, and what had befallen her son.
And as to the slave Moofrij has despatched to bring
the ransom, she added, it is all a trick and strata-
gem, that he may seize your property, and lay his
hands on your friends. Amarah was thus con-


REBIA'’S PLOT TO DUPE MOOFRIJ. 21


vinced that his death was nigh, and he felt how
impossible it was to escape from immediate disso-
lution; and he repented sorely of what he had
done. Ah! I never indeed laid my account to this,
groaned he to himself; never more shall I taste of
food or wine: unless Antar come in quest of Ibla,
never shall I be liberated. ‘Thus Amarah endured
his sorrows. Moofrij, in the mean time, was ex-
pecting of Ibla the oom pienon of his hopes; and
thus was he occupied.

But Rebia was hastening with his hardy war-
riors, passing many a horde, till he reached the
tribe of Tey. Know, said he to his comrades, we
are now in the land of the Teyans, our enemies;
our object is the deliverance of my brother. No-
thing 1s required in this affair but prudence in our
plans, that they may be surprised, and we attack
them to advantage. Let us therefore detain the
slave, and despatch one of our own people to Moofrij
as a decoy: let him say to him, Mount your horse,
O .Chief, the Absians are arrived with only ten
horsemen, to escort the ransom money ; they met
some travellers in your country, whom they have
plundered. They are now in your territories with
their booty, which of nght belongs to you: meet
them, and rescue your property from the foe, or
eternal will be your disgrace. Now I am sure, sons
of my uncle, he will come down upon us with a few
attendants, in the height of his folly and intrepidity.
But let us disperse ourselves, whilst ten are sta-


99 ANIS REPAIRS TO MOOFRIJ.


tioned to reconnoitre; and when he approaches, let
us all rush out on him; let us take him prisoner;
and having ransomed our brother with his own per-
son, let us return home safe; thus converting our
afflictions into honour and glory. Rebia’s plan and
stratagem amazed them, and they felt certain of
their brother's deliverance. (We have already men-
tioned that Rebia was a great adept in every fraud
and artifice.) They reposed till morning, when his
brother Anis was sent on to Moofrij, with every
requisite direction. He set out, and reached the
tents of Moofrij. At that time Selma, Vachid’s
mother, was with him, and they were in deep con-
versation. ‘The fumes of wine were still working
on him, when one of his attendants came in, and
said, Master, at the door of the tent stands a
stranger, inquiring for your tents. Moofrij went
forth, and beheld Anis, on horseback. God pre-
serve you, O Arab, said he; what do you want?
Anis repeated to him what Rebia had instructed
him to say, adding, Overtake the Absians before
blood be shed, and the property be lost that is now
at your disposal. Moofrij turned back into his
tent, roaring like a lion, and in great wrath. He
put on his breast-plate, and girded on his sword,
and ordered his slave to prepare his black steed ;
but he said not a word to any one of his family.
Selma heard all that was passing, and saw the con-
fusion in which he was. Son of my uncle, said


she, what is the matter? what have you heard from


SELMA DISCOVERS THE DECEIT. 23


this horseman that has so much disturbed you?
Let me hear it; and be not too precipitate, lest-
you fall into trouble. He accordingly explained to
her all he had learnt from Anis, and his eyes were
like two balls of burning coals. Now Selma was
one of the most subtle women in all Arabia—very
cunning and clever in every act. Lion-warrior, she
cried, this is all false. He is come to deceive you,
in order to entice you out: they will overpower
you with numbers, take you prisoner, and ransom
their brother from bondage with you. This is a
common trick among such fellows. I am fully per-
suaded you ought not to go forth with less than
two hundred horsemen; for undoubtedly they are
lying in ambush for you, and waiting for you.
Moreover, the proof of there being some fraud in-
tended is, that the slave whom you sent has not
returned; so look to what you are about. Moofrij
was astonished. How must this business be ar-
ranged? said he. The best plan, she replied, is to
seize this horseman, who has come on this errand:
imprison him, and chain him to his countryman.
Then take with you some of your warriors, in whom
you can confide in difficulties. Set out all at once,
and let your meeting be the assault of the cleaving
scimitar ; and thus take them all prisoners. Moofrij
approved of this advice; and instantly rushing out,
pulled Anis off his horse, and pinioned him, saying
to a slave, Carry him to his countryman, and tor-
ture him: soon will I cut off their heads, and march


‘94 ANIS AND AMARAH IN PRISON.


to their country, and destroy it. Having selected —
two hundred horsemen, he departed, traversing the
plains and the wilds. The slave dragged Anis to
Amarah, and threw him down opposite to him.
Oh, my brother, said Amarah, truly I am quite
bewildered and confounded ; for what has happened
to me never befel any human being before, so vast
are the horrors I have endured; ‘and I am expect-
ing my ransom of you and Rebia. Anis upon this
acquainted him with Rebia’s stratagem, and how
Selma had discovered it all to Moofrij, advising
him to seize him. Amarah burst into tears. Alas!
said he, this is a sad affair—a most deplorable ex-
pedition: every vestige of the family of Zeead will
be effaced. All this, added Anis, is owing to thee,
O Amarah. Thou hast brought us into this scrape
by thy villany. We warned thee against Ibla, but
thou wouldst not be dissuaded ; and thou hast con-
tinued thy violent proceedings till misfortunes have
overwhelmed us all: and if the family of Zeead be
destroyed, it will be owing to thy obstinacy and ill
luck. It is very true, my brother, cried Amarah ;
but still I wish that Ibla was in my power, and
then I should not care what happened.

‘ When Rebia had despatched Anis, he divided
his people into three parties, leaving ten to keep a
Jook out; and saying to them, As soon as you ob-
serve Moofrij and his horsemen, with my brother
Anis, ride up to him. Salute him, and say, O Chief,
ave are the persons come to ransom our brother from


DISMAY OF THE ABSIANS. 25


bondage: but we chanced to encounter a band of
horsemen, who carried off the cattle we had with
us. We have been sent on to inform you, that
you may come and rescue your property; for we
are now in your country, and under your pro-
tection. Contrive to conduet him among the ra-
vines: then the ambuscade shall rush out. We
will overpower him; for I know he will only come
slightly attended, on account of his confidence in
his superior gallantry and prowess. The party lay
concealed, and the ten were looking out, when lo!
Moofrij appeared, accompanied with a troop of
warriors; and they no sooner came up with the
Absians, than they plied their swords among them,
and split open their skulls. Grief and dismay fell
upon them, and their consternation was great. In
a moment seven were slain; three fled towards the
concealed party, and communicated the event. The
ambuscade being now brought to light, and all their
artifices being made manifest, Moofrij saw that Sel-
ma’s hint was correct. The whole plot was now
discovered. He rushed down upon them like a
hon in his wrath, and shaved off their heads from
their bodies. Cousins, exclaimed Rebia, our stra-
tagem cannot succeed, unless it is well supported.
I strongly suspect he has seized my brother Anis,
and is now come to fight us; so that we have no
means of escape but our sharp swords and our long
spears: otherwise we shall be destroyed in this land,
and Antar will exult over us. He spoke, and as-


96 MOOFRIJ ASSAILS THEM.


sailed the foe. The dust arose. He wielded his
sword among them. The confusion was univer-
sal. Cowards sought the mountains: but the bold
plunged into a sea of distress, and patiently sub-
mitted to calamities. ‘They desisted not from fight-
ing until the day closed, when they quitted the
contest. The family of Zeead took refuge under
the sand-hills; fifty being killed, and many wound-
ed. Moofrij returned to his tents, and congratu-
lated his friends on the termination of their diffi-
culties, saying, Truly was Selma’s advice perfectly
correct. Having reposed till morning, the two par-
ties mounted their hard-hoofed steeds, slung on their
spears, girded on their swords, and sought the field
of battle. Moofrij started out between the two
parties, and appeared between the two corps, ex-
claiming, O family of Zeead, we understood you
were coming with camels, but ye are come with
troops and warriors. You imagined you would
succeed against us: but now only anticipate the
devastation of your lands, and the extirpation of
your families. Come on—to the battle—the thrust
and the blow! Him whom you came to rescue you
shall never reach, and him whom you sent I have
seized; and thus he continued in verse:

“ The snort of the war-horse, with the pliant
“ spear, and the blow of the sabre on the thin
“ casques, are sweeter to me than gaming over cups
& and the goblets, and the cupbearer. Ye think,
“ O Absians, that I am dead, and that your slave


REBIA REPENTS. 27


“ survives in the tents; but your stratagem has
“« made him a captive, and he is in chains. Ye
“ have perfidiously deceived me, and this is one of
“ the results of treachery. I imagined the party
“ were come light, only leading baggage and ca-
“mels; but they came heavy-armed and laden,
“ tight-waisted, girthed for the chase. But I have
“ sworn that I will disperse your numbers in the
‘‘ day of encounter, and I will steep my lance in
“ the blood of horsemen as it streams at my feet
“ and legs.” |

Rebia came down upon him; but Cais, urging
on his horse, engaged him first. The dust arose
between them: the horsemen approached the scene
of uproar, and extended their necks, with anxious
looks. A general shout,  O by the valiant Cah-
tan,” arose from the midst of the black dust-cloud !
and lo! Moofrij had taken Cais prisoner, and bound
him with cords, a miserable wretch! And he in-
stantly returned to the contest and clamour. Rebia ©
was confounded, and repented of what he had done.
Alas, he cried, we have fallen into misfortune; we
shall be totally annihilated by our enmity towards
Antar. Could I but feel certain that we should
escape safe out of this conflict, 1 would send to
King Zoheir and make our excuses for our base
and improper conduct; I would beg him to de-
spatch our countryman and defender, Antar, to
rescue us from perils. He had scarcely spoken
these words when a shout from Moofrij and an-


28 OORWAH TAKEN PRISONER.


other yell were heard issuing from the black dust;
and, lo! he had taken a third brother prisoner.
Rebia screamed out in horror of his situation, and he
resolved on attacking him ; but Oorwah anticipated
him. He was a lion-like horseman; and he rushed
against Moofrij, thus reciting :

‘© Away with boasting, for Fortune builds up
“ and throws down. She is impartial or oppressive
“ unintentionally, and elevates to glory him who
“c has passed a life in ignominy. She makes the
“ afflicted smile—now giving, now denying. To
“ him who lives in the glories of the world the day
“ sometimes brings joy that turns to bitterness.
“ May I forfeit the high-bred steed if I do not
“ plunge with him into seas of death and the over-
“ shadowing dust. I will smite every warrior with
“ my Indian blade, that rebounds from the frac-
“ ture and is not blunted. I will sacrifice myself
‘‘ for the tribes with my long spear until it be ho-
4% noured and respected.”

But Moofrij soon interrupted him and assailed
him. A dreadful conflict ensued between them;
till Moofrij, rushing furiously at Oorwah, over-
whelmed him, and, assaulting him with the vehe-
mence of a lion, grasped him by the throat: he
clung to him and made him his captive. The
Absians raised vast shouts. ‘The Teyans attacked
them from all quarters: and the contest was so
fierce, that, the noise of it being soon spread
throughout the whole clan, both riders and pedes-


REBIA’S SUPPLICATION. 29


trians joined the party; and they did not desist
till it was dark. Rebia now saw death and de-
struction were at hand. Accompanied by his party,
he took refuge among the sand-hills; and there
were only seventy remaining out of the two hun-
dred. Thirty were prisoners, fifteen had fled, the
rest were slain, and all were wounded with the
points of the arrows. Distracted and bewildered
as they were, thirst augmented their anguish.
Well, said they to Rebia, what is your plan now?
_what is your advice? Sons of my uncle, he re-
plied, we have indeed fallen into the sea of Destiny
and Fatality—we can find no favour with any
one; and all these calamities are owing to my bro-
ther Amarah and that black slave. We have no
other resource but to send to Moofrij and demand
his protection ; here to remain with him in bondage
until we can redeem our lives by our property.
They reposed, waiting for the day-light; and it
was scarcely dawn when Rebia despatched a man
to Moofrij, saying, Noble warrior! lion-hero! Arabs
do not pride themselves over the Persians but on
the sanctity of their protection and hospitality.. We
demand protection of you, that we may surrender
ourselves to you and procure our ransom: but if
you will not abstain from shedding blood, at least —
let us be supplied with water. Be just to us in the
conflict— come out against us with equal numbers,
that we may exert ourselves and die under our
standards and our ensigns. When the messenger


30 MOOFRIJ LISTENS NOT TO THEIR TERMS.


had communicated this proposal, Moofrij laughed.
What consideration is due to you, he cried, now
that you have falsified your word? By the faith
of an Arab, you have no refuge against death un-
less you throw away your arms, and all of you
come dismounted before me, that I may shave off
your beards and cut off your noses and your ears.
On this condition you shall be furnished with
water. Then will I hang ye all, by Lat and
Uzza! My lord, said the messenger, whose name
was Jemeel, and he was a celebrated orator, here I
stand in your presence: take my horse and my
arms; cut off my ears, if you please; shave off
my beard; but, oh! let me moisten my heart and
soul with one drop of water. Moofrij was softened :
he accorded him his protection and allowed him
some water, saying, You are now under my pro-
tection, but not so your companions. On you I
have had compassion on account of your speech:
so go your way, and interfere no more; otherwise
I will leave you a corpse. As to your comrades,
their death is resolved on. And if they keep them-
selves on the defensive, and do not descend from
the:sand-hills, I will torture them with hunger and
thirst till they be all stupified: then will I take
them prisoners, and hang them all on one day.
Jemeel returned back to Rebia; and, having told
them what had passed, the consternation was uni-
versal. Should he cut off our noses and our ears,
eternal will be our disgrace and infamy. But, said


GLORIES IN THEIR DISTRESS. 3]


Jemeel, security is the great gain of man: and
thus informing them that he had obtained the pro-
tection of Moofrij for himself, he turned away his
horse and sought his own safety. Rebia and his
friends descended, and commenced another attack.
The Teyans assailed them right and left, and drove
upon them with their long spears. Before mid-day
they were all in the wildest confusion: thirst re-
duced them to the state of drunkards, and they
were all made prisoners. Moofrij carried them, all
bound with cords, to his tents. They preceded
him, overwhelmed in disgrace and infamy. Selma
was more overjoyed than any one: she abused the
Absians to. their faces, crying out, You filthy
Arabs, I must absolutely drink of your blood till I
am gorged. Moofrij ordered them all to be cast
into the same place with Amarah: and he sent
word to the tribe of Jalhema, and to King Maljem,
son of Handhala, and his brother the Blood-drinker,
_ congratulating them on the misery that had befallen

the family of Zeead, and requesting their attendance
to see them all hanged.

Now Ibla was rejoicing at the downfall of her
enemies—very glad was she that they were thus
chained and fettered, and reduced to such wretched-
ness and misery. Many of her sorrows were
soothed —for she still expected the arrival of her
cousin. The night was not far spent when Moofrij
became intoxicated. ‘The people had departed to
their respective tents, and every one was asleep,


32 IBLA’S RESOLUTION AND ANGUISH.


when Moofrij happened to think of Ibla; and as
he was considering how he should complete his
gratification, he repaired to his mother, and said, I
wish you would bring me that Absian damsel, that
I may enjoy her this night. If she will not con-
sent, I will use her most cruelly; I will multiply
her distresses and slay all her countrymen. Away
hastened his mother to Ibla. Go to your master
instantly, said she, that he may show sume kindness
to you and your countrymen; but, if you still ob-
stinately refuse to yield to him, dread his violence.
Barbarian, vile hag, exclaimed Ibla, were your son
even to hack my limbs with the sword, or to mas-
sacre the whole tribe of Abs and all that the sun
rises upon, never would he see me his property,
never see me yield or submit to him. Wishes he
my death? I will kill myself with mine own hand.
Accursed wretch! cried the old woman. She
struck her with her fist, and ordered the slave-girls
to drag her forth, as she screamed out, O by Abs!
O by Adnan! who can now save me? who can
assist me? who can redeem me from this captivity ?
Alas! is there any one to deliver me from this
distress? She continued shrieking and screaming
till even the family of Zeead heard her cries in the
stillness of the night. What is the matter with the
daughter of our uncle, that she screams and cries
so loud? asked they of their guards; who in-
formed them of what had passed between her and
Moofrij—how he had sworn and confirmed his


‘OORWAH PREDICTS HIS FALL. 33


oaths, that, if she did not submit to his demands,
he would not leave one of them alive. Be satisfied,
said Oorwah ; I will request of the Almighty that
she may irritate him still more, so that his cruelty
may be sharpened, and he strike off our heads at
once: but if Moofrij will listen to me, he will have .
nothing to do with her, for she brings ill luck on
every one that demands her—lucky is he who lets
her alone. Oorwah had hardly done speaking when
loud screams and shouts were heard. Every one in
the tents was in confusion and in motion, sword in
hand. It is well, said Oorwah, it is God’s work ;
and to-night will Moofrij be slain, were he even
the horseman of the plains and the mountains.
The shouts and the uproar became more distinct,
-and the roars of, O by Abs, O by Adnan, were
echoing loud ; but the howl of Antar overpowered-
them all. Dreadful misfortunes overwhelmed the
tribe of Tey. Scimitars were labouring in every
hand : blood flowed in torrents: men were slain:
many were hewn in pieces. The Teyans were
rushing upon one another: some sought flight.
_ The camels were dispersed over the plains and the

deserts. But the cause of this confusion was
follows. 7


VOL. II. . D


34 ANTAR MEETS JEMEEL.


CHAPTER IX.


As we before stated, Antar departed in pursuit of
Ibla, traversing various tribes and hordes, till,
coming nigh to the tribe of Tey, he resolved to
send away Shiboob, to gain information, and to
learn what had happened to Rebia and his bro- -
thers At that moment a horseman met them,
advancing from the sand-hills, and tearing up the
earth in his speed. Antar accosted him, and lo! it
was Jemeel the Absian. God preserve you, young
man, said Antar. And joy be with you—you, the
protector of our tribe, replied Jemeel, as he flung
himself off his horse on the ground ; and, covering
his head with sand, he bewailed his family and
friends. Antar went towards him: he took him
by the hand and quieted his sorrows. He con-
ducted him to Prince Malik, who questioned him
as to what had befallen him. Know, O Prince, he
replied, that the family of Zeead are in bondage :
noble warriors are slain, and only a few remain out
of the whole party — I left them all either prisoners
or dead. Thus communicating all that had passed,
he added, I have received the protection of Moo-
frij, to the exception of my comrades. O Aboolfa-
waris, exclaimed the Prince, let us away with all


HE SURPRISES THE FOE. 35


speed ; perhaps we may join our party in the con-
test, and rescue them from their terrible situation :
thus let it be known that they are the freedmen
of thy sword and thy intrepidity. I am aware,
O Prince, said Antar, that my honours with re-
spect to them are entirely useless, were I even to
plant their glories on the backs of the clouds: but
it is your order to join them. There is not one of
them that can brave dangers, and I am sure that
they are at this moment in chains and bondage ;
for, as Jemeel remarked, they have neither the
power to breathe nor think. My plan is this: let
us surprise the foe in the dark; let us throw our
troops among the tents; let us convert their joys
into sorrow; let us establish tears and grief in
their land, and rescue Ibla before morning. Upon
this they continued their journey, till, being close
to the tents, they perceived that their lights were
extinguished, and both freemen and slaves were
asleep. Take you the left, my lord, said Antar to
Prince Malik ; leave me the right—and mark what
I will do with them, thus taken unawares. So he
left one hundred and fifty with the Prince; and,
with only fifty men, he assaulted on the right, con-
spicuous among the tents and the tent-ropes. Malik
attacked on the left like a ferocious lion. They
gave one universal shout, and the whole earth
trembled. The sword spared neither old nor young,
whilst the troops poured down among the tents.
Moofrij was anxiously expecting Ibla; but, as soon
D2


36 IBLA’S EXULTATION.


as he heard the uproar, intoxication fled from his
brain, and his consternation and alarm increased.
He hastened to the door of the tent. Bring me
my horse, he exclaimed to his slaves ; bring me my
armour of war and cuirass, that I may discover
what means this tumult, and what means this con-
flict, that appears like a flame of fire. Peradventure
Fatality and Destiny have driven the Absian slave
to this land, that I may destroy him and hurl down
annihilation upon him; and thus will I exterminate
both him and his friends. Ibla heard Antar, in
the tranquillity of the night, roaring like a peal of
thunder. Her heart was soothed, after all her
agitations. She raised her voice and cried out, Now
am I sure of comfort, after all my miseries: mis-
fortune is coming upon thee, thou son of infamy
and disgrace: the noble horseman is at hand: the
tribe of Abs will pounce down upon thee like
eagles, and will deliver the fawn of the desert from
thy grasp: this night shall thy mother mourn for
thee. The mother of Moofrij heard this; and,
being in the wildest consternation, she struck her
on the face, crying out, Dost thou dare to abuse us
thus—thou, a captive in our hands? This very
hour thou shalt behold the head of that black.
Dost thou imagine he will be able to. aid thee,
fallen as thou art into the clutches of the devouring
eagle? As she turned towards her son, she saw
him mounting his horse, tottering still in intoxica-
tion and the fumes of wine. She was alarmed, and


é
SELMA’S RAGE AND FLIGHT. 37


dissuaded him from the contest of swords and
spears. Now scimitars were at work on all sides:
shouts shook the land: frightful were the blows of
Antar’s sword, and deadly were the thrusts of An-
tar’s spear. Shiboob was casting fire among the
tents and dwellings; and dust arose that was
blacker than the darkness of night. The camels —
fled in terror away: the necks of men and women
were trampled on. Thus continued the fray till it
was near morning. ‘The country was involved in
lamentation, and husbands abandoned their tender
wives: death and disgrace were conspicuous. All
sought the plains and the deserts, quitting the tents
and the habitations; whilst Shiboob made his way
to the prisoners in chains and in utter dismay.
Selma, Vachid’s mother, no sooner beheld this sad
reverse, than she rushed from the tents, intending
to seek the open country; but perceiving Moofrij’s
mother detaining him from the conflict and turning
his horse’s head towards the sand-hills, and also
marking his flight under the guidance of a slave,
she mounted a noble steed, and, snatching up a
sword, Never, she cried, will I depart from the
tents till I have eased my heart, and accomplished
my desires on the foe. And she darted towards the
prisoners, and had already wounded many of them,
resolved to slaughter them all, when Shiboob ar-
rived and roared at her. She fled: her horse was
swift, and she rode off among the fugitives. Shi-
boob approached Rebia, and loosened his arms and


38 IBLA AND THE ABSIANS LIBERATED.


those of his comrades, who sprang towards their
friends, whose death they had considered inevitable ;
and they released one another, exclaiming, O by
Abs, O by Adnan! and the mountains and the
rocks echoed back the shout. When the day
dawned, not a youth or an old man was found, but
was either dead or a captive. Shiboob in the mean
time was roaming about the tents in search of Ibla,
whom at last he found almost smothered with the
entrails of the dead, groaning like a woman be-
reft of her children; and as she listened for the
voice of Antar, she thus exclaimed:

“O my cousin, ease my heart, and lead me
« home by the hand, for my body is worn out, and
« my strength fails. For the black hero I have
« encountered disgrace. My frame—the Zephyr
« would overwhelm it, so greatly have they ex-
‘‘ hausted me with eternal pains. My resignation
6 it is at an end. My foes exult over me, and
‘‘ I have endured endless horrors. Convey me to
& the protection of Antar; no one but the lion can
‘‘ defend the fawn. Tell him I am in dismay, and
“ my heart wanders wild in its fears. My eye-lids
& —-no sleep have they; but they mourn for eter-
‘nal sleep. Were a rock to experience a portion
“ of my sufferings, the rock itself would be cast
“down. This eternal banishment will never end:
& it is a separation that exceeds the distance of the
‘< planets.”

Shiboob heard her lamentations, and his heart


IBLA RECOVERS HER PROPERTY, 39


grieved for her distress. He hastened towards her,
and, discovering himself, he bore her away in his
arms, and conveyed her to his brother Antar; who,
the moment he saw her, dismounted, and pressed
her to his bosom, and kissed her between the eyes,
saying, Grievous indeed it is to me that you should
suffer and endure such calamities, and I be alive in
the world. But this is the misfortune of the times,
against which no human being can find refuge.
Take her, he added to Shiboob, take her to the
tent of Moofrij: place her on his throne, and pro-
tect her, whilst I go to Prince Malik, and see what
he is about. Shiboob entered the tent of Moofrij ;
and as he found it empty, he searched about, and
opened some chests, in which he saw all Ibla’s rich
robes and garments, and strings of jewels. Shiboob
was exceedingly pleased, and delivered them to Ibla.
Thus all her distress and affliction vanished, and
her hopes and wishes were realized. Antar had
departed to the opposite quarter, in quest of Prince
Malik and his associates, to observe how the combat
stood. But Prince Malik and his friends were re-
nowned horsemen, and had performed the deeds of
heroes that night, destroying the enemy with the
sword, and forcing their way among the tents, and
brandishing their spears and their scimitars: the
Prince ever at their head, like an eagle, or a lion,
when he rushes out from his den. Antar rode up
to him, and kissed his hand, congratulating him on ,


40 ANTAR FORGIVES THE FAMILY OF ZEEAD.


his safety, and inquiring about the acts of the night.
O Aboolfawaris, he replied, it has been a night
comprising many nights: but by your good fortune
we have succeeded in our attempts. They per-
ceived, that during that night’s contest only three
of Antar’s heroes had been killed, and thirty of
Prince Malik’s. But disgrace had fallen abundantly
on the adverse party, and a most dreadful example
had been made of them. Fate and destiny had
been let loose upon them. My lord, said Antar,
we must not remain in this land; for we have no
friends, no associates, no allies in it. And as they
were setting out for their own tents, Rebia came
up to Antar, and wept tears of deceit and fraud.
Cousin, said he, we have not the face to meet thee,
on account of our shameful deeds, and thy infinite
kindness towards us. May God render thy favour
towards us eternal; for it is God that has united
thee to Ibla, thy cousin. After him came up Ama-
rah, crying in excess of jealousy, envy, and regret.
Son of my uncle, exclaimed he, what is done, is
done. It is all the work of human failings: do not
therefore revenge yourself on me for what I have
done: do pardon my transgression, and forgive me.
Antar pitied them; and feeling favourably inclined
towards them on account of his relationship, he
embraced and saluted them; thus congratulating
them on their escape :

“ Exult, if ye will—or be just: behold in the


HE QUITS THE LAND OF MOOFRIJJ. 41 |


“ time of battle my exploits. Although I am abused
‘‘ for being black, my acts are the acts of the noble-
“ born.”

As the family of Zeead listened, the passion of
envy burnt in their hearts ; and though they thanked
him outwardly, internally their galls were bursting
with rage. They now returned to their tents, and
reposed; and when they had had their wounds
dressed, said Antar to them, Sons of my uncle,
although we shall never be vanquished, and we
have gained a signal victory, yet we are in the land
of Cahtan; and there is not an individual in it but
dreads us, and is our foe. So come away: let us
refresh ourselves, and depart. Prince Malik having
also expressed his approbation, they slaughtered
some of the captured camels and sheep, and pre-
pared their dinner.

But Moofrij, when he fled and sought the sands,
fearful of death and infamy, turned his eyes back
over the desert; and as he beheld the noble Absians
take possession of his tents, and his own companions
sleeping in death, his soul festered at the sight, and
he hastened his flight over the plains.

‘The Absians had no sooner finished their repast,
than they set out on their way home. They had
not been long gone when the tribe of Jadeelah
arrived, about five hundred strong, in order to
enjoy the sight of the execution of the Zeead fa-
mily. Moofrij joined them, overwhelmed in tears
and sighs, and lamentations, and telling them the


42 ` OVERTAKEN BY HIS ENEMIES.


misfortunes he had suffered from the Absians. Let
us pursue them, cried the strangers; let us speedily
annihilate them. Just then arrived also the tribe
of Nibhan, amounting to five thousand warriors,
and headed by Mohelhil, son of Foyadh; and he
was one of the lion-tyrants at that period of igno-
rance, most renowned for his courage in the field,
of a most untractable temper, and of harsh man-
ners. He also came to see the Zeead family hung:
The confusion of Moofrij increased ; for these allies
were come at his invitation. But when he had de-
tailed every particular of the past events, one of the
Nibhanians advanced, Jabir by name—their mighty
champion in the dust of confusion, and their vora-
cious lion. Disgraced are the tribes of Nibhan and
Tey, he cried; I will not dismount from the back
of this horse till I have slain that slave Antar, son
of Shedad, and destroyed the tribes of Abs and
Zeead. And he instantly galloped away, followed
by the tribes of Jadeelah and Nibhan. Moofrij
collected the remnant of his people, and they set
out, traversing the plains and the rocks—in all
about fifteen thousand men, armed with cuirasses,
and well accoutred ‘for war. Proceeding with great
speed, they overtook the Absians about evening,
just as they were about to halt, and repose for the
night: but as the valiant Teyans drew nigh, the
Absians prepared for battle. What sayest thou, hero
of war and tumults? said Moofrij to Jabir. Shall
we attack the Absians with the riving scimitar?


ANTAR’S INDIFFERENCE. 43


Shall we convert their joys into sorrows? By no
means, returned Jabir: the Absians form but a
small party, and we are a numerous army. If we
assail them by night, we shall be worsted, and they
will have the advantage of us in the engagement.
Our attack would be too confused, and thus we
may fail. My opinion is this: do you take four
thousand men, and station yourself in the desert,
cutting off their road home: I will remain with the
rest in the rear. As soon as morning dawns, let us
attack them on both sides. Moofrij was convinced
that Jabir was an experienced horseman. (Now
this Jabir was the father of Asedoorrahees, who
had mest extraordinary adventures with Antar, and
whose deadly deeds were a warning to the wise.)
According to Jabir’s directions, Moofnj went off
with four thousand horsemen, and cut off the com-
munication from every traveller and passenger.
When the Absians heard the shouts, and saw the
glitter of spears, and the dazzling brightness of sci-
mitars, they cried out to Antar, Now, indeed, is
confusion let loose upon us. What is your advice
in this crisis, O Aboolfawaris? the Teyans have
overtaken us, and you well know that their hearts
are cauterized on account of our united deeds.
Cousins, replied Antar, this is a conjuncture that
alarms me not; it does not cause me the smallest
uneasiness ; neither is it worth a question. If they
assault us by night, disgrace and misery will befal
them, and we shall have the advantage of them;


44 ARTAR’S PLAN OF ATTACK.


for a small party is concealed in the shades of the
night, particularly when it is mixed with superior
numbers. I observe that they are formed into two
divisions, which have separated, said Prince Malik.
One division is gone forward, and the other keeps
behind. I will explain this to you, O Prince, said
Antar. They fear that we shall run away in the
night, and seek our own country ; for they feel cer-
tain that we must be greatly embarrassed about
their numbers: but I swear by him who infuses
light into the: moon, I will not let the morning
dawn before this affair be decided, and the foe be
dispersed over the plains and the sand-hills; for the
Lord of Heaven has aided me. Direct your com-
panions to prepare their warlike instruments, that
I may show you the dreadful deeds I will execute
upon them this very night.’ Cousin, said Rebia,
what is your plan? I am resolved, replied Antar,
to let them alone until they alight from their horses,
and feel secure in the obscurity of the night: then
will I charge with you this division in front of us.
But I am aware, that the shouts will also come
down upon our rear, and that the troops will rush
in vast crowds to the scene of carnage. Do you,
however, not be wanting in the engagement, but
attack them in the hour of contest in small bodies,
and dash among them at random. In the onset,
cry out to your associates; but when all are mixed
together, be silent, and mention not “ Abs and
Adnan.” Dart forwards into the plain, and the


AMARAH’S INIQUITOUS PROJECT. 45


road that leads out of this land, leaving them to
cut up each other with their own swords; and be-
fore the dawn of day your exertions will have suc-
ceeded, and numbers of the enemy will be extir-
pated. Rebia greatly approved of Antar’s plan,
which he communicated to his people, desiring
every one to prepare for the conflict. O Ebe ool*
Ebyez, cried Amarah, addressing himself to Oor-
wah, this is indeed an awful night! What terrible
things will happen in the dark during this combat !
My best plan would be to take this opportunity of
slaying Antar myself, and pierce him with this
spear; for he will be off his guard in the attack,
and we will say the Teyans slew him. The project
you suggest, O Amarah, is most infamous, said
Oorwah. Disasters and calamities would be the
consequences of it; for if we kill Antar this night,
the Teyans will not leave one of us alive. My
opinion is, that we should exert ourselves, and
assist him in the slaughter, so that we may de-
part in safety out of this land. When they were
ready, Antar advanced with the troops a little, and
then halted till the enemy had alighted, and every
trembling coward felt secure. The night was ex-
ceedingly dark, and many of them being already
asleep, said Antar to Shiboob, I beg that you
will protect Ibla this night. Watch over her in
the hour of battle; for I wish to exhibit before her
exploits, such as ages shall record. Mount her


* Father of Candour.


46 ANTAR’S NIGHT ASSAULT.


upon one of the noblest steeds, and clothe her in a
strong breast-plate of steel, such as blades of India
will not penetrate. He then hastened to Prince
Malik; and when they were all assembled, they
made one universal shout, at which the whole
country shook. They pointed the barbs of their
spears: they brandished the blades of their scimi-
tars, and rushed down, in the obscurity of the night,
upon the four thousand, the division under Moofnj,
stationed to intercept their retreat. They aimed
the blow of the sword, and levelled the penetrating
spear. Now this division, feeling secure in the pro-
tection of the great army in their rear, had dis-
mounted, and they were asleep; neither did they
recover themselves till the Absians were already
among them, with their falchions. Every one
sprung up from his sleep, and, grasping his sword,
fell upon any one that was near him, fearful of
Antar: and thus they all promiscuously assailed
each other with their sabres. The shouts and the
commotion increased. The obscurity of night over-
shadowed them. The confusion and agitation were
general. Warriors were thrown down, singly and
in pairs. Jabir, the Nibhanian, -heard the shouts
of the horsemen. Greatly dismayed, he turned
towards Mohelhil, and said, Verily the Absians
have acted like heroes: they have boldly marched
into horrors and calamities. If we attack them, to
aid our friends, we shall unavoidably fail; but if
we abandon them, the Absians will destroy them,
and escape out of our land in safety. Away with


A DREADFUL CONFLICT ENSUES. 47


such discourse, exclaimed Mohelhil: assault the foe
with me, that we may annihilate them to the last.
So they all rushed towards the division under
Moofnj, and cut down the foe with their swords.
In a moment all were involved in the black dust.
The tumult redoubled. Skulls were clipped off
from bodies like reeds. Cowards fled: the brave
stood firm. War raged with foot and leg. Heads
and hair turned gray. Shame fell upon the weak-
hearted: the noble in soul were undaunted. Heads
and trunks were heaped up together. ‘The sword
decided the fate of heroes: it was impartial in its
judgments, and never unjust. Blows fell at ran-
dom. Warriors were hurled down, and trampled
on. What was once hidden and concealed, now
became public. Lives were torn away promis-
cuously. The King of Death grasped souls, and
never failed. But Antar exposed himself to every
peril, for he knew Ibla was looking at him. He
exhibited horrors and wonders. He cut through
the horsemen: he strewed the troops: and thus he
continued till midnight, when he conducted away
the Absians to the open desert; and there the
slaughter was carried on between the two armies
till the dawn of day, and the victors became distin-
guished from the vanquished. The Teyans now
looked round, and observed that they were con-
tending with each other, whilst the Absians were
standing apart in the plain. Now the loss of the
Teyans during that might amounted to nine


48 MOOFRIJ CHALLENGES THE ABSIANS.


thousand, who had drunk of the cup of death: of
the Absians there were only twenty slain. Amarah
had been trodden down under the horses’ feet, and
his ribs were broken. Rebia was severely wounded.
They were now about to dismount, when lo! Selma,
the mother of Vachid, appeared on the field of
battle, and exclaimed, Disgraced for ever are the
Teyans by the hand of this black slave. She was
quite frantic. Moofrij rode up to her, having first
changed his horse, and put on his coat of mail and
cuirass. Turn back, my aunt, he cried, I will
accomplish your wishes. I will soon bring you this
Antar, bound as a prisoner. I will destroy the
whole tribe of Abs, and the family of Zeead; for
this day my flame burns fiercer than yours, and my
shame is greater than yours; and if I do not anni-
hilate them all with the blade of my sword, let the
Arabs blush for me in every land. Thus he in-
duced Selma to retreat from the scene of engage-
ment; and driving his own horse among the troops,
galloping and riding about to and fro, he exclaimed,
Never, O Absians, never did there happen between
man and man the like of what has occurred between
you and us these two nights. But the past is past.
It is now the light of day : now shall the dust cover
the plains, and the skill of noble warriors be mani-
fested in the contest; for it is the custom of Arabs
to act fairly—such is the characteristic of the brave.
Come on then—on to the battle—on to the blow
of the sword and the thrust of the spear, that I may


ANTAR PREPARES FOR THE COMBAT. 49


make ye drink of the cup of death and perdition.
But let, no one dare to oppose me, if not of equal
rank; and when the noble horsemen are satisfied
with fighting, then let the vile slaves contend; and
Moofrij intended that Antar should hear him, as
he thus continued :

« If I do not demand my due and debt with the
“& blow of the sword and the Redeinian lance, may I
“ never be secure from the nocturnal catastrophes !
“ May sleep never visit my eyelids! Ye have
“ known the deeds that have raised this war be-
“ tween me and you, sons of Adnan; and if I do
“ not appease myself among you, never may I be


called ennobled in my parents! Here I stand;


“« and in my hand is a polished-bladed one and a
“ bloody double-edged one, with which I will ex-
“ terminate your horsemen in open fight, when the
‘“‘ coward gnaws his two hands in agony.”

Antar heard his address, and well he understood
his views and meaning. And as he was stopping
by the side of Ibla, soothing her heart, and inquiring
how she felt, Cousin, said she, I feel no disquietude
or uneasiness as long as you are alive. At these
words, Antar sprung from his horse on the ground.
He stripped off his armour and steel, so that he
remained in his ordinary dress, with short sleeves,
his head uncovered, and barefoot. Again he vaulted
on the back of Abjer, and bellowed at Moofrij like
the most ferocious lion: Thou coward, wouldst
shame me with thy deceit and artful sia thou


VOL. II.


50 HE ADDRESSES MOOFRIJ,


and all thy race are of the same stamp. Are ye
indeed men of such high dignity and honour? But
mark how numerous ye are, and we how few. We,
however, have committed our lives to the chances
of war and carnage. What is, is. Here are you
and I in the plain of commotion; you clothed in
steel, and I in my simple garments. Exhibit your
prowess to the multitude, and your powers before
these noble warriors. Antar rushed at Moofn);
and, as he galloped about, he thus addressed him :

s“ When my adversary charges me with a debt,
& I discharge the debt with my Redeinian lance.
“ The edge of the sword makes us all even, and it
“ shall justly decide between me and you. | am
“ exalted by my scimitar and my spear to the sub-
“ limity of the shooting stars and the two Bears.
« Wretches! ye are ignorant of my might, but the
& inhabitants of the two hemispheres know it. The
« hand of time has not annihilated my force, and
“ the fingers of age have not been extended against
& me. How many horsemen, laid low by my sword,
‘“‘ remain with begrimed cheeks, and hands steeped
& in gore, whilst the eagles of death hover round
& them, and the ravens crowd about them. I hum-
“ble the fugitives in terror of my battle, and I
& force the tears from both their eyes. How then
“ shall I sleep unrevenged, whilst my sword is
& sharp-pointed, and its double edge is bloody,
“ with which I will extirpate all your horsemen,
“ and quench my fury, and gladden my eyes !”


AND SLAYS HIM IN BATTLE. 51


Having concluded, he immediately dashed at
Moofrij, like a wild lion, or an outrageous hyena. —
Moofrij received him, and imagined he had him
within his grasp. The two heroes encountered each
other like two mountains; but after a conflict of
two hours, the powers of Moofrij were enervated
by fatigue: he flagged and failed—disgrace suc-
ceeded to glory; and whilst he was contending
with Antar, he turned towards the Teyans, signi-
fying to them to fall upon Antar bodily, and rescue
him from death. Antar, perceiving his situation,
pressed upon him: he clung to him, and cut off
all retreat, till stirrup grated stirrup. He at length
grasped Dhami, and aimed at Moofrij between the
‘eyes. He received the blow on his shield ; but the
scimitar hewed it in two, and also his helmet: it
continued its sway till it issued out between his
thighs, through the horse’s belly, even to the
ground. The whole mass was thus cleft into four
portions; and as Antar marked the effect of the
blow, he exclaimed, O by Abs, O by Adnan! I am
ever the lover of Ibla. The Absians were perfectly
astounded at the vastness of his strength, and there
was not one but rejoiced and congratulated himself.
But horror struck into the hearts of the Teyans;
and just as they were about to make one united
effort against Antar, Jabir, the Nibhanian leader,
prevented them, saying, Cousins, if ye attack this
dæmon at once, ye will be worsted; for’ if he be
not slain, all our hopes will be frustrated. He will

ER


52 HIS SCORN OF JABIR’S VANITY,


mfuse terror and consternation into your souls, and
thus will his impetuosity be roused to mightier
deeds. But I have discovered a mode of attacking
that no one else has perceived. I am certain that
I can overwhelm him with evils. Now will I assail
him, and make him quaff the draught of perdition,
and I will make Ibla one of my slave girls. ‘Thus
saying, he sprung forward in quest of Antar, fierce
as the fiercest lion, and completely immersed in
steel, and a well-riveted coat of mail; and as he
approached, he thus addressed him: Come on—
now for my battle! Away—away with thy con-
ceit, thou foul Arab! base is the tribe that has ad-
mitted thee, and deservedly disgraced. Silence!
cried Antar. May thy mother lose thee! may thy
family forfeit thee! All thou hast uttered about
thyself is false—vain babbling of the tongue, and
absurdity. I acknowledge no rank, no dignity, but
this cleaving scimitar, and this penetrating sped ;
and he who boasts, saying, my father was such a
one, my grandfather such a one—all empty words
—all idle nonsense. And if thou hast any doubts
on the subject, invoke thy father and thy pro-
genitors, that they may all come and deliver thee
from my presence. Antar summed up all in these
verses :

“ I am a slave, and low in rank; but my sword
“& shall gain me honour and respect: a sword—
« when T wield it on the days of battle, the necks
s of the Arab chieftains bow down to it.”


HE PUTS THEM ALL TO FLIGHT. 53


And he fell upon Jabir hke a column of clouds.
They commenced the contest with the utmost fury,
forcing down draughts of sudden death, so that
every one present was in utter astonishment. For
two hours they persisted in the frightful combat,
till fatigue fell on Jabir’s arms: he slackened in his
efforts, for he perceived in Antar what was not in
himself. Antar, aware of his condition, grasped
him, and clung to him, and cut off all means of
escape. He pierced him through the chest with
his spear, and made the barb issue out at his back.
Jabir fell down dead, weltering in his blood. Come
on against this vile black, make him drink of the
cup of infamy, exclaimed Mohelhil, as he observed
the fate of Moofi1j and Jabir. So the Teyans
poured down upon Antar from all quarters. But
Antar, still in his common clothing, met them like
a voracious lion. Prince Malik now joined the con-
flict. Horsemen encountered horsemen, and heroes
heroes. The brave were hurled to the ground.
Sword and spear played round heads and bodies:
and there ensued an engagement ages will record.
They continued plundering souls from bodies, until
it was almost dark; when an immense number of
the Teyans and Nibhanians being slain, the rest
took to flight, pursued by Antar and his friends,
till, having driven them out of that land, they
returned for their scattered horses and dispersed
arms: and when they had collected every thing,
they sought their own tents, like the lions of the


54 HE EXULTs IN IBLA’s APPROBATION.


forest, preceded by Antar, like the judas-flower.
Ibla rejoiced in his prowess and intrepidity, and
smiled : and, as Antar saw her smile, Daughter of
my uncle, said he, are you smiling at what you saw
me perform this day in the carnage and the com-
bat? By the faith of an Arab, she replied, my
sight was bewildered at your slaughter among these
wretches. Her words descended into his heart
sweeter than the purest water to the thirsty spirit.
And as he told her all he had done among the
Teyans, he thus added :

« O Ibla, if the shades of the sable battle-dust
“ conceal from thee my achievements on the day of
& conflicts, arise and ask my Abjer if I ever let him
‘‘ charge but at the armies like the gloomy night.
« Ask my sword of me, if I ever smote with it on
“& the dreadful day but the skulls of Kings. Ask
“ my lance of me, if ever I thrust with it but at
“ the panoplied hero between the throat and the
“ under jaw. I steep my sword, I steep my spear
“ in streams: I practise patience, and fear not hell
“ itself. How many of my blows with the sword-
‘* edge have been cleaving blows! How many are
“ the spear-thrusts of which my saddle-bow and
“ my hip-bone have complained! And were there
“ not one at whose power even Kings tremble, I
« would make the vault of the firmament the _—
“ of a horse.”

Ibla was greatly delighted at this denpa,
and thanked him for his address and his actions.


RER FATHER’S HATRED AND MALICE. 55


The same did Prince Malik and others, except
Malik, Ibla’s father, and Rebia and Amarah, and
the family of Zeead, for their galls and their hearts
were bursting with rage. After this they all retired
to their tents, and, having eaten their dinner, their
eyes sought repose. But Antar mounted his horse,
and was about to keep the night-watch. What,
said Prince Malik, will you keep the watch, and
shall we sleep, fatigued as you must be from the
labours of the battle? Let me relieve you; at
least, I will take my turn of duty. No, by the
faith of a noble Arab, cried Antar, masters must
not serve their slaves. When Rebia observed Prince
Malik nding with Antar, he also mounted, and
Malik, son of Carad, and many other warriors,
quitted their tents likewise; but, as they roamed
about, Antar’s enemies remained in one party to-
gether. The night was calm: and, as they wefe
abusing Antar as usual, Sons of my uncle, said
Ibla’s father, these imprecations do not ease my
pain; for though this slave is an ignoble wretch,
yet the Lord of Heaven favours him—and he
whom the God of Heaven protects is protected
against all human power. All my exertions and
efforts have failed, and I am melted even as lead is
melted, for I cannot deliver myself from the clutches
of this black slave; all my contrivances for his de-
struction revert on myself; his fortitude and elo-
quence only increase, and the Lord of Heaven fa-
vours him. For my part, said Amarah, my ears


56 l ENCOURAGED BY REBIA AND AMARAH,


have no pleasure in Antar’s poetry; there is no
harmony whatever in it. Hold! O Amarah, cried
Oorwah, you speak foully and falsely. No one in
the whole tribe of Abs and Adnan will agree with
you on that point; for there is not an individual in
. all our tribes, no, not even in the tribes of Cahtan,
more fluent in his discourses than Antar—none
whose heart and spirit are firmer in the field of
battle. I do not speak thus of him from my love
towards him; but let the truth be spoken. Did
you not mark the noble Antar on his return from
the conflict and the carnage, which he described in
such beautiful rhymes, saying, “ Were I not afraid
“ of the power of God, I would make the vault of
“ the firmament the back of a horse?” Ah! said


Ibla’s father, I have not an eye that can bear to


look at that black slave; neither will I dwell in the
land where he dwells. I will wait patiently till we
quit this country and these sand-hills; but, when
we reach home, I will carry away my daughter,
and fly during the night in quest of some one that
may protect me from this vile black: I will be ho-
noured among strangers, but not live disgraced
among my family and connexions. By God, ex-
claimed Rebia, I will not permit you to emigrate ;
I will not submit to such a separation: but I will
give you a hint—profit by it, and you will succeed
in your expectations, and all your wishes will be
accomplished ; never will you again be annoyed
about Antar nor any one else. Let not your ene-


WHO ARE PLOTTING ANTAR’S DEATH. 57


mies exult in your emigration and departure, nor
fill their hearts with joy. Oh! do advise me, my
friend Rebia, cried Malik, in this troublesome
affair, that I may not be browbeaten and bullied.
Be quiet, said Rebia, till we reach our own country.
Introduce yourself to Prince Shas, son of King
Zoheir, and demand his protection: tell him all
your grievances, and surrender your daughter to
him, saying, O Prince, my daughter is your hand-
maiden, I beg that she may live under your pro-
tection; marry her to whomsoever you please, but
let not that foul slave, Antar, covet her. Thus
will your daughter remain with the illustrious Shas,
secure from every act of violence, whilst we will
deliberate about slaying Antar. We will expose
him to perils, and make him drink of the cup of
dangers: you will not see him return for a length
_ of time. Thus they continued in conversation till
midnight, when they returned to their tents; and,
having first divided the spoil, they mounted their
horses and departed, traversing plains and deserts
until the day shone over them, when, lo! a dust
arose in their rear and darkened the whole land.
Speedily it advanced, and the wild beasts fled be-
fore it: the black column appeared like a mass of
clouds. Scimitars glittered, the spear-barbs spar-
kled, and shouts shook the mountains and the val-
leys. These, they cried, are the Teyans; they are
coming upon us from their hordes—horse and foot
have overtaken us. And all were terrified, expect-


58 THE PARTY SURPRISED BY MALJEM.


ing death and destruction. Be of good cheer, cried
Antar, obeerving how their countenances were dis-
figured with dismay ; fear not their numbers; be
not alarmed at the glittering of swords or the
sparkling of spears; I alone will meet this nu-
merous host, were they even double their numbers :
do ye only protect my rear. Antar galloped to-
wards the dust, to learn what occasioned it, fol-
lowed by Prince Malik and the tribes of Abs and
Carad; but the horsemen of Zeead stayed be-
hind with Amaruh, Rebia, and Malik, Ibla’s father.
This was the Teyan army, headed by King Mal-
jem, son of Handalah, and his brother the Blood-
drinker: for Moofrij, when he had taken Rebia
and his comrades prisoners, sent to these warriors
to come and assist at the execution of the family
of Zeead ; and they no sooner received-the glad
tidings, than they assembled their troops and has-
tened to take vengeance on the family of Zeead :
but when they reached the country of Moofrij, and
saw nothing but dead bodies strewed about, broken
spears, and shattered scimitars, they halted in the
greatest consternation. Shortly arrived the fugitives,
with Mohelhil, routed and dispersed. King Maljem
having questioned them as to what had happened,
Mohelhil imparted to him all that had occurred
with Antar, who had already slain Moofrij and
Jabir, and scattered their troops over the rocks and
the plains. Indeed! cried Maljem: you have
clothed us with dishonour, and disgraced us in


SOME RESOLVE ON FLIGHT. 59


every quarter of Arabia, by your flight before that
base-born slave. When he had collected the rem-
nant of the discomfited army, after a halt of two
hours, he mounted, and set out with a force of
twenty thousand horsemen, who travelled with the
utmost speed till they overtook the Absians, as we
have already stated, at a spot which happened to
be the last of the Cahtanian territory and the first
of the land of Adnan ; and, as soon as they beheld
the Absians, they encompassed them on every side.
The Absians were terrified at the sight of their vast
numbers, and at the brilliancy of their steel armour
and coats of mail. O Malik, said Oorwah to Ibla’s
father, verily we have fallen into a most perilous
situation; Antar is our only resource, in order to
avoid death and perdition. You are right, replied
he, much agitated and in great disorder; take my
advice and fly, otherwise we must drink of the cup
of annihilation. If you resolve on flight, observed
Oorwah, the first captive will be your daughter
Ibla. Let her alone, continued Malik, let her be
captured, provided that vile slave do not possess
her. At any rate, said Rebia, we must wait awhile,
till these horsemen come nearer to us; and, when
the dust arises on all sides, let us give the reins to
our steeds, and cry out, Fly, Absians, fly! and let
us then scatter ourselves over the desert. Those
who join us will be our excuse, and those who re-
main behind will be slain and buried in the sand.
No one will ever survive to jbring any accusation


60 ANTAR RECEIVES THE ENEMY.


against us: we, on the contrary, shall appear to
have fought with our friends, and be secure from
blame and reproach. I am convinced Antar will
never abandon his beloved Ibla or fly, so vast is his
intrepidity and pride—he will fight till the foe
sever his head. Malik, son of King Zoherr, will
not follow us, so that death and destruction must
overwhelm him. To this they all assented; and,
with this vile nefarious project, they resolved on
flight. But Antar received the twenty thousand
as the parched land the first of the rain—his heart
harder than stone, and his soul more impetuous
than the waves of the sea when it roars. He pene-
trated the thick dust with blows irresistible and
thrusts more rapid than the twinkling of the eye,
followed by the horsemen of Abs and Carad, under
Prince Malik, who, pouring down vehemently
upon the enemy, exerted every energy in concert
with Antar: they imitated his deeds, and made
the foe drink of the cup of death and perdition.
In less than an hour, Antar checked the progress
of the hostile tribe, and their van was driven back
upon their rear. They roared out at Antar from
a distance, but ventured not to approach the spot
where he fought. Antar cut through them, although
their numbers were great and their force immense.
Ibla screamed out to him in a loud voice, for she
trembled in excess of fear. Shiboob moved round
her, and protected her with his arrows. But as
soon as Antar heard Ibla’s voice and cries, in order


SUCCOUR ARRIVES. 61


to relieve her mind of the foe, he dashed into the
midst of the troops and armies, and plied his whole
force among them. In the mean time Rebia, Ama-
rah, and the family of Zeead halted till the dust
thickened, when they gave the reins to their steeds
and fled, exclaiming, Fly, Absians, fly! But they
had not proceeded far when a dust arose in front
of them that obscured the whole country. Let us
wheel to the left, cried Oorwah, that we may escape
death and destruction. At the word, they turned
their horses’ heads and galloped to the left; but,
before they had advanced any distance, another
dust arose in front. Whither can we now fly?
exclaimed Oorwah : the enemy has cut off every
road and communication in this desert and wild.
They drew up and halted, eagerly staring round
them. At last the dust cleared away, and there ap-
peared horsemen of a swarthy complexion, mounted
on chargers swifter than antelopes; every one ex-
claiming, O by Abs! O by Adnan! At these
shouts their souls revived : they hastened forwards
and saluted them, and related all the horrors they
had endured from the Teyans. Overtake Prince
Malik and Antar, they cried in conclusion, for they
are combating twenty thousand lion-warriors, and
are almost overpowered and destroyed. Upon this
the horsemen rode on at full speed towards the
field of contention, and, rushing upon the Teyans,
they..shouted, O by Abs! O by Adnan! Antar
-was at that moment nearly exhausted; he was


64 ANTAR THANKS THE PRINCES.


also, he fled, and followed Maljem. The troops
soon imitated their leaders, and the standards and |
ensigns were reversed. Antar and the Absians fu-
riously pursued them, till they had driven them
out of that land; when they returned for the dis-
persed cattle and scattered arms: and having col-
lected the. spoil, they halted; and congratulated each
other on their safety. But Antar searched for his
friend, Prince Malik, whom he at last found, but
covered with wounds. He soothed his anguish, and
calmed his heart with encouraging expressions; and
turning towards Shas and Cais, he complimented
find thanked them for their timely appearance, ex-
tolling them and their father, King Zoheir. Cais
smiled upon him, and felicitated him on his escape ;
thus captivating Antar’s whole mind and heart.
Shas, on the contrary, received him haughtily, and
with the harshest severity and most overbearing
pride, exclaiming, Welcome, thou son of Zebeeba !
When they had reposed and eaten, Rebia inquired
of Shas the cause of his coming; who gave an ex-
planation of all that had passed with his father on
the subject. The next day, Shas, Malik, Cais, and
Antar, with the whole army, marched forward,
preceded by their immense plunder, the united pro-
perty of three large tribes; and after three days
marching, they approached their own country. As
soon as they halted for the night, Malik, Ibla’s
father, and his son Amroo, repaired to the tents of
Prince Shas. Malik cast himself at his feet, and


` e
MALIK BEGS SHAS’S ALD. 65


kissed his hand. What is the matter, O Malik?
said Shas. O my lord, cried Malik, you have in-
deed done us the greatest of favours; and you have
exposed yourself to imminent perils on our account :
but now I implore you, my lord, graciously to be-
stow on us your protection. Keep off this vile black
from my daughter: take her to your own dwelling
when we reach home, and make her serve you as
your slave; only suffer not this base-born to dis-
honour me in my daughter. It is true, my lord,
his reputation is great, and his friends are nu-
merous; and I am quite worn out by his attentions
and importunities. His object is to espouse my
daughter, and our enemies already exult in my
shame and disgrace. I throw myself on you, my
lord, and I consign my affairs entirely over to you:
for you alone are able to assist me, and protect my
daughter. Tell me whether you will do so or not!
Either take my hand, or I will turn my face to the
wilds and the deserts, and go down to one of the
Arab princes, and demand protection of him; where
I may become at least a respected guest, far from
my own country. Shas pitied his distress: he en-
deavoured to soothe and calm him, saying, I will
keep this black slave away from you: verily he
shall be prohibited from any intercourse with your
daughter, or I will make him drink of the cup
of perdition. Thus Shas, having quieted Malik’s
mind, and dismissing him, sent for Antar; who no
sooner appeared, than Shas abruptly commenced


VOL. If. F


62 ANTAR WOUNDED; BUT IS RELIEVED.


covered with wounds, and his courage cooled: for
he had rescued Ibla from captivity seven times, and
had overthrown the heroes around her: he had also
driven back the enemy five times from Prince Malik,
now rushing to the nght, now to the left, whilst the
Teyans wheeled in whichever direction he moved.
At this critical juncture arrived the Absians, as we
have stated, and attacked the enemy, as we have
described.

When Antar departed to accomplish Ibla’s de-
liverance, with Prince Malik, King Zoheir was at-
tending a marriage-feast with the tribe of Fazarah ;
and upon his return, three days after, he inquired
for Antar and his son, but was told they had set
out for the land of Tey. Being greatly alarmed
for them both, he instantly sent for his son Shas.
Know, my son, said he, that your brother Malik is
gone with Antar against the Teyans; and I am in
fears about them, being aware of the great power
of King Maljem, son of Handala, and his brother,
the Blood-drinker. I wish that you and your
brother Cais would mount, with two thousand
horsemen, and overtake them. Return not with-
out them. Shas obeyed his father’s orders, and
marched on till he came up with them in the field
of carnage.

Now Antar’s powers expanded. He dismounted
from Abjer, who was much fatigued at the dread-
ful scenes he had endured. He mounted another,
and assailed the enemy with the impetuosity of a


MALJEM FLIES IN TERROR. 63


lion; and in the fury of his assault he overthrew
heroes, and plunged them into misery and disgrace:
he hewed off joints and arms, and cut through the
troops, right and left. The deeds of the Absians
would have turned infants gray. King Maljem
and his brother halted upon a high sand-hill, taking
no part in the contest, but waiting to receive Antar
and the Absians as captives; when lo! they ob-
served their own army staggering, and the Absians
making their way through them; and blood flowing
over the land, and the steadiest hearts quaking, and
their horses stumbling over carcases, and warriors
hurled to the ground, and the bravest wounded.
Instantly King Maljem and the Blood-drinker
darted forward, and eagerly ordered their troops
to renew the conflict, and to force back the fugitives
to the combat. . Thus was Maljem engaged in the
terrors of war, and in the thickest of the fight, when
a bellow, like a peal of thunder, echoed behind him.
He quickly turned round, and behold it was Antar !
Foam issued from the corners of his lips as he over-
threw the heroes, right and left. Maljem was hor-
ror-struck at his yell, and the immensity of his
form: but Antar rushed upon him in this state of
terror, and pierced him with his spear through the
thigh, forcing it even into the ribs of his steed.
Maljem nearly drank of the cup of annihilation ;
but, urged by the sweetness of life, he clung to the
neck of his horse, and fled. Antar then roared out
at his brother; and as he was about to pierce him


64 ANTAR THANKS TAE PRINCES.


also, he fled, and followed Maljem. The troops
soon imitated their leaders, and the standards and |
ensigns were reversed. Antar and the Absians fu-
riously pursued them, till they had driven them
out of that land; when they returned for the dis-
persed cattle and scattered arms: and having col-
lected the spoil, they halted; and congratulated each
other on their safety. But Antar searched for his
friend, Prince Malik, whom he at last found, but
covered with wounds. He soothed his anguish, and
calmed his heart with encouraging expressions ; and
turning towards Shas and Cais, he complimented
ànd thanked them for their timely appearance, ex-
tolling them and their father, King Zoheir. Cais
smiled upon him, and felicitated him on his escape ;
thus captivating Antar’s whole mind and heart.
Shas, on the contrary, received him haughtily, and
with the harshest severity and most overbearing
pride, exclaiming, Welcome, thou son of Zebeeba !
When they had reposed and eaten, Rebia inquired
of Shas the cause of his coming; who gave an ex-
planation of all that had passed with his father on
the subject. The next day, Shas, Malik, Cais, and
Antar, with the whole army, marched forward,
preceded by their immense plunder, the united pro-
perty of three large tribes; and after three days
marching, they approached their own country. As
soon as they halted for the night, Malik, Ibla’s
father, and his son Amroo, repaired to the tents of
Prince Shas. Malik cast himself at his feet, and


. n
MALIK BEGS SHAS’S AID. 65


kissed his hand. What is the matter, O Malik?
said Shas. O my lord, cried Malik, you have in-
deed done us the greatest of favours; and you have
exposed yourself to imminent perils on our account:
but now I implore you, my lord, graciously to be-
stow on us your protection. Keep off this vile black
from my daughter: take her to your own dwelling
when we reach home, and make her serve you as
your slave; only suffer not this base-born to dis-
honour me in my daughter. It is true, my lord,
his reputation is great, and his friends are nu-
merous; and Í am quite worn out by his attentions
and importunities. His object is to espouse my
daughter, and our enemies already exult in my
shame and disgrace. I throw myself on you, my
lord, and I consign my affairs entirely over to you:
for you alone are able to assist me, and protect my
daughter. Tell me whether you will do so or not!
Either take my hand, or I will turn my face to the
wilds and the deserts, and go down to one of the
Arab princes, and demand protection of him; where
I may become at least a respected guest, far from
my own country. Shas pitied his distress: he en-
deavoured to soothe and calm him, saying, I will
keep this black slave away from you: verily he
shall be prohibited from any intercourse with your
daughter, or I will make him drink of the cup
of perdition. ‘Thus Shas, having quieted Malik’s
mind, and dismissing him, sent for Antar; who no
sooner appeared, than Shas abruptly commenced


VOL. 1I. F


66 ANTAR REBUKED BY SHAS.


by saying, Know, O son of Zebeeba, outrage ever
ends ill; and he who covets what is not his by
right, is an oppressor and a tyrant. Your uncle
Malik was with me just now, and complained to
me of his situation. I have granted to him my
special protection, and his daughter Ibla will hence-
forward live in my family, and with my wife. Her
enemies will be mine, and I warn you that you
must no more frequent her society: no more must
you talk of your marriage with her, either in pri-
vate or in public; otherwise in no land will you
have a more decided enemy than myself. I have
heard you say a thousand times that you will never
submit to disgrace or infamy; but now you are
wittingly dishonouring yourself by a worldly lust
after women. Do you indeed say, exclaimed Antar,
whilst the tears started into his eyes, and he sighed
from his sorrowing heart, do you indeed say that I
am dishonoured by reason of my worldly desires?
God forbid! Indeed, though love and affection
thus overwhelm me in disgrace, it is my uncle him-
_ self that has excited my passion; for when she is a
prisoner, he urges me to liberate her, and I expose
my life to perils for her sake: but when his daughter
is safe in his tent, he calls me a-slave, and the son
of a slave-woman. Antar’s eyes flashed fire, and
he quitted the presence of Shas; but he conquered
his feelings till he came to his friend, Prince Malik,
to whom he related all that had lately passed with
Shas. O Aboolfawaris, said he, greatly distressed,


ANTAR RESOLVES TO GO TO MECCA. 67


let not your bosom be agitated—let not your
thoughts grieve you: for by him who created man
and things, | will carry off Ibla for you, were I
even to be slain in the attempt. I will accomplish
your wishes. Wait patiently till we reach the pre-
sence of my father, and you shall see what I will
do to your enemies. I will so act that you shall
enjoy supreme authority over them all, high and
low. Antar blessed him, and thanked him. Re-
tiring, he waited till it was dark; when he said to
his brother Shiboob, Son of a black, walk my horse
Abjer into the open plain, that he may breathe
freely, and recover from the fatigue of battles and
conflicts; for I can no longer remain with this das-
tardly tribe. What has happened, asked Shiboob,
that you are going to quit your country and family
in such a hurry? Ay, cried Antar, as soon as we
reach home, Prince Malik is resolved on taking my
part; but Shas will never resign his hatred towards
me. Thus disturbances will arise among the tribe,
and this unhappy business will be productive of
dissensions : so that the noble Arabs will say of me,
that Antar was the cause of troubles and divisions
among the tribe. Now I do not wish to load Prince
Malik with my distresses, which are indeed into-
lerable; for he is interested about me in every
trouble and adversity: it is my wish to cure my
own disease with my own medicine, and not let my
enemies triumph over me. I will establish myself
at Mecca, near the holy shrine; and there will I
F 2


68 HE DEPARTS BY NIGHT.


make my complaints to the Lord of mankind, in
order that his supreme decrees may succour me,
whether death assail me, or fortune relieve me.
Do so, my brother, said Shiboob; wait patiently
for Ibla, and comfort yourself. Yes, continued
Antar; for as jong as she resides in the habitation
of her father and mother, my heart is at ease about
her: but should her father listen to the addresses
of any other person, then shall the Arabs learn
what I will do: they shall see who is the most
powerful. I will slay him, were he even in the
chambers of Chosroe, or the Roman Emperor, or
under the protection of the Kings of the tribe of
Asfar. Not a man would I leave alive among
them.

Shiboob followed his directions. He led out
Abjer, and, quitting the tents, walked him about
among the sands and wastes, till the renowned
Antar joined him; and when it was quite dark,
he mounted his steed and departed, preceded by
Shiboob. ‘They traversed plains and deserts; and,
as they travelled on, Antar reflected on the fright-
ful adventures he had encountered, and the dread-
ful scenes he had endured on account of Ibla. Still
his ambitious passion was not assuaged, nor was his
disorder, the result of his love, appeased: and thus
he spoke:

“ If, O tear, thou canst not relieve me in my
“ sorrow, perhaps thou mayst quench the flame
‘¢ that consumes me. O heart, if thou wilt not wait


HE COMPLAINS OF HIS TRIBE. 69 ©


“« patiently for a meeting, die then the death of a
“ woe-begone, wandering stranger. How long must
‘s I defy the evils of fortune, and encounter the
“ vicissitudes of night with the Indian blade! I
“serve a tribe, whose hearts are the reverse of
“s what they exhibit in their fondness for me. I
“ am, in the field, the prince of their tribe; but, the
“ battle over, I am more despised than a slave.
“Oh that I could annihilate this affection of a
“lover! How it humiliates me! It agonizes my
“ heart; it enfeebles my courage. But I will soon
“ seek the sacred shrine, and complain of my ill-
“ usage to the Judge against whose decrees there
* lies no appeal. I will renounce the days when
“ my tears deceived me, and I will aid the widowed
“ and plaintive dove. On thee, O daughter of Ma-
« lik, be the peace of God! the blessing of a sor-
& rowing, heart-grieved lover! I will depart, but
s“ my soul is firm in its love for thee. Have pity,
“ then, on the cauterized heart of one far away.
“ Soon will my tribe remember me when the horse
“ advance—every noble warrior trampling and
“ stamping over them. Then, O daughter of Ma-
“ lik, will agony be plainly evident, when the coward-
“ gnaws his hands in death.”

Having finished his verses, Antar pursued his
way with Shiboob, travelling day and night, until
they approached the land of Mecca. Ours, my
brother, said Shiboob, is a singular history; equally


so is our journey into this country, for we have seen


70 HEARS ONE SURROWING IN THE WASTE.


no one. Forward, O Ebe Reah, cried Antar, for
hitherto we have never seen any one but that has
brought evil upon us; and truly I am harassed
with encountering disasters, and my heart is dis-
gusted at fighting. And Antar quoted these two
couplets: ‘ Retire within yourself, and be familiar
“ with solitude: when you are alone, you are in
“the right road. Wild beasts are tamed by gentle
“ treatment, but men are never to be induced to
“ abandon their iniquities.” He had scarcely finished
these lines, when he distinguished a scream through
the calmness of the night. O Arabs, look! is there
not a human being in this desert who will hearken
to my cry, who will observe the respect due to rank .
and noble birth? Will no one deliver my virgin
daughters from the miseries of captivity and in-
famy? Alas, O disgrace! Alas, no aid, no succour !
Such was the cry; and thus a voice continued :

“« Flow and stream, O eyes, in copious tears for
“ the damsels, bereft of all assistance, friendless,
“ dishonoured in the desert. Mounted on tall ca-
“c mels, they mourn for such iniquitous barbarity in
“ the lonely waste. The old man, wounded, lies in
“ the last agony, and his sons have been robbed of
“ their lives by the calamitous spear. Their mo-
“ ther in her distress breathes in fire, and in the
“ madness of her passion calls on instant death.
“ O ye travellers by night under the veiled dark-
“ ness, perhaps there is a hero among ye who can
« show himself a lion-warrior, and whose thrust in


OFFERS HER ASSISTANCE. 71


“ the battle-day under the black clouds of dust
‘* may assist us against the foe before the pangs of
“ death arrive, and thus obtain a noble reward from
“ the eternal God.”

‘As Antar heard this, the flame in his heart blazed
afresh. Alas, my brother, said he, this must be an
oppressed female. Her enemies have slain her sons,
have made her daughters captive, and have left her
to become a prey to her own anguish, [I am re-
solved instantly to find out this wronged lady, and
perhaps the God of Heaven will take vengeance on
those who have wronged me. Thus saying, he
slackened his bridle, and galloped over the country
in the direction of the spot whence issued the voice.
O mourner! O woman of tears and woe! he cried,
tell me if any one has injured thee—that I may
come to thy aid. Alas! replied the woman, whilst
she wept from joy that some one had answered to
her cry, By the Lord of Heaven, a horseman of
the desert has insulted me; he has hurled at me
the shafts of sorrow; he has slain my three sons,
taken captive my three daughters, and has wounded
my husband As-hath, the son of Obad. It is now
hree days and three mghts that I am calling out
in this wide desert, but no one has come to succour
me—no one to intercede for me—no one has even
vouchsafed me an answer, but thou, O Chief of the
Arabs. If thou art a man of noble spirit, deliver
me from this calamity. Of what tribe art thou ?
exclaimed Antar. I am of the noble race of Ken-


72 SHE REPEATS HER TALE OF WOE.


deh, she replied. This year a famine visited our
lands; so we emigrated, in order to go down to the
country of Harith, where we have a daughter mar-
ried. It was our intention to settle there: but a
warrior, called Sudam, son of Salheb, attacked us
with forty horsemen of the plundering Arabs m
this wild. They slew my three sons, and my three
daughters they took prisoners, and wounded my
husband As-hath. They are now about to convey
us to the mountains of Toweila, there to sell us as
slaves. Take care of these women, said Antar to
Shiboob; assist them down from the backs of the
camels, whilst I go and look out for those vile
wretches who have done this foul deed. Thus
saying, he urged on Abjer; and it was just at the
first dawning of day, when he distinguished some
horsemen advancing from the centre of the desert,
headed by Sudam, like a ferocious lion, who thus
exclaimed :

“ I am Sudam, the assailer of warriors; in me is |
“ a heart harder than mountains. In horror and
« fear of me, even the wild beasts of the waste
“ shrink into the obscurity of caverns: and were
“ Death.a substance, I would steep his right hand
«in the blood of his left.”

Antar grasped his spear; he slackened the bridle
of his steed, and gave a shout that made the deserts
and the rocks tremble. Frustrated are thy hopes,
he cried ; into hopeless misery art thou fallen. As
Sudam cast his eyes on Antar, he rejoiced, and was


SUDAM’S FRIENDS OVERTHROWN. 73


glad. Here is a glorious morning! he exclaimed,
addressing his comrades: this booty to begin the
day with will suffice. Assault him, one of ye; let
him not escape: bring me his horse and his spoil.
At the word, one of the forty galloped down upon
Antar, crying out, State thy descent ; peradventure
thy connexion may protect thee: otherwise, deliver
up thy horse and thy armour. But Antar deigned
not an answer; and, without a word, he assailed
him like a lion rushing out ‘of his den: he bran-
dished his Jance before him, and, piercing him
through the chest, forced the point out at his back ;
and he threw him down dead, weltering in his blood.
Sudam and his associates marked Antar’s intre- |
pidity ; they all stood aghast: but though Sudam
was most anxious to engage him, his friends would
not suffer him, and they all fell on Antar at once.
He, however, received them as the parched soil the
first of the rain; and plunging with them into the
thick dust, he soon began to glean off horseman
after horseman; so that the sun had scarcely risen,
before they were all stretched upon the earth.
Sudam was bewildered at such prodigious efforts of
valour; and though he felt alarmed, he knew he
must attack him. Accordingly, he advanced, and
exclaimed, Hold, O Arab: tell me what horseman
thou art, and with what tribe thou art connected ;
for thy battle excites my surprise, and thy prowess
is most wonderful. I should be overjoyed in thy
friendship, and I would willingly live with thee.


74 SUDAM HIMSELF SLAIN.


Let us unite our force and plunder; and, to
begin, I will divide with thee the spoil that is
now in our power. There are three virgins; and
those who were to have shared them with me
thou hast killed. Away, thou son of a cuckold,
replied Antar; away with this absurdity: come on
to the contest! Despair of this booty and these
damsels, for the God on high has delivered them
from bondage and infamy. Sudam was highly in-
dignant that Antar should presume to thwart him,
or he be disappointed of his prey; so he rushed
upon him, and sought to engage him, conceiving
that he must be hke other warriors whom he had
fought. But Antar received him like a ferocious
lion: he gave him no time either to advance or to
retreat, but struck him on the chest with his cleaving
Dhami, and he divided him down to the belt of his
back. Sudam fell down dead, weltering in his blood.
At that moment Shiboob ran towards him, swift as
a blast of wind; and seeing that Antar had slain
` the hero, he congratulated him on his safety. And
when they had collected the scattered horses and
dispersed spoil, they repaired to the women; who,
at the sight of this plunder, felt convinced that their
defender had destroyed their enemies. So they
crowded round him, and kissed his hands, thanking
and praising him; but the mother of the damsels
advanced before the others, and thus extolled her
deliverer :


‘© May thy God grant thee all thou desirest in


THE GRATITUDE OF THE MOURNERS. 15


« thy hopes, and bestow on thy lands the blessings
“ of plenteous showers! O Knight of the troop !
‘‘O thou unrivalled hero in the tumultuous clatter
“of spears and the thrusts of the lances! may
“ every morn thy foes tremble before thee! May
“ their lives dread the speed of death! May thy
“ envious enemies feel in every limb their hearts
“ fried in flames and fire! Mayst thou increase in
« glory wherever they insult thee; and may the
“ sword of thy honour rest on their skulls and
“ heads! Were people to be impartial in their
“language, and tell the truth, no one but thee
“ would they style a hero: for truly thou standest
“ alone, unequalled in the universe, matchless in
‘‘ the mountains and the valleys.” |

Antar was exceedingly gratified at the old lady’s
verses, and greatly admired her eloquence, and the
elegance of her expressions. He requested the
young women to veil themselves; and turning to-
wards their father, who was lying on the ground,
he dismounted, and bound up his wounds, and
assisted him to sit down to repose himself a little ;
congratulating him at the same time on his deli-
verance from his enemies. The Sheikh thanked
him, and kissed his hands. Antar also rested him-
self awhile after the fatigues of the conflict, and the
old lady brought him something to eat, which she
placed before him, whilst her daughters stood round
him in silent admiration. Now Antar had eaten


%6 THEY REQUEST HIM TO LIVE WITH THEM.


nothing since his separation from Ibla, neither had
he slept; so he ate till he was satisfied, and then
asked them whither they were going with their
baggage? We wish, they replied, to proceed on
our journey to the tribe of Harith, for they are our
relations; and with them we intend to remain all
this year, O Aboolfawaris. Upon this, Antar di-
rected them to mount their camels: so they all
seated themselves in their howdahs, together with
the Sheikh; and they departed, seeking the rocky
deserts. But as Antar accompanied them, the
Sheikh questioned him about his affairs, and his
projects, and his expectations. Antar informed
him of all his adventures with his uncle Malik, and
that he was now going to Mecca and the holy
shrine, there to take up his residence for some time.
O Aboolfawaris, said the Sheikh, my heart is much
interested in your fate: you have made me forget
even the slaughter of my sons; for you have in-
deed acted nobly towards me, and done what no
friend ever did for friend before. But I have
nothing with which to recompense you for these
honourable deeds, but these honourable damsels,
whom you liberated with the blade of your sword
and the barb of your spear. Take one of them, I
beseech you: come and live with us, that we may
serve you with all our power—myeelf, this old
lady, and my daughters, even to our dying day.
How can this be? said Antar. How can I resign


HE REJECTS THEIR OFFER. 77


Ibla, my uncle’s daughter? and he thus continued
in verse :

« Were my heart mine own, I should desire
« nothing beyond you—1it would covet nothing but
“ you.. But it loves what tortures it; where no
“ word, no deed encourages it.”

The Sheikh was amazed at Antar’s love and
passion : and thus they travelled on till they reached
the land of Harith; and as they were now in safety,
Antar took leave of them; and giving them all the
horses and spoil he had captured, he separated from
them, and, in company with Shiboob, traversed the
plains and the wastes till he arrived at Mecca. He
alighted in the Sacred Valley, and there he resided,
passing his days in hunting, to relieve his sorrows
and afflictions, and his nights with Shiboob, in
talking over old stories and past events.


18 IBLA AGAIN BETROTHED TO AMARAH.


CHAPTER X.


Soon after Antar’s departure, the sons of Zoheir
searched for him in every direction; but, when all
their inquiries were fruitless, Prince Malik was
sorely grieved for his loss, for he loved him sin-
cerely. Shedad and his companions were also much
troubled; but Malik, Ibla’s father, and Rebia, and
Shas, were the happiest of men. Now, indeed, said
Shas to Amarah, your business has succeeded to
your every wish —you have no rival with Ibla, in
the absence of that obstinate black; therefore, as
soon as you reach home, present to her father the
marriage dower and settlement, be married to Ibla,
and thus obtain your heart’s desire: I will back
your claims. And turning to Malik, Ibla’s father,
he added, Give your hand to Amarah—make your
daughter over to him, and marry him to her: I,
too, will stand as witness for you, that our pro-
jects may be completed, ‘our hearts relieved from
pain; and Ibla will be in security in the dwellings
of the Zeead family. I swear by your liberality
towards me, cried Malik, I wish Amarah may have
ten sons by her at least; and he extended his hand
to Amarah: and the contract was formed by shaking
hands. ‘Thus he married his daughter to him, and


PRINCE SHAS SEPARATES FROM THEM. 19


the people of the tribe witnessed the deed. For my
part, said Oorwah, I anticipate nothing but evil
and ill luck to us all from this match; for whoever
espouses that girl will rise in the morning a head-
less trunk. Prince Cais laughed at Oorwah’s pre-
dictions, for he too was aware of their folly. The
plot soén reached Prince Malik, who was in the
rear of the army. By the faith of an Arab, said he
to Shedad, I much fear that some sad disaster will
befal my brother Shas for all this, and that he will
repent when the evil day comes; but never will I
permit Amarah to feast on Ibla until I am with-
drawn from the mansions of this world. However,
you may now demand back from your brother all
that your son Antar gave him in cattle, and Asafeer
camels, and he camels, and the tiaras and girdles,
and the diadem; for it was all Antar’s property.
Let us say nothing about it, said Shedad, till we
reach home ; then you shall see what I will do in
the presence of King Zoheir. Having marched on
till evening, they alighted and reposed till morning,
when they pursued their way to the land of Abs
and Adnan, near the lake of Zat ool irsad, where
they halted. Shas had always kept in the advance
of the army, and it was his practice to pass his
leisure time in hunting. One day, on the march,
he separated from his brothers, and, only taking
with him ten horsemen, he launched out among
the wilds and the plains in pursuit of the antelope
and the deer. Prince Malik went home. And just


80 TAKEN PRISONER BY MAISOOR.


as Shas and his comrades were returning, lo! a
great dust arose and obscured the country; and
there came forth a hundred horsemen, all in steel,
and advancing from the quarter of the tribe of
Fazarah. Shas and his friends divided themselves
into three parties. Sons of my uncle, said he, if
this troop attack us, we have no other means of
escaping death but by the blows of the sword: se-
parate, therefore, four horsemen in each division.
To this they assented, and soon the ten heroes at-
tacked the strangers; but in less than an hour they
were all slain, and Shas was taken prisoner, and
dragged before the chief, whose name was Maisoor,
son of Zeead, of the tribe of Hazrej, which was
also a division of the tribe of Hanth. He was
roaming about on a predatory excursion against
the lands of Abs and Adnan; and for two days
they had concealed themselves in the country of the
tribe of Fazarah, but had not chanced to fall on any
prey till they met Shas and his party. The prisoner
was soon brought into the presence of Maisoor, who
resolved on killing him, for Shas had slain Mai-
soor’s brother in the fray ; but as soon as he looked
at him, and saw how magnificently he was dressed,
and that he was mounted on an Arab steed, richly
caparisoned with housings of burnished gold, studded
with pearls and jewels, he was assured that he was
a distinguished chieftain. State your birth and pa-
rentage, said he, perhaps they may save you, before
you are laid low in the dust. I am the son of King


PRINCE SHAS ILL-TREATED. 81


Zoheir, ruler of the tribes of Abs and Adnan, re-
plied Shas. I have slain some of your countrymen,
and am now in your power: demand whatever
quantity of cattle you please ; but, should you put
me to death, you are aware that behind me are
warlike tribes and heroes. Shas, you must die,
exclaimed Maisoor, silent must be your soul; you
afflicted me in my brother, and have left me to
mourn him for ever. Upon this he placed him on
the back of a horse, and scourged him with a whip
he held in his hand till the blood streamed from
every part of his body; and then Maisoor and his
companions passed over deserts and wilds, seeking
their own country, whilst Shas endured the pangs
of death at every moment.

In the mean time Prince Malik and his com-
panions reached home ; but in the greatest distress
at the disappearance of Antar, the intrepid war-
rior. When they presented themselves to King
Zoheir, they informed him of the dreadful scenes
they had endured with the Teyans, and the battles
they had fought; and to the King’s inquiries about
Antar, they related his exploits. When he asked
for his son Shas, they assured him he was on a
hunting party, and that he would return in the
evening. King Zoheir was persuaded that they
had ill-used Antar; and observing his son Malik
was full of grief, and that he was unable to speak,
Tell me, my son, said he, what ails thee. May
God curse every act of oppression and those who


VOL. II. G


82 AMARAH’S PUNISHMENT.


‘abet it! exclaimed Malik: curses on those who
know what justice is, and do not adhere to it. He
then stated to him all that had happened to Antar :
how he had exposed his life in battle and carnage
for the family of Zeead, and had rescued them
from dangers; and how they had obliged him to
abandon them in the desert. Vilest of men, cried
King Zoheir, turning to Amarah, this is all owing
to your infamous conduct towards your tribe, and
your treachery to Ibla in taking her captive: your
death would indeed be more gladsome than your
life! Is this the return that you make your cousin
Antar, the destroyer of horsemen, for having de-
livered you, on his arrival from Persia, out of the
hands of the Nocturnal Evil and the Depredator of
the Age? He immediately ordered the slaves to
seize Antarah. They rushed upon hin, and, throw-
ing him on the ground, they laid on him with such
heavy blows, that the blood streamed from every
part of his body till he was almost dead ; whilst his
brother Rebia stood by, but dared not make a single
remark on the subject, knowing well what King
Zoheir suffered on account of Antar’s absence and
his son’s wounds. Oorwah only laughed at the in-
dignities and disgraces thus heaped upon Amarah.
Well, Amarah, said he, these are the first-fruits of
your marriage with Ibla. Still the slaves continued
to beat Amarah ; and, when he was near his last
gasp, they tied him, with his hands behind him, to
a tent-pole, groaning in excess of pain. King Zo-


KING ZOHEIR REBUKES MALIK. 83


` heir now ordered Malik, Ibla’s father, into his pre-
sence. What! cried the king, do you consider
yourself as one of the illustrious Arabs and a Chief
of the tribe of Abs and Adnan in rank and degree?
How then have you dared to act thus? How
dared you to accept your daughter's dower from
your nephew, and, refusing to acknowledge it,
marry her to another? Your infamy and ignominy
will not be consummated till you have wedded her
to a wretch who has violated your honour, and
clothed you in shame amongst all the Arabs of the
desert and the plains. How often has Antar libe-
rated you from captivity and misery, even after-
you had exposed him to a sea of deaths in the land
of Irak! And did he not bring to you the wealth
of the King of Persia and of King Monzar, with
their he-camels and Asafeer she-camels? O my
lord, replied Malik (for his deceit and cunning were
ever at hand), I swear by your liberality I have
not injured my nephew Antar. I have delivered
my daughter over to your son Shas; and when I
said to him, Let no one else interfere with her— she
is your property; you know what is good and what
is bad for us; you are lord over my children and
my property; my daughter is at your disposal —
marry her to any one you think will suit her: No
one but the Chief Amarah is a proper match for
her, was your son’s reply. - So he betrothed her to
Amarah, and was arranging all our differences,
when I objected, saying, My lord, how can this
G2


a


84 MALIK’S EVASIONS AND DUPLICITY.


` be? my nephew has already brought me the mar-
riage dower, and your father favours him on this
point, as also your brother Malik. Away with
your folly ! continued Shas; I will settle it. And
he sent for Antar, and made terms with him: at
which being much exasperated, he abandoned us
in the night, and we know not whither he is gone.
So vexed am [I at his absence, that I feel as if on
the burning coals of hell— for he was indeed a limb
of my own limbs; but I could not thwart Prince
Shas’s orders. Now that my daughter is at home,
I pray you, do not use her ill, but look after her
as you please: make her one of your handmaidens,
and I am your slave. Do you and the tribe of
Abs bear witness to what I say. King Zoheir saw
through all his art and malevolence, but said, Let
there be no compulsion used towards Ibla, till An-
tar appears, and we hear what he has to say; we
will then decide who is to blame: and, when my
son Shas returns, he will explain what you said to
him, or 1 will expose you to the public for your
conduct. King of the Age, exclaimed Shedad, it
is my turn now to demand of Rebia and his bro-
ther the blood of my son. It is they and Malik,
who has married his daughter to Amarah, who
have destroyed him. O that thou, O Shedad,
groaned out Amarah, O that thou wert but mar-
ried with this kind of ceremony, which consists only
of stripes and whips. King Zoheir and all his at-
tendants laughed heartily at Amarah; and thus


THE KING'S ANGUISH AT THE LOSS OF HIS SON. 85


they continued talking, till, it being dark, they all
separated. But still Shas did not return. King
Zoheir was in great distress, and was much agitated
till the dawn of day—but Shas did not return.
Convinced, at length, of the loss of his son, he
called out to his horsemen, and ordered them to go
forth in quest of Shas over the whole desert. They
mounted their steeds, and plunged into the midst
‘of the waste, where they roamed about the whole
day, and returned at night, having heard nothing
of Shas. King Zoheir’s affliction increased, and the
tears poured down like rain. Alas! it is his base
conduct towards Antar, he cried, that has ruined
my son. By the faith of a noble Arab of Medhr,
if I hear of his death, I will strike off the head
of that Amarah, and I will hang Malik, son of
Carad.

Now Matsoor was continuing his journey with
Shas, torturing him and making him swallow the
bitterness of death, till he reached the land of the
tribe of Harith, and Shas was nearly lifeless. When
they were settled in Maisoor’s tents, he summoned
his comrades: You know, said he, that this’ Absian
prisoner has slain my brother, and I must put him
to death; do you take his horse and his arms, and
those of his comrades, and leave me to assuage my
heart by tormenting him. He enclosed Shas be-
tween four bars of iron, and stationed a guard of
slaves over him; and, whenever he went out, he


kicked him ; and, whenever he entered, he thumped


86 MAISOOR: PREVENTED FROM KILLING SHAS.


him with his fists; and, when Shas was hungry, he
gave him nothing to eat; neither did he allow any
one to pity him. This story was soon spread abroad
amongst the tents, till, at last, the torments and dis-
graces Shas endured reached the chief of the tribe.
He was a valiant horseman, and his name was
Mewhoob, son of Yezid. He sent for Maisoor,
and said to him, My cousin, such conduct towards
your prisoner is by no means just; for he is a
prince, and the son of a prince—his father is su-
preme among the tribes of Arabs: and I cannot
possibly permit you to kill him, now that this
business is become so public, unless you go to the
King of this country, Abdoolmodan, and. consult
with him about destroying him. If he order you
to kill him, do as he bids you; but, if you kill him
without his permission, he will be bound to punish
you. For, most certainly, the family of your cap-
tive will not rest quiet—and, no doubt, some one
here will depart, and give information to his tribe:
and, if his father hear of his death, he will mount,
and come down upon us with the tnbes of Abs and
Adnan, Fazarah and Ghiftan, Marah and Dibyan,
for he rules over those Arabs; and he will root us
out of the land. And should he send us to our
King, and require our punishment at his hands, he
will be greatly enraged against us, and will say to
‘us, You took the son of King Zoheir prisoner, and
slew him with your own hands, so you must suffer
what you made him suffer. Now, my cousin, take


SHAS FINDS A FRIEND, 87


my advice—relieve your prisoner from torture, and
consult with King Abdoolmodan. Maisoor was much
disturbed at this, and alarmed at the dangers that
threatened him. He hastened back to Shas, and
untied his hands, but bound his feet, and kicked
him in the rear; and, having stationed a slave over
him, he rode away, with twenty horsemen, tra-
versing the wilds and the wastes on his way to
King Abdoolmodan.

But Shas, now that his torments were somewhat
lightened, addressed. Maisoor’s wife, saying, Noble
lady, will there ever be any relief from the deaths
I endure? If they delay much longer to kill you,
she replied, you will probably escape total per-
dition, and perhaps be ransomed at-a considerable
price, for wealth softens the hearts of all men. O
‘my aunt, added Shas, I am powerful in cattle and
possessions, but I have no one whom I can send to
inform my family of my situation. And Shas con- ,
tinued talking till a party of women entered, all
clothed in black; among whom was an elderly
lady, who, after saluting Maisoor’s wife, ex-
claimed, Daughter of mine uncle, who is this
young prisoner? Cousin, replied the lady of the
dwelling, springing up on her feet and com-
plimenting her guest, this is the son of the King
of the tribes of Abs and Adnan. The moment
she heard this she advanced towards Shas, and,
expressing her grief at his misfortunes, Young
man, said she, are you indeed one of King Zoheir’s


88 WHO QUESTIONS HIM OF HIS TRIBE.


sons? Yes, my aunt, replied Shas. Which of
them? continued the lady. I am Shas, he answered.
May God grant your rescue, exclaimed she; for
you are all famed for your bravery, your bene-
volence, and liberality—but I do not think you
seem to be very eloquent. Now her view in this
speech was to learn something of his history, and
to draw from him some of Antar’s verses. Noble
lady, he replied, you have among you some of the
tribe of Cahtan, who are so gifted with eloquence
that they put to shame all the tribe of Adnan.
Yes, said she, we can boast of Emir ool Cais, the
son of Hijir: he has already fixed some lines on
the Holy Shrine, in which are these words :

“« My beloved is come to me, to efface all painful
‘¢ impressions from my tortured heart. Didst thou
“ not see that, when she visited me by night, I
“ found the sweetest essences in her breath? Yet
“< she loves me not.”

We also, cried Shas, laughing and much pleased,
have a black, born to slavery, who tends the camels
and the sheep. We have lately admitted him to
our rank, and acknowledged him as a relation. He
can utter the most perfect rhymes—such as neither
Emir ool Cais nor any one else can equal. Had I
known his real worth among warriors, never should
I have fallen into bondage and captivity. By your
life! cried the lady, do you not recollect any of his
verses? Upon which Shas repeated these two
distiches : a


SHAS’S CONTRITION. 89


“ May nought but protection touch thee from
<“ the sword! Mayst thou ever move like the
_ branch of the ever-green tamarisk ; resembling
‘“‘ the flowers that glow in the evening, entwined in
‘ chains round her neck.”

Before Shas finished, the ladies joined in testify-
ing their pleasure and admiration. The thoughts
are indeed most beautifully expressed, observed the
old woman, and their meaning is elegantly con-
veyed. But are not these the words and rhymes
of the great Antar, son of Shedad, who is distracted
with his love for Ibla? Yes, said Shas; and I per-
ceive you are acquainted with him. Most true, she
added: I heard of him some time ago, with my
family, in the noble tribe of Kendeh. Is he mar-
ried to Ibla, or not? Alas! cried Shas, I am the
person who has injured him: I thwarted him in
the execution of his purpose. But I have bound
myself to the God of Heaven, who is our final
refuge, that, should I be liberated this time by his
means, I will throw myself at his feet; for he is a
favoured being, and he who is his foe quickly falls
into fetters and manacles. May God destroy his
oppressors, and save us from his death! said the
lady. How speedy are his rewards! Adhere
firmly, O Arab, to this resolution, and feel secure
of liberty ; for this soul would not exist in the body
of man but in the expectation of the beneficence
of Fortune. And having recommended Maisoor’s
wife to behave kindly to him, she left him. Now


90 PREPARATIONS FOR SHAS'S DEATH.


this was the woman of Kendeh whom Antar had
rescued, with her husband and her daughters, from
the grasp of Sudam, and had afterwards escorted
to her family. So, as soon as she returned home,
she sent for her husband, to whom she communi-
cated the circumstance. Cousin, said she, we have
now the means of rewarding Antar for his gallant
conduct— Shas, liberated by his hand, will be-
friend him in his suit for Ibla. Mount, therefore,
your camel, and hasten to Mecca, and acquaint
Antar with what has happened; and let him de-
termine in his wisdom how to act. As-hath mounted
his camel without delay, and departed over the
plains and wastes on his way to Mecca; and he
had been on his journey only three days when he
met Maisoor, who was all joy, accompanied by ten
horsemen, officers of the government of Abdool-
modan. Now Maisoor, as soon as he was admitted
into the presence of Abdoolmodan, kissed his hands,
and consulted him about Shas. Hasten back, cried
he, avenge your brother’s death; and, if you are
able, do the same to all the tnbe of: Abs: root
them out. Delighted at this permission, Maisoor
returned with his ten officers, all anxious to enjoy
the sight of Shas’s execution; for, at that period,
there was not an Arab but cried out for blood and
vengeance against the tribe of Abs. When Mai-
soor reached home, he ordered his servants to
slaughter camels and sheep, and prepare a feast,
and make ready a sumptuous entertainment for his


MAISOOR’S SCOFFS AND EXULTATION. 91


whole clan; and he particularly requested the at-
tendance of Mewhoob. Satiated with eating, they
called for the goblets of wine; and as they drank,
they cast the offals and: scraps at Shas, whilst he
himself was bewailing the severity of his fate; for
he was a prince, and could not endure his reverse
of fortune; and whenever Maisoor looked at him,
he wept. Ah, cried he, when you pierced my bro-
ther Shiban through the chest, and forced the spear
out at his back, why had you not pity on him?
why did you not feel for him? Early to-morrow:
morning will I hang thee, that those present and
absent may take warning by thy fate. The lady
of Kendeh was witness to this scene: it was dark,
and the wine rioted in the heads of the guests,
most of them having already retired to their dwell-
ings; the servants were lying down asleep, and
Shas was bemoaning his torments in tears and la-
mentations—thus speaking :

“ Was there ever seen by the stars of night one
‘ like me, bewildered, and sorrowing and sighing
‘‘ for his native land? And by the lustre of the
“* dawn the foe will spoil him of his life in their
“ ferocity, or murder with their daggers. O ye
‘* breathing gales, in the name ‘of God, blow high
‘< to Mount Saadi; peradventure ye may explain
“ my situation to my brother Cais, and Rebia, and
«© Malik ; for I am bound to my tribes by ties that
“ they will remember. Look, my cousins: in the
‘* obscurity hear the herald announce—the mes-


92 SHAS RESCUED BY A WOMAN.


‘‘ senger proclaim the tidings. Then let the dust
“ of the horsemen appear: let its black clouds arise
« in sable columns, and beneath its dark shadows
« let Antar be the consolation of my disquieted
“ heart. He, with his might, can indeed calm my
‘< mind, and soothe it into patience.”

And lo! a person entered, and took him by the
hand. Shas, congratulate thyself on thy safety,
said the stranger, at the same time striking off the
bonds from his hands. Absian, follow me to my
tent—fear not—you are at liberty, continued the
voice. Shas instantly arose and followed his guide,
whilst the darkness of the night concealed them till
they reached a spacious tent, and Shas’s terrors
and alarms were at an end; and as he considered
the person’s face by the light of the fire, behold it
was the old lady, the mother of the young women,
the same that had addressed him a few days ago.
Explain all this to me, said he, for truly you have
dared a deed for me the bravest warriors would not
venture to do; and I must make you some return
for so noble an act. High-born Shas, replied the
dame, whatever you may wish to do towards me,
do it for Antar, son of Shedad, and befriend him
in his marriage with Ibla. Let this be my engage-
ment between God and you: when you meet him,
kiss his bosom and his hands for me; aid him, and
be kind to him, for we were all delivered by his
sword, and rescued by his spear. And she related
to him all that the mighty Antar had done for her


MAISOOR’S DISMAY AND CONFUSION. 93


and her family when he met them; how he had
delivered them from the grasp of Sudam, and had
conducted them to this country. I have despatched
my husband, she- continued, to Antar, to give him
this intelligence, that he may take measures for
your rescue: but when I saw your death was nigh,
I did this deed. Shas listened, and his eyes were
filled with tears at Antar’s exploits, as he said to
himself, Such was ever Antar’s conduct towards me
and to all mankind ; but we disgraced him by ser-
vitude, and we degraded him to the care of camels
and sheep. Such has been our conduct to him,
Chiefs and Princes as we are, boasting of our high
rank and our superior condition. But if I am libe-
rated from this critical situation, and meet him
again, I will kiss the soles of his feet; I will aid
him, and treat him generously. The old woman
now presented him food, of which he ate till he
was satisfied: she also brought him some women’s
clothes, and put them on him, and made him sit
with her daughters; so that all his fears were re-
moved, and he reposed quietly till morning.

At day-light, Maisoor waked from his sleep, and
sent for Shas, that he might torture him as usual,
and afterwards hang him. The slaves went forth
to drag him in, but could not find him: they rushed
in crowds towards their master, and crying out with
a loud voice, exclaimed, He is gone, he is gone.
He shouted out to his horsemen, who mounted, and


separated over the wastes and wilds till the third


94 THE WOMAN DISGUISES SHAS.


hour, when they returned without any news of the
fugitive, having perceived no trace of his flight.
Maisoor felt assured of his calamity: he dashed his
fist against his head till the blood darted from the
veins. Just then one of Abdoolmodan’s officers
came up to him, and addressed him: his name was
Shireed, son of Mean, and he was a devil in the
form of a man. Be not so distressed, said he;
search among your enemies in your own clan, for
certainly he is not gone hence. My opinion is, that
you should direct a woman to search the women,
and a man to search the men; thus you will suc-
ceed. Maisoor acknowledged the good counsel;
and having given the necessary orders to his slaves
and handmaidens, he stationed men on the high-
ways, and women in the tents.

When the old lady observed this, and that the
search had already commenced in the first tents,
she instantly started up, and taking up a cauldron,
she filled it with water, and placed it on the fire;
and when she had infused into it many medicinal
roots, and fresh herbs, and black juices, she let: it
remain on the fire till at boiled: she then stripped
Shas quite naked, and stained him with the dye till
he became totally black; and clothing him in the
garb of a slave, she conducted him out, he going
before her with the other slaves, driving the camels
and the sheep to the pastures. But when they were
at some distance, she saw Shireed himself, who im-
mediately turned away from them; but the old


SHAS FALLS INTO ANOTHER DISTRESS: 95


lady commenced the conversation, saying, May God
assist you, mighty sir; you have indeed performed
deeds which no man on earth can surpass. I hope
you will catch this accursed Absian, so that my
sorrowing heart also may be relieved by his death ;
for the Absians slew my sons. ‘Thus she pursued
her way over the desert, till, reaching’ the pasture,
she turned towards Shas, and said, Be no more
afraid—you are now free. Fly—bend your steps
towards Mecca, and when you meet Antar, kiss his
hands for me: salute him for me. So Shas bounded
over the wastes, hardly crediting his escape, and
continued running forward and looking behind him
till evening: he then turned out of the road into a
mountain-cave, where he slept till the night was
almost passed. Again he arose, and set out on his
way to Mecca, till the sun arose and he thought
himself secure from pursuit, when lo! in front of
him arose a thick dust, and horsemen appeared like
black eagles, who no sooner espied Shas than they
rode down towards him, and surrounded him on
all sides, headed by a Chief, who, staring in his
face, Cousins, said he, this is the very fellow who
last night was lurking about our tents, and stole
my horse Sahab. And he seized Shas, and tied
him with cords, and bound him fast, and fastened
a long rope round his neck ; and as he dragged him
along, Villain, said he, how dared you lurk about
my tent, and steal my horse, and thus impudently
‘venture back a second time among us? I will tor-


96 ON THE POINT OF BEING KILLED.


ture you well, and punish you, and cut your throat.
But tell me, whither have you carried. my horse?
Shas groaned from the excess of agony he endured :
Arab, he cried, I am no robber; I know nothing
about it. Do not put me to death—you may suffer
for it; for I am indeed Shas, son of King Zoheir,
King of the tribes of Abs and Adnan, Fazarah and
Ghiftan, Marah and Dibyan. I have been made
prisoner in this land, and have encountered infamy
and disgrace, such as no one but myself has ever
endured ; and only by this disguise have I escaped
death. Shas continued speaking till one of the
horsemen ran up, and struck him with his fist in
the face with his whole force: O my countrymen,
said he, this fellow’s father, King Zoheir, slew my
father some years ago, and I in consequence was
brought up an orphan ; so they took away from me
all I possessed in goods, in he and she camels, and
noble steeds: but now has fate delivered this hero
into my hands, that I may avenge my father’s mur-
der. His companions approved the justice of the
threat, and were surrounding Shas, to put him to
death; and as he was about to be destroyed, lo!
various wild beasts were seen scudding towards
them, and antelopes running away in terror. A
man on foot was coming down upon them lke a
descending cloud, and behind him there appeared a
lion-warrior, like a tower on a promontory, or a
fragment rent from the mountain's side; and close
to him rode a horseman, mounted on a steed that


ANTAR APPEARS, 97


outstripped the western wind. The horsemen stop-
ped to contemplate the agility and powers of the
man on foot; and when he drew nigh, Shas gazed
intently at him, and lo! it was Shiboob, and the
hero behind him was his brother Antar, the lion-
warrior. Haste to me, Shiboob, exclaimed Shas;
I am Shas, King Zoheir’s son. I have fallen into
the hands of these wretches, and have suffered hor-
rors; and had I not seen you at this very instant,
my gall had burst, and I had expired of agony.
Foul wretches, exclaimed Shiboob, let go my lord
Shas, for Antar, the trampling hero, is coming
down upon ye. And he roared out to his brother,
Come hither, thou son of a black woman; God has
facilitated thy success, and has accorded his divine
aid. Antar increased his speed, and galloped to-
wards him. |

Now the cause of Antar’s appearance in that spot
was As-hath, whom the old lady had desired to go
for him. With all haste he traversed the plains
till he reached Mecca, where he inquired for Antar ;
and bemg directed to his residence, he introduced
himself, and told him what had happened to Shas,
and how he had left him in despair. May God
never deliver him from peril or death! cried Shiboob,
for my brother has no such enemy among the Ab-
sians as him. Brother, said Antar, bear malice
against no man; and he repeated these verses :

« Do not bear malice, O Shiboob. Renounce it;
& for no good ever came of malice. Violence is

VOL. II. | H


98 AND DELIVERS 8HAS,


‘¢ infamous: its result is ever uncertain, and no one
“ can act justly when actuated by hatred. Let my
‘‘heart support every evil, and let my patience
“ endure till I have subdued all my foes.”

When Antar had finished, the old man was
amazed at such clemency towards his enemies,
strong and powerful as he was. That night they
reposed, but early next day Antar said to As-hath,
Let us depart, O Sheikh, before my lord Shas be
reduced to the last extremity, and be killed. The
Sheikh and Antar were soon mounted, and Shiboob
started in front of them, making the wild beasts
and antelopes fly before him; and they proceeded
till they reached the spot where they found Shas at
the point of death with those horsemen, who be-
longed to the tribe of Riyan. As soon as Shiboob
recognized them and addressed them, he attacked
them with his arrows, and gave notice to Antar,
who urged on Abjer towards them: but he did not
come up with them till Shiboob had brought. down
three warriors with his shafts. Antar quickly slew
seven of them, and only one escaped, mounted on
a swift camel. l

Antar devoted himself to Shas, and, dismounting
from Abjer, loosened the rope from his neck, and
untied the cords from his hands. Shas hung down
his head from shame, and wept bitterly. Rejoice,
my lord, said Antar, in your safety ; grieve not for
the past, for no one is born but to encounter evil.
O Aboolfawaris, replied Shas, it is not that I am


WHO PROMISES TO REWARD HIM. 99


distressed at the misfortunes that have befallen ime,
but it is the abominable conduct that I have pur-
sued towards you: had you not effected my release,
I should have even destroyed myself before the
evening. No more of that, cried Antar, till I have
gratified all your wishes. My first wish, said Shas,
is to come close to you, that I may kiss your hands
and the soles of your feet, and thus bind myself in
love to you for ever, and exert all my power and
faculties in proving my sincerity towards you. As
he spoke, he cast himself at Antar’s feet, in order
to kiss them: but Antar begged him not. Shas
would not listen to Antar’s expostulations, till, said
Shiboob, we want no kissing of feet from you; all
we demand of you is to order his uncle to give
him his daughter in marriage. Speak no more, O
Shiboob, cried Shas, until we reach home, and I
will concert a plan that will amaze the high and
low. Upon this, they moved towards a pool of
water, into which they plunged Shas, and washed
off the black dye. Antar took out some of his best
clothes, and having dressed him, he mounted him
on one of the noble captured steeds. Take you,
O Sheikh, said Antar to As-hath, these horses, and
all this plunder. Depart home, and may God re-
ward you for your worthy acts, As-hath thanked
him, and drove the horses and plunder before him,
seeking his own country.

But Antar and Shas, and Shiboob in front,

H 2


100 THEY ARE OVERTAKEN BY THE FOE.


marched on till about the third hour, when a dust
arose ahead. They halted to observe it atten-
tively, when lo! two thousand horsemen of the
tribe of Riyan appeared, with their King Hoosan
at their head.

The horseman who had escaped did not stop in
his flight till he reached the dwellings of his clan.
The whole tribe crowded round him, inquiring
what was the matter. He informed them what
Antar had done, and how he had destroyed his
comrades: and as soon as King Hoosan heard the
news, he cried out to all near him, Come on, my
countrymen, perhaps we may still succeed in slay-
‘ing him. ‘To this proposal they all assented; and
they marched away, two thousand in number, till
they overtook Antar and Shas: and as they drew
nigh, they attacked them, shouting aloud, with
spears and faulchions. Shas no sooner beheld this
disaster than he felt convinced of Mis death, and
that he could not even .escape by flight. Alas! he
exclaimed, have I escaped so often only at last to
fall into this greater peril? Fate and destiny I have
hitherto averted, but this can never be repelled.
Antar smiled. My lord, said he, congratulate your-
self on your security from death and destruction ;
for there are only two thousand assailants — vaga-
bond Arabs: and by your munificence, I would
this day annihilate, for your sake, the inhabitants
of the earth in its utmost breadth and length.


ANTAR QUIETS SHAS’S FEARS. 101


Cheer up your heart, and brighten up your eye!
And Antar thus continued in verse :

& Augment not thy fears and alarms, my lord.
s Come on with the black, well practised in war.
‘* By thy life, were there thousands, I would meet
< them and scatter them to the east, and disperse
<“ them to the west. I am the image of death—
€ such as those figure to themselves who are bereft
s of their children or of their parents. ‘The Indian
“blade obeys my hand; for, when the day of ter-
“‘ rors is intense, I glut it with blows. The tall.
& spear complains of thirst among the foe, but with
“<< me it is drenched in draughts of blood. More-
<< over I should say, the sword would be heavy to
& my joints, were I not to mount with it on a
“ strong horse. I am the Absian Antar, the horse-
« man of his tribe, when the brave hasten into the
“theatre of war. I plunge among the warriors in
< the scene of battle, and destroy them with spear
“ and scimitar of wrath. There lives not my equal —
“in all the tribes, and in the conflict of lions. I
“dread not flight: my charger, my lance, my
«& breast-plate, my courage, my sword, my shield,
« plunder far and wide the foe. Tribe of Abs, on
“ the battle-day I am yours, and my glory is en-
“ nobled by that parentage.”

As he finished, he fell upon the enemy like a
ferocious lion, his soul unappalled at death: he
assailed the two thousand with reiterated blows and
repeated thrusts; and as different bodies followed


102 KING HOOSAK SLAIN.


one another, he dispersed them over the whole
plain, and overthrew them far and wide: whilst
Shiboob, in front of Abjer, shot his arrows, and
slew the horsemen to the right and left, laying them
low in the field of battle. The dust was immense ;
it arose in rapid columns; and the mind was scared
at the exploits of Antar, who was now engaged in
the hottest of the fight, when King Hoosan himself
appeared, exciting his heroes and rallying his horse-
men, as he shouted out, What means this horror
which a single slave has infused into you, you so
numerous a host? Rush down on him on all sides
with your spears; hack him piecemeal with your
scimitars, or he will extirpate ye all, even to the
last, and he will quit your lands safe and unhurt.
But Antar permitted him not to conclude his ha-
rangue: he assaulted him like a devouring lon:
he roared at him in a voice that thrilled through
him, and filled his whole soul: he pierced him with
his spear through the chest, and forced it out qui-
vering at his back. Hoosan fell dead, weltering in
his blood. But as he had been mounted on one of
the most celebrated steeds of Arabia, Antar said to
Shiboob, Take this fine charger to Prince Shas;
tell him to mount, and not be afraid. Shiboob
obeyed, and quitted the contest with the horse.
Shas was standing aloof in one corner of the plain,
contemplating the intrepid conduct of Antar, and
the slaughter he was making. He was all amaze-
ment at such brilliant achievements, and at his


ANTAR DISPERSES THE ENEMY. 103


style of destroying his opponents with his blows
and thrusts; and there he continued till Shiboob
joined him with the horse, and said, Rejoice in
your safety, my lord, your enemies are destroyed.
So Shas mounted, and again became a valiant war-
rior ; assailing the foe, and engaging in the coms
bat—bold under the protection of Antar. The
battle continued to rage, and blood to flow, and
the flame of war to blaze, till night came on, and
veiled them in obscurity. * More than six hundred
and fifty of the tribe of Riyan being slain, the
remainder dispersed, crying out, May God curse
your flat-nosed father and your harlot mother!
How strong are your blows! how forceful are your
thrusts! Antar, Shas, and Shiboob pursued them,
till, having driven them out of that country, they
returned to the dispersed horses and scattered spoil,
which they collected: and as Shas observed that
Antar was like one merged in a sea of blood, he
kissed him between the eyes, and complimented
him. By your existence, my prince, said Antar,
had the day-light lasted longer, I would not have
permitted one of them to return home. Shas was
amazed at his magnanimity and discourse; and
whilst they were wandering over the deserts and
the sand-hills, Antar wished to halt and rest. Let
us not alight here, cried Shiboob, for cares and
difficulties may befal us. I am well acquainted
with all these tracts, and here it was that your
father Shedad made us captives. There is not a


104 SHIBOOB GUIDES THEM OVER THE WASTE.


spot that I do not know, nor a fountain I am not
acquainted with. Ahead of us, onthe road, are
ravines and defiles, and a valley, rocked in on all
sides, called the Valley of Foxes; and much I
fear that the fugitives who have sought their own
country may rally against us and come down upon
us, and, by anticipating us, may possess themselves
of the entrance of the defiles. Take my advice—
listen to me, and let me conduct you out of this
wilderness and desert towards the country of the
tribe of Zebeed. I will lead you across those
mountains and plains, and hasten with you into
- the land of Dimeya and the Great Lake and the
waters of the tribe of Akhram. We will then ascend
the hills of Khashakhish, and descend into Edjil,
where we need be under no alarm or apprehension.
‘Thence we will traverse the land of the tribe of
Rebeeah, and speed into the country of Abs and
Adnan—thus being secure from the people of
Riyan. Forward, then, thou Father of the Winds,
said Antar, highly approving of his counsel: go
on, whithersoever it pleaseth thee, and do what
thou listest. So Shiboob ran on be‘ore them, and
Shas and Antar followed him, till they were at
some distance from the land of Riyan, and the face
of security shone upon them. Shiboob was their
guide, and conducted them through various tribes,
from clan to clan, until he brought them to the
land of the tribe of Codha’ah. And it was on the
fifth day of their journey that they arrived .at the


ANTAR DREAMS OF IBLA. 105


Great Lake and the waters of the tribe of Akhram.
Antar was astonished at Shiboob’s accurate know-
ledge in traversing these plains and deserts; and
when they reached the tribe of Ghaylem they re-
posed and rested. Here they ate something, and
their eyes sought sleep. But, as they slept, Antar
beheld his beloved Ibla, and her image visited him
by night: he saw her charms and her beauties. It
was hear morning when he awoke. His love and
passion were intense; but, feeling strong in hope
under the protection of Shas, he repeated these
verses :

“ The dear image of Ibla visited in sleep the
€ victim of love, intoxicated with affliction, I arose
& to complain of my sufferings from love, and the
<< tears from my eyes bedewed the earth. I kissed
«c her teeth—I smelled the fragrance of musk and
` & the purest ambergris. I raised up her veil, and
<< her countenance was brilliant, so that night be-
< came unveiled. She deigned to smile, and looked
<< most lovely ; and I saw in her eye the lustre of
& the full moon. She is environed with swords
& and calamitous spears, and about her dwelling
& prowls the lion of the land. O Ibla, love for thee
<< lives in my bones, with my blood ; as long as life
& animates my frame, there will it flow. O Shas,
& IT am persecuted with a deadly passion, and the
« flame of the fire blazes still fiercer. O Shas,


- were not the influence of love overpowering every


106 THEY MEET A GREAT WARRIOR,


& resolution, thou wouldst not thus have subdued
« Antar.”

Shas had also waked from his sleep, and over-
heard what Antar had uttered; and his heart was
sorely pained at his plaints. Calm your heart, and
brighten your eye, O Aboolfawaris, said he, in a
kind voice, Ibla shall not be withheld from you,
were she even beneath the seventh earth. Soon
after they mounted, and traversed the deserts for
ten successive days; but on the eleventh day they
passed over a country called Zat ool Ialam: and in
the middle of the plain they met six howdahs, upon
six camels; and over each howdah was a crescent
of polished gold, with hangings of magnificent vel-
vet; and round the howdahs rode a troop of sturdy
slaves, armed with shields and sharp swords. ‘The
whole cavalcade was preceded by a knight in whom
fortitude and intrepidity shone conspicuous. He
was close-vizored, and broad-shouldered ; over his
body was a corslet that enveloped his limbs ; upon
his head was an Aadite helmet, like a raised ca-
nopy ; he was girt with a well-watered scimitar,
and a well-proportioned spear was slung round
him; and beneath him was a white horse, of
the noblest breed; and, like a feroctous lion, he
marched in front of the howdahs and the camels.
This youth, O Aboolfawaris, said Shas, must either
be nobly connected and related to Abdoolmotalib,
or he must be a chosen horseman, thus to venture


WHOSE ATTENDANT AND SHIBOOB PARLEY. 107 l


alone in this wild; and that would be a species
of contemptuous security. I think, Aboolfawaris,
you had better direct Shiboob to go on forward
and inquire who he is, that we may learn from his
conversation what may be his views. O Prince,
replied Antar, may you experience every thing
that can give you gratification, and may every
thing that can distress you be averted from you.
O Ebe Reah, he continued, addressing Shiboob,
go on to this youth, and order him to surrender all
his goods and property before he drink of the cup
of death. Shiboob let out his feet, and hastened
towards the young knight. Now the warrior, as
soon as he beheld Shas and Antar, addressed one
of his slaves, saying, Ride towards these slaves that
are advancing upon us, and warn them from their
fate and destruction. If they be poor Arabs, let
them come nigh unto me, that I may give them
clothing and money ; but, if they be plunderers,
drive them away, make them retire, and let them
not hasten to their death. So the slave advanced
till he met Shiboob, to whom he cried, Whither
speedest thou so fast to thy fate, urging on thy
existence and life to the Tomb of Perils? It is my
first intention, replied Shiboob, to seize the pro-
perty and all the camels thy master possesses: re-
turn, therefore, to him, and order him to deliver
up eyery thing before the vicissitudes of fortune
environ him. Vilest of slaves, exclaimed the other,
verily you have lost your manners: this day you


108 HE 18 A LOVER OF IBLA.


shall drink of the cup of perdition from the hand
of this mighty warrior, whose fury makes even
lion-heroes shudder ; also famed for his eloquence
and liberality. Son of my aunt, said Shiboob,
much surprised, to whom does this youth belong?
What is his name among horsemen? Whither are
ye going with these howdahs and camels over these
sand-hills and deserts? Tell me the truth; make
no ambiguous explanations; do not prevaricate.
The rank of my master is exalted, replied the
slave; fluent and rapid is his speech: his name is
Roudha, son of Meneea. He is now on his way
to the dwellings of the noble Absians, to demand
in marriage Ibla, the daughter of Malik, son of
Carad. He will slay every horseman that dares to
dispute her with him; and he will overwhelm her
father with wealth, and lawfully marry her.

Now this horseman was of the tribe of Saad ;
and his meeting with Antar in that place is thus
accounted for. The father of Roudha left behind
him at his death immense property, of which the
son took possession as soon as he grew up to man-
hood: and he spent much of it among the war-
riors, that they might teach him the art of fighting,
and instruct him in the various modes of thrusting
and assailing, and all the plans and stratagems in
battle and feats of arms, and also the manceuvres
in boxing and wrestling. So, when he became
perfect in the art of war, and very expert in the
thrust and the blow, he used to practise with them


JEALOUS OF ANTAR’S EXPLOITS. 109


in vanquishing the Arab tribes, and in plundering
the dwellings and the fountains; and on their return
home, when they were dividing the spoil, he would
say to them, Sons of my uncle, I give you my share;
I am rich enough without it. But there was a man
among them that bore him an inveterate grudge: .
his name was Asmoo, son of Diraa; and one day,
when he was in his company, eating and drinking,
he said to him, Son of my uncle, have you ever
seen the only person that outshines every one ef the
age? And, pursuing the conversation, he told him
all Antar’s history; enumerating the feats he had
performed in battle, and mentioning that his cele-
brity was spread over every plain and city; re-
peating, also, some of the poetry he had composed.
on his cousin Ibla, whose uncommon charms and
loveliness he extolled with peculiar emphasis. His
object was mercly to rouse his countryman against
Antar, who, he thought, would destroy him, and
make him drink the cup of extinction. Roudha
listened, and his heart was rent in pieces; and
being the more galled and provoked by his coun-
tryman’s continued eulogiums, he made inquiries
every where; and as the result was only repeated
panegyrics on Antar’s prowess and intrepidity, he
said to himself, If it be true that Antar stand alone
in the world, and be the bravest of horsemen, he
who shall engage him in the field of battle, and
shall vanquish him in the contest of swords and
spears, will be pre-eminent among all warriors; his


110 HE SETS OUT FOR THE TRIBE OF ABS.


dignity will be exalted far above his contemporaries.
Doubtless, his cousin Ibla must be wonderfully
handsome and beautiful, as she is talked of by
every man and every woman. How I long to exert
myself to obtain this object, that no one but myself
may be quoted for his excellencies !

Having consulted with his mother, Do, my son,
said she, whatever pleases you, and let no one be
your equal in martial exploits; for your rank is
exalted above all, your beauty is most eminent, and
your star auspicious. Follow your heart’s desire.
These words confirmed him in his resolution, and
all alarms and doubts were at anend. He collected
vast presents, and cattle, and precious articles, and
determined on hrs journey. He had five virgin
sisters; them he took, with his mother also, that
they might assist at his wedding with Ibla: and
when they were all ready, and the ladies, each on
a separate howdah, they set out for the land of Abs
and Adnan, travelling over plains and deserts, till
they ehcountered Shas and Antar.

_ The conference between Shiboob and the slave
being over, they returned to their respective parties.
Shiboob came running up to his brother, smiling
and laughing. Son of a black, cried Antar, what
have you heard that makes you so merry? How is
this horseman called? Whither is he going? And
when Shiboob had told him, Antar, too, laughed
and smiled, saying, This Arabian ignorance is quite
inconceivable; and he urged on Abjer till he ap-


a


MEETS AND ATTACKS ANTAR. 111


proached Roudha, Come on, youth, he cried ; here
is the very person you are seeking, that he may
show you horrors and wonders. Roudha only
laughed, and, galloping his horse, advanced in front
of Antar. Halloo, he cried, thou mighty warrior !
which of the Absian heroes are you? for, indeed,
I mark their well-known fortitude shining in you.
Birth, exclaimed Antar, is the boast of cowards:
however, know that my genealogy is long. I am
Antar, son of Shedad, the son of Ibla’s uncle, whom
you are going to demand in marriage. Roudha
was overjoyed at these words: his chest expanded,
and he was in ecstasy: he slackened his horse’s
bridle, and riding up to the howdahs, O my mother,
cried he, now indeed I have obtained what I so
ardently desired. This is Antar, the warrior of '
battles. This day will I bring down death upon
him. His mother just put her head out of the
howdah, and said, Well, my son, if this be Antar,
go back, and put him to death. Encouraged by
this advice, he hastened back, seeking Antar, with
all his paternal impetuosity, and Arabian pride and
courage. He gave the full reins to his charger,
and, poising his spear, he rushed down on Antar,
like an angry lion, and thus spoke:

“As soon as my age knew me, its power was
& reduced, and was humbled—its calamities shrank
& from me. I am he to whom the deadly spear
* bows, and it precedes me against the foe I engage.
4“ Should any one thwart me, I crown his head with


112 THEY ADDRESS EACH OTHER.


“ the cleaving blade, whose blows never fail; and
“ the Indian sabres associate with it, as if they were
s its children and its relations. How many nations
“ are there, whose armies my sword has dispersed,
“ and whose camps it has scattered over their lands !
“ How many are my victims, whose carcasses ever
« lie for the fowls of the air to devour, and round
“ which the wild beasts come prowling! O Ibla,
s there 1s coming for thee a husband, who will tear
“ thee away. ‘Time itself may perish, but his glo-
“ ries can never perish. O Ibla, as to thy slave, his
“ death is resolved at my hands, and his judgment
“ day is fixed. Let the heart of thy father, O thou,
“ my hope, be this day at ease! Let him sleep by
“ night, as long as the stars wander in the skies.”

As Antar listened to these verses, he was con-
vinced that his antagonist had fallen into the sea of
love. Coward-born, he cried, I will this day pre-
pare such a marriage for thee, no other wedding
shalt thou require. And reflecting on all he had
suffered on Ibla’s account, and the misfortunes
he had encountered, he assaulted Roudha, thus
speaking:

“« How fortune removes away what I anxiously
“ wish to approach, and thus sends a monster that
“ I must fight! O thou, from whom fortune has
“ averted all its vicissitudes, at me it has levelled
“ all its insults. What, am I the only person who
.“ must experience the treachery of its disposition ?
“ How, then, can any one, who associates with me,


COMBAT OF ANTAR AND ROUDHA. 113


« live in happiness? I have tried it, and I am
‘‘ proud of it: it may enfeeble me, and often its
“ trials have turned my head gray. But still how
« can I fear the calamities of fortune? No—its
“ severities are the most tolerable of all that I
“ suffer. How many nights have I wandered over
‘‘ the wastes alone! it was dark, and the stars were
s“ declining towards the west. How many lakes
“ are there whose waters I have mixed with blood
‘in the morning, where the wild beasts sought
“& refreshment and repose! My scimitar and my
‘‘ spear are my companions, when the lions of the
« den crowd around me. O thou, that hungerest
“ for my death, return, free from such avidity, and
‘‘ behold not the cup thou wilt drink.”

Having finished, he assailed Roudha like a cloud ;
and Roudha received him as the parched earth the
first of the rain. ‘These two furious warriors com-
menced the conflict: they dealt blows and thrusts,
and for an hour were tasting of death, so that the
eye was scared. Antar beheld in Roudha what he
had never yet experienced from the stoutest hero:
he was on his guard against any fatal event, for he
observed him brandish his lance as a writer would
a reed. Upon this, he pressed upon him, and
clung to him, excluding all escape, so that stirrup
grated stirrup. He struck Roudha’s spear, and
shivered it: he extended his hand towards the rings
of his mail, and, tearing him out of his saddle, made
him his prisoner, and threw him to Shiboob, who,

VOL. II. I


114 ROUDHA'S SISTERS INTREAT


with cords, tied his shoulders and arms behind him,
and brought him before his brother Antar. He
drew forth Dhami from its scabbard, and was about
to put him to death, when lo! his mother and his
sisters cast themselves out of their howdahs on the
ground, their faces uncovered, their hair dishevelled
— drowned in tears, and their veils loose. O Knight
of the age and æra, exclaimed they, with one voice,
by the life of your ancestor Adnan, have compassion
on our tears—our misery—our forlorn state, and
the absence of our heroes! If you are resolved on
the death of our brother, O put us to death first,
for fortune has left us only him of all our family
and friends. The eldest sister then advanced to-
wards Antar, and casting herself at his feet, she
thus addressed him:

“ O Knight of the horse, all that has been said
“& of you is true. Pardon! for in my heart there
“is a burning flame. This youth, whom you have
“ captured, is my brother: besides him, I have no
‘‘ life, no sight. Release him, and pardon him:
“ protect us, and accept our gratitude. This day
« I implore your forgiveness ; for you are a warrior
“ at whose glory every one must bow, and for whom
“ the fire of war blazes. Pity him, and release him
‘in your kindness, pardon him; for he is my
& hope—he is my hearing, and my sight.”

Here she stopped, and retired. The second sister
then came forward, and thus addressed Antar:

“ O Knight of the horse, tears burst from my


ANTAR TO SAVE THEIR BROTHER. 115


“ eyes. Have pity on my weakness—my patience
« is exhausted. Release your victim— this boy —
“ pardon him, and we will ransom him with wealth
“ and jewels. Though your complexion be black
“ as a coal, let your deeds be recorded, brilliant
& as the moon. Listen to us females, whose re-
‘¢ putation is now decreased; for they only demand
& mercy at the hands of a conqueror. May God
“ execute your every wish in exalting your family,
4“ in supporting and glorifying it.”

She retired. The third advanced, and thus
spoke :

“O Knight of the horse, unrivalled warrior,
& foremost when chargers neigh, and horsemen are
s in trouble. Every princely mortal is ennobled
“ by thy sword; and yours are praises like the
« sweet-scented ambergris. Accept my compliment,
« and reward me with your kindness. Have pity
“ on a forlorn girl, who is in misery. Release this
« boy, and pardon him; for he is my hearing, and
“ the light of my eyes. Pity this distraction of a
‘‘ heart, a prey to anguish before I die; for this is
“« my last breath.”

She retired. The fourth sister came forward, and
thus spoke:

“ Patience and forbearance are no more; grief
“< and sorrow oppress me. My heart is divided in
“its wishes—pity the anguish of my soul. O
s friend, take me by the hand, for I am sinking
& with desolation. My soul longs to bid farewell

12


116 HIS MOTHER ALSO INTERCEDES.


“ to its afflictions; but, alas! all its joys are ex-
“ tinct. Let us at last be relieved by your kind-
‘* ness !”

She retired. The fifth sister now advanced, and
thus addressed Antar (she was the youngest, and
the most beautiful) :

“ O Knight of the horse, protect me, and pity
“& my destitute condition: do not reject our pe-
“ tition. This youth, whom you have captured, is
“ our brother. Pity his youth, and let not strangers
“ exult over him. Though he have behaved proudly
“ and overbearingly, let your compassion extinguish
“ rancour and anger. You are one who have the
« lives of warriors at command, and destroy whom-
& soever you wish. Though your complexion be
“ black, bravery, and beneficence, and courtesy,
“are far superior; and if the inhabitants of the
“ earth were all exalted, the multitude would be
“ slaves, and you would be raised on high.”

Having finished, she retired. ‘The mother them
advanced, and thus commended Antar:

“ O Knight of the horse, protect us, and pity
“our forlorn state: become our succour against
“ the vicissitudes of fortune. But if you are re-
“ solved on putting him to death, satiate first your
“ vengeance on us. God forbid, that a Knight
“ should be deficient in liberality, and injure us,
“í or make us weep tears of blood. He attacked
“ you insultingly, but he is overpowered. Pity his
“ youth, and pardon him his crime. O Knight, to


ANTAR YIELDS. 117


« whom there is no equal, pity our tears, —compas-
“ sion will grace your other accomplishments; and
« when all the earth is exalted, the multitude will
“ be the earth, and you heaven.”

As Antar listened to these prayers, and the
speeches of Roudha’s mother and sisters, his pagan
pride stormed in his head, and an anxiety to pro-
tect them increased throughout his limbs, for Antar
was ever interested for woman; and his heart
softened after what he had endured, and he said to
Shiboob, Release Roudha from his fetters. I have
pardoned him on account of his mother and sisters.
He directed the women to return to their howdahs,
safe and secure from harm. Shiboob accordingly
liberated Roudha from captivity, and whilst all this
was passing, Shas stood listening and looking on
and admiring Antar’s excessive generusity and kind-
ness, and he said to himself, Truly Antar has exer-
cised his liberality in its proper place. But Roudha
was no sooner at liberty than he ran towards Antar,
and kissed his hands, thanking him, praising him,
begging his pardon, and saying, You well know, O
Aboolfawaris, that time teaches man some new
wisdom and experience: I was indeed ignorant of
the state of the world and its affairs, and was going
to demand your cousin in marriage, knowing very
little of you; but now I have had proofs of your
value, and till now I was ignorant of the respective
dignity of Horsemen. Now, however, I beseech
you to accept the presents that I have brought with


118 HE RETURNS HOME.


me for your cousin Ibla; you deserve them better
than I do. I beg most earnestly that you will
- oblige me by receiving them. And turning towards
the camels, he unloaded them: on these were three
robes of velvet of three different colours; on each
robe was a wreath of jewels worth 30,000 dirhems
of gold. These he presented to Antar, and he kissed
the ground before him, imploring his forgiveness.
By the faith of an Arab, Roudha, said Antar, you
are more munificent and liberal than I am: never
can I make you any suitable return. Roudha bade
Antar farewell, and Antar kissed him between the
eyes, and thus they separated, each seeking his
own country.

Antar and Shas travelled night and day, till one
morning being near the land of the Absians, Shas
said to Antar, I think it would be proper, Aboolfa-
waris, to apprize our families of our arrival. As you
please, my Prince, said Antar; and he bid Shiboob
to go forward. Shiboob gave his feet to the winds,
and in less than an hour he reached the tents.
The families hurried eagerly from every quarter,
and the news soon reached King Zoheir. He or-
dered Shiboob into his presence, and being informed
of the approach of Shas and Antar, he ordered
Amarah to be released from prison and confine-
ment, and then he mounted, with his sons and
officers, and went out to meet Shas and the lion-
warrior Antar. He also ordered his slaves to pro-
claim it throughout the tents, that no one should


CONGRATULATED BY HIS TRIBE, 119


be absent, but that all should come forth and bring
goods with them, to make offerings to Shas and
Antar in the wild and the waste. In obedience to
these orders and proclamations all the horsemen
marched out; the noble warriors of the family of
Carad rejoiced, but silence reigned among the fa-
mily of Zeead, as if they had lost their children.
Malik, Ibla’s father, and his son Amroo, joined
the others and went out in the procession. Amarah
too mounted, muttering to himself, No welcome, no
welcome, to this bastard slave, who is returned safe!
and forsooth King Zoheir is not to be satisfied but
by requiring us to attend him, and be witnesses to
his filthy face. Thus he mounted, though his an-
guish was insupportable. Not a person remained
in the tents; every one had come forth to hail An-
tar, the lord of battles: before them went the wo-
men, beating the cymbals, and the slaves waving
their swords; and the whole country was in uproar
and tumult. They had not proceeded far when
they met Shas and Antar. The first that advanced
towards them was Prince Malik. I congratulate
you, O my tribe, he exclaimed, on what has ap-
peared this day, which God has vouchsafed to ho-
nour with his favour, and on the meeting of my
brother and my friend. Thus saying, he embraced
Antar andhisbrother. Antar kissed the Prince’shead,
and prayed for a continuance of his glory. After this,
they all crowded about Shas and Antar, making
their offerings of gold and silver, and girdles, and


120 WHO MAKE HIM PRESENTS.


robes: joy and gladness were diffused among the
slaves and the freeborn; and the high and the low
exulted in the return of Aboolfawaris Antar. Ama-
rah had hinted to his slaves to stand close to him,
and not’ to quit him, saying to them (as he was
about to execute King Zohier’s order) When you
see me make my present, advance quick, and catch
it before any one else. The slaves promised to
do as he bade them, and they had prepared their
coarse aprons to catch the golden offerings, which
their master was to make. So when this munificent
Amarah came nigh unto Shas and Antar, and stood
between them, he testified the utmost joy, and said
to Antar, God has brightened your eyes in this
affair, Aboolfawaris, and you have received of his
bounties and favours what no one other, on foot or
on horseback, ever possessed before. And he let
fall out of his sleeve some gold coin in a sly, artful
manner; but Shiboob slipped in and caught it, and
took it away and put it all into his own hair-cloth
apron, and kept it all himself, saying, God bless
such great men as you who offer presents to their
friends and comrades. May God reward you well,
Shiboob, said Amarah, for you are deserving of
wealth and money: we are all greatly rejoiced at
your return, and all our griefs and sorrows are at
anend. Malik, Ibla’s father, next advanced, and
embracing Shas, congratulated him on his escape :
he kissed his bosom and hands, and saluted him;
but Shas turned away his face from him, and said,


MALIK PROMISES HIM HIS DAUGHTER. 12]


Malik, no more of your deceits and artifices ; if you
are really glad at my deliverance, as you say you
are, marry your daughter to your nephew, Antar,
this very night. Malik smiled the smile of shame,
and his heart burned with excess of anguish.— By
your life, my lord, said he, through your interces-
sion my heart entertains no rancour whatever to-
wards Antar; and at this very moment, O prince,
my daughter 1s his handmaiden, and I am one of
his slaves, and do you be my witness; if you wish,
I will marry her to him this very night; and now
that he has done all these things, how is it possible
that I should not love him and favour him? Having
thus spoken, he dismounted and fawned on Antar ;
but all this was the result of his excessive cunning
and deceit. However, Antar dismounted from Ab-
jer, and kissed his uncle’s bosom and hands, ex-
claiming, O my uncle, do not load me with what
cannot be supported! I am indeed your slave, and
the shepherd of your flock. After this, they all
mounted again, and every heart was cleansed of its
griefs and distresses. Shedad thought the world
too narrow for the extent of his joy on the arrival
of his son: his mother Zebeeba too kissed him,
as she said, If you would but stay and tend the
camels with me, my heart would be relieved from
the pain of these terrible events. Antar smiled, and
composed her. As soon as the people had retired
to their tents, King Zoheir ordered camels to be
slaughtered, and a dinner to be prepared, and a


122 THE PRINCES ANNOUNCE


splendid feast to be set out (the like of which no
one in the world ever saw), to testify his joy at the
escape of his son Shas from drinking the cup of
death, and the safety of the great Antar. They
were thus occupied for three whole days, and Antar
was always seated by the side of King Zoheir, and
every one presented him gifts of value, consisting
of horses, female slaves, and gold. On the fourth
night he was invited to a banquet given by Prince
Shas, and when they had dined and the wine-glasses
were going merrily round, Shas started up and put
his hand into Antar’s, in fulfilment of what had
been hitherto so grievous, and exclaimed in the
presence of all the Absians, O sons of my uncle, O
ye, that are here present, whether friend, relation,
or companion, let every one who wishes to recom-
pense this hero according to his power, do so; for
there is no one in the whole tribe but Aboolfawaris,
who can defend his property and goods, or protect
his family and friends. Let it not be. said, O my
cousins, that Shas only speaks thus because he is
overcome with wine; for, by the Lord of Heaven,
I am the freedman of his sword and his spear, and
he has overwhelmed me with liberality and munifi-
cence. Nothing will I keep hidden or concealed—I
will lay it all before Antar, as also the property of
my brothers and my father—every thing that be-
longs to me. Shas’s brothers were all unanimous
in their assent; but Antar thanked them and
prayed for them, saying, O my lords, this does not


THEIR PARTIALITY FOR ANTAR. 128


please me; this appears wrong in my eyes, that all
the property of the Arabs should be at my disposal,
and that I should squander the wealth of the chiefs.
It is, however, necessary that in ten days I should
make an excursion among the tribes of Cahtan, and
carry away all the property of those Arabs, and I
will not let my marriage-feast be concluded till the
season of the spring be passed, and the high and
low be entertained and enriched. It shall be a day
to me, future ages shall record. Aboolfawaris,
cried Prince Malik, we will not permit you to ab-
sent yourself, nor let this your day be followed by
your morrow until you have celebrated your mar-
riage-feast and wedding; and when you resolve on
an excursion we will accompany you, and be in
your suite, and at your command: were we to ex-
pend our whole substance, and were we all to act
justly and impartially, all our property and that of
all the Absians would be yours and at your disposal :
for how often have you rescued it from the hands
of the horsemen by the blade of your sword, and
by the exposure of your life in our cause. When
Antar heard the princes thus address him, the
flame within him burnt violently: he could no longer
make any opposition, but waited patiently till the
feast was over, and when Shas invested him with a
superb robe, and mounted him on an Arab steed,
and treated him with every kindness, he retired
with his father and uncles, seeking the tents of
Ibla’s father. Now all the party had separated to


124 AMARAH'S DESPAIR AND ANGUISH.


their own homes and tents, and there was not one
among them but would willingly have offered all
he was worth to accomplish Antar’s success but
Amarah alone, and his anguish was redoubled, his
gall was burst, and his very soul melted ; and his
brother was in despair about him, for again the
fever seized him, and the strangury, and the pains
in his loins, and the diarrhoea. When Rebia went
to see him he complained bitterly of his situation,
and grieved and implored his assistance. Amarah,
said Rebia, it is quite impossible for us any longer
to oppose Antar; for any more absurd plans on our
part would only be followed by our death and ruin.


ANTAR’S SUDDEN DISAPPEARANCE. 125


CHAPTER XI.


Tue next day King Zoheir, accompanied by his
sons and his horsemen, rode out to the chase, as
was customary among the Arabs of those days.
They first made inquiries for Antar; but, hearing
nothing of him, they remained abroad till near the
third hour, when they returned home to their re-
spective tents. But Shas, and his brother, Malik,
sent a slave to the habitations of the Carad family ;
and he returned in an hour, his heart filled with
grief. My lord, said he to Prince Shas, no one
has heard any thing of Antar this day: his uncle,
Malik, assured me so; adding, that, when they
retired from your feast, he stayed drinking with
him an hour, and afterwards repaired to the tents
of his mother, Zebeeba. Early this morning they
searched for him, to accompany them to the chase
with your father, King Zoheir, but they could not
find him; so, on that account, they put off their
hunt for the day: and, when Shedad asked his
mother about him, she told him, that, when he
came home, he did not go to sleep; but, as soon as
the fires of the tribe were extinguished, and the
obscurity of night came on, he mounted his horse,
and, taking his brother, Shiboob, with him, he


126 THE SORROW OF HIS FRIENDS.


departed over the wilds and the plains. On hear-
ing this account of Antar, Shas was exceedingly
grieved. May God curse thee, O Malik! he cried:
how infamous are thy deeds! how black are thy
actions! What is the matter? asked Prince Malik.
Know, my brother, replied Shas, that Malik se-
cretly plots against Antar the very reverse of what
he promised us: he deceives both us and Antar.
And he only ‘received him thus craftily and art-
fully, just to quiet his apprehensions for the mo-
ment; and now he has driven him away out of the
country, and has sent him on some perilous ex-
pedition. It may be, observed Prince Malik, that
he is gone, in order to bring back what may supply
his marriage-feast, and enable him to support his
wedding establishment. O my brother, continued
Shas, cast away all such ideas. Be assured that
Malik will ever practise on us his craft and wiles;
and it is my opinion we should inform our father of
his conduct. The news was soon spread abroad,
to the great joy of his enemies, and particularly of
the family of Zeead.

But the cause of Antar’s disappearance was as
follows: When Rebia, and Malik, son of Carad,
saw Antar return safe with Shas, and that his glory
was greatly exalted, and that every family be-
friended him, their galls burst, and their senses
were blinded, particularly Malik, a proficient in
arts and frauds; for he dared not to contradict
King Zoheir: and though in his presence he ex-


MALIK’S NEW STRATAGEM. 127


pressed his satisfaction, in the violence of his ini-
quity and accursed malignity he said to his daughter
Ibla, Take these robes that your cousin has brought
you, abandon your grief and sorrow, gird yourself
with these strings of pearls and jewels, and decorate
yourself with every sumptuous article of dress, and
be not shy of your cousin in any respect; for now
you will be married to him, and all your property
will be delivered over to him: the business ts now
finally arranged, and his high honours render it
necessary to conclude it. Now Antar, on his re-
turn from entertainments, always devoted himself
to a conversation with Ibla, enjoying the sweetness
of her smiles: and, on his return from Prince
Shas’s feast, he accompanied his father and his
uncles to the tents of Ibla’s father. Ibla received
him in the kindest manner; and her father had
instructed her, when Shedad and Zakhmet ool
Jewad should depart for the night, to detain Antar,
and push about the glasses. Being, therefore,
seated, and the conversation turning on his mar-
riage, said Malik to Antar, O Aboolfawaris, the
words of Prince Shas grieve my heart; I do not
approve of our providing the marriage feast out of
our own property. Well, said Antar, I will per

form in your presence deeds such as the bravest
heroes will fail in executing—such as no prince or
warrior will be able to accomplish. But what do
you intend to do, O Aboolfawaris? asked Ibla.
Tell me all, that I may comprehend it. Whatever


128 IBLA ASKS A MARRIAGE GIFT.


you please, cousin, said Antar. I demand of you,
then, added Ibla, that you will place me amongst
the most exalted, as Khalid, son of Mohanb, did
on his marriage with his cousin Jaida, daughter
of Zahir. You little devil, exclaimed her father
designedly, where did you learn any stories of
knights and warriors? Oh, said Ibla, I heard
this from the women who came to congratulate me
on the return of my cousin. Antar smiled: And
pray what did you hear on that occasion ? said he.
Know, answered Ibla, that, whilst they were talk-
ing of marriages and feasts, one of them said, No
one has ever made a really magnificent wedding
but a knight of the tribe of Zebeed—and he was
Khalid, son of Moharib, when Jaida, daughter of
. Zahir, was united to him: for he slaughtered at
his feast a thousand camels, male and female, and
twenty lions and lionesses; and he invited to his
entertainment the horsemen of the tribes of Zebeed,
of Khitaan, and of Morad. He staid with these
three tribes, and supplied them with provisions:
and the camels were the property of Gheshm, son
of Malik, surnamed the Brandisher of Spears, a
knight of the tribe of Aamir; and, when he mar-
ried Jaida, the bridle of her camel was held by
the daughter of Moawiyah, son of Nizal. Antar,
irritated at her words, quickly replied, And dost
thou think, then, O Ibla, that this was such a
great exploit? At thy marriage I will permit no
one to lead thy camel but this Jaida herself, with


ANTAR ENGAGES TO EXECUTE IT. 129


all her perfections—and round her neck shall be
slung the head of Khalid; so that no one shall vie
with thee, or be exalted above thee. No, cried her ©
father, I will not allow of this: give up such a
proposal, my daughter. She is talking nonsense,
Antar: do not listen to her; stir not from home
till your projects are completed; for I cannot
possibly refuse King Zoheir and his sons. Antar
made no reply, but hastened back to his mother’s
dwelling, and awakened Shiboob, and ordered him
to prepare his horse. Shiboob imstantly complied ;
and Antar sprung on his back, Shiboob running
by his side. And when they were beyond the tents,
and the fumes of the wine had fled from Antar’s
brain, Well, thou black-born, said he to Shiboob,
away to the mountains of Toweilaa and the land
of the tribe of Zebeed by the shortest road. Well,
brother, replied Shiboob; but what is there so
urgent in this affair, that you have set out at this
unseasonable hour? Antar related what had passed.
There can be no doubt, added Shiboob, that it is
your uncle who has exposed you to this perilous
enterprise; for how should Ibla know any thing
about warriors, or hear such things from women ? °

Now all this was Rebia’s contrivance: he it was
who suggested this wicked and malicious plan to
Malik, in order to sacrifice Antar. Malik desired
his daughter to mention it to Antar, and make the
demand of her cousin, but not to explain at whose
instigation. Thus Antar set out by night, traversing

VOL. II. K


180 HIS EXULTATION.


wilds and wastes, disregarding Shiboob’s hints ; on
the contrary, he was full of joy at an adventure
- his beloved had required of him. And, as the jour-
ney lengthened, he thought of Ibla, and thus ex-
claimed :

«c I traverse the wastes, and the night is gloomy :
‘“‘ I stray over the wilds, and the sands are parch-
“ ing: I desire no other companion but the sword,
“ whether, on the day of horrors, the foe be few or
& numerous. Ye beasts of the desert, beware of
& the warrior ; for, when he brandishes his scimitar,
“& caution avails not. Accompany me; ye will be-
“ hold prostrate carcases, and the birds darting at
“them as they hover and look on. Now, that I
“am going in quest of him, no eternity is there
« for Khalid*. No, no: let Jaida no longer boast.
“ Short will be the happiness of their country :
“ soon will the tiger come. O Ibla, may the riches,
& that come for thee, rejoice thee, when Fortune
“ casts me among thy enemies! O thou, who,
& with one glance of the eye, hast exposed my life
“‘to deadly arrows, whose wounds are frightful !
“ it is well; for thy embrace is an unadulterated
“ paradise, and the flames of separation from thee
“ cannot be endured. O Mount Saadi, may showers
“ from the rain-cloud ever moisten thee, and may
“ the dew ever refresh thy lands! How many
“ nights have I travelled in thy society, and lived


* Khalid signifies eternal.” .


MOHARIB AND ZAHIR. 131


“ in happiness, unalloyed by pain, with the damsel
& who circles the goblets, and whose form shines
“ among them like the flame of wine: the maiden
“ who passes them round is of the daughters of
“ Arabia, elegantly formed, and Paradise is in her
& eye, If I live, it is she whom I will ever remem-
“ ber; if I die, a night in death with her will be
c existence.”

Now Khalid, whom Antar went to seek, was a
horseman of the tribe of Zebeed; and the Arabs of
those deserts, and the Kings of those countries and
cities, stood in awe of him. He was a hero of the
dust and confusion; and Maadi Kereb, the father
of Amroo, the Zebeedian, was allied to him in feats
of arms, and in rank, among the Arabs of the de-
sert: and he used to confess among the horsemen,
that he had learnt all his courage and imtrepidity
from this undaunted lion, and this all-conquering
warrior, Khalid, son of Moharib; and: he was also
the cause of his marriage with Jaida, the daughter
of Zahir: and their history was marvellous to
relate.

Mohanb and Zahir were two brothers, by the
same father and mother; and the Arabs called
them uterine brothers. Both were eminent for
their bravery and courage; but Moharib was the
chief of the clan, and Zahir was his: minister under
him: he was his counsellor and adviser. At last
it happened, that a violent dispute and quarrel
arose between them. Zahir retired to his tents,

K 2


182 THEIR QUARREL.


greatly afflicted, and he knew not what to do.
What is the matter with you? said his wife. Why
do I see you so bewildered? Tell me what has
occurred, and what you are thinking of. Who can
have displeased or insulted you, you the greatest of
the Arab Chiefs? What can I do? he replied; he
who has injured me is one against whom I cannot
raise my hand—one I cannot harm ; my companion
in the womb—my brother in the world; and had
it not been he himself, I would have shown him
the power of a formidable antagonist, and made an
example of him among the tribes and Chiefs. Aban-
don him, leave him in his own land, exclaimed his
wife; at the same time reciting these verses, from
some poet of the time:

« As to thy soul, away with it, if it cry out in
“ pain, and abandon thy home, to mourn over him
“ that built it. Bear not insult from thy relations;
“ quit thy relations, and seek what will stand thee
“in lieu of them. As to thy person, thou mayst
“ wander from country to country; but as to thy-
“ self, thou canst find no other self but it. The
‘¢ warrior’s might is not proved till with his life he
“‘ remove all that pains him. Send not thy mes-
“ senger on an important affair; for, with regard
“ to thyself, there is no adviser but-thine own self.
‘© He whose death must be in & eertain spot, can-
“ not die elsewhere. This is the opinion of a wise
“ and sensible man; so listen to it, and doubt not.”

Zahir assented to his wife’s counsel; and he pre-


THE BIRTH OF JAIDA 138


pared for his departure, struck his tents, loaded
his camels, and departed, seeking the tribe of Saad,
who were also his cousins. Still he was greatly
afflicted at this separation from his brother, and
thus spoke :

“ I will wander from thy home a thousand years,
“ and the journey of every year shall be a thousand
« miles. Were my favours from thee a thousand
« Ægypts, and in each Ægypt were there a thou-
s. sand Niles, still thy favours would be but trifling ;
“ and I shall be content far from thee with a little.
s“ I will recite in thy absence this distich, which a
“ string of pearls cannot equal in value: ‘When a
“ man is vexed in the land of his tribe, there is
“ nothing left for him but to depart.’ O thou who
« hast maliciously offended me, soon wilt thou feel
“ what the beneficent Deity will effect; for he is
“ the judge between thee and me—he, the un-
‘* changeable and imperishable.”

Zahir continued his journey till he reached the
tribe of Saad, where he alighted. They received
him kindly, and welcomed him, and begged him to
settle among them. It happened that his wife was
with child; and he said to her, If a son be born,
most welcome will he be; but if it is a girl, conceal
it, and let it appear to the world at large that we
have a male child, that my brother may not exult
over us. When her time was completed, she brought
forth a daughter ; so in private they called her Jaida,
but in public Jooder, making it appear that she was
a boy : and accordingly they made a great entertain-


134 AND KHALID: THEIR EDUCATION


ment and rejoicings, evening and morning. His
brother Moharib, about the same time, had also a
son, whom he called Khalid (eternal); giving him
this name because he had continued to prosper in
his affairs after his brother’s absence. Now as the
two children grew up, and their fame was spread
among the Arabs, Zahir taught his daughter to
ride on horseback; he instructed -her in all the
martial exercises of a warrior, and in all that con-
stitutes bravery and courage, and in the arts of
war and battle: he hardened her, also, to toils and
dangers; and whenever he went forth to battle, he
took her with him, mingling among the other Arab
clans in her company; and when the horsemen
joined her, she ever commanded in the front of the
boldest. ‘Thus she continued to overthrow her
contemporaries, and attacked lions in their dens,
till she became a common proverb: and when she
vanquished a hero, she cried out, I am Jooder, son
of Zahir, the horseman of the clans and the tribes.
In the like manner flourished her cousin Khalid,
son of Moharib, who was the Chief of his people;
and he had established dwellings where guests were
entertained, and where horsemen took up their
abode. Khalid was educated among them, and
acquired fortitude of heart: he perfected himself in
horsemanship among them, until he came forth an
intrepid warrior, and a valiant hero; every horse-
man and every knight acknowledged his courage
and undaunted soul. At last he heard of his cousin
Jooder ; and his anxiety to mark him, and engage


JAIDA LOVES KHALID. l 135


him, and be an eye-witness of his skill in arms,
became very great: but he was unable to gratify
his wish, on account of his father’s indignation :
and thus he continued, till, his father dying, he
obtained possession of his seat, and inherited his
property and lands. He acted as his father had
done, in keeping up the establishments for guests,
in protecting the timid and the helpless, and in
clothing the widowed and the naked. He used also
to ride out in the plains with his warnors, and
exercised himself with the horsemen; so that his
bodily powers and vigour were strengthened. And
after a short time, he collected some rich presente,
and taking his mother with him, he went to visit
his uncle: neither did he halt till he came unto
Zahir, who was delighted to see him, and set apart
for him a magnificent dwelling; for he had heard
accounts of his accomplishments from various tra-
vellers. Khalid also visited his cousin: he saluted
her, and pressed her to his bosom, and kissed her
between the eyes, thinking she was a young man.
He was much pleased with her, and stayed ten
days with his uncle, every day engaging with his
horsemen, and lancing with his warriors. But his
cousin, when she beheld how beautiful and valiant
he was, was deeply enamoured of him. She re-
nounced sleep; she ate nothing, and her love and
` passion increased: and now when the flame of love
had gained complete possession of her heart, she
complained of her situation to her mother, saying,


186 ER MOTHER ENCOURAGES HER PASSION.


O my mother, if my cousin departs, and I do not
accompany him, I shall die of grief in his absence.
Her mother pitied her, and could not reproach her,
being fully convinced how unavailing would be all
reproof. Jaida, said she, conceal your feelings,
and be not so distressed: you have not acted im-
properly; you have, on the contrary, done nothing
but what is correct; for he is your cousin, of your
flesh, and of your blood. You resemble him in
beauty and loveliness, in form and figure, and also
in bravery and horsemanship. To-morrow, when
his mother comes to us, I will explain the matter
to her: we will marry you to him without delay ;
and we will, moreover, return to our native land.
She waited patiently till the following day, when
Khalid’s mother came: her mother then conducted
her into the apartment, and uncovering her head,
her hair fell over her shoulders. Khalid’s mother
perceiving her excessive beauty and charms, was
quite bewildered, and exclaimed, Cousin, is this not
your son Jooder? No, she replied, this is Jaida;
the moon is risen. And she related the circum-
stance, and all that had passed with her husband,
and how she had concealed her sex, fearful of the
consequences. Cousin, continued Khalid’s mother,
in astonishment, amongst all the daughters of Ara-
bia, most celebrated for their beauty, I have never
seen one more lovely than this girl. What is her
name? Jaida, she replied; and my only object in
disclosing this circumstance, is to offer you all these


REJECTED BY KHALID. 137


charms: and it is my wish to marry her to your
son, and to return to our native land. To this
Khalid’s mother immediately assented: And most
fortunate, said she, will be my son with such a
possession. She instantly started up, and repaired
to her son, to whom she imparted all she had seen,
expatiating on the charms of Jaida’s form. By the
faith of an Arab, said she, I have never, my son,
beheld in any desert or city, amongst the most
perfect of the daughters of Arabia, any one that
resembles your cousin: nothing can be more beauti-
ful than her form—more exquisite than her love-
liness and shape. Haste then, my son, to your
uncle Zahir, and demand her of him. Lucky, in-
deed, if he grants her to your wishes: let her not,
my son, escape you. As Khalid listened to these
words, he hung his head towards the ground, and
remaining thoughtful awhile, Mother, said he, I can
stay here no longer; I must return home to my
horsemen and my troops. I do not wish to have
any thing more to say to my cousin, now that it is
ascertained that she is a person of a waving bosom,
awkward in speech, and of a trivial, light dispo-
sition; for I have always been accustomed to the
society of warriors, where I throw away money, and
acquire martial renown. As to her love for me,
it is only a maiden, feminine weakness. And he
mounted his horse, and accoutred himself in his
armour and warlike weapons; he bade adieu to his
uncle, and resolved on instant departure. What


138 JAIDA'S INDIGNATION.


means this haste? exclaimed his uncle. I cannot
possibly remain here any longer, answered Khalid ;
and he rode off, traversing the wilds and the wastes.
His mother took leave of Jaida, and having com-
municated to her all that had passed with her son,
she mounted her she-camel, and set out on her way
home. Jaida’s soul felt the indignity. She was
deprived of all repose, and scarcely ate any thing ;
and when her father, a few days after, was going
forth with a party of brave horsemen in quest of
gain, and to plunder warriors, he looked at her,
and observing she was much altered, out of spirits,
and dejected, he made no remark, hoping that she
would soon recover.

Her father had no sooner quitted the tents, than
Jaida, who perceived that her life was in danger,
and that her situation was critical, said to her mo-
ther, Mother, I am dying, and that wretch Khalid
still lives. I must make him drink of the dis-
tractions of death, and make him taste of the bit-
terness of punishment and torture, if God but
grant me the power. She rushed forth like a
lioness, and, clothed in armour, she mounted her
horse, telling her mother she was going to the
chase. She traversed rocks and mountains, her
anxiety ever increasing, and her distress augment-
ing, till she approached the dwellings of her cousin.
Having disguised herself, she entered the tents of
public entertainment, close-vizored, like a horseman
of Hijaz. The slaves and attendants met her, and


ENGAGES KHALID IN ARMS. 139


gave her a most hospitable reception, behaving
towards her as they always did to their guests, or


any noble personage. That night she reposed ;
‘but the next day she came forth into the course,
where she engaged the horsemen, and proved her
superiority over the bravest, to the great astonish-
ment of all the spectators. It was not yet mid-day
when all her cousin’s horsemen acknowledged her
superiority. Khalid marked her prowess, and was
surprised at such uncommon skill, and went forth
to meet her. Jaida encountered him, and they both
commenced the attack, exhibiting every stratagem
in the assault and defence, until the darkness of the
might came on; when they separated, unhurt, and
neither of them knew which was the conqueror.
Thus was Jaida exalted in the eyes of every spec-
tator, and the distress of their hearts was assuaged
when they saw her wonderful intrepidity and skill.
Khalid ordered all his slaves to attend on her, say-
ing, Treat this great Knight most hospitably ; and
he retired to his own tents, his heart entirely en-
grossed with the combat. She remained three days
with him, and every day she appeared on the
course, and engaged her cousin till the close of the
day; and though she was exceedingly rejoiced, yet
she never discovered herself: and it never occurred
to him to make any inquiries of her, or ask her to
what tribe she belonged. On the fourth morning,
Khalid mounted as usual, and sought the plain;
and as he passed by the tents of entertainment, he


140 HIS HATRED CONVERTED INTO LOVE.


saw her mounting her horse. He saluted her, and
she returned the compliment. Noble Arab, said
Khalid, I wish to put one question to you. I have
hitherto been deficient in decorum, but I now be-
seech you, by the God who has clothed you in
robes of beauty, and has endowed you with such
dexterity in feats of arms, tell me who you are,
and to what noble Princes are you allied? for your
equal in bravery and horsemanship I have never
beheld. My heart is all anxiety—my soul is all
doubt and eagerness. Jaida smiled, and replied,
as she opened her vizor, Khalid, I am a woman,
and no warrior; I am your cousin, Jaida, who
offered her person to you, and resigned herself to
you; but you accepted her not, priding yourself on
your love.of arms. And she instantly turned away,
and giving the reins to her charger, she sought
her native land. Her cousin retired, abashed: he
knew not what to do with the love and passion that
now beset him. He abhorred all his warlike pur-
suits, on account of the troubles with which they
had encircled him; and his hatred for women was
converted into love. He sent for his mother, and
related the adventure. My son, said she, this cir-
cumstance only renders you still more deserving of
her: wait patiently, that I may go and demand
her of her mother. She accordingly mounted her
she-camel, and departed over the deserts, following
the traces of Jaida; who having reached home, in-
formed her mother of all that had occurred; and


JAIDA NOW REJECTS HIM. 141


greatly was she alarmed at what she had done.
Khalid’s mother soon arrived, and throwing herself
into her cousin’s arms, begged her to marry Jaida
to her son. Zahir was still absent on his excursion.
But when she imparted to her daughter Khalid’s
request, That can never be, said Jaida, were I even
to drink of the cup of death. I only performed
this deed in the presence of heroes, in order to
extinguish the flame of my agony and distress, and
to soothe the anguish of my heart. Upon this,
Khalid’s mother returned home, disappointed, and
found her son in the cruellest state of misery and
anxiety. He started up in haste (for his love and
passion had greatly augmented), and eagerly in-
quired what had passed with his cousin: and when
he learnt what Jaida had said on the subject, his
grief became still more violent ; for this rejection of
his love shot a flame into his heart, as he had only
known it by experiencing the miseries of desire and
torture. What is to be done now, O mother? he
exclaimed. ‘There is no way of eluding this ca-
lamity, she replied, but for you to assemble your
horsemen from the Arab Sheikhs, and all between
whom and you there exists any connexion or
acquaintance. Wait till your uncle returns from
his expedition, then go with your comrades, and
demand her in the assembly of warriors: if he
denies the fact*, explain to him all that has passed,


© That is, if he denies that he has a daughter.


142 KHALID VISITS’ ZAHIR,


and importune him with assurances till he grants
your request. His mother’s advice soothed his
pains: and when he heard of his uncle’s return,
he assembled the Chiefs of his family, to whom he
related his adventure. Greatly were they amazed ;
and Maadi Kereb (for he was one of Khalid’s
bravest comrades) observed, This is, indeed, a most
singular occurrence: we have always understood
that your uncle Zahir had a son called Jooder : but
now the whole affair is discovered, and made mani-
fest. You are, therefore, the person who has the
best right to the daughter of your uncle. It will
be well for us all to go to him, and throw ourselves
down before him, begging him to return to his
family, and not marry his daughter to a stranger.
Khalid, without any further delay, took with him
one hundred of his chosen horsemen, who had been
brought up with Moharib and Zahir from their
youth; and collecting some magnificent presents,
more valuable than his former offerings, he set out,
and did not halt till he reached the tribe of Saad.
Khalid congratulated his uncle on his safe return ;
but Zahir was amazed at this second visit, after so
short an interval, particularly when he perceived
the Chiefs of the family with him. He never
thought of his daughter Jaida, and only supposed
that they were come to induce him to return to his
' native land. He received them hospitably, and
accommodated them with tents, and lodged them
in his most magnificent dwellings. He slaughtered .


AND DEMANDS HIS DAUGHTER. 143


camels and sheep, and prepared a feast, supplying
them with every requisite for three days. On the
fourth day, Khalid arose, and having first thanked
and commended his uncle, he demanded his daughter
in marriage, and begged him to return home with
them. Zahir denied having any other child but
his son Jooder; but Khalid explained the whole
affair, and stated to him what had happened con-
cerning his daughter; at which Zahir hung down
his head to the ground, in excess of shame. For
some time he remained thoughtful ; till feeling that
the business could only become worse, he turned
towards all present, and said, Cousins, I. will no
longer hesitate to confess the secret: and now let
us terminate the business, and marry her to her
cousin as soon as possible ; for he, of all men, merits
her the most. So he gave him his hand for. the
marriage, and they immediately shook hands in
the presence of the Chiefs, who were witnesses to
the contract; and they settled her dower at five
hundred she-camels, red-haired and black-eyed, and
a thousand he-camels, laden with the rarities of
Yemen. The tribe of Saad, with whom Zahir had
been living, were amazed at this event. But when
Zahir demanded Jaida’s consent to this arrange-
ment, she stood abashed at what her father had
done: however, he assured her so positively that
he could not leave her unmarried, that she at last
said, Father, if my cousin desires me in marriage,
I will not enter unto him until he can slaughter at


= 144 SHE COKSENTS ON CONDITIONS.


my wedding-feast a thousand camels belonging to
Gheshm, son of Malik, surnamed the Brandisher
of Spears. Khalid assented to this requisition ;
but the Sheikhs and warriors would not quit Zahir
till he had collected all his property and wealth,
and departed home with them : and no sooner was he
settled, thar Khalid conducted away one thousand
horsemen, with whom he vanquished the tribe of
Aamir. He plundered their property, and slew a
number of their heroes, after having wounded the
Brandisher of Spears in three places, and taken
away from his lands more than Jaida had de-
manded. With this booty he returned, exulting
in his success: but when he now sought the con-
summation of the marriage, Jaida again sent for
him, and said, If you wish me to be your wife,
first fulfil all my wishes, and execute the contract I
shall form with you. My demand of you is this:
on my marriage-day, let the daughter of a noble,
free-born woman hold the bridle of my camel. She
must be a Prince’s daughter, and of high dis-
tinction; so that I may be honoured above all the
virgins of Arabia. Khalid acquiesced, and obeyed.
On that very day he mounted, with his horsemen,
and traversed the plains and the valleys, seekmg
the land of Yemen, till he reached the country of .
Hijr, and those sand-hills. Here he attacked a
family-tribe of Moawiyeh, son of Nizal. He came
down upon him like a torrent of rain; and plying
his sword among his horsemen, he took prisoner


THE MARRIAGE-FEAST. 145


Amima, Moawiyeh’s daughter, from her retirement;
and thus he returned, having performed deeds no
heroes of old.ever executed, dispersing whole tribes
and clans, and plundering the property of all the
Arabs in those parts; and he did not re-enter his
own dwellings till he had collected wealth thatcovered
the country and the desert. The damsels met him,
playing on their cymbals and musical instruments,
and the whole tribe rejoiced; and when he came
nigh to his own home, he clothed the widows and
orphans, and invited to his feast all his friends and
companions. All the Arabs of that region flocked
to his marriage, and he supplied them with meat and
wine in abundance. But whilst the guests were
engaged in feasting and merriment, Khalid, accom-
panied by ten slaves, rode away into the wilds and
the marshes, to attack lions in their dens single-
handed, and to hunt lions and lionesses, with their
cubs, that he might carry them back to the tents,
where he wished to serve up their flesh as a meal,
and distribute it among all classes. Jaida knew what
he was doing; she also mounted her horse, com-
pletely armed, and, disguising herself, quitted the
tents; and as there remained still three days of
carousing, she sought for Khalid in the desert, and
found him in aden. She rushed at him like a savage
lion, and assailed him with loud shouts, crying out,
Dismount, you Arab, from your horse—stnp off
your coat of mail, and your armour. If you hesi-
tate, I will drive this spear through your chest, and
VOL. It. - L


146 THEIR FEATS AMONG THE LIONS.


force it out quivering through your back. Khalid
determined to engage and attack her, and they com-
menced a furious combat, and after an hour's con-
flict, he perceived in her what affrighted his eyes.
Checking his horse, and refraining from the battle,
I demand of you, by the faith of an Arab, he cried,
to tell me what horseman of the desert you are, for
I observe that vour thrust is irresistible, and your
blow inevitable; and verily you have disappointed
me in my wish, and in the accomplishment of my
hopes. At these words, Jaida raised the visor from
her face. Khalid, she cried, Who like you can attack
wild beasts in their dens? That this should be said
to the virgins of Arabia is not the attribute of a
lion-warrior! Khalid was abashed at her taunts. By
the faith of an Arab, he replied, No one but your-
self can resist me. But is there no one in all this
desert who challenged you, or did you only wish to
exhibit before me a specimen of your gallantry?
By the faith of an Arab, added Jaida, I only came
forth into this desert to assist you in chasing the
wild beasts, that you might not be reproached
among the warriors on my account. Khalid was
astonished at her expressions, and amazed at her
spirit and resolution. So they both dismounted,
and darted into a cavern. Khalid seized two fero-
cious beasts, and Jaida seized a lion and two lionesses,
and they performed deeds to strike every eye with
horror. This being done, they congratulated each
other, and Jaida was rejoiced in the presence of


THEIR MARRIAGE AND TRIUMPH.- 147


Khalid. Henceforth, said she, I will never permit
you to leave the tents till after our marriage; and
immediately she hastened back to her private apart-
ments. Khalid also returned with the wild beasts to
the horsemen, who shuddered at what he had done,
and exalted his dignity above all other heroes. They
thus continued the feast, and every one was satiated
with food. The maidens put the cymbals in move-
ment, and the slaves flourished their swords, whilst
the damsels and virgins sang till the evening, when
Jaida was married to Khalid, and he was blessed in
her possession. Amima, the daughter of Moawiyeh,
held the bridle of her camel, and the glory of Jaida
was exalted among women and men. The hour
was propitious; every foe grieved; every friend re-
joiced. But in the course of that year Zahir died,
and Jaida inherited all his property, his he and she
camels. The kings of Arabia feared her, and mighty
rulers were tributary to her; and every courteous
poet of the desert extolled her in his rhymes. Now
it happened that this story reached Rebia, and he
was delighted at it, for he felt certain of the destruc-
tion of Antar.

Now Antar, with Shiboob running ahead, did
not halt till he reached the lands of Zebeed. He
concealed himself in the barren wastes, and de-
spatched Shiboob to gain intelligence. Shiboob
hastened onward till he came to the tents, which he
entered about the close of the day, and began a con-
versation with the slaves and freemen, till, the morn-

L 2


148 ANTAIS PLAN TO SURPRISE JAIDA.


ing dawning, he returned to his brother, swift as a
blast of wind, and exclaimed, These lands are just
now unoccupied by their masters, for Khalid has
mounted his horse with some others, and has left
Jaida here with two thousand warriors. But what
is Jaida’s employment? cried Antar in haste. Whither
is Khalid gone? I asked some slaves about him,
replied Shiboob, and they told me he was gone to
war with the tribes of Temeem and Aamir, with the |
chiefs of his heroes. But Jaida rides out every night
with twenty horsemen, and wanders about the high-
ways far from the tents, fearful lest any Arab foe
should surprise them. By the faith of an Arab,
cried Antar, my wishes are accomplished : this very
night will I seize Jaida, when she launches out into
the desert. But do you, O Ebe Reah, as soon as I
fall upon her and attack her, run on and cut off
the way home from her attendants, so that not one
may escape. Thus they remained concealed till the
darkness of night came on, when they quitted their
retreat, and, as they had arrived close to the tents
by a by-road, Jaida and her horsemen appeared
under the obscurity of the night, and Jaida headed
the warriors like a tower, or a fragment rent from a
mountain, and thus she exclaimed :

‘¢ The dust of horsemen in the desert is brillant
“to me: to pierce their bosoms in the fight is my
“ employment. To hunt lions in their dens is my
« glory, and to boast over others who cannot equal
‘me: for daily I am in the wastes, making lions


»


HE KILLS HER HORSE. 149


“* tremble for their separation from their lionesses
& with their cubs. And the tribes acknowledge that
s my fame is raised above all that have preceded me.
“ I am Jaida, and him who dares to assault me I
“ will plunge into night, in the rocks or in the plains.
“ I alone may exult above all mankind, in my ac-
& tions, in my fortune, and in my husband.”
Antar listened till Jaida had finished her verses,
when turning to Shiboob, Son of my mother, said
he, intercept these horsemen on the side of the tents,
whilst I attack Jaida, and I will show you what I will
do amongst these our foes. Shiboob obeyed, and
giving his feet to the winds, sought the extended
waste, till he wasin their rear, and had cut off their
road home: here he crouched upon his knees, and
emptying his quiver before him, he remained in ex-
pectation of their approach. But Antar’s assault
on Jaida resembled the assault of a voracious lion;
he drove his spear at her horse and it entered his
chest, and she and the horse fell together to the
ground: at the instant he drew forth his noble
Dhami and rushed upon her comrades. In the
twinkling of an eye he slew twelve of them: the
remaining eight fled; but Shiboob received them
with his arrows of death. Antar also overtook them,
and destroyed some, quick as the eye-glance; so that
not one out of the twenty escaped. They now re-
turned to Jaida, who had fallen, and for a time she
was stunned; but soon recovering herself, she stared
to the right and to the left. Seeing no one, she


150 ANTAR AND JAIDA FIGHT.


started up, and grasped her scimitar, and speeded
homewards. She was, however, much weakened by
her fall, and could not conceive who could have done
such a deed. She had not gone far, when she met
the horses of her companions, without their riders.
She mounted one of them, and as through the dark-
ness of the night she was proceeding to the tents, lo!
Antar encountered her, looking out for her with
Shiboob. She no sooner heard Antar speak to Shi-
boob, than being convinced that he must have been
the author of her own fall, and the death of her
attendants, Begone, she cried, ye who would realize
your hopes with Jaida; and though your attack
and your thrust have given you an opportunity of
seeing her stretched on the ground, yet is she re-
turned to make you drink of the cup of annihilation.
She thus became furious, and bellowed like a lion at
Antar: he met her, and they commenced the con-
flict, which they kept up so violently and vehe-
mently, that their arms and shoulders were com-
pletely benumbed, and they felt assurcd of death,
whilst Shiboob, to protect his brother, watched about
the desert in the dark. At last Jaida was fatigued
and exhausted, for she had encountered a warrior
unlike any warrior, and a hero without an equal:
still she would not retreat from the battle, and not-
withstanding all she had suffered, she evinced per-
severance and desperate resolution to the last, con-
cealing her pain and anguish, and fully determined

rather to perish than surrender herself to Antar.


JAIDA MADE PRISONER. 15]


When Antar was aware that she began to fail, he
darted at her as a lion on his prey, and seizing her
by the rings of her mail, he raised her up in his
hand like a sparrow in the claws of a devouring
hawk; and as he dashed her violently to the ground,
her length nearly entered into her breadth. Shi-
boob fell upon her, and fastened down her shoulders,
and bound tight her arms and her ribs. And it
was about day-break, when said Shiboob, Now, my
brother, let us away before the day becomes clear,
and the news reach the dwellings, for horsemen will
come upon us from all sides. What means such a
proposal? exclaimed Antar. Shall I return home
without any he or she camels? Shall I leave the
property of these people untouched and at liberty?
and must a second expedition be undertaken for
Ibla’s marriage? By. the faith of honest Arabs, I
will not stir from this country till I drive away all
the he camels, and untouched she camels, and what-
ever else I covet: then will I return home, and my
wishes be fulfilled. Shiboob approved; and they
concealed themselves till the sun had risen three
hours, and the cattle came forth in quest of the pas-
tures: and when they were at some distance from
the tents, Antar rushed among them, and separating
them from their shepherds, he drove away five thou-
sand he and she camels, with their herdsmen, having
first dealt some cleaving blows among the slaves,
who cried out, Quarter from thy sword and thy
spear! Some of them escaped home, and exclaimed


152 THE DISMAY OF HER TRIBE.


Alas! alas! we are undone. The horsemen instantly
mounted, and joining the slaves and the shepherds,
What is the matter? they cried; where is Jaida? What
has fortune done to her? The slaves only replied,
What of Jaida? we know nothing of her. We only
know that a black horseman, tawny and furious,
the image of a painted death, has driven away the
camels, and has sin many of us with his sword—
he is now waiting and looking out for any who may
assail him. We imagine he must have already killed
Jaida. But one of the horsemen, named Jabir, ex-
claimed, What is this? Can any single warrior op-
pose Jaida, the destroyer of heroes? Can any one
contend with her in battle? Had she even fallen in
with a numerous host, she would not have left one
alive. She must only be absent in the desert for the
chase. We must keep this business secret from her,
and parry this attack. Upon this, they slackened their
bridles, they fixed their spears, and rode off till they
overtook Antar, scattered about as they were in tens
and twenties. They beheld him motionless in the
waste. He had taken his feet out of his stirrups, and
crossed them over Abjer’s neck, leaning on his over-
whelming lance, nor was he moved by this sight.
As they approached, they cried out, Who art thou,
thus exerting thy feet towards death, and drawing the
bridleof perdition towards thyself? Noanswerdeigned
he to give them; but, replacing his feet in the stir
rups, he lifted his spear from the ground, and as-
sailed them like a lion rushing out of his cave. He


ESCAPE OF JAIDA. 153


pierced one, and overthrew him; a second he de-
prived of life; of a third he tore out the entrails; a
fourth he dashed to the earth; a fifth he left de-
spairing of life. Now those that advanced against
Antar amounted to eight hundred, all valiant scowl-
ing-eyed warriors. But where are the Pleiades,
and where the earth ! Where are towns and where
are villages! Where are the seas, and where are
rivers even when they flood! And in less than an
hour he had destroyed numbers of them; the rest
escaped, and sought safety in flight, exclaiming,
May the curse of God light on your flat-nosed
father, and your harlot mother! How forcible are
your blows! how irresistible your attack! He pur-
sued them, till having driven them out of that land,
he returned for their scattered horses and dispersed
arms ; and when he had collected the whole, Shiboob
followed him as he traversed the rocks and sand-
hills, till the best part of the day was spent, when,
lo! a dust arose infront of them, and darkened the
land. Well, said Antar to Shiboob, All paltry shifts
and evasions will be useless this day. Do you take
care of our booty and Jaida, whilst I show you
what I will do with these foes. ‘Thus saying, he
gave the reins to Abjer, and hastened onward. But
he had not gone far, when Shiboob appeared before
him. Where is Jaida and the plunder? he cried.
Alas! replied Shiboob, this dust and the slaves
under my charge took off my attention from her,
and as soon as they perceived the dust also, they


154 HE VENTS HIS RAGE ON HER PEOPLE.


refused to drive on the camels; they screamed out
at me, and came down upon me; I turned aside
from them, and slew three of them; and greatly
afraid I was, that, were I to attend to them exclu-
sively, this army might overtake me whilst you were
engaged far away from me in the conflict, and that
I should be made to drink of the cup of death;
for, indeed, this dust announces an immense force,
and you are alone in the desert. O, you son of an
accursed mother ! cried Antar, so you in your alarms
have quitted Jaida and the booty. By the faith of
an Arab, I will show you wonders this day. He
slackened his reins, and galloping on till he overtook
the cattle, he found that the slaves had already set.
Jaida at liberty, and were shouting out, O for the
warriors of Zebeed! Jaida was also mounted ; but
her distress and indignation were intense, for she
was bandaged up on account of her wounds, and
unarmed. Antar observing their situation, rushed
upon them like a ravenous lion, and roared out a
frightful roar at the slaves. Ye bastards, he cried,
presume not to move. He pierced the first, and
hurled him to a distance; a second he deprived of
existence; a third he emboweled; a fourth he
made a warning to all that beheld him. But the
slaves and the horsemen, seeing their own alarming
position, exclaimed, O warrior of the age, quarter,
quarter from your sword ! quarter from your spear !
and they all assembled together, and drove the
cattle on before him. As to Jaida, when she


ARRIVAL OF THE ABSIANS. 155


marked Antar’s exploits, she shuddered, and her
eyes were bewildered. She gave the reins to her
horse, and galloped towards the dust, in hopes of
assistance from it. Antar pursued her like an eagle,
or a lion springing out of his den, and it gladdened
his soul that he should have to plunge into the midst
of that army in quest of Jaida, so that he might
fulfil his object, even were he to drink of the cup of
perdition. Jaida ardently gazed to ascertain what
horsemen were in front or her,.and lo! they were of
a swarthy complexion, on steeds nimbler than an-
telopes, and they all shouted out, O by Abs, O by
Adnan! Come on, O Aboolfawaris, on to your foe !
Fear not, for we are come solely on your account
into this land.


156 KING ZOHEIR’S DISTRESS ABOUT ANTAR.


CHAPTER XII.


Waen the Princes Shas and Malik missed Antar,
they inquired of Ibla’s father concerning him ; but
as he gave them no direct intelligence, they repaired
to their father, King Zoheir, to acquaint him with
what had happened to Antar. At this news his
bosom became tightened and oppressed ; he sent for
Shedad, and asked him about his son. He could
give him no information; but said, My lord, my
brother Malik has complete ascendancy over him,
and I am convinced that he has entrapped him, and
exposed him to dangers. I am in the greatest dis-
tress and despair about him. By the faith of an
Arab, cried King Zoheir, if your son Antar should
be slain, or should any misfortune befal him, I will
put your brother Malik to death, and I will hang
his son Amroo; so, Shedad, try to obtain some
true intelligence for me on this point. Shedad sig-
nified his obedience, and quitting the king’s presence
he commissioned Zebeeba to go to Ibla and inquire
of her what had passed, and what had been con-
certed. Zebeeba accordingly repaired to Ibla, and
in answer to her questions Ibla imparted to her all
that had been planned against Antar. Zebeeba
immediately returned, and told Shedad all his


RESOLVES TO JOIN HIM. 157


brother Mahk’s contrivances. Upon this, he has-
tened back to King Zoheir, and communicating the
news to him, he added, Never can my son return—
never will he be able to escape from the claws of his
enemies, now that they have exposed him to the
swords of Khalid and Jaida. May God never let
your brother taste of rain or moisture! exclaimed
Shas. By the faith of a noble Arab, I will not
suffer him to remain alive whilst I am among the
mansions of this world. But should Antar be killed,
most ample vengeance will I have; your brother
Malik shall be well repaid. But if he be still alive,
I will aid him against all his enemies. And it was
the wish of Shas instantly to mount and to go after
Antar. Stop, my son, said his father, for I myself
will march with all my warriors of the brave Absians
to the assistance of Antar,’ our protector, and the
remover of all our difficulties.

King Zoheir immediately ordered his slaves to
proclaim to the horsemen an expedition against the
tribe of Zebeed. He himself mounted, and went
out towards a spot called Nika, where, the eagle
standards being raised over his head and all the
noblest Absians being assembled round him, he pre-
pared for war and battle; and as they were about
to traverse the wastes, Malik, Ibla’s father, went up
to King Zoheir, and said, What means all this
agitation? Whither have you resolved on marching
with this host? To loosen the knot you have tied,
replied King Zoheir, that we may unravel it with


158 MALIK PUNISHED.


arms and slaughter. But you, filth that you are,
how often have you deceived us, and lied in your
speech ! and exposed our cousin to misfortunes and
‘calamities! My lord, said Malik, this affair was
none of my doing. I have but this moment heard
of it; and, in fact, I was resolved on returning to
the tents in order to strike off my daughter’s head
with the edge of the sword, for the women must
have turned her wits to have made her talk so ab-
surdly to her cousin, thus obliging Antar to under-
take so perilous an enterprise. By the faith of an
Arab, exclaimed Shas, truly thy death would be
preferable to thy existence, for this plot is only one
of thy deeds, and one of thy stratagems, and one of
thy calamities; otherwise, never would Ibla have
pointed out such a dreadful adventure. I swear to
thee, were I not afraid of my father and Antar’s
- comfort, I would strike off thy head, and make thy
skull fly from thy shoulders, that thy infamous
designs might revert on thyself. Avaunt! away
from us! Associate not with us in this affair—be no
longer a companion of ours. And he fell upon him
with a whip he had in his hand, and cut him across
the shoulders till he nearly killed him, and thus
forced him back. King Zoheir also drove away
Rebia and the crowing Amarah, together with all
the family of Zeend, and all the plotters against
Antar; and with the remaining warriors he pro-
ceeded on his journey.

But Malik, Ibla’s father, shrunk away, crying


HE AND REBIA EMIGRATE. 159


out with pain; I cannot, will not, remain any longer
in the land of the tribe of Abs, said he to Rebia,
for now no one will ever again raise his head to-
wards me. I will emigrate, and seek the land .
of Syria, where I will establish myself, and worship
the Cross: and not let this slave-demon bully me—
Oh, had he cut off our heads with the sword, it
would have been more tolerable than this insult!
Ay, said Rebia, it is very true, O Malik! King
Zoheir has only treated us thus on account of this
vile, base-born slave ; let us therefore emigrate from
the land of Shureba and Mount Saadi, that no one
may find fault with us, or expose us to taunts and
reproaches. So they collected their standards for
their departure, and directing their slaves to strike
their tents and load the camels, they mounted, and
prepared for an entire separation. They drove
away their cattle, with their women and their chil-
dren before them, amounting in all to seven hun-
dred, for Rebia was one of the sheikhs of the most
celebrated Absian families, and he had been the
companion of renowned monarchs. His brothers
were nine, all famed horsemen, who took part in the
councils of King Zoheir. Malik was also of the
party, with his daughter and all his property.
Oorwah, son of Wird, likewise departed with one
hundred horsemen, all Absians, and great warriors.
Towards the close of the day they set out, and when
they halted: in the evening they began to deliberate
on the course they should take. Nothing can suit


160 ANTAR’S JOY; JAIDA SURRENDERS.


us better, said they all, than the land of the tribe of
Aamir, for they are honourable and noble people.
Let us go down to Khalid, son of Giafer, a liberal
and hospitable man; and also Gheshm, son of
Malik, surnamed the Brandisher of Spears; let us
for ever establish ourselves among them, for we
form a numerous host. No; said Rebia, why should
we go down to these great tribes? we form of our-
selves seven hundred tents; let us repair to some
of the well-known waters and springs, where we
may be in the way of hearing of Antar, and what
happens to him among the tnbe of Zebeed with
Khalid, son of Moharib. If he be destroyed, I am
sure King Zoheir will turn to us again, and endea-
vour to conciliate us, that we may return home.
After this they assembled their standards, and having
travelled the distance of two parasangs, they halted
at a place called Zatool Khirjein, where they let the
cattle graze.

King Zoheir, in the mean time, continued his
journey over the land, far and wide, until he joined
Antar.

As soon as Antar saw the Absian horsemen, he
was pleased, for he felt assured they had come on
his account. But Jaida, knowing that they were
Absians, surrendered herself to Antar, and begged
for quarter. He protected her from death, and
ordered Shiboob to tie her hands behind her back.
Antar dismounted, and went to do homage before
King Zoheir, saying, Why, my lord, all this com-


MUTUAL CONGRATULATIONS. 161


motion? O Antar, replied the King, it was your
expedition against your enemies that has rendered
this movement necessary ; and, moreover, our fears
for you in the scenes of death. Know, too, that
one like you must not be so easily abandoned ;
we' must exert ourselves to protect you; and had
you informed us of this journey, and this your
resolutien, we would have made your uncle’s in- `
sidious designs and foul deeds revert on his own
vile person, and have obliged him to marry you
to his daughter. Antar kissed his feet, and thank-
ing him for his kind discourse, My lord, said he,
by your munificence, which I can never repay,
I have only exposed myself to these difficulties .
that I may leave my uncle nothing to say against
me. Moreover, I am firmly fettered and bound
down to him, and can do nothing but what he
requires or what he proposes, whether it be near
at hand or at a distance. And turning towards
King Zoheir’s sons, he saluted the Princes Shas
and Malik; and thanking them also for their con-
duct, he paid his duty to his father Shedad, and
his uncle Zakhmet-ool Jewad, and congratulated
them on their safety. In return, they related to
him all that concerned his uncle Malik, and the
disgrace with which they had loaded him; at the
same time making inquiries about his situation, and
all that had befallen him in the land of Zebeed.
My lords, said he, it has terminated, through your
favour, in the happiest manner. Wherever I have
VOL. II. M


162 THEY PLUNDER THE TRIBE OF ZEBEED.


been, I have succeeded, and whithersoever I have
turned, I have prospered; for when I directed my-
self towards this land, I found it stripped of its
warriors, so I have gained possession of Jaida, who
was my grand object; and had I had fifty horsemen
to fight, I would have driven away the cattle: of
three tribes. But now the business will be easy
enough. Alight you here, and let my lord, King
Zoheir, repose. Let us attack these tribes, and
carry off their property, and their he and she camels,
for their chief, Khalid, is absent against the tribe of
Aamir, and has confided them to the care of Jaida,
and he does not know that she has fallen into the
talons of the devouring eagle, at whose command
the mill of war revolves. King Zoheir accordingly
alighted, bid his tents be pitched, and the standards
to be raised, whilst his horsemen, with his sons,
rode off; and being absent all night, they returned
in the morning, with camels and cattle that covered
the whole country; King Zoheir having strictly
enjoined them not to capture the married women,
nor touch any thing but the slaves and the cattle.
So when he beheld this immense abundance, he
greatly rejoiced, saying, Antar is indeed a most
fortunate fellow, and no one contends with him but
dies tn anguish.

During a stay of three days they slaughtered
camels and sheep, and feasted; but on the fourth
day they departed for their homes. King Zoheir
set out, and by his side rode the Chiefs and Antar,


‘


SUDDEN APPEARANCE OF THE FOE. 168


who conversed and recited verses all the way till
there remained only two days march between them
and their own country; and as they entered a spa-
cious meadow, How wide and extensive is this spot !
exclaimed Antar, how well adapted for battle and
contentions! © Aboolfawaris! said King Zoheir,
all places are alike to us, and we are prepared for
all events: to me this spot appears most -fit for eat-
ing and drinking, and for hunting in the vicinity.
O King! cried Antar, I have only been brought up
in war and conflicts, and the encounter of warriors,
and I feel that my heart enjoys nothing so much as
feats of arms. May God ever protect thee, thou
valiant knight of the horse, thou plunger into night !
cried King Zoheir. Soon after they struck their
tents, and marched on a little way, when lo! some-
thing appeared like a cloud. They halted, and lo!
it rose on high, and obscured the whole region.
The light of day was changed to gloom, and beneath
the dust was the flash of scimitars and the glitter of
spears, and shouts and lamentations. O Abool-
fawaris ! exclaimed King Zoheir, truly it has turned
out just as you wished: doubtless this dust an-
nounces the army of Khalid, and the prisoners he
has taken from the tribe of Aamir. We have
nothing to sustain us but patience against the blows
of cleaving scimitars and the assault of these devour-
ing lions, and yet we shall attain the pinnacle of
glory. Antar smiled: Great King, said he, let not
your bosom be oppressed; for yours are horsemen
Ma


164 KMALID'’S VAIN ATTACK ON THE AAMIRITES.


prepared for battle; but the foe shall soon be re-
duced to captivity and disgrace. Not one of us
will shrink from the combat, cried out King Zoheir's
sons and the warriors. And directing their horses
towards the dust, and having first secured the foreign
slaves whom they had captured, they drew up their
men, right and left, Antar heading them, and long-
ing for the blow and the thrust.

Now this army in front of them was the force of
the tribe of Zebeed, under the command of Khalid,
son of Moharib; and the prisoners who were with
them were the treacherous family of Zeead, Rebia,
and Amarah. It happened that when Khalid went
forth against the tribe of Aamir with five thousand
horsemen of the tribes of Zebeed, and Khitam, and
Zarim, and Cais, son of Mokewshah, the Moradian,
and Maadi Kereb, the noble knight, they continued
their journey, and eagerly pursued their course tll
they reached the tribe of Aamir; but they found
them already well informed of their intentions, and
entrenched among the ravines. This mode of de-
fence was the plan of the Brandisher of Spears:
for after the defeats he had received from Khalid,
he kept perpetually on the look out, and was on the
watch night and day; so that when Khalid invaded
his country, he found him prepared ; and not being
able to take him unawares, he consulted with a man
well versed in such matters, called Leith, son of
Maad.. O Khalid! said he, if you wish to lose time
in absurd enterprises, and not return but disap-


CAPTURES REBIA AND MALIK. 165


pointed, remain in this land; but if you wish to
return victorious, attack the land of the tribe of
Abs and Adnan: such an invasion will enrich your
comrades with he and she camels, in roan horses
and cattle. Accordingly he marched till he came
to Zat-ool Khirjein, the very spot where Rebia and
Oorwah, and Ibla’s father, with their brave fol-
lowers, had halted. When Khalid beheld this pro-
fusion, the tents and the horses, he was much
surprised, and said to Maadi Kereb, Illustrious
Chief, when we passed by this spot the other day,
we saw no one. . And whilst they were conversing,
the Absians mounted, and began the assault and
the shout, O by Abs! O by Adnan! and at their
head was Rebia, and the ruffian Amarah, and Oor-
wah, and his noble adherents. Khalid shouted to
his people, and they rushed to the conflict and the
combat of swords and spears. The Absians exerted
their whole strength; but the enemy was superior
in number. They persisted in the fight the whole
day, but before evening the Absians had lost one
hundred horsemen. The remainder were taken pri-
soners, their property was plundered, and their
families made captive; and a great lamentation
arose among them: but the grief and plaints of
Ibla exceeded the rest; for when she had seen that
her father was again resolved to marry her to Ama-
rah, she burst forth into most violent cries and
wailings; but when this sad event took place, and
they were all made prisoners, she was a little re-


(d


166 SENDS AN ARMY AGAINST THE ABSIANS.


lieved, and she cried out in a loud voice in the
name of Antar, never thinking of any part of her
family but to revile and abuse them. Khalid re-
marked how much distressed she appeared, and
inquired who was the wretched mourner. Some of
the prisoners, who were no friends of Antar, related
to him the whole story, and told him that Antar
was gone in quest of Jaida, in order to carry her
away, that she might attend on Ibla on her marriage
night: arid we, they added, on account of this cr-
cumstance have fallen into this disaster; for King
Zoheir was incensed against her father, and went
off after her cousin, being greatly alarmed about
him, aware of your power: thus has he produced
feuds amongst the families—Rebia too has accom-
panied us. This report roused the alarms of Khalid.
What, cried he to the Absians, is King Zoheir now
in my country? Yes; they replied, and with him
all our troops and forces, and our lands are left
destitute of all protection, there being only Warca
and three hundred horsemen appointed to defend
them. Then, cried Khalid, by the faith of an Arab,
will I tear out his lips, and erase the tribe of Abs
from the race of men, and make them a proverb in
the world. Sending for Maadi Kereb, he exclaimed,
Away with these horsemen to the land of the Ab-
sians! Make their women and their children cap-
tives! Slay their horsemen and troops, and go with
your prisoners into the land of the tribes of Morad

end Zebeed, so that I may occupy this country,


PUNISHES MALIK AND HIS FAMILY. 167


and by some lucky chance encounter King Zoheir,
and render his expedition most inauspicious to him.
Should he surrender himself a prisoner, I will con-
fine him in my tents to grind wheat and barley.
Maadi Kereb did as Khalid directed, and departed
with a thousand men; whilst Khalid turned back,
a flame raging in his heart ; and all Malik’s sayings
to Antar were reported to him, viz. I will not marry
you to my daughter unless Jaida, the daughter of
Zahir, be present to hold the bridle of her camel.
At this he fell upon Malik’s nose with a whip; he
treated Amroo, his son, in the same manner; and
he gave them a thrashing hotter than burning coals.
Amarah was looking at-them in their tortures, and
made a thousand calculations as to his own fate.
Rebia had been severely wounded in three places,
and he was more distressed than any one of the
party, for he had been the instigator of this mur-
derous contest in which they had been made pri-
soners. Oorwah also had the same feelings, and he
felt resolved never again to follow the counsels of
the family of Zeead, for they were wicked, obstinate
` people: and when he heard Malik scream out in
pain and torments, This, said he, is the reward of
one who is every day marrying his daughter to some
one or other, but never makes her over to her only
friend and protector. Thus was Khalid’s heart a
little appeased; and as he traversed the passes of
the desert, his soul full of Jaida, he thus recited: —

“ I lead on the horse in clamorous multitudes


168 KHALID'S HARANGUE.


« like hideous dragons, and they sweep along with
‘‘ their feet and their armour: mounted on them
“ are stubborn warriors, all strong-armed and full-
“ mustachioed. Thus they trampled down the lands
“ of the tribes of Aamir and Kelab, and the country
< of the tribe of Hellal; who fled at my approach,
“ and ran like wild animals from the lion of the
“‘ forests: they passed the night on the mountains,
“ and their armies watched my form from the sum-
& mits of the sands. As to the Absians, I attacked
“ them by day, and surrounded them with the
‘< points of the spears—I captured their Chiefs, and
& I have left some as rotten carcasses at Khirjein.
s How many of their high-bosomed beauties are
‘‘ shedding tears from their fawn eyes, crying out
« in their anguish, O by Abs! help us. But the
« Absians are in chains. Zoheir is, indeed, march-
“ing against me with slaves and with Chiefs; but
s death has driven him to a land where the women
& surpass such men. If what I have heard be true,
& truth is bartered for lies: for soon will it be evi-
‘‘ dent in the day of contention who is the dupe in
‘¢ the acquisition of glory. The gleaming scimitar
“ sparkles in my hand, and the pliant spear weeps
“in blood. I fill.the ears of the warriors with
‘¢ dread, that the nations fly away from the din and
‘‘ the clamour; and the hero, at the very mention
“c of my name when he slumbers, sees in his dreams
“ a phantom of my form. But if time allow it, I
& will one day return and seize in fetters that de-


MESSENGERS SENT ON BOTH SIDES. 169


“ spicable Absian slave; and were I to boast of my
“ powers, I would say, the whole earth is convulsed
“ by my right hand and by my left.”

Khalid continued his march over the sand hills,
till he came nigh unto the Absians, as we have
stated; and he gave a shout at the meeting that
made the mountains tremble with horror. But
when the Absians heard the cries and exclamations,
they said to one another, These are the voices of
our own women—the cries of the daughters of our
uncles. Ruin has fallen upon us, and no profit
have we gained ta this trade. What do you think
of this? said Antar to Kimg Zoheir. I cannot com-
prehend it, he replied, nor what has happened to
us; but I will despatch some one to clear it up.
And calling to an Absian horseman, Go, said he,
and inquire about these captives. The horseman
instantly gave the reins to his steed, and as Khalid
saw him approach at full speed, he said to himself,
If this horseman, whom King Zoheir has sent,
should demand quarter of me, by the faith of an
Arab, I will not consent—I will disgrace the tribe
far and near; and every one that I capture I will
reduce to slavery. Still is my heart anxious about
Jaida, for I have no intelligence. of her. So turning
to a horseman, he said, Go forth to this Absian, and
hear what he has to say; learn, too, if he knows
any thing of Jaida, and return, for I am in alarm
about her for the evils of Fortune: and my fears
are great that she may be a captive, or lying dead


170 — THEY PARLEY IN FRONT OF THE TROOPS.


on the plain. The horseman rode off, and met the
Absian half way, and cried out, O thou, a criminal
towards your own life, and marching towards the
silence of the tomb, say, what news? before I hack
thy joints. Thou Zebeed Arab, replied the Absian,
what meanest thou by these threats and menaces?
The event is still to happen, we must come down
on you, and you on us. But as to myself, I am
only here to ask intelligence and to give information,
and to warn you. And what, asked the Zebeedian,
do you require of us? what information do you
give? and against what would you warn us? This
is my intelligence, added the Absian ; we have con-
quered your country—we have taken prisoners your
wives and your families, and we have plundered
your property. But we warn you against the black
Absian, and the Adnanian troops that accompany
him, whose spears are sped with death. ‘The in-
telligence I demand is this, whence have you ob-
tained these captives that are now in your power?
Have you invaded the lands of Aamir and Kelab?
Now I have done speaking, and I demand your
answer. As to your question about the prisoners,
replied the Zebeedian, we obtained them without
any trouble or difficulty, such was the impartiality
of fortune towards our Chief Khalid, the ruler of
the necks of the Arabs. And when he had described
all that had happened, he concluded by saying,
Khalid has despatched Maadi Kereb, with one thou-
sand horsemen, against the Absians, and has ordered


RETURN TO THEIR OWN CHIEFS. 171


him to ravage their lands, plunder their property,
slay their men, and to take their women captives.
And he departed yesterday evening, swearing that
he would not leave a single Absian alive. But now
I must ask about Jaida, the daughter of Zahir.
She is our captive, exclaimed the Absian, and
severely wounded. What hero could take her pri-
soner? asked the Zebeedian, equal as she is to her
own cousin in the fight? She was taken, answered
the Absian, by a man, who resembles no man; by
a warrior like unto no warrior; one who regards
not the conflict of heroes, and before whom the
necks of the bravest bow down; our protector on
all occasions, our relief in adversity—the kindler of `
the flame of war on the day of carnage—an intrepid
horseman—the instructor of warriors in the blows of
the cleaving scimitar—one who has humbled the
fiercest lions, and vanquished the stoutest heroes—
the serpent of the bowels of the desert—the Chief
Antar, son of Shedad. On hearing this, the Zebee-
dian returned to Khalid, and the Absian hastened
back to King Zoheir; and as he advanced he thus
spoke :

“ Arise, ye Absians! we have fallen into cala- _
& mities ; your dwellings are destroyed ; loud winds
‘‘ whistle about them: nothing remains but the
“echo! They have driven avay your property
“ and your children; disgrace is let loose, as mis-


s fortunes descended. Behold your goods plun-


172 CALAMITIES OF THE ABSIANS.


‘‘ dered and ruined, and your wives violated with
“ their slave girls. The Zebeedians mvaded you
« with their horsemen, and death has succeeded to
“ joy, by means of their strong spears, like long
& poles, whose thrusts calamities accompanied.
« Were you to behold your wives; they are, in-
s“ deed, captives, and no ome listens to the la-
“ mentations—they are mourning over their land,
“and their enemies have accomplished all they
‘¢ wished. Come on! take vengeance! Avert from
“ ye this disgrace; your wives are in consterna-
“ tion; tears and sorrow abound among them.
« Couldst thou, O Antar, behold the grief of Ibla,
“gs she calls out, and frequent are her calls.
& Couldst thou but see her; how her tears flow,
‘“‘ bedewing her garments and her robes. Ibla is
“ among them, shining like the sun. Her charms
“ are like the full moon in the heavens.—Come
“on, ye cowards! engage the foe, for death,
“ and not existence, is now most acceptable. No-
« thing remains but blows and thrusts; skulls and
-“ chins must fly. The enemy has made your wives
‘‘ captives, as ye have done, and the one has re-
«s quited the other.”

On hearing this, King Zoheir and the Absians
wept. Antar nearly fell from his horse, though
rejoiced at the sorrows of the family of Zeead, feel-
ing assured that their own iniquity had visited
them, and convinced that his uncle, Mahk, had


MISFORTUNES OF THE ZEBEEDIANS. 173


been the cause of the mischief, and the contriver
of the expedition. But on Ibla’s account he en-
dured all.

The Zebeedian messenger also turned back, and
tearing off his garments, he related to Khalid what
the Absian had told him ; thus speaking:

« Holà; ye full-armed nations! ye have fallen on
& the tribe of Abs that are marching towards you
‘‘ with spears, on thin-flanked generous steeds that
<“¢ fly with them, and bear them like hideous dra-
& gons. They are driving away all your property,
‘¢ leaving nothing but what is old and rotten in the
& ruins of your homes. Your families are exclaim-
s ing; Is there any one to aid us against those who
s have exposed themselves to nocturnal depreda-
€ tions? Is there any merciful one who can pity a
& tribe whose women and lords are prisoners? O
‘© Khalid, could thine eyes but behold Jaida shed-
« ding tears from her fawn eyes! Haste thou, lion
« hero, and soothe the edge of the sword and the
& spear among them ; for is not death pleasanter than
«< life that loads man with ignominy ? Forget not the
& wretches who have covered us with shame by
& what they have done in the nights that have
c6 ”

Anguish and grief overwhelmed Khalid as he
heard these verses, and he ordered the Zebeedians
to prepare for battle. The riders mounted their
steeds and girded on their swords. Every brave horse-
men stood forth; the cowards shrunk away and


174 ANTAR EXCITES HIS FRIENDS TO THE FIGHT.


were terrified; the warriors sought the open plain,
and the Absians did the same as the Zebeedians.
The whole desert trembled under their charges,
Spears were in motion, and tore out lives at will.
King Zoheir turned toWards Antar (for he beheld
what made him shudder), O Aboolfawaris, said he,
this is indeed a frightful scene, replete with terrors
and destruction. By your existence, my lord, re-
plied Antar, lives will not fail or increase; and
such a day as this is what I long for and ardently
desire. I will assuredly release our property, and
our women, and destroy the foe, were even the
Great Nushirvan, or the emperor of the christians,
or the kings of the tribes of Asfar among them,
and not one survivor will I leave to mourn over
them; and thus Antar continued :

“« When a youth is content with a contemptible
“í existence of pleasure, and wears a veil like a girl,
“ and attacks not the insulting lions; and gores not
“ the chests of the chargers; and treats not hos-
“ pitably the guests that come to him; and defends
“ not the tribe with his scimitar; and attains not
“ glory with the blow of the cutlass; and is not re-
“ solute in calamities; and upholds not with all his
“« might him who protects his neighbour; and does
“ not steep his spear in the blood of the chieftains :
“ Say then to the female mourners of death, when
“.they would bewail him—Stop, O ye mourners!
“« Never mourn, but the lion of the den, intrepid in
“ the rising conflicts. They call me tothe battles,


KHALID EXHORTS HIS COMRADES. 175


“ and I meet the envious and the hostile; I smite
“ with the sabre, when the men of combats exclaim,
“ O thou, joy of champions! I gore with the lance
<< in quest of honour, and I strike with the severing
“‘ falchion: I rush into the carnage, and I heed it
“ not; the brave youth alone is hailed by the chief-
& tains. Such is the fame that lasts, and never
‘‘ perishes through the remainder of existence.
“ And I will defend my tribe by my exertions from
‘‘ the terrific calamities of war: I will rescue our
“ property in a battle, to which the firm-rooted
« mountains shall bow in submission; and I will
“« cause my darling Ibla to shout to them all in
“ their dispersion and confusion ; I will liberate our
‘< captives from them with the sword that splits the
“ skulls of the warrior-chiefs. I am Antar, and
‘‘my reputation is well established among the
“ valiant for the strokes of my falchion.”

May God never abandon thy mouth! and may
no one ever harm thee! cried Shas. But when
Khalid beheld the Absians advance like overpower-
ing lions, the horrors of his situation increased.
Rage and fury worked within his soul, and he
shrieked out to the tribe of Zebeed, Come on, my
cousins ! the battle! the battle! Pour down punish-
ments upon your foes; but whoever’ of you falls
upon an Absian, let him not slay him: if he be
able, let him take him prisoner. With this ex-
hortation, he bent his head over the saddle-bow,
and began the assault, and his men acted as he did.


176 HORRORS OF THE BATTLE.


The noble Absians received them, brandishing
their sharp swords and long spears, headed by Antar,
the knight of the blow and the thrust, rushing
down upon his foes and antagonists. Now the con-
flict raged furiously between the two armies ; deaths
were at hand; horrors abounded; the sword fell
among them right and wrong; souls were dragged
out with violence ; lives quitted bodies; the heavens
rained torments upon them, and made horsemen
drink of tortures ; the terrors of doubt augmented ;
calamities stuck to them with their fangs and claws.
Men became old, young as they had been; the
cupbearer of death made them quaff the liquor of
extinction; fate decided among them, and erred
not, but always effected its purpose; and bodies
were suffering the severest agonies. Thus they con-
tinued the engagement, and the summits of the
mountains burst at the fury of the carnage and
the slaughter. Antar endangered every horseman
of the tribes of Morad and Zebeed; his scimitar
threatened and menaced in every direction as he
stretched the heroes in the dust. But his impe-
tuosity was principally directed towards the pri-
soners on account of Ibla; still he could not reach
her, so numerous was the host in front of him.
Khalid, too, was dealing most vigorous blows, that
startled the eyes and alarmed the hearts of the
bravest; saying to himself, Wherever I assail, no
one can resist me; and he imagined the whole earth
was within his grasp, and verily the mountains


SHAS AND MALIK WOUNDED. 177


rocked under the vehemence of his attack, and
trembled in awe of him. But he experienced from
the Absians the reverse of what he expected; and
never could he make a single prisoner till he had
completely harassed and exhausted him. ‘Towards
the evening he fell upon that part of the army
where King Zoheir fought. He pierced through
it, and wounded Princes Shas and Malik. And
when King Zoheir beheld this calamity, his senses
were disordered, and he attacked him like an un- ©
daunted lion, and engaged him till the day was
clouded over, and the sun was clothed in robes of
twilight yellow, and the armies of darkness threw
around him the robes of obscurity. At last the
troops retired from the battle, and separated to the
right and to the left. Blood was still streaming
and flowing, and the whole field of contention was
choked up with skulls.: But when the darkness
became general, all dismounted and began to eat.
Then King Zoheir acquamted Antar with the ex-
ploits of Khalid, and the extraordinary scenes that
‘had passed between them, and told him that Shas
and Malik were wounded. By the Ruler of the
world, exclaimed Antar, sorely grieved at this
circumstance, I must make him drink of the wine
of perdition! I could not give my attention to him
this morning in the battle, for I sought the release
of Ibla; but, to-morrow, I will be the first to en-
gage; I will challenge him to the conflict, and when
I have slain him in the face of all these warriors,
VOL. II. N


178 ANTAR GOES OUT BY NIGHT.


perturbation and disma ywill'seize them, and wé
will rescue our captives from bondage and impri-
sonment, in spite of the boasting of Khalid. Yes,
said King Zoheir, we shall vanquish them, and
bring down annihilation upon them; but, I own,
my heart trembles for Maadi Kereb and his ex-
pedition against our families with his ruffian Arabs,
for no one remains to protect them but my son
Warca with a small party of brave fellows: and I
fear much, that he will gain a victory over them, if
we do not succeed to-morrow in the concussion of
swords and spears. After this, they partook of a
repast, and sought repose in slumber: but Antar
watched till it was dark, when, mounting his horse,
he went forth in order to protect his friends from
any sudden calamity under the veil of nocturnal
darkness, attended by Shiboob, and in his heart was
a flame of fury that he had not subdued Khalid,
and had not released Ibla from misery. The words
of King Zoheir also, and his alarms for his children,
burst upon him, and he felt conscious it was all
owing to him, and to the failure of his attempts:
so, as sodn as they had launched into the desert,
he poured forth all his sorrows to his brother
Shiboob, saying, in conclusion, I would not go
alone on the execution of my own concerns, except
ìn a country where there is no one that harbours
evil designs against me. Moreover, I do not feel
secure about the issue of this business, though
truly I performed deeds, in which the bravest of


_MAADI KEREB'S APPEARANCE. _ 179


heroes would have failed. Thus they continued
roaming about, gently moving as it were, on their
tiptoes, till they came in the rear of the army, where
they concealed themselves.

Now, by the first dawn of day, the two armies
sallied forth, anxious for the battle and the contest.
King Zoheir was expecting to see Antar dart for-
ward as usual, but he did not appear, and to all his
inquiries no one could give him any satisfactory in-
formation: at this he was troubled and astonished.
The circumstance was soon publicly known, and
whilst King Zoheir was expressing his distress at
such an event, lo! a great dust arose and increased ;
a black cloud preceded it with immense velocity,
and the wild animals were seen running away in
terror: the two armies stared with fixed eyeballs,
when, behold! there came forth from beneath the
dust some horsemen like lions, and at the head was
a knight like the declivity of a mountain, stalking
over the land with two feet of prodigious size and
length; and in front of him were men bound with
cords, and numerous dispersed horses without
riders: and the multitude shouted, O by Zebeed !
and he that led them was Maadi Kereb, whom
Khalid had directed to proceed from Zatool Khir-
jein. He had marched on, till approaching the
tribe of Abs, he said to his Sein Only drive away
the horses—mind not the camels—capture not their
women and families—and let us be gone as speedily
as possible, that the mass of the tribe of Ghiftan

Na


180 KHALID ABSENT FROM THE ARMY.


may not attack us, and whilst we attempt too much,
let us take care not to be worsted. Accordingly
they assaulted the tribe of Abs, and drove away
the horses and steeds, and without laying their
hands on the daughters, they departed over the
rocks and the plains: but when the cries of the
slaves and the freeborn arose, Warca mounted with
the few horsemen that remained with him, and pur-
sued the enemy. Maadi Kereb turned upon hin,
and made a violent assault upon the Absians; and
before the close of the day, one hundred and fifty
of the Absians were made prisoners, Warca himself
being made captive. Maadi Kereb immediately re-
sumed his journey with all speed, nor halted till he
reached the two armies just as they were about to
begin the attack. Ah! cried King Zoheir, this is
just what I feared; now, indeed, our only resource
is to smite with the sword, for never must we be-
hold our wives reduced to infamy and ignominy.
Maadi Kereb was joyfully received by his friends,
who advanced, and saluted him, and in answer to
all their inquiries, he told them what had passed.
He asked them also for Khalid. Alas! said they,
we know nothing of him; last night he went forth
to keep the watch, and even till now we have seen
no traces of him. Maadi Kereb was greatly dis-
tressed : he could neither rest nor repose—he cried
out and shouted, and made the assault of one vio-
lently afflicted. All the ranks followed him, ex-
tending their spears to grasp souls. The Absians


THE ABSIANS SUDDENLY RELIEVED. 181


received their spears on their breasts, and their lives
spurned the calamities that overwhelmed them, and
the misfortunes that overpowered them. The whole
country shook as with an earthquake—blood began
to flow and stream—death was eagerly occupied,
though at first in jest. The achievements of the
feeble were distinguished from those of the brave,
and the sun had not mounted high before proofs of
death were manifest. King Zoheir was on the right
defending himself, and boldly fighting, surrounded
by his sons and a party of his brave followers, who
at last seeing the calamities that were descending
upon them, spread themselves over the desert in
flight. In vain King Zoheir would have rallied
them; they heeded him not; and the Absians were
nearly destroyed: heavy evils pressed upon them;
and just at the moment that death was let loose
upon them, lo! a shout arose in the rear of the
enemy, and a large body of horse charged in va-
rious directions, exceeding a thousand men, every
warrior armed with a lance, and every one crying
out, O by Abs! O by Adnan! Antar was in front
of them, and Shiboob by his side, roaring out,
Hey, O Zebeedians! misery awaits ye from all
quarters: abandon your false hopes; and if ye will
not admit the justice of what I say, behold, here is
the head of your leader Khalid! Calamity has over-
taken him. Thus saying, he raised up a towering
spear, on which was a head like the head of a
demon. And immediately Antar assailed them with


183 ANTAR AND KHALID MEET BY NIGHT;


his companions, plying their blows and thrusts
among the tribe of Zebeed. Antar pierced them with
penetrating thrusts, and hurled down the horsemen
off their steeds; and the souls of the Absians re-
vived after death. Cousins, exclaimed King Zo-
heir, in such a crisis as this we must persevere and
be firm in adversity, that we may obtain the noblest
rewards of glory. Turn back then on the foe. Our
friends are advancing; Khalid, son of Moharib, is
dead.

Now while Antar was keeping watch over his
cbuntrymen, he said to Shiboob, Let us stretch out
into the desert under this darkness, and let us make
towards the spot where are our prisoners, perhaps
we may rescue them before the morning. Shiboob
assenting, they plunged into the desert until they
heard no more of the armies, and then they sought
the forces of Zebeed. Khalid had also that night
taken on himself the protection of his countrymen.
His distress and anguish were intense; and he had
only one attendant, his slave Damis: and when
they had roamed far over the waste in the thick ob-
scurity of night, Damis directed his course towards
the Absian camp. Damis, said Khalid, my sole
wish this night is to meet Antar, that I may drink
of his blood as I would drink pure water, for he has
laid low my beloved Jaida. Khalid had scarcely
finished these words when the indistinct form of
Antar appeared before him: He moved towards
him, and cried out, What foul Arab art thou?


THEIR COMBAT. 183


Whither art thou going in this obscurity? Antar
also addressed him; his agitation increased. Damis
recognised him. My lord, said he, mark how the
olden god has gratified your wishes, and has ful-
filled your desires. Antar, alone, is moving to-
wards you. Come on; hola! and make him drink
of the cup of perdition. Khalid gave a shout at
Antar. What wouldest thou of me? cried Antar.
O Khalid, what seekest thou? What are thy de-
signs ? Bastard, exclaimed Khalid, to bring destruc-
tion on thee; to darken thy life, and make thee feel
thy proper value. And he instantly made the as-
sault of night and day. Antar received him with
blows like the harbingers of fate. Shiboob and
Damis were each eagerly occupied; they too began
to manceuvre and fight; and when they separated,
they shot their arrows, directed by the sound of
their voices. In the mean time Khalid and Antar
were engaged in a conflict of attacks and thrusts;
of pressure and junction, neither man nor genii
could have waged. ‘They exerted all their powers
and bellowed ; their blows descended by thousands;
the contest was fiercer than a blazing fire. The ob-
scurity of night continued till the skirts of the gar-
ments of darkness were drawn up, and the light of
day shone, when Antar saw in Khalid what he had
not counted; but the flame of his fury only raged
the more; he plied his blow and thrust the more
violently: so likewise did Shiboob and Damis ;
though wearied by the vehemence of their labours,


184 DEATH OF KHALID AND DAMIS.


still they sprang and plunged at eachother the
more. The arrows of either being expended, they
returned to the contest with daggers, and trusted to
the blows of their poniards; and just as each raised
his hand with his dagger, and aimed a blow at each
other, lo! there burst forth a withering howl; and
a voice exclaimed, I will not fail, for I am ever the
lover of Ibla: I will not be controlled ! and he that
uttered this sound was Antar. Perceiving his an-
tagonist flag in his strength, he pushed upon him
like a voracious lion; he poured down upon him
the attack of fate and destiny, and smote him with
the irresistible Dhami, and behold his head rolled
upon the ground. When Damis saw this, and heard
the shout, he was struck with horror. He attempted
to fly, but Shiboob overtook him, and plunged his
poniard in between his shoulders, and forced it out
between his paps: then turning towards his master,
he congratulated him on his safety, and inquired
about his adversary, and what had happened to him.
By the life of the eyes of Ibla, exclaimed Antar, I
never beheld a more valiant ‘hero, nor a more im-
petuous arm. Very well, said Shiboob, but, this
time however, you have not so much the advantage
over me as to make me blush; for you have slain
your man, and I ming - But, said Antar, how dif-
ferent were they in their advance and retreat! Upon
this, he ordered him to take up Khalid’s head, and
thus they retired from that spot to the field of bat-
tle, and when they arrived, he perceived the Ab-


VICTORY OF THE ABSIANS. 185


sians discomfited, and the Zebeedians hot in the
pursuit of his friends, who were invoking his as-
sistance. All the troops being now dispersed over
the plains, and there being only one hundred men
stationed as a guard over the prisoners, Antar, who
observed this circumstance, called out to the slave-
girls and slaves of the Absians, why do you delay
releasing your masters from captivity and bondage?
And he rushed upon the hundred men, and scat-
tered them right and left, stretching many on the
dust. The slaves instantly liberated their masters
from their cords, and rescued both men and women,
who sending forth one universal shout, made the
mountains ring with the uproar. They hastened
to the scene of action, and blackened the country on
all sides. In a moment Antar assailed the foe, and
poured down upon them thrusts that anticipated
death, whilst Shiboob hoisted up Khalid’s head on
the point of a tall spear, and cried out in that voice,
and spoke in those words. God now dispelled the
gloom and sorrow from the heart of King Zoheir and
his warriors. Flight and dismay fell upon their ene-
mies, who fled towards their own country. The
Abzsians retired from the field of battle exulting in
the realization of their wishes, and the accomplish-
ment of their hopes. The borsemen dispersed to
collect the spoil and the cattle, but Antar returned
Jike a ferocious lion, and sought King Zoheir and
-his sons, thus speaking :

“« Verily we have found the Zebeed stout in the


186 JAIDA ESCAPES: MALIK DISAPPEARS.


“ day of our concussion, and the troops of death
‘have scoured the plain. But when they fled, we
« laboured in their rear as fire-works among straw,
“ when it burns. I have left Khalid a prey to birds
“ on the ground, and not a breath of life is in his
“ carcase. I was born for war, and I kindle it when
“it cools. I would plunge into hell-flames when it
“ blazes. I have met the thrust through the dust
‘¢ with smiles, and the scowling warriors when they
“¢ were moist with sweat. And were deaths to ad-
“ vance upon me, when they are in quest of the
“ grasp of souls, I would anticipate their assault.”
Having finished these verses, he hastened to King
Zoheir and kissed his stirrup, and related to him
the combat he had sustained with Khalid. O Abool-
fawaris, cried the King, we have indeed been ex-
posed to the most imminent perils, and all to please
your uncle Malik. O King, said Antar, all this
proceeds from your gracious favours towards your
slave, who is not worth the dust of your feet, and
who can never requite your favours. And whilst
they reposed, Antar sent for Jaida; she was not to be
found. He inquired for his uncle Malik and Ibla; no
one knew any thing of them. At this he was greatly
distressed and astonished ; his eyes filled with tears ;
and he wept, as he informed King Zoheir of the
event, and he even felt more than Antar, ‘These
men, said he, have made us a common proverb
among the Arab tribes; and to his inquiries about
who remained at their post still and quiet at the


REBIA'’S ATTEMPT AT JUSTIFICATION. 187


time of the engagement, not fighting and not com-
bating, they assured him, there were only Amarah,
Rebia, and Oorwah left behind, for they were
covered with wounds; and not one of them able to
move or stir: but there were women, and a crowd
of people attending them. On hearing this, King
Zoheir summoned Rebia, who came supported by
some slaves. O Rebia, said he, have you not failed
in what I recommended to your care! But the
God of Heaven will repay you. We left you in
charge of our habitations and our families; but you
emigrated thence, and abandoned them to be plun-
dered by the foe. You have adopted the evil pro-
pensities of your brother Amarah, even so as to
reduce us to this unhappy state. O King, cried
Rebia, whilst he poured forth groans and plaints,
it was you who reviled me; you insulted me; you
abused me; you refused me justice. You treated
me contemptuously at the time of your departure
from home; and you have implicated me in the
dissensions between Antar and his uncle. But
never have I failed in my duty towards you. You
were not acquainted with the real state of the case :
for soon after your departure, Ibla’s father deter-
‘mined on emigrating on account of the beating he
had received from your son Shas, -saying, By God,
he would remove to the cities of Syria, and worship
the cross. This alarmed me; so I accompanied him
on account of the oaths I heard him utter, and with
him I went down to Zatool Kherjcin, and did all I


188 ANTAR’S FRIENDS TRY TO CONSOLE HIM.


could to soothe his heart, repeating to him, Kmgs are
only indignant and conciliatory with regard to their
subjects when the internal evidence of affairs is made
clear to their satisfaction. But we had been there only
three days when these disasters befel us. Well, said
King Zoheir, this business is now over, Rebia ; and
‘ this is not the time for talking about it; our hearts
are bent on home. So tell me where are Malik and
hisson Amroo? Rebia swore by every oath (all falsc),
that he had seen nothing of him from the time they
had been set at liberty. I was lying on the ground
wounded, he added, and the blood was still issuing
from my wounds. I will punish him according to
his deserts, said King Zoheir, and I will show him
which of us is to be master.

They remained in that spot till morning, that
every one might seek relief from fatigue, and quietly
repose ; except Antar, for he tasted not of meat that
night, nor of sleep. He laid himself down near the
Princes Shas and Malik, full of grief and sorrow.
His father sat dewn near him, and also his uncle
Zakhmetool Jewad. All tried to console him, and
engage him in conversation. By my life in thee, O
Aboolfawaris, said Prince Malik, enemies and de-
signing malicious people shall not exult over us;
particularly that family of Zeead. But, bear up
like a man, till we learn whither your uncle is gone;
then tear his soul from between his ribs, and make
him suffer to the extent of your power. Thus they
continued to console him till a great part of the


HE PASSES A SLEEPLESS NIGHT. 189


night was passed. At last, they all fell asleep,
overcome by fatigue; and when Antar found him-
self alone, he wept and mourned; his tears flowed
copiously. He sighed, and his passion and agony
were excessive. His tongue loosened into rhyme,
and as he wept he thus expressed himself:

“ When my tears give evidence against me, how
** can I deny it? and the fire of anxious love is burn-
« ing in my entrails. In vain I would conceal what
*¢ I suffer from love, and the garments of sorrow are
& every day renewed. I meet my pangs with cou-
& rageous patience, and though my love is severe,
“ my resignation is eternal. It is to God that I
‘¢ complain of my uncle’s ill treatment and perse-
_ © cution, and when I find no friend to aid me against
‘‘ his cruelty, O my friends, shall I let my love for
“ him destroy me; my arm being so strong, and
“ my sword Indian? O daughter of Malik, sleep
& is sacrilege to me! Who can sleep whose bed-
« ding is of burning charcoal? I will mourn till
& the birds shall know that I am in grief, and the
‘¢ plaintive dove shall pity me. I will kiss the earth
‘¢ where thou art, perhaps my passion may be cooled
“ by the moisture of the ground. My mind and
& my heart, O Ibla, are stupefied, and wail over the
“‘ track of the baggage-camels and the horses: have
« compassion then on my condition, if thy love is
« lasting: my vows indeed will survive, and my
s Jove is immortal.”

At day-light King Zoheir set out to return home ;


190 ANTAR’S CONTEMPT FOR AMARAH.


but Antar’s heart was like a pan upon a fire, and
he despatched Shiboob to procure intelligence for
him concerning his uncle Malik. As to the family of
Zeead, it was all holiday time for them on account
of their triumph over Antar. Towards evening
King Zoheir permitted them to alight near some
waters, that the women and children might repose ;
and when they were all dismounted, Amarah went
up to Antar, and thus addressed him, giving vent
to his exultation, How are you, black skin? you
look vastly miserable indeed! At this Antar’s fiery
agony blazed the more, and he could not refrain
from answering him in these words: Well, son of
Zeead, although you would shame me for my black-
ness, yet am I fair in act and mind; and ask all
the women in your tents that are with child, who is
the father of their children: I perceive evident signs
and proofs of jealousy in you; and every Arab can
bear me witness, how greatly I honour the ge-
nerous giver; how I abhor the base and igno-
minious ; and thus he continued in verse:

“ Shall Amarah threaten me, and shall he con-
€ sider me a mean wight, unable to defend himself?
“ whilst I have a sword more deadly than death;
“ and whenever it moves, sparks flash from it, and
“ a spear of the tall spear of Khata *, whose barb:
“ may be taken for a flame in the night, and that
“ deals mighty and lacerating blows; when a man


* An island in the Persian gulf.


THE ABSIANS REACH THEIR TENTS. 191


“ dares it, it spoils him of life. Soon shalt thou know
“ which of us is nearest to death, and who shall be
“ left dead on the waste.” |

Shas happened to overhear what Amarah had said,
and abused him in the harshest manner, adding,
Cannot you have pity on yourself, and keep out of
mischief? How infamously you use a man who has
a thousand times shown you the greatest kindness!
but you can do him no harm. Upon this, Amarah
slunk away, and sorely he felt his inferiority. In
the morning they traversed the valleys and the
deserts till they came near home, when the high and
low came out to meet them, and it was a grand day
for them all. Each party retired to his dwelling ;
friends greeted friends; and those who remained
rejoiced in the arrival of the absent. But when
Antar beheld the abandoned and ruined dwelling of
Ibla, his grief again overpowered him. He leant
on his spear, and in a voice expressive of his con-
sternation, he thus spoke:

“ * Have the poets left aught to be repaired in
“ song? Canst thou recollect the abode of thy love
“ after long meditation? O dwelling of my Ibla!
<¢ Speak to me from Jiwa! Hail to thee, dwelling
“ of. my Ibla! Secure and safe be thou.”

At that moment King Zoheir’s.son came up to
-him and exclaimed, By the Holy Kaaba! no one


has surpassed you in poetry, and you are the most
eloquent of all the tribe of Abs and Adnan. But


© Thus begins his Moallacat, which appears afterwards.


192 ANTAR'S SORROW AND PASSION.


one who can speak as you speak, and act as you
act, how can he abandon himself to the vehemence
of passion and desire? Drive away this sorrow from
your heart! O, my Prince, said Antar, it is not by
my own will or my inclination that this passion has
entered into my soul, so that I can dismiss it at
pleasure. And as his agitation increased, he thus
continued :

“To whom i: suns appear in the obscurity
“ of night, or shine in coloured robes and velvet,
“ comprising every beauty like a meadow fashioned’
“ in marble, or a picture of ivory? They move and
“& wave about in garments like a ship sailing over
“ the billows: round them are entangled swords
“ and spears, and horsemen and suitors roam about
“ them: but among them she is a fair form like the
“ branch that flutters through a veil of ebony. I
« beheld her—I became enamoured, but I concealed
“ what I suffered, so that no one knew of it—I came
“ __T conquered—but I forgave her for the ex-
“ alted beauties that were perfected in her. What
< is it to me P—What care I for the railers? My ob-
“ stinacy and my perversity are increased towards
“ them; I shout when they persist in their in-
“ vectives against me, and their own reproaches
« shall be their own murderers.”

When he had concluded these verses, Antar re-
tired to the tents of his father; the Princes also
went away and repeated to King Zoheir what had
passed between them and Antar, and the verses he
had recited.


ABS AND FAZARAH FEAST EACH OTHER. 198


CHAPTER XIII.


‘THE next day came Beder, son of Amroo, and two
of his sons, Hadifah and Haml, of the tribe of Faza-
rah, with some other Chiefs, and congratulated King
Zoheir on his safety. In the course of conversation,
said Beder, Think not, O King, that we shrunk
from Maadi Kereb, when he came and drove away
your property, and made your sons prisoners we,
on the contrary, mounted our horses as soon as `
the news reached us, and we pursued them night
and day; but we found them not. All has ended
well, said King Zoheir. And he detailed the won-
derful events that had happened, and told him how
Antar had slain Khalid, son of Mohanb. After
this, a magnificent feast was prepared, and the vi-
‘sitors staid three days; and whenever Antar was in
the King’s presence, he raised his dignity, and seated
him on his right hand, thus exalting his rank among
the Sheikhs of the family of Beder and his sons, and
dignifying him above all his nobles. But when the
feast was over, Hadifah invited King Zoheir’s son
to visit him. Shas begged Antar to be of the party,
and as he was ashamed to refuse and hang back, he
departed with them: and as soon as they reached
the habitations of the tribe of Fazarah, Hadifah


VOL. IT. Q


194 ANTAR'S GRIEF AND MELANCHOLY.


made them alight in a spacious meadow, abounding
in springs and fountains, and trees and flowers.
And it was now the season of spring. When they
had reposed, varieties of viands were served up;
the wine glasses went round, and the maidens sung
with melodious voices. At last the tears burst into
Antar’s cyes, for he was agonized at his misfortunes.
He arose, and going out of the tent alone, he wan-
dered over the desert, when lo! a flight of turtle
doves came flying from the right, and perching on
the date trees, they conversed like childless mothers,
and complained in the tones of women mourning
the dead. At this sight the tears rushed in torrents
into his eyes; scorching sighs and uninterrupted
burnings burst from him—he was bewildered—and
his heart and soul suffered the most excruciating
- pangs, as he thus addressed them:

“ O bird of the tamarisk! thou hast rendered
& my sorrows more poignant, thou hast redoubled
“ my griefs. O bird of the tamarisk! if thou in-
& vokest an absent friend for whom thou art mourn-
« ing, even then, O bird, is thy affliction like the
& distress I also feel? Augment my sorrows and
« my lamentations; aid me to weep till thou seest
« wonders from the discharge of my eyelids. Weep
& too from the excesses that I endure. Fear not—
& only guard the trees from the breath of my burn-
« ing sighs. Quit me not till I die of love, the
& victim of passion, of absence, and separation.
« Fly, perhaps in the Hijaz thou mayest see some


SHIBOOB’3 RETURN. 195


“¢ one riding from Aalij to Nomani, wandering with
& a damsel, she traversing wilds, and drowned in
& tears, anxious for her native land. May God inspire
“ thee, O dove! when thou truly seest her loaded
& camels. Announce my death. Say, thou hast
& left him* stretched on the earth, and that his tears
& are exhausted, but that he weeps in blood. Should
& the breeze ask thee whence thou art, say, he is
4 deprived of his heart and stupefied; he is in a
& strange land, weeping for our departure, for the
s God of heaven has struck him with affliction on
* account of his beloved; he is lying down like a
& tender bird, that vultures and eagles have bereft
& of its young, that grieves in unceasing plaints
& whilst its offspring are scattered over the plain
“ and the desert.”

Thus he continued till the flame in his bosom
cooled. Now Prince Malik also arose in order to
follow him: he approached unperceived by Antar,
and heard what he recited; and his heart was
wounded. They remained some days feasting; but
on the eighth day by daybreak they returned home.
Antar’s sorrows -and afflictions burst out anew, and
signs of illness appeared in him: nothing comforted
him but the expectation of Shiboob. After a period
of forty days, behold Shiboob came in to him by
night, and his heart was near breaking. Well,
Shiboob, he cried, hast thou any news with thee?


* This is a figure of frequent occurrence.


o2


196 DISCOVERS IBLA AND HER FATHER.


Truly I have news, replied Shiboob, news that thou
mayst depend on. Haste then and speak, my brave
brother, exclaimed Antar. Know then, added Shi-
boob, that your uncle is the falsest of men. He is
gone down to the tribe of Shiban, and has demanded
protection of their King Kais, son of Masood, com-
plaining of his fortunes. Kais has assisted him, and
your uncle has married his daughter to Bostam, the
King’s son, and he has established himself among
them. At hearing these words, the flame was re-
kindled in all its fury in Antar’s heart. Ah! he
cried, and has Bostam indeed received the comple-
tion of his wishes? No, said Shiboob; when I
quitted you I visited all the hordes of Arabs, and
inquired at every dwelling, till at last I heard that
your uncle was gone down to the tribe of Shiban;
thither I proceeded without delay, and entering the
habitations by night, I remained concealed till the
dawn of day, when I beheld King Kais, and your
uncle riding by his side; and, moreover, the King
kept him near him, gave him a robe, and honoured
him greatly. I no sooner saw this than I wandered
among the dwellings till I discovered Ibla’s tent,
and watching it till her mother was gone out, I en-
tered, and found her in tears, longing for her native
sand hills. The moment she saw me, she jumped
up, and cried, Shiboob, where is your brother Antar?
I replied, At home: and what has befallen him for
the loss of you, never befel man before. O Shiboob,
she continued, I am under the greatest apprehen-


IBLA’S MESSAGE TO ANTAR. ` 197


sion for him, and I am unable to send any one to him.
My father has married me to Bostam, and has de-
manded as a marriage dower the head of Antar.
The tribe has orders to be in readiness: so hasten
to your brother, and give him this. intelligence—
recommend him to be on his guard. ‘Thus she bade
me adieu, and wept, adding, God be with you,
Shiboob, repeat these verses to my cousin:

“ O my cousin, all my comfort is destroyed, and
“ I am wasting in agonies of separation and in sor-
“ row. Were I able, I would eagerly fly to that
“ land with the winds: but round my tent are men,
“ whose hands are brandishing spears. In the
morning I am like a bird, but the hand of fortune
“ has clipped my wings, and my father has betrothed
« me by force to mine enemy; my death and in-
“ famy are united in such an act. May God send
“ woes upon him! that he could unite one so gentle
“ as I am to a foe, as if it were a friendly contract;
“ and could thus condescend to a foreigner, rejecting
“£ thee, O thou lion of the waste! By thy truth, I
“ will never break my vows to thee, were I to be
“ hacked in pieces by the broad cutlasses; so con-
“ trive what seemest best to thee, for thou art most
‘‘ experienced in expedients. Question the gales
“of Nejd £ my health when me blow in the
“ morning.”

- As Antar listened to these verses, he groaned
aloud, and his eyes were flooded with tears; but his
fears were quieted by this assurance. My object,


198 BOSTAM PROMISES TO SLAY ANTAR,


added Shiboob, in thus coming to you by night is,
that you may conceal every thing about me. By
the faith of an Arab, cried Antar, I will bring down
on Bostam and the tribe of Shiban a calamity time
shall record: and I will requite my uncle as he de-
serves. But, Shiboob, where has the party halted ?
In the land of Anizateen, my brother, answered
Shiboob, and they are but few in number.

Now Bostam had promised Malik te bring An-
tar’s head as a marriage present for his daughter ;
and soon after, as Bostam and his father were con-
sulting about the management of the expedition,
My son, said King Kais, this engagement to which
you have bound yourself is very difficult, it is a very
serious affair, for if we assemble the tribes of Shiban,
and march against the tribes of Abs and Adnan,
dissensions and feuds will arise among the Arabs.
Wait patiently, let us deliberate about the execution
of this project in a proper manner. But Bostam,
after this conversation, only waited till it was even-
ing, when he called his servant, and told him to
prepare his horse. He girthed him, and brought it
to him as soon as it was dark. Bostam mounted,
and as he launched into the wilds and the wastes,
he thus spoke :

“ O Ibla, may thy salutations greet me fre-
“ quently; keep my vows and preserve my faith,
“for thou hast subdued a Chief of the tribe of
“ Shiban, who never felt love or amorous passion
“ before, a knight to whom warriors in the battle


URGED ON BY HIS LOVE FOR IBLA. 199


“ bow through fear before he draws the sword. My
“ heart is satisfied; one look from her reconciles
“& me to my departure from my own country, al-
“ though my eyelids are antimonied with sleepless-
“ ness, and my eyes consider slumber as a sacrilege.
< O my tribe, I am slain by two large eyes, and I
“ am become a distracted and impassioned lover.
“ My soul longs for an Absian maid, that has
“ launched at me the shaft of death. Surprising,
“ that her deadly glances have shot their arrows at
“ my heart! Since the new-born moon beheld her,
“it snatched up light from her countenance, and
“ became full-orbed ; and the shadow of night was
“ astonished; she let her hair flow down, and there
<< came on a total darkness. She is an idol; were
“ she to appear before us every day, we should
“ worship no other image but her. O son of She-
“ dad, relinquish thy love; comfort thyself without
“ her, now that she has met Bostam, the knight of
“ the horse, and the horseman whose equal dwells
“ not on earth, and be safe.” -

Bostam continued his journey over rocks and
deserts till the obscurity of night was illumined,
when recovering his senses, he opened his eyes, and
looked around to observe what was before him. He
soon perceived that the Ruler of the Air had de-
prived him of his succour, and that he had lost his
way; for he had intended passing through the val-
ley of Deecar, but he now found himself in the land
of Dimaya; such had been the impression his love and


200: MEETS TARFA ON THE ROAD


passion had made on his heart. At day-light he
was in an open country, with roads in various direc-
tions. He halted, and looked to the nght and to
the left, when lo! a dust arose, and mounted on
high in front of him, and there appeared seventy
horsemen, all clad in steel; and before them rode a
knight, like a strong bastion. On the back of his
neck was slung a long spear. Bostam instantly put
his steed in motion for battle and combat; and as
he came nigh unto the troop they all halted. Their
chief alone came forward, who beckoning to Bostam
with his hand, exclaimed, What Arab art thou ?
state thy parentage. Thy parentage may be thy
protection. Youth, replied Bostam, and should it
not be my security, my well-proportioned lance, and
my well-tempered blade, will be my protection. I
am Bostam, son of Kais, King of the tribe of Shi-
ban, and the protector of the lands of Numan*. But
who of the Arabs art thou? The youth laughed
aloud, and waved his spear in joy. Welcome! he
exclaimed, I greet thee, OAboolyaczan +, thouknight
of the age. This is indeed a meeting for which I
ought to render thanks to the Great Creator, who
has shortened my road, and has thus favoured me.
How so, young man? said Bostam. Hast thou any
debt against me, the payment of which thou claim-
est? or is there blood that thou wouldest demand of
me? No, Bostam; by God, no; exclaimed the
® Son of Monzar. now dead.
+ Father of Vigilance, a nickname; (i. e.) the cock.


BOUND ON HIS DESTRUCTION. 901


stranger. I have no debt, no blood to claim of thee;
and never in my life did I see thee till this day. I
am called Tarfa, son of Rafa. I have demanded in
marriage Saada, the daughter of Shohab the Bar-
booyte, whom thou didst slay the day he plundered
thee. But, said her mother to me, I will not marry
my daughter but to him who shall avenge her, and
shall bring me the head of Bostam, her father’s mur-
derer. This is my business with thee, that I may
separate thy head from thy shoulders. And by the
faith of an Arab, I will not betray thee, neither will
I permit one of my comrades to approach thee till
our contest be decided. Be on thy guard, and look
to thyself. Bostam was amazed at this address, and
forgetting the purpose of his journey, Tarfa, said
he, since evil designs have driven thee on to this
wicked contest, thou and thy party shall this day
witness my exploits and my powers. All I demand
of thee in this conflict is fair play. What dost thou
demand as justice, asked Tarfa, that I may treat
thee fairly? All I want of thee, added Bostam, is
to wait whilst I dismount from my horse, and let
him repose a little; and when I mount him again,
come on and appease thy disquietudes. Well, said
Tarfa, as thou wilt. Bostam accordingly dismounted,
and loosening his horse’s girths, rested him and
walked him about a little. But he had no sooner
resumed his seat, than advancing towards his an-
tagonist, he exclaimed— |

“ Fortune is just, and has impartially decided ;


202 BOOTAM SLAYS HIM;


“ and by my life, O my tribe, it has never outraged
“ us. I set out to demand blood of one who never
“ betrayed me, and it has brought me one who
“ seeks my blood; a lover who complains of the
“ warmth of his love, and whose disease is Itke mine.
s It is an adventure to surprise all hearers; it will
“remain a tale among men. O tribe of Shiban,
s“ my heart is lost, so sing of it among the tent-
‘“‘ ropes, for a fawn has beguiled it with its eyes,
‘‘ which are the hunters that chase the lions of the
« forest. She is an Arab damsel, that would dis-
‘‘ grace all the virgins of Persia; so lovely, that
« should she come forth from her retreat, having
& once seen her, we should adore no idols. She rises
« like the sun at noon-day ; or she is the new-moon
“ among the shades of darkness. O hope of my
« life, couldest thou see my thrust with the spear,
“ or my blow with the sword among the skulls, no
« longer wouldest thou sigh for Antar. No; thou
“ wouldest not be hardened against princes for the
“ sake of a slave.”

Bostam rushed upon the troop, and came down
upon them like a calamity. He broke through all
their defences, and shed the blood of the chiefs. He
dispersed their mght; he routed their left. He
sought out his adversary Tarfa, but after an hour's
combat, consternation fell upon Tarfa; and Bostam
perceiving how it was with him, shouted at him and
terrified him, and pierced him in an instant, and slew
him. Again he turned upon his companions, who were


AND MEETS ANTAR. 203


of the tribe of Nazr, and as they fled over the wastes
and the wilds, Bostam soon quitted them, and con-
tinued his course over the spacious deserts till he
came to the land of the tribe of Saasaa. ‘Thence he
proceeded till he approached the land of the tribe of
Merah; and there he encountered on a sudden a black
knight, mounted on a short-haired charger. He was
immersed in steel and armour. His intrepidity proved
him one of the bravest of heroes, and the superiority
that shone in him, testified that he was a knight of
the age and period. In front of him was a man on
foot, scouring the land. This horseman was theknight
of the deserts and the cities—the chief Antar; and the
man on foot was the dust-coloured dragon, Shiboob.

When Shiboob had explained to Antar the pain
that Ibla was suffering, and that his uncle had de-
manded his head as a marriage present for his
daughter, he gnashed his teeth with rage: but
concealing his brother that night, that no one might
know his arrival, and recommending his mother also
to secresy, and desiring her, should any one of King
Zoheir’s sons inquire for him, to say, that being
anxious about his brother’s long absence, he was
gone to procure some information respecting him ;
with these precautions he quitted the habitations
as soon as all were asleep. Now Shiboob, said he,
cut by the shortest way to the land of Shiban, that
I may show you the infamy and disgrace to which I
will reduce mine enemies. Thus they continued
their expedition (Antar’s passion increasing in force


204 HIS EXTRAVAGANT AMBITION.


and vehemence), till they met Bostam, whom of all
people he was searching. Each recognised the other-
But being desirous to confirm their doubts, O Abool-
yaczan, cried Antar first, whither are you going over
this land? Against you, son of Zebeeba, replied
Bostam; that I may bring down evils upon you,
and lay low your skull, and return to wed your be-
loved. Hey, Bostam! cried Antar, in all the heat
and anxiety of love, have you beheld her, that you
can describe her charms? Yes, said Bostam; and
I have received her father’s hand; and I have
pledged myself to her. This is the very day she
will become my wife, and be under my will and ‘au-
thority. Think not, exclaimed Antar, that you will
ever obtain my permission to see her again. Be on
your guard before inevitable death visit you. Turn-
ing towards Shiboob, he enjoined him not to assist
him in the combat. Bostam prepared for the con-
flict, and drawing mgh unto Antar, he thus ad-
dressed him :

“ The revolutions arrive ever new; they raise up
“ a slave, and debase nobles. Hero of night, re-
“ linquish the contest; pursue justice, abstain from
“ rapacity. ‘The assault of chargers resembles not
“ the camels of the desert, that thou wast used to
“ tend at the rising of the dawn. No; and Ibla is
“ not a person of whom thou shouldest talk or love;
s for Ibla is more precious than the loveliness of
« the moon’s orb when it rises at its full. Ask of


« her, how that a lion hero has possessed her by his


THEY CHALLENGE To THE FIGHT. 205


& sword, that, were it to smite a rock, would split it;
« who engages warriors in the day of battle witha
“ courageous heart, unmixed with fear. Tribe of
“ Shiban, I have obtained my wish; and the grief
“ of my heart is illumined and removed. To-mor-
“ row, I will tell ye of Antar, that he has drank the
« draught of death.”

When Antar had heard his poetry, he saw that
Bostam was vain of his youth, and that his love and
passion had urged him to attempt impossibilities,
and had made him swerve from rectitude into error;
so, charging with him, and shouting at him, he thus
exclaimcd :

“ O Aboolyaczan, thy vehemence deceives thee;
‘* soon thou wilt engage a lion not to be repulsed.
« Heedlessly art thou come to seek me; but, thou
‘< hast raised a lion that pursues the invading ene-
“c mies. O Aboolyaczan, how oft the game escapes
‘¢ when the huntsman falls! If thou complainest of
€ the pains of love, I will soon cure thee of that pain
“‘ with a sword; whenever I draw it death ever
‘¢ submits to it, and prostrates itself. I am the
“ black, the slave, that assails troops when the dust
<c rises. My pedigree is my sword and my spear;
< my courage is my companion when fears thicken. `
« All mankind is but as one individual; some are
& exalted, some debased. Tribe of Shiban, my
“uncle is a tyrant: and on ye, this day, tyranny
« shall fall. Bostam is driven on to his destruc-
“tion, dragging along the train of rash courage.


906 ANTAR SPARES BOSTAM.


& I am searching him out in your dwellings, and I
“ will repay him for his deeds.”

Having thus recited their verses, they commenced
the combat, and they launched into the wild and
the desert. Their shouts were incessant; the fury
of their love and passion obscured the forms of pro-
priety. They continued fighting till evening, and
even after it was dark. At last Bostam became
weary and exhausted ; the cord of his resolution was
slackened, and he repented of his enterprise: and,
knowing that horsemen behave generously to one
another, and that Antar was not deficient in that
point, he requested of him a truce from the combat,
and permission to repose till morning. Antar agrecd,
sure that he could not escape out of the desert.
Dismount where you please, said Antar. I grant
you free permission; you are safe from me till to-
morrow’s dawn. On this, Bostam retired to a high
sand-hill, and alighted from his horse, sensible that
his passion could not be gratified. Antar also dis-
mounted, for he was tired and wearied. Brother,
said Shiboob, what do you mean by lengthening
out the contest with this devil? He came to seek
your death from a distance. I was almost tempted
to kill him myself, but I was afraid of your anger ;
and truly, you have not found it an easy task. Let
him alone this night, Shiboob, said Antar. Let
him perish in regret and anguish. Let him gnaw
his fingers with the fangs of repentance. 'To-mor-
row, I will seize him before he can attack me; for


THEIR CONFLICT INTERRUPTED 207


he is now indeed within my grasp. This apparent
remissness is all my own doing; for had I wished
to slay him, I had done it from the very first: and
he would not have lived to see this evening. I want
to take him with me to the tribe of Shiban, and
make them all taste of infamy and misery. And
verily, by the faith of an Arab, he is a horseman
few horsemen can equal; and truly, I gave over
fighting this evening quite fatigued. He ordered
Shiboob to look after him till morning. It was just
day-break, when Antar was mounted, and ready to
renew the conflict. Bostam too descended from the
sand-hill, assured he must perish. And just as he
advanced, and was about to commence the attack,
behold a dust arose in the direction of the land of
Abs and Adnan; and there appeared a hundred
horsemen, all like eagles ; who perceiving Antar and
Bostam about to engage, cried out, O by Abs! O
by Adnan! O by Zeead! O by Hamadan ! giving
the reins to their steeds. Bostam was on an emi-
nence, when lo! another dust arose from the quar- -
ter of Shiban. In less than an hour the dust cleared
away, there came forth three hundred warriors,
mounted on high-priced steeds, with long spears,
and polished scimitars. Now all these horsemen
were bent on the destruction of Antar; and there
was not one friend among them. But, when a
servant of God is fortunate, the Almighty produces
events that frustrate the wicked designs of his ene-
mies. In the first dust that came from the land of


208 BY PARTIES FROM ABS AND ‘SHIBAN.


Abs, were Oorwah and Amarah ; and the cause of
this movement was Malik, Ibla’s father, who in con-
sequence of what had passed between him and
Bostam, now gone to fetch Antar’s head, sent to
inform Rebia of what had occurred, saying, My
cousin, so and so has happened in the land of Shi-
ban, but my heart yearns after my native land.
Bostam is gone into your country to put Antar to
death, and I must beg your assistance for him.
As soon as this message reached Rebia, he imparted
it to Amarah. They all felt much pleased, being
now sure of Antar’s death and destruction. Ama-
rah communicated the news to Oorwah, and they
remained watching Antar till they found out that he
was gone away in quest of Ibla. The next day
Amarah with Oorwah and some troops set out on
the way to the tribe of Shiban. Amarah was in
ecstacies of delight, until they overtook Antar, who
was then combating with Bostam. But the second
' dust is thus explained. King Kais was very
anxious about his son’s departure in search of Antar,
and after forming various plans, he equipped three
hundred men, and appointed Nijad to command
them, and they set out by the direct road, till they
came up with Antar and Bostam. When Antar
saw how matters stood, he was convinced that there
was not a single friend among them. So he in-
stantly rushed upon Bostam, and hemming him in
and pressing upon him, and closing every means of
escape, he thrust at him with the butt end of his


THE MISTAKE OF ANTAR’S FOES. 209


spear, and threw him off his horse on the ground.
Bind him fast, cried he to Shiboob, whilst we mark
what may happen between these fellows now moving
towards us. When Nijad beheld what had hap-
pened, he cried out to his comrades, Hey! this black
has taken Bostam prisoner, but I am persuaded, he
could only have reduced him to this infamy through
the fear of this party of Absians. So, come on,
overwhelm them with the barbs of your spears,
whilst I turn upon this black knight, and cut his
body piecemeal; for I think this-demon must be
Antar, whose head Bostam went to bring away.
Thus saying, he assailed Antar with fifty men; the
remainder rushed upon Amarah, and all this was by
the will of the Supreme God! Amarah advanced
with his comrades to slay Antar; but uninten-
tionally he assisted him, being obliged to defend
himself, fearful of death and perdition; and not
being at that moment able to escape, he fought and
exerted himself, whilst the dust flew about like an
extended canopy. The tears coursed down his
cheeks; and the bodies of theenvious melted through
excess of jealousy, and the Absians were discomfited
on that day. Oorwah felt all was lost, and he re-
solved in his own mind, and bound himself by a
solemn compact, that if for this once he should
escape, never would he return to his odious practices
against Antar, nor have any more to do with him.
Amarah searched about for his companions, but per-
ceiving that fifty were already anmhilated, and the
VOL. II. . P


210 NIJAD AND HIS PARTY DESTROYED.


rest in the utmost danger, and that the calamity
appeared disastrous in the extreme, he cried out to
Oorwah, Escape, my cousin, escape, or we die. And
he gave the reins to his horse and fled, accompa-
nied by Oorwah and his companions, and pursued
by the Shibanians. In the mean time Antar en-
countered Nijad and his warriors. He aimed thrusts
at him that blinded the sight, and anticipated fate
and destiny, as he pranced and charged round them,
his heart firmer than rock. In a moment he had’
destroyed thirty. He thrust at Nijad, and hurled
him off his horse. But, when the others beheld his
slaughter, and the effects of his exploits, they took
to flight, exclaiming, May God curse your flat-nosed
father ! how strong are your blows! how fierce is
your assault! Bostam was amazed and bewildered
at Antar’s achievements; but Shiboob stood guard
over him, till Antar alighting from the back of his
horse, and having walked him about a little to re-
heve him, again mounted to pursue the Shibanians,
who were now on their return with the spoils of the
Absians, whom they had slain, and driving before
them their prisoners whom they had taken, and
seeking their leader Nijad, whom Antar had de-
stroyed. As to Amarah, he contrived to escape
with his companions. But Antar thus greeted the
Shibanians ; Foul Arabs, by the faith of an Arab,
had I not had a grudge against mine own tribe,
never would I have permitted you to accomplish
your designs against them. And he encountered


BOSTAM’S TERROR AT ANTAR’S THREATS. Q11


them with the head of his spear, overthrowing the’
horsemen, and shedding the blood of the warriors.
The Shibanians resisted, till learning that Nijad
was dead, they said to one another, Verily, this de-
mon has taken Bostam prisoner, and slain Nijad and
all his brave comrades. He is indeed a nocturnal
calamity, and a destroying thunder-bolt; let us
seek our own country, or not one of us will be alive.
So they lashed their horses flanks, and escaped at
full speed, scarcely crediting their security. Now,
said Antar to Shiboob, I am resolved on proceeding
to the land of Shiban, and to fill them with despair
after all their fond hopes, and exhibit to them the
evil stars of my cuckold uncle: and I will not re-
turn till I have rescued Ibla. Moreover, I am
aware that these fugitives will soon reach King
Kais, and will tell him what my sword and my
impetuous assaults have effected; they will also
inform him, that his son Bostam is my captive.
He will immediately assemble his horsemen and
march against our country, and endeavour to re-
lease his sons with his warriors. His tents will
therefore remain untenanted, and his property un-
protected. I will take away what I please, and will
leave what I please. I will carry off Ibla, my chief
object; and should I catch hold of her father, I
will abandon him to disgrace and infamy; and I
will now make him know who I am. O Abool-
fawaris, said Bostam, shuddering and trembling at
Antar’s language, You must certainly be proposing
Pz


212. ANTAR REJECTS HIS AID.


to yourself impossibilities, deeds that will expose
your life to dangers and troubles. Be generous
towards me, and make me your frend and com-
panion; and by the faith of an Arab, I will realize
your wishes: I will go home with you, and not let
your uncle quit our territory till he has married his
daughter to you with us, and thus your projects be
accomplished. What! O Aboolyaczan, cned Antar,
Am I so far unable to execute mine own business,
that I must ask assistance of another, whether I
will or no? I will bè the only agent in mine own
designs against your country—I will bring down
calamities upon your horsemen—I will requite every
one according to his deserts; and I will suspend
your head round my uncle’s neck, that he may
repent of his conduct, and never think proper to
emigrate from his own country again. But do you,
O Shiboob, he added, hasten to the habitations of
the tribe, and see what they are about—mark the
exact truth. Shiboob let loose his feet, and speeded
away till he disappeared among the wastes. About
the latter part of the day he returned, all aghast
and out of breath. What is the matter, cried Antar,
that you have returned in such haste? Know, my
brother, replied Shiboob, That as soon as I had
quitted you, I traversed the plains and the deserts
till I reached the tribe of Shiban, when I perceived
them all overwhelmed with the screams of slaves
and women, on account of their horsemen that had


been slain, and troops were flying about in every


ANTAR’S PLAN TO SECURE IBLA. 213


direction. I began to fear that some misfortune
might befal me, and methought also, should your
uncle recognise me, I should be a dead man. But
just as I had determined on retracing my way back,
I overheard a peasant say to another, This night
drive away your flocks as speedily as possible, for
our families are departing for the valley of Jiljil and
the plains of Jandil, (a spot in Arabia, well known
and mentioned by the poets). - As soon as I heard
this news of their approaching removal, I was over-
joyed. But what is the circumstance, exclaimed
Antar, interrupting him, that has so disco

you? Know, said Shiboob, that Ibla must also
go away, she and her mother, with the females of
Shiban. So you had better set out at the very
moment of their removal with their camels, and
convert their pride into despair. I will seize the
bridle of Ibla’s camel and lead it away; but mind
you keep off from me the- troops, whether they be
few or numerous. By your father, exclaimed Antar,
delighted and smiling, I will show you what will
joy your heart. Soon after this they departed, and
when they reached the vicinity of the tribe of Shiban,
it being late in the day, they chanced to perceive
some flocks on their’ way to the dwellings, at-
tended by a single slave, who was thus crying out
and lamenting, Alas, for thee! O Bostam, how
fortune has betrayed thee, and delivered thee over
to a slave of no worth, and of no faith! May. God
never bless that Ibla or her father !——May he curse


214 HE OVERHEARS A SLAVE ABUSE HIM ;


the hour that brought her here !—May God whelm
them in his calamities and his misfortunes! And he
thus continued in verse :

“ O full moon of perfections! O lion of battles,
“ we are grieved for thee! O thou, the protector of
“our women in every land when fled the brave
“ heroes of war! The tribe of Shiban has lost its
“ sword; a sword that could cleave even the rock-
“ ribbed mountains. Thou art humbled, warrior
“ as thou wert, whose power made the lions of the
“ den crouch before it. A slave of the tribe of
“ Adnan has made thee a captive—a slave that
“ lately tended the camels: but were not oppression
“ natural to man, the slave would never subdue the
“ master. May no good betide thee, O Ibla! Mayest
“ thou never be protected from the calamities of
“ night—may the lands of thy father be laid waste
“ and ravaged, deprived of its cherished inhabitants !
“ Tn an evil hour came Malik to us; his deeds were
“í iniquitous; may God curse him for a vile Sheikh ;
“ crushed be his chin; plucked out be his musta-
“ chioes! for he has spoiled the joy of our lives,
and we are all reduced to misery.”

Antar’s rage and indignation increased as he
listened to the words of the peasant; and he said
to Shiboob, Bring me that slave, that I may ques-
tion and call him to account. Shiboob seized
him, and dragged him before Antar, frighted as
he was. Who art thou, slave? cried Antar. I am
one of King Kais’ slaves, he replied. And do


SEIZES HIM: THE SLAVE’S HORROR. 215


you all remove to-morrow? Yes, my lord. For
what purpose? Know, my lord, continued the
slave, we are in great alarm about the tribe of
Temeem, which our Chief, Bostam, kept in awe.
It was he who protected us from every villain; but
he is now a prisoner in the hands of a hell-born
slave; and therefore must we remove. We have
assembled all our comrades, and are going to rescue
our Chief, the son of our King. But who has
taken Bostam prisoner? is he the foremost knight
of the age? asked Antar. Oh! no, no, said the
slave: he who has taken him prisoner is a con-
temptible, insignificant fellow, and he is not reckoned
a horseman at all: but the times have turned out
most extraordinary, and a total revolution in fortune
has upset his family. Here the slave related the
whole story of Malik, and how he had demanded
Antar’s head as a marriage present for his daughter.
Antar smiled and drove the peasant on before him till
he came up to Bostam. . Look at this prisoner, said
he, who is now before you, and ascertain who he
is ; observe well whether it be your master, that we
may be liberal towards him in restoring him to
‘liberty. The slave recognised Bostam: his tongue
quivered in his speech, and his knees quaked as he
stood. He felt as if his very soul were on the wing,
and his limbs trembled as with an ague: for he was
convinced that the person who was speaking must
be Antar himeelf, the lofty column. He gave him-
self up for lost and a dead man: then turning to-


216 THE TRIBE OF SHIBAN INVADED.


wards Antar to appease him, he said, Pardon, my
lord, for it is the noblest quality of the great; act
not thus towards my master, Bostam; do not cut
down the very tree of generosity from mankind.
And he wept from his tortured heart and his
agonised eyes. He kissed Bostam’s feet, and gave
_ aloud scream. But Shiboob darted upon him and
stopped his mouth, and binding him fast, left him
by the side of Bostam. Antar reposed in that spot, -
whilst Shiboob stood guard during the night. By
daybreak Shiboob quitted the plain, and sought the
tribe of Shiban, to gain some information: but not
long after, as Antar had his eyes fixed on the road,
behold ! Shiboob appeared, like a bird when it flies, .
the tears streaming from his eyes. - What is behind
thee? cried Antar, what event has called forth this
lamentation? O, my brother, he replied, the enemy
has anticipated us in the completion of their desires :
all our plans and projects have failed. A subduing
arm has already fallen upon the tribe that cannot
be repulsed—an irresistible, unconquerable foe!
How is that? thou black-born. How has this hap-
pened? asked Antar. Know then, answered Shi-
boob, I had no sooner quitted thee, than I dis- '
covered that they had already set out with their
families and their baggage-camels, and the howdahs
were placed on the camels. The tribe of Shiban
were all on horseback, and prepared with their
spears and their scimitars. ‘They were marching
forward with their wives and their flocks, when, lo!


ANTAR’S DISTRESS FOR IBLA. 217


the plain was filled with horsemen and warriors,
rushing on from every direction, and stopping up
all the roads and passes, crying out at the same
time, O by Temeem! At their head was a
knight of prodigious bulk, who rode towards the
quarter of the women, driving back all opposition,
and piercing the horsemen ; and when he had gained
possession of the women, he forced them on before
him, eagerly and resolutely. Ibla was among the
women, shrieking out in the language of anguish
and distress, and letting fall streams of tears, as
she cried out, O by Abs! O by Adnan! O men,
nobly generous towards women, where is the va- °
liant knight? Where the undaunted hero? How
I long for the Absian horseman! Oh that I
could meet him! Youf uncle Malik and his son
Amroo were soon made prisoners. So I deter-
mined to return to you, when, lo! this warrior
whom I mentioned before, bellowed out like a savage
lion: Attack, attack, my cousins! he cried, the
business is a mere trifle, for I have obtained my
beloved Budoor. Having witnessed all these dis-
asters, I departed; and here I am in despair.
Antar’s tears flowed and streamed at the recital.
O Malik ! he cried, May God never let thee taste of
moisture! or let thee escape from these perils! for
thou hast drawn these misfortunes on thyself: and
thou hast dishonoured thy daughter among all man-
kind. And as he was resolved on mounting his
horse to quit the plain, anxious to encounter the


218 BOSTAM’S GRIEF FOR HIS SISTER.


enemy alone, he chanced to hear the Chief, Bostam,
exclaiming, Alas! the foe has disgraced me; they have
exulted over me: verily a blow from a sharp sword,
or a thrust from a long spear, is more tolerable than
the insulting outrage of enemies! Antar listened to
his words and his complaints, but only thought they
proceeded from his passion for Ibla. Is all this in
consequence of the violence of your flame? said
Antar, or is it on account of the captivity of Ibla,
that this affliction makes such an impression on you ?
By thy existence ! he replied, O Aboolfawaris, there
is not even a small or a large portion of my love for
Ibla surviving in my heart; neither does my an-
guish proceed from what thou hintest at: but my
tears flow for the grief of the females of mine own
family. I have a sister, who is called Budoor,
and she is my youngest and favourite sister. ‘The
Chiefs of the tribes of Cahtan have been her suitors,
and also the nobles of Shiban and Nibhan; but she
has rejected them all: and this is one of her lovers
who has invaded us on her account, and has seized
our wives and our families, and has carried off
my sister Budoor. He is called Keshaab, son of
Ghayath: he must have heard of my captivity,
and thus taking advantage of my absence, he has
assailed my tribe, and violated the honour of my
family, and of the females of my countrymen, thus
possessing himself of my dearest sister. But now,
O Aboolfawaris, I conjure thee, by the faith of an
Arab, and by the Lord who overthrows when he


ANTAR LISTENS TO HIS PROPOSALS. 219


pleases, either make me fall beneath thy sword, or
pardon and grant me thy protection, that I may be
one of thy dependants and thy servants. I am
aware that I have been overbearing and insulting,
but I now know my error; and thou wilt be cele-
brated for thy forbearance and generosity. Let me
go, that we may exert our whole force and fight. °
Perhaps we may still succeed. Think not, O Abool-
fawaris, that on such a person as myself, a noble
action or an obligation will be thrown away. And
thus he addressed Antar:

“ Thou hast taken me prisoner, and the horse-
« men are charging ; sword and spear spare not and
“ stop not. I went against thee, but now I know
“ that I wronged thee; and after such insults, I
« implore thy forgiveness. Shouldst thou kill me,
& it is but justice that thou seekest. But, if thou
“ wilt pardon me, thou shalt be my ear and my
‘eye. O thou, from whose sword, when it is drawn
“ in the fury of war, fate and destiny descend, were
“ all the dwellers on earth to engage with thee on
“ the day of terrors, they could not subdue thee.
‘¢ Spare me, forgive me, powerful as thou art. Con-
“ sider my praises, and the story I have told.”

These verses brought tears into Antar’s eyes ;
for he was compassionate of heart, and kind, root
and branch. Being now convinced of Bostam’s dis-
tress for his family, he untied the cords and band-
ages, having first bound him to his word. He also
restored to him his armour, and his weapons, and


290 AND HASTENS TO RELIEVE HIS TRIBE.


his horse. But this bastard slave! said Shiboob,
wilt thou not put him to death after all the foul
words he made us hear ? O Shiboob, replied Antar,
shall we release illustrious chiefs, and kill slaves ?
particularly when between them and us there is the
tie of blackness? He has done nothing to merit
punishment. He only expressed his sorrows and
regrets for a master who had honoured him, and
had treated him well. Release him, for we will be
kind to him on account of his dark complexion.
Bostam burst into a loud laugh, and said, May God
prosper thee for a great hero, and a noble lion!
How just are thy words! When Shiboob had re-
stored the slave to liberty, Antar and Bostam
mounted, whilst Shiboob and the slave ran on ahead
of them; and they hastened on till they came up
with the tribe of Shiban, where they perceived
men scattered right and left on the ground; the
country was destitute of the women and families,
and appeared an uninhabited waste. Bostam wept
at the misfortunes and dreadful events that had be-
fallen him. Run to the top of yonder hill, he cried
to the slave, whose name was Hamam; collect the
fugitives, and tell them to be of good cheer, as
their protector Bostam is arrived: bid them come to
me. The slave cried out as Bostam directed, and
the troops rallied from the different parts of the
desert, rejoicing in the safety of their chief, who,
when he had explained what had passed, exclaimed,
Now pay homage to the chief Antar. But Antar


THEY OVERTAKE THE INVADERS. 221


comforted their hearts, and their respect for him in-
creased, and their griefs diminished. They marched
on. till they approached the enemy about sunset ;
and having explored Keshaab’s position, they occu-
pied the roads, and attacked him when all were quiet
and reposing. As the prisoners were stationed be-
hind the camels, Antar heard the voice of Ibla, and
distinguished it from the others; the whole country
seemed too confined for him. He could wait no
longer, but gave a yell that made every mountain
tremble. He sought the standards and ensigns, and
laboured in the slaughter of the chiefs, Shiboob ever
at his side. Bostam also assailed them, and rushed
to the combat, his heart encouraged by the example
of Antar. His horsemen and nobles also joined in
the attack. But the tribe of T’emeem seeing them
advance, despised them, saying, These must be some
stragglers from the tribe of Shiban; it is not worth
our while to pursue them. But they soon marked
how they burst through their right, and dispersed
their left; and the calamity seeming now to be great,
they mounted, and began to take a part in the con-
flict. They beheld Antar’s thrusts tearing out the
hearts of the heroes, and his blows making heads
fly off right and left. He was raising his mighty
shouts, and plying his cleaving blows: and he ex-
hibited among them all his powers. The chief
Bostam also overwhelmed them with his deadly
strokes. The battle continued till night had veiled
the land in obscurity; and still the combat and car-


222 ANTAR WISHES TO PUNISH HIS UNCLE.


nage grew more terrific. When Keshaab saw one
of the flanks of his army routed, and a great part of
them hacked and torn to pieces, and beheld Antar
hewing his way through them, and Bostam sending
down upon them infamy and dismay, he was greatly
alarmed. He shouted, and rushed towards his
people; but he found their heads flying about like
leaves. Carnage was on all sides. The conflict
raged. Terrors became more frightful. But Antar
ceased not slaughtering and destroying till he came
up to the camels and the women, having already
slain one hundred and twenty of the bravest. Bos-
tam had overthrown thirty: and when they had
collected the cattle and the families, said Antar to
Bostam, dismount, O Aboolyaczan, and rescue your
father from bondage ; release all your tribe and your
relations that are with him; but leave alone my
uncle Malik, and his son Amroo, and do not re-
lease them on any account: for I now know that
my uncle is full of deceits, and were I to let him go,
he wouid take away his daughter and his wife, and
flee away from us: and we shall have to do it all
over again. I will detain him until the affair is de-
cided. Shiboob was despatched to Ibla to comfort
her heart, and remove her grief. Now, when Ma-
lik heard Antar’s voice in the attack, he said to his
son Amroo, O my son! these are the shouts of that
accursed black. This night the warriors of 'TTemeem
will be annihilated by his evil destiny. O that the
enemy had made me drink of the cup of death! O


THE SHIBANIANS RELIEVED. 293


that I might never again behold that black hard-fea-
tured face! But I must have him put to death and
destroyed. I will remove his beloved from him, or in
truth I will kill her on his account. It is to be
sure a noble return for his rescue of me from ca-
lamities, and his protection of my child; but still I
must have him murdered. Whilst Malik and his
son were thus conversing, Bostam hastened towards
his father and released him, together with all those
that had accompanied him, detailing to them all that
had passed with the magnanimous Antar, from the
time of his departure to his re-appearance. King
Kais was amazed, and reflecting on Antar’s noble
conduct, If he is a mortal, said he to his son, his
equal is not to be found in the universe. No man
can recompense such deeds. Having thus released
their people and the trains of camels, the women
and children alighted; but they still left Malik,
Ibla’s father, and Amroo in captivity, as Antar the
ferocious lion had directed. Release me too, O
Bostam, cried Malik. O thou base-born wretch,
replied he, how could you fly from this noble war-
rior with your daughter, and marry her to me who
am not worthy to be his servant? What, nothing
would suffice you but the head of this illustrious
Antar, as her marriage-present! But know, that I
am become one of his associates and friends; for he
has protected my sister, and the other women and
wives of the tribe of Shiban, and never can I make
him any suitable recompense; were he even to order


IIA TME COMBAT RENEWED.


me to make you drink of the cup of ignominy, I
would do it: for you are not a man; neither can
kindness or noble conduct have any virtue with you.
Thus saying, Bostam rode back to Antar, in order
to aid him in keeping the night-watch, and protect-
ing the people, whilst Shiboob staid with Ibla.
Amongst other things, he told her all his brother
had done with the Shibanians on her account ; and
afterwards conducted her to the women of King
Kais, who received her with every mark of atten-
tion.

Early next day the tribe of Temeem sprang up,
eager to renew the fight and the contest. King Kais
appeared among his troops and warriors, to whom
he related the friendly intercourse established be-
tween his son and Antar. In the mean time Antar
and Bostam being together, said Antar-to him, Why
do you keep back from the combat ? Begin with the
foe, before the foe begins with you. Attack him, and
be of good cheer. Antar mounted Abjer, and
casting his eyes towards the tribe of Temeem, he
observed it was their intention to make a general
assault; so he attacked their right, and singled out
their heroes and chieftains.

As soon as Keshaab had clad himself in armour,
and had seated himself on his steed, he pushed for-
ward to the front of the army ; and there too was
Antar, who had already slain two and twenty war-
riors. Keshaab assailedghim in the 'fulness of his
rage; and he cried out, Now will I bring down per-


ANTAR BEHEADS KESHAAB. 995


dition on thee. Knowest thou not who I am?
Have none of my deeds, none of my exploits reached
thee? Hast thou never heard of me, that thou
darest thus to follow me? Dost thou hope to take
my plunder away from me, or to rescue my beloved ?
As to thy beloved, cried Antar, my sword has libe-
rated her, and last night she reposed under my pro-
tection. But, if thou art indeed so bold and so
skilled in war, come and rescue her, and make good
thy pretensions. On the instant each assailed his
antagonist, aiming alternate thrusts and blows at
one another, and both bellowing and roaring, the
blood gushed from their nostrils. At last they
vanished from the sight, and plunged into the wilds,
till drops of gory sweat streamed from them, and
their fury grew intense.

Keshaab’s uncle being present, turned towards
the tribe of Temeem, and said, O my cousins, be
on your guard in this conflict, and beware of that
black hero; for much I fear he will prove superior
to your Chief. Upon this, the tribe of Temeem
rushed forward from all sides; but Bostam, who
observed them advance, met their assault with the
Shibanians, when lo! a yell pierced the dust, and
one cried out, O by Abs, O by Adnan ! and behold
Antar darted forth from beneath the dust, holding
in his hand the head of Keshaab, son of Ghayath,
and thus he spoke:

« When I steep not my sword in the blood of
‘¢ foes, and when the gore trickles not from its lustre,

VOL. II. Q


226 HIS EXULTATION


“ may the lids of my eyes be never antimonied with
“ sleep, and may no harbinger visit me from the
« phantom of Ibla! Tam Death, but I am impa-
“ tient for the lives of warriors; and Death is pa-
“ tient. Whenever Death sees me, it humbles itself
“ to my awful form, and the arm of the Arab is too
“ short to reach me. I am the grasper of lives with
‘“ sword and spear. I am the warrior—the hero—
“ the intrepid—the undaunted! Whenever I meet
“ Death, I turban his head with the sword tempered
‘in draughts of blood. I am the lion of death,
& that protects all that depend on me, and my ex-
** ploits shall be recorded to eternity. My swarthy
“ complexion is fair at the moment my deeds stand
“ forth conspicuous. My progenitor is celebrated,
“ and my ancestors boast of their fathers; for my
“ friends live respected, and my foes shrink away,
“ abject, frightened, and maimed. By the raiser
“ of the seven heavens, who knows every secret,
“ mighty and sublime, I swear, that I will never
“ weary of the battle till I have repaid my foe, and
' & am the victor. I am the lion of the waste, and
“ of eternal war, one soiled with deaths and dust.
‘I have repulsed Temeem; I have felled their
‘¢elders. I am returned, and my sword is reeking
s“ with the blood of the tribes. O tribe of Abs, be
“ strong in glory, and boast of a slave, whose
‘mansion is between the Pisces. Whenever the
« herald of the tribe proclaims, I answer him whilst
“ the horses stumble among the skulls. My Indian


4
THE DREAM VERIFIED. 997


‘‘ blade is drawn; and it will tell thee that I am
“ Antar in the contest.”

Keshaab’s uncle had been conversing beneath his
standards, surrounded by his nobles. I am alarmed,
said he, about Keshaab, for his mother had a dream,
in which he was victorious over the Shibanians.
But as he was returning home in triumph, a
black in the form of a lion met him, and de-
prived him of all his plunder, and finally cut off his
head and silenced his life. Now just as he had
uttered these words, behold Antar appeared, and
thus shouted, bearing Keshaab’s head in his hand.
Ah! exclaimed his uncle at this sight, the dream,
the dream! Again he shouted to his surrounding
friends, and the troops followed him to the assault.
The Shibanians also attacked with their Chief Bos-
tam. Dust and black clouds of sand arose. The
conflict became severe. ‘The brave stood firm; the
dastardly fled. Antar encountered the whole force,
and his assault was the descent of a torrent; and as
the foe was supcrior in numbers, he exerted all his
vigour, assailing them right and left, and crying
out, O by Abs, O by Adnan! Thus were matters
situated, when lo! twenty horsemen appeared among
the sands, and rushed upon the tribe of Temeem,
overwhelming them with disgrace. They galloped
towards Antar, who viewed them a time, and saw |
that they were Absians, headed by Ghayadh, son
of Nashib. But they came not with the intention
to assist Antar; on the contrary, their object was

f a2


298 GHAYADH BECOMES ANTAR’S FRIEND.


his destruction. This was another of the insidious
plans of Amarah, who, when obliged to fly for his
life, continued his retreat till he reached the land of
Abs by night. In the morning he repaired to his
brother Rebia, and related to him what had passed.
Rebia advised him to wait patiently, and keep on
the watch for some chance opportunity to kill Antar.
Amarah quitted him; but being still sorely ex-
asperated at his defeat, he sent for Ghayadh, and
as he stood crying before him, he implored his aid.
Explaining what he must do in the tribe of Shiban,
he assured him of wealth and camels in abundance
as a reward. His avarice induced Ghayadh to
assent, for he was one of Antar’s enemies. Witha
party of twenty horsemen, he departed for the land
of Shiban, where, on his arrival, he made inquiries
about the tribe of Temeem; and afterwards he pur-
sued his way till he came up with Antar at the head
of his troops, defending the women and the families;
and he saw all that immense host opposing him,
whilst he cried out, Where is he who plunders girls
and women? At hearing this, all the malice and
rancour in the heart of Ghayadh was converted into
love and affection, and he said to his companions,
Cousins, we must indeed aid this hero, who exposes
his life to death, anxious only to preserve the mo-
desty of women untouched. To hell and disgrace
be Amarah and his cattle! May he never be out of
affliction and trouble! And he instantly attacked
with his men, all exclaiming, O by Abs, O by


ANTAR’S ADDRESS TO IBLA. 229


Adnan! and they thrust their spears against their
chests, and hacked their necks with their swords,
till the tribe of Temeem took to flight, pursued by
the Absians. :
Ghayadh turned towards ae and saluted him,

giving him a full detail of Amarah’s conduct, and
how he had engaged him by the promise of flocks
and camels. Antar thanked them for what they
had done for him, and extolled their brave deeds.
Thus they proceeded together to the loaded camels
and the families. The women and the men met
‘them with the young girls, in front of whom was
Ibla, and she was drowned in tears; but as soon as
Antar saw her, he thus addressed her :

© “ Hail, I greet thee, branch of the tamarisk !
“ Welcome to the new moon of the desert and the
“city! O Ibla! thy form during my absence was
“ ever in the core of my heart and my eye. Since
“ thou hast been absent, all my joys have been ab-
“ sent; all my pleasures closed : and my blood-shot
“ eyes have past the nights in sleeplessness. Never
& has slumber visited me since I quitted thy form.
“¢ O thou full moon of obscurity, in truth, thou face
“ of the moon itself, were I to complain of what I
“ have endured in sorrow, I should fail to describe
“ by the truth of the shrine and the stone! what
“ I suffered in the horrors of my journey, and the
“ jealousies I have been subject to from my relations.
“ How many horsemen, whom I have encountered
« in the barren waste, have been laid low on the


230 HE ACCEPTS HIS UNCLE’S EXCUSES,


“ earth and in the tombs! Keshaab, son of Gha-
“ yath, lies prostrate, on the day of horrors felled
“ by my Indian blade. These shall ever be my
“ deeds with the foe as long as the sun shines, and
“ as long as the morning-star glitters at the dawn.
« I am the son of Shedad, and the lion to whom
“ every one that dwells in the desert or in towns
“ bows in submission.”

After this he went up to Malik and his son.
Ibla’s father wept; My son, said he to Antar, do
not rebuke me, do not reproach me for my be-
haviour, the crime is all Rebia’s; it was he alone .
who contrived this stratagem. But now I will not
quit this land till I have married my daughter to
thee, and have offered her to thee as thy hand-
maiden; then we will return home.

Ghayadh and his comrades having also assured
Antar that his uncle was not to blame, he ordered
Malik and his son to be unbound; and when he
had mounted his horse Abjer, they all thanked and
extolled him. Soon after this, King Kais set out
for his own country with the tribe of Shiban; and
when they reached their native land, they pitched
their tents and hoisted the standards. King Kais
slaughtered sheep, and made preparations for a
feast, of which all his companions and friends par-
took; and when they had done eating, the wine-
glasses were presented, and the carousing lasted
three days.


WHO AGAIN EVADES HIS PROMISES. 231


CHAPTER XIV.


On the fourth day, said Antar to Malik, Uncle, we
must depart. No, Antar, he replied, I cannot pos-
sibly move from hence on account of the language
of the Zeead family. Let it not be said again, that
Malik fled from Antar the black, and is now return-
ing to marry his daughter to him against the consent
of every one. Never will I return home if some-
thing be not done to raise my consideration, and
some one of my friends come to conciliate me.
Oblige me in this respect, go you home first, and
send me one of King Zoheir’s sons, that he may re-
pair the evil done to my character. Antar heard
him, and thought him sincere; for he could not
divine the wickedness of his heart. Well then, he
said, I will send you the Princes Shas and Malik ;
but I will not stir from you until you make Bostam
and his father King Kais testify for you, that you
have betrothed your daughter Ibla to me; and if
again you have recourse to your vile arts, I will
draw my sword across your neck.

The next day Antar conducted his uncle to King
Kais, and in the presence of his children and his
tribe, related all that had passed between him and
Malik, and made them bear witness to what he had


232 AND DECEIVES ANTAR.


said: then recommending his uncle and his family
to Bostam and King Kais, he departed. He took
with him Ghayadh and his companions, and when
they were near home, he sent on Shiboob to announce
his arrival. The report was soon spread abroad,
and reached the sons of King Zoheir, who accom-
panied their father on horseback to meet Antar,
who dismounted, and prayed for the long life of
King Zoheir. He went to his sons and saluted
them and all the horsemen, to whom he related
what had passed with his uncle among the Shiba-
nians, and that he would not return home until
_ some one was sent to conciliate hin, and unless his
honour and character were exalted. As the man is
ashamed of what he has done, said Zoheir, we must
of course make it up with him, and grant his wishes.
It was then settled that King Zoheir’s son should
depart with Antar for the land of Shiban, and ap-
pease his uncle. For four days they continued
eating and drinking, and just as they were deter-
mined on their journey, lo! a slave arrived from
the land of Shiban: he saluted Antar, and kissing
his hands, My lord, said he, King Kais and his son
salute you, and inform you that your uncle only re-
mained there one night after your departure, and
on the next day he quitted the country, and since
then we have no tidings of him. Ask not the effects
of Bostam’s anger! He desires you to be quiet till
he can inform you where he is. Antar on hearing
this shed torrents of tears; but when King Zoheir


OORWAH INCURS ANTAR’S ANGER. 233


heard what had happened; Cheer up your heart,
said he, and be your brow bnghtened up, for your
uncle has now no enemy but me, and I alone will
secure the completion of your wishes.

When the people had retired to their tents, and
silence reigned among the family of Carad: How
long will you extend your arm to what it will never
reach? said Oorwah to Antar; the daughters of
Arabia are numerous, incline towards them, and
relinquish those in whose house you were brought
up. These words made a deep impression on Antar,
and he recommended to Shiboob to keep a good look
out after Oorwah. Now Oorwah had a sister called
Selma, who was married in the tribe of Ghiftan, to
a man whose name was Jahjah; and he went to
visit his sister for some days. Shiboob watched
him, and informed his brother Antar of his move-
ments. As soon as it was dark, Antar sallied forth
to lie in ambush for Oorwah on the road side, con-
cealing himself in a mountain called Tebeer. But
Oorwah, when he reached the tribe of Ghiftan,
went to his sister Selma, and found her quarrelling
and wrangling with her husband. She no sooner
saw her brother than she wept and complained after
the manner.of women. Brother, said she, by that
womb in which you and I moved, you must relieve
me from the state in which I am, and take me to
your home; do not let me die here of rage and
passion. So the next day he put her into her how-
dah, and went away with her towards the land of


234 NE IS WAYLAID BY GHAZI.


the Absians} but just as they reached the mountam
where Antar was concealed, behold! ten horsemen
met them, and in front of them was a knight of im-
mense stature, of the dimensions of an elephant,
who, on seeing the howdah and the camel, advanced
towards Oarwah without delay, roaring out, Who
art thou? what is thy birth and parentage? I am
the son of Wird, he replied, Oorwah is my name;
noble are my father and my grandfather ; so begone.
The knight listened: he was much: surprised at
this language; but with a smile, he continued, Wel-
come, O Ebe-ool-Ebyez, for thou art my object, and
my goal. Knowest thou who I am? Who art thou?
said Oorwah, thou son of a two-thousand horned
cuckold! I am Ghazi, answered he, the son of Kais,
the son of Dibyan; thy slave Antar slew my father,
and I must verily put him to death; thou too
didst slay my brother, and didst plunder my flocks,
- and drive away my camels when I was absent from
home; so I have waited patiently till I might have
thee in my power, and now that I have come upon
thee, I will take away thy life from between thy
sides. As soon as he had spoken, he rushed upon
Oorwah, and exhibiting his strength and skill; and
as Ghazi was superior to Oorwah, he charged : after
a furious conflict he threw him on the ground, and
bound him fast. He then seized the bridle of
Selma’s camel: she screamed, and invoked assist-
ance, crying out, O by Abs! is there no one to
aid me ?—no onc to release mc? Antar had marked


AXTAR'S RESENTMENT COOLED. 235


Oorwah, and was ready to rush out upon him; but
when Ghazi encountered him, he was better pleased,
saying to himself, He is a lucky man who succeeds
by the means of another. ° But he no sooner saw
that Oorwah was a prisoner, and heard Selma's ex-
clamations, than his anger subsided in his heart ;
his enmity gave way to his noble pride, and his
soul was softened: so he darted forth from the
defile like a lion in his wrath. Daughter of my
uncle, he cried, rejoice in your rescue from your
enemies, for the God of heaven has requited your
brother; he has had compassion on your sorrows, _
and has sent me to your deliverance. Thus saying,
he directed his impetuous course towards the troop,
and poured down upon them with the vehemence
of a torrent; he thus exclaimed :

s Ye dastards, have ye captured Selma, and
« Antar, her guardian, is he here in ambush? Her
‘© brother, indeed, was my opponent, but now that
‘¢ he is sick, I will be his physician. Had she not
“ cried out, O by Abs! and had not her tears
+ flowed in sorrow, the rancour I harboured would
<< not have been subdued, and I should not have
s defended the well-shaped, high-bosomed dame.
s But now be at ease; mark my deeds when thou
‘* beholdest my antagonist inflicted with my spear.
«+ Oorwah shall return after this, and he shall an-
“‘swer with submission to my call: were I to
“ punish him for the family of Zeead, Ibla would
‘* never be mine.”


236 SELMA’S GRATITUDE


When Ghazi heard Antar’s verses, and observed
his motions, he assailed him. They galloped
about—they dashed against each other—they strug-
gled—they plunged into the combat—they resisted
the thrust and the blow. But Antar fatigued Ghazi,
and having worn him out, struck him with the butt
end of his spear; he hurled him over, and knocked
him off his horse; when his companions hurried to
his relief, crying out, May God blast the tips of
thy fingers! what a noble knight hast thou slain!
Antar also assailed them, and the mountains trem-
bled at his violence; in less than an hour he slew
those who were destined to die, and the rest were
dispersed among the wastes. Selma rejoiced at her
rescue. She descended from her howdah, and came
forwards to meet Antar. May God bless thee for
a protector, she exclaimed, and in such as thee
noble dames may exult. And as she threw herself
before him kissmg his feet, she thus expressed her
thanks:

“s May God reward thee with every good from
« us—may no evil of fortune afflict thee! for thou
“ hast rescued us from a base tribe, and converted
“ fears into security: they saw thee, and bade adieu
“ to life, when thou didst inflict the blows of thy
“ dreadful sword ; thou didst return, and upon thy
“ spear were clots of their blood, and upon thy
‘“ barb—thou didst fell down their Chief with thy
“s polished blade; sturdy in the field of battle ; for
“‘thou art the lion, the champion of the race of


AND ENTREATIES SAVE OORWAH. Q37


« Abs, and their Chief far and near. May ever
«c thy foe in every land groan in the anguish of the
“ strangury ! May thy sword be ever drawn against
« thy enemy in the tumultuous combat! May thy
« glories ever increase in sublimity, even to the sign
“ of the Lyra and the two Bears.”

When Antar heard these verses, his rage was
calmed, and turning towards Oorwah, against whom
he was much provoked, he said, My heart was in-
deed wounded at your expressions, and I only came
forth with a view of making you drink of the cup of
death, but things have turned out contrary ; for
when I heard Selma’s lamentations and sighs, this
violation of her modesty fell heavy on me, so I have
liberated her from the power of these wretches. But
I still turn towards you with an ulcered heart; see
then who can rescue you from me; who will be your
deliverance. O Aboolfawaris, cried Oorwah, your
generous nature will rescue me, the sweetness of
your milk will protect me; all I beg is, that you
will pardon me this once, and make me your friend,
and if you ever see me act foully again by you,
may I not be a legitimate son! may my pedigree
prove false! His sister Selma also intreated Antar,
and threw herself down before him; neither did
she desist till Antar had untied him: and when
Oorwah stood up, he thus said:

“ O thou whose face has smiled, mayst thou ever
“ be the leader in every enterprise! for thou art
“ far above the’ world in courage; the universe


2388  ANTAR’S UNCLE PLIES TO THE KENDEBANS.


“ may perish, but thy glory can never be extin-
* guished.”

He then advanced and embraced him, and swore
he would never betray him again under any circum-
stances whatever. After this they set out, and
whilst they were marching on, a wandering Arab
met them, roaming wildly over the plains, and
driving the wild animals before him. As soon as
Antar marked him, he desired Shiboob to bring the
fellow to him. Shiboob went and brought him.
Son of my aunt, said Antar, what is the cause of thy
wandering thus astray? My master Bostam, he
replied, has sent me to you; he salutes you, and
informs you that he has news of your uncle from
the tribe of Kendeh ; and he wishes to know whether
you desire him to come to you with a party of Shi-
banians, or whether he shall join you in the land of
Kendeh. |

Arab, said Antar, salute your lord, and tell him
I am able to do myself justice, with the aid of the
Lord of all power; what I shall do with the tribe of
Kendeh shall be reported to him, for { will en-
counter them were they even as numerous as the
sands of the desert; but let not your master, out of
his kindness and generosity, trouble himself about
such matters: let him not quit his own country and
family. May God bless him, and his hberal con-
duct! The Arab took his leave, and departed
home. But Antar felt all the fierceness of rage and
indignation. O Aboolfawaris, said Oorwah, will you


ANTAR PURSUES HIN. 239


not consent that I become one of your servants?
let me take my men and attend upon you. O Oor-
wah, said Antar, how can I place any dependance
on you in the day of battle? I have never tried you
on any occasion. Speak not so, said Oorwah; by
the faith of an Arab, were I able this moment to
make my heart a shield to meet the spears of thy
enemy, I would do it, for I can never requite thee.
March. on home, said Antar, and tell no one where
I am going. Oorwah drove on Selma’s howdah,
and went home; but Antar, who regarded not his
professions, sought the land of Kendel, and every
difficulty seemed easy to him, as thus he spoke:

“In whatever language the railers shall abuse
“ me, let them know that I watch while they sleep.
‘ T rave, and I exhibit nothing novel in my love;
‘ for were they to taste of passion, they too would
“í rave. Can I ever forget my afflictions in my love
“‘for Ibla? are there any means of sheltering
“ myself from it? They think a moment’s meeting
“ with thee too much, and years and years have
“ been past in grief and troubles. It would indeed
“ trouble me, were I not to see the treacheries of
“ fortune,—the sight of such is natural and con-
“ stant.”

Antar proceeded on his journey, and felt exceed-
ingly pleased that neither King Zoheir nor his sons
knew where he was, and could not assist him in the.
conflict; and as Shiboob directed him on the road
to the tribe of Kendeh, he felt anxious to proceed


240 AND THUS DESCRIBES HIS PASSION.


unattended and unaided. O thou who seest, and
art not seen, he cried, thou knowest that an expedi-
tion when I am alone is more agreeable to me than
horsemen and troops, be thou only my succour,
O God of those who adore thee ! and thus continued
in verse :

“ O bird! alas! it grieves me in the groves, and
“the hand of fate points out to me my abode.
‘¢ I stop, and love has engraved its characters with
“ the pen of my blood in the desolation of my heart.
‘¢ I question it about Ibla, and the raven answers
“ me, What have I to do with distracted lovers ?
“ It grieves for its mate, its passionate sorrow tor-
‘< tures me, plaintive is its note, but not in articulate
“words. It grieves for the excess of its passion,
“ and I answer it with a heart ever throbbing in
“ regrets! What, O raven! if thou wert my com-
“ panion, we would traverse the countries of God in
“ our circuit, we would wander far away ; perhaps
“ we might see a messenger from the tribe of Abs,
“ through whatever land or country we might pass.
‘In the shades of the night the dove calls out
“ mournfully, complaining of the vicissitudes of
“ fortune. If thou wert as melancholy as I am,
“I cried, thou wouldst weep for me in ever-
“ streaming tears. O Ibla, would thy phantom
“ visit me, I would be satisfied, and though thou
“ art absent from my eyes, O daughter of Malik,
“ thy form ever dwells in my heart. To-morrow


“ the foe shall lie round thy tents, gnawing their


OORWAH’S SINCERITY TOWARDS ANTAR. 243


‘ fingers in dismay. Think not armies shall repulse
“ me when | charge through their native lands on
“ my steed. Let Death come in whatever form he
<¢ pleases, let him behold my sword blows and my
“ spear thrusts.” |

Antar pursued his course till he reached the
waters of the tribe of Nagil; there he turned off,
and wished to alight, when lo! a cloud of dust arose
behind him ; he waited to see it, and when it cleared
there appeared an hundred horsemen in armour of
steel, and their chief was a noble of the tribe of Abs
and Adnan, Oorwah, son of Wird, who was coming
after Antar to afford him his assistance. For when
he separated from him, he conducted his sister to
the tribe of Abs, and having assembled his people,
in whom he trusted in difficulties, Know, said he,
that Antar was the most odious of men to me, but
now he is dearer than my life. Then he related all
that had passed; how he preserved his sister’s ho-
nour, and had rescued him from death. J am now
resolved to accompany him, and follow him where-
ever he goes, for he is a fortunate man ; we shall be
among his abettors, and thus become the prop of
the tribe, and this will be a great additional honour
tous. This is my only reason for having quitted
him, for he is going against the tribe of Kendeh,
and is determined on attacking them alone. With
one who is endued with such fortitude and intre-
pidity, we cannot but hold a glorious course, for he
will plunge’ into the fire of battle, and divide with

VOL. II. R


242 HE JOINS HIM WITH HIS FRIENDS.


us the spoil and plunder. Oorwah continued ex-
tolling the excellencies of Antar’s character to his
comrades till they agreed to act as he desired, and
they all swore obedience to Antar; so they imme-
diately prepared for the expedition, and on the next
day they set out, Oorwah at their head, thus re-
citing :

“ I go to the noble hero to aid him with my
“ voice, my deeds, and my arm. I will aid him till
““ he rescue Ibla, and cut down the foe with the In-
“ dian blade. Come on then, my cousins, let us
“ follow him, for he was indeed my succour in the
“ evil day; he liberated me when I was in captivity
“ and disgraced; and he released my person when
“ I was in chains. He protected my family—he
“ was the intrepid lion—he destroyed my foe, and
“ T succeeded in my project—and by this act I am
“ become, as it were, his slave. How can one deny
“ a man who has acted thus? By God, with no
“ man on earth will I associate but him; to please
“ him shall be my object till I am dead and in-
“ terred.”

They pursued their journey till they all met,
as we stated, and as they neared each other, O
Ebeulebyez, said Antar, my acts towards thee did
not merit such a return as this. Aboolfawaris, ex-
claimed Oorwah, we will not die but for thee. And
they proceeded and traversed the roads till they
reached the tribe of Ghaylan, when Antar said to
Oorwah, Do you and your men alight here, whilst


ANTAR’S ASTONISHMENT 243


I and my brother Shiboob roam among these sand
hills and rocks. Antar took Shiboob, and leaving
Oorwah and his people there, the two brothers
wandered about till they at last reached a valley
abounding in trees and murmuring streams; and
as they came near to the water, they heard groans
issuing from a sorrowful heart, and some one ex-
claiming, May God curse thee, O Malik, how infinite
have been thy frauds and artifices! The moment
that Antar heard these words he dismounted, and
stood listening, when lo! in a voice stronger than
at first, came these verses: |

“ O mother, relieve my woes with water from the
“ misery of thirst! Weep for me, all that behold
“ me, a wretched lover; my woes have destroyed
“ me, and grief has worn out my frame. Tears
‘ were my relief, but now they are become blood.
“ I see no one that feels compassion for me, or that
“ can dissipate my sorrows. Sing to me, dove of
& the waste, and favour a victim of love! Watch as
“ thou wert wont in nights of old. Here are we in
“ the valley of Hima, all night mourning in absence,
“ suffering for fidelity to vows that I ever preserved.
“ If my darling Ibla asks thee after me, .say I am
“ no more; that every day was passed in passion
s in this grove. O Ibla! had the enervating senti-
“ ment of love left any power in my body, I would
“ not thus be grieving in a foreign land, a miserable
“unhappy lover. But all that is passed is by the
“will of God.” - 3

R2


244 AT FINDING ANOTHER ANTAR AND IBLA.


How, son of my mother, exclaimed Antar, do
these words find me awake or dreaming? Or among
the Arabs is there another Ibla and Malik, her
father? or has destiny sent me hither to rescue her
from perils? They advanced, and came to a pool
of water, where they found on its banks a black
woman exceedingly ugly, and before her was a
youth, hard-featured, strong-limbed, and much like
her, sometimes closing his eyes, and sometimes
opening them; and the woman was grieving over
him. . Woman! said Antar, as he stood over her
head, who art thou? and who is this youth that is
lying before thee, and what has thus distressed him ?
Arab, she replied, this is not his natural condition,
for he is a gallant horseman; but the decrees from
the great God have come upon him, and a cruel
uncle has harassed him. And what is this youth's
name? asked Antar. My lord, she replied, his
name is Antar, son of Shedad, and his mother is
Zebeeba. Our story is curious: his father captured
me among the hordes, and I bore him this son, who
grew up, and God endowed him with force and
strength. He mounted the horses, made much
plunder, and enriched his father and uncles. One
of his uncles had a daughter, with whom he was
brought up—he loved her. At last his father ac-
knowledged him as his son, and he continually
besought her father to marry her to him, which he
promised, but deceitfully and treacherously, because
his friends and companions abused him. He had also


IN THE SAME GRIEFS AS HIMSELF. 245


an enemy called Rebia; his uncle was ever ill-treat-
ing him, and at last he ran away with his daughter
from place to place till he came hither, where a
celebrated warrior and renowned hero encountered
him, called Mozahim, son of Jeyash, the lord of this
valley. When he took up his abode here, he slew
her father, and lusted after her. My son in the
mean time remained wandering over the deserts on
her account, and came to this valley, I also follow-
ing him, always crying out to him, till he reached
this spot, and threw himself down in this state as
you see; and it is now three days that we have
been in this condition.

Whilst the woman was speaking, Antar medi-
tated, and was quite amazed. Woman! said he,
has he a brother called Shiboob? No, she replied,
by the truth of the unseen Knower of all things!
She is like our mother Zebeeba, said he to Shiboob ;
and verily, I am quite alarmed at this calamity.
Well, he continued, and does he who has taken
Ibla prisoner—Ibla, the daughter of this youth’s
uncle, reside in this valley? Yes, she replied, and
we are in the greatest danger, for were he to know
of our situation, our fates would be at hand.

Now this was a renowned warrior—a tyrant—
whom fire could not touch. He was a shedder of
blood, a violater of women, and morning and even-
ing he practised his iniquities. His sole desire and
object was cattle, that he might plunder—crimes


that he might perpetrate—debaucheries that he


246 ARTAR DISCOVERS ABOOLESHBAL,


might commit, and a goblet of wine that he might
drink. He listened not to the voice of the railer,
and he never was to be deterred from his villanous
proceedings. It was he who having driven away
the inhabitants of this valley, caught some young
lions, and brought them up till they became huge
animals: he tamed them, and whenever he rode out,
they roamed round him; and when he staid in his
den they guarded him also. On this account the
Arabs called him the Father of Lion-cubs—Abool-
eshbal: and when that damsel fell mto his hands,
he dragged her into this valley, and demanded of
her what man desires of woman. But she would
not listen to him, but answered him with abuse; he
smiled at all she said, and gave himself up entirely
to her, and sought by every means to attach her to
him.

Now when Antar came, his abode could not be
discovered on account of the quantity of bushes.
But Abjer smelt out the lionesses, and started
back. Antar doubled his legs to dismount, and
proceeded on foot. He drew forth Dhami, and
rushed in, saying to Shiboob, Hold Abjer whilst I
settle this affair. He soon beheld a spacious dwell-
ing, and a tent pitched; a horse ready bridled, a
long spear, and a sword suspended. Abooleshbal
was seated in front of his habitation, and before him
was a wild ass; and he was cooking over a fire ; and
by his side was a goblet of wine as big as the belly
of a camel ten months gone with young. The dam-


+


WHOSE LIONS ATTACK HIM. Q47


sel was in tears; How long will you thus persist ?
cried she; never will I betray my cousin Antar, no,
not even were you to cast me into this fire. Abool-
'eshbal, enraged, was about to kill her, when she
cried out, Where are thine eyes, O Antar, that thou
mightest see me thus cruelly, infamously used ?

Antar really imagined it was his cousin Ibla: he
almost expired; he gave a howl that made the
mountains rock, and the lions roared. Antar at-
tacked them with his irresistible scimitar, and his
brother Shiboob followed him with his arrows. God
has hastened vengeance and death on you, cried the
damsel. He sought his lions, and found seven of
them dead; for Shiboob had killed two with his
arrows, and Antar five with his sword. Amongst
them all there was one brute with a long red mane,
with immense talons. It looked at its master, and
sprang upon Antar like the descent of Fate and
Destiny. But Antar met the beast with his Dhami.
The blow came down just between the eyes, and
the sword issued flaming between the thighs.

When Abooleshbal saw the effects of that stroke,
he was aghast ; he shouted out to two lions, and let
them loose into the desert. And as he advanced to-
wards Antar, You know me not, he cried; and they
rushed at once at each other, well matched ìn the
contest.

Abooleshbal soon said to Antar, Wilt thou wrestle?
Willingly, said Antar. So they threw aside their


swords, and returned to the conflict. He was greatly


248 ANTAR SLAYS HIM.


rejoiced, but as Antar was afraid of protracting the
contest, he dashed at him with a vast roar. The
mountains echoed back the terrifying sound, and
the lions quaked with fear: he grappled with him,
he grasped him between the thighs with his nght
hand, and raising him up above his shoulder, till
the black of his arm-pit appeared, O by Abs! he
cried, I will not be resisted. I am the lover of Ibla;
I will not be controlled; and dashed him on the
ground, and smashed his length into his breadth : he
again took to his sword; he cut him through his ju-
gular vein, and severed: his head from his shoulders.
May your arm be never palsied, exclaimed the girl,
or your wife made captive; and may never any one
harm you! and thus she eulogised lim:

“ God prosper thee for a noble youth of the thrust
“ in the day of battle, and the struggle of equals.
“ O knight of knights! O lion of war! O asylum of
“ the Adnanian horsemen! O cleaver of heads! O
“crown of glory! Thou hast converted my fears
“< into security! May the pillar of thy sword make
“ thee a horseman to subdue the kings of Cahtan!
“ O thou defender of the age, my limbs and my
“tongue will sing thy praises. O thou, who
« honourest the age with thy existence, and raisest
“ men to high distinction by thy deeds, mayest thou
“& be secure, and live under the shadow of happiness
‘as long as the lightning flashes over Hedjaz !”

Antar thanked her for her compliments, and re-
joiced at this virtuous act. He ordered Shiboob to


THE JOY OF THE UNHAPPY LOVERS. 249


collect all the cattle in the valley, and the silk stuffs.
He then went forth, and there found the boy, and
the woman, who was soothing him with her con-
versation. As soon as she saw Ibla and Antar, her
heart was near bursting. She instantly jumped up,
and kissed Antar’s hands and feet; on which he
dismounted, and seating himself by the head of the
youth, he said to his cousin, Come, and speak to
him; for it is only the disorder of lovers; nothing
can dispel it but the beloved object; that is the only
physician. The damsel approached, and spoke to
him; whilst Antar gently offered him some food.
The youth recovered, and returning to himself, he
exclaimed—

“ Alas! for my heart that passion has melted,
‘* by glances cagt at me from the edge of a sword.
« If I say he is a scimitar—he is a drawn scimitar.
‘“* If I say he is a bow—here are the arrows. Thou
“ hast brought me to life again, O knight of the
“ land, through whom the hand of fortune has ad-
& ministered peace to me. Openly will I thank
“ thee as long as I am able: O thou, my generous
“ benefactor !” p

Antar, on hearing this commendation, thanked
him; but the youth, now that he felt restored to
life, turned towards Antar, saying, My lord, I
anxiously hope- you will be so obliging as to take
me with you as one of your assistants, for I cannot
separate myself from you. Take some nourish-
ment, replied Antar, and go to your cousin, so that


250 HE SUBDUES A PARTY ON THE ROAD.


your distresses may be removed, and the flame of
your heart be cooled: as long as you live I will
protect you, but be not called. by that name, or you
will meet your death, for I have numerous enemies
among the Arab tribes. Then making him a pre-
sent of a string of camels that belonged to A boolesh-
bal, he bade him farewell, and quitted him, ahd
he continued his course, rapt in meditation. But
they had not proceeded, when, lo! a dust arose,
and twenty stout horsemen appeared beneath it;
with them was considerable plunder, and they were
on their way home. As soon as they saw Antar,
they turned towards him. Dismount, said one of
the horsemen from your horse, and surrender. Ac-
cursed be your father, exclaimed Antar, go your
way, and keep what you have already gained. On
hearing this, they laughed at him. I will soon
convert your smiles into tears, he added, and he
instantly attacked the first, and smote him, and
severed his head from his shoulders. As soon as
his companions saw this blow, May God blast your
right hand! cried they, how vigorous are your
blows! Who are you, noble knight? Iam Antar,
son of Shedad, he replied. When they recognised
him, they fled into the wastes, fearing the power of
his sword. Antar drove on the camels, and as he
drove them, thus he recited :

& Long has my anxiety and my passion endured ;
« nought but thee do I wish for, and without thee
« I am not comforted. I am going towards thee,


JOINS HIS FRIENDS AND PURSUES nis way. 251


“ that I may have one look with which my heart
‘“‘ may revive from sorrow and inquietude. I have
‘¢ seen Abooleshbal in the tumults among lions; he
“ a lion, red-haired and tough of heart; I charged
‘‘ among them, and I soon felled them to the ground
* in my vigour, my resolution, and my impetuosity.
s Abooleshbal too turned upon me, but I cut him
<< down instantly, hand over head. Armies opposed,
‘“‘ eager to strip me—all patient heroes, hardened
s in fight. But I implore relief from my Creator
“in thy embraces; O thou the hope of my heart
“* among the world !”

When Antar had finished, Shiboob urged on the
spoil and plunder, and they traversed the wastes
and wilds till they rejoined Oorwah and his com-
rades, who congratulated him on his safety, and to
their inquiries, he informed them about Abooleshbal
and the damsel Ibla, and her cousin Antar. Oor-
wah was amazed at his liberal conduct, and was in
the greatest consternation. Antar divided the spoil
with Oorwah and his men, and soon after they re-
sumed their journey towards the land of Kendeh,
like lions in steel, Antar at their head, and Oorwah
by his side, and thus he spoke :

“s Verily I have been oppressed with the cala-
‘© mities of fortune, and I have been overwhelmed
“ by it in perils and enemies. How long must I
& endure in battles horrors that blind and bewilder
“‘ the senses of every youthful hero! Every day I
“ am engaged in endless contests, that would crush


252 KING AMROO PROTECTS MALIK.


« the bones of lions in the hour of concussion, trials,
“ meetings, absences, and every intolerable goading
“ oppression. O Ibla! how many terrible tumults
“ have I endured for thee among the Arabs and
“ Persians! How many lion-hearted, princely horse-
“men have I slain with the spear and sword,
‘intrepid heroes in the day of terrors,. undaunted
“ warriors in quest of prey !”

This was their situation ; but Malik, Ibla’s father,
when he fled from the land of Bostam, son of Kais,
went and demanded protection from the Arab tribes.
He wandered far over the deserts, and whatever
tribe he halted at, when they knew who he was, ex-
pelled him, for they were alarmed at the sword of
Antar. Thus he continued, till he came to the
tribe of Kendeh, and this was an exceedingly power-
ful clan. He introduced himself to the King
Amroo, taking his son with him; they kissed his
hands, requesting his protection: he took com-
passion on them, and feasted them for three days.
On the fourth day he sent for them, and asked them
who they were, and why they had halted in his
land. O King! they replied, we are of the noble
tribe of Abs. The King, on hearing this, said,
O Malik, could not your cousins protect you?
They are the strongest of the Arab tribes, and their
power the most universal. Upon this he acquainted
him with the story of his nephew Antar, and what
had passed between him and his daughter. As
Amroo listened, he felt assured that Malik was a


'MAS-HIL’S ARRIVAL AT KENDEH. 253


man of great dignity and liberality, but he did not
know that he had plotted the destruction of his
country, and its entire annihilation. King Amroo
pitched a tent for him by his own dwelling, and as-
signed him servants and handmaidens; and as he
staid with him a long time, he frequently, with his
son, rode out to pay their compliments to the King ;
but one day they perceived all the family in con-
fusion, and the horsemen all mounted. On asking
the reason, they told him that the son of the King’s
sister, famed in war, was on his way, and that all
the people had come forth to meet him. Malik
therefore accompanied the horsemen, and was amazed
at the immense concourse of Arabs. Soon appeared
Mas-hil, son of Tarak, and before him marched
seven hundred horsemen in coloured dresses, and
with gold maces. He was a terrific object, but
quite a youth like a brilliant moon, broad-shoul-
dered and strong-limbed; and as he approached,
all the horsemen crowded round him, eager to kiss
his hand. When Malik saw this, he also followed
the Arab custom, and went up to Mas-hil, and
saluting him, expressed his affection for him. O
Sheikh! said Mas-hil, truly this country is ho- |
noured in your presence, and he continued praising
him till Malik again kissed his hand. And when the
multitude had retired, and the glasses were circling
freely round, and the girls and boys were dancing,
said King Amroo to Mas-hil, What is it that has
brought you hither at this moment? I am. come,


254 IN DISGUISE HE SEES IBLA,


said Mas-hil, to demand the daughter of this Ab-
= sian in marriage. She has been often mentioned to
me, so I have presented myself here, and 1 wish
you would assist me. Truly this damsel is well-
favoured, said he, much surprised, and the hand of
God has contributed to her charms; moreover, I
say nothing to you but what is perfectly true. I
am anxious, said Mas-hil, tosee her before the con-
tract, if your wife will but aid me; when the women
come to congratulate her on my arrival, Ibla and
her mother will be of the party.. I will put on the
garments of your daughter Najia, and will seat
myself by the side of her mother. When this con-
versation was over, he went to his aunt, and told
her all his story, and in the morning she dressed
him in her daughter's clothes, and placed him by
her side, and invited the women in. They all came,
and Ibla and her mother too. But Mas-hil was in
ecstasies ; he was quite enraptured, and his pride
and glory were humbled; he was in torture till the
women departed, when he stripped off the clothes,
and felt like a drunken man; he put on his own
garments, and could not account for this revolution
in his feelings. In haste he repaired to his uncle,
and in the greatest agitation. All present stood up.
Mas-hil went towards his uncle, and related all that
had passed. King Amroo turned towards Malik :
Know, O Arab, said he, that the son of my sister
entertains the strongest friendship for you ; he was
talking to me last night about it, and he said, O


TO WHOM HE IS BETROTHED IN MARRIAGE. 255


uncle, I much wish this Sheikh and his son would
go home with me, that I may load them with kind-
nesses. Now truly he is a horseman of the uni-
verse, his sword has conquered all from Yemen to
Irak ; his commands are strictly obeyed : I told him
your adventures, and the circumstance of the slave
who was educated in your tent. Uncle, said he to
me, were he not a man of noble pride and dignity,
he would not have emigrated into a foreign land.
In addition, he told me he was come to demand
your daughter in marriage, and would give her all
he possessed, and this is what has passed. When
Ibla’s father heard this, his joy was great; O King,
said he, the God of heaven knows my intentions,
and has now realised all my expectations. Do as
you please, and make me one of your slaves; here
is my hand as a proof of my sincerity, and in con-
firmation of what I say. He made the contract
with Mas-hil, son of Tarak; feasts were prepared,
and the good tidings promulgated, and the slave.
girls all shouted in delight. About evening, Ibla’s.
father returned home, Mas-hil having invested
him with a splendid robe, and made him presents,
and given him some richly-caparisoned steeds, and
instantly told Ibla all that had passed ; but when she
heard this news, she beat herself violently, and
screamed aloud, weeping and sighing piteously. As
to Mas-hil, he set out that very night on his journey
home, that he might despatch the marnage donation
and dowry, which consisted of a thousand she-camels


256 ANTAR’S TIMELY ARRIVAL.


laden with the rarities of Yemen, and a thousand
dinars, and three thousand sheep, and fifty swift
steeds, with their armour and rending spears; and
robes of satin, and ten strings of jewels, and twenty
balls of scented musk. Early in the morning he
sent it all away with his attendants, and fixed on a
certain day for the wedding. In a few days the
marriage presents arrived in the land of Kendeh;
al] the multitude were amazed at that quantity of
wealth, saying, No damsel has ever seen the like


- that this Absian has beheld, but she deserves it and


as much more. ‘They continued making the prepara-
tions till there only remained three days of the
appointed time, and during that period arrived
Antar. Happening to reach the land by night, he
dispersed Oorwah’s people among the. mountains,
saying, O Ebeulebyez, I am anxious to know what
is going on with Ibla in this country, for certainly
they will provide her a new husband. I want much
to go among the dwellings, and I will soon return
with intelligence. What would you be about?
cried Shiboob. You, just like a huge bull! I am
the only person for such a project. I fear, said
Antar, that my uncle may recognise you. I will
not let him discover me, said Shiboob, were I even
to stand close to him. And he went to his travelling
bag and took out some women’s clothes, which he
put on, and having veiled himself, he slung over his
shoulders a water bag. Antar and Oorwah were
astonished at his contrivance. You are indeed like


fe
THE NUPTIAL ENTERTAINMERT. | 257


one of Shedad’s slave girls, said he, and resemble
the young Banah. These are her clothes, said he;
she is my mistress, and I am her lover. And he set
out for the tents of the tribe of Kendeh, and re-
paired to the dwellings of King Amroo, moving and
swaggering his shoulders like a woman. He per-
ceived the tents destitute of horsemen, for they
were gone out to the plain, and the families were
occupied in festivities. ‘The unmarried girls were
playing about and beating the cymbals and musical
instruments, and the slaves were brandishing their
swords and shields, and their countenances appeared
glistening with joy. l

When Shiboob saw this, he advanced towards
them, and mixing with them, looked towards a tent,
on the outside of which was a brillant illumination
of lamps and candles. Being convinced that this
must be the nuptial pavilion, he made a great noise,
and began to play, and mingled with the women
and slave girls, and danced till he attracted the at-
tention of all present; and they all crowded round
him, staring at him whilst he sang, for he knew his
voice would reach Ibla :

“ Fawn of the huntsman, thy captor is come; say
< not he is not come; lo! here he is—certain are
“ all thy hopes. Rejoice in the aid of the sword of
& thy hero. Understand the tale I tell thee: how
“ Jong wilt thou delay? Joy is now descending on
“ thy home, and will ever endure summer and
‘“< winter.”

VOL. II. s


258 SHIBOOB CONCERTS IBLA’S RESCUE.


Now Ibla was at that moment listening to the
music from the tent. She signified her wish to sing
and play with the other damsels, and thus addressed
Shiboob :

“ O wanderer of the desert, dancer of the tent—
‘“‘the lion is the noble animal that affords refuge
‘¢ after excess of pain—this is indeed a period of my
“ joy in thee. All my sorrows and griefs have
“ vanished. My joy depends on thee, O Chief!
s“ Approach, for I am here as one dead !”

When Shiboob heard these words, he pretended
being tired, and sat down near the tent. Just at
that time Ibla also appeared and looked at him, and
as he was dressed in woman’s clothes, This damsel
cannot be a Kendeyan maid, she said; she must be
a damsel of Shedad’s. Then went pit-a-pat Shiboob’s
heart; but he turned towards her; and calmed her
mind, and uncovered his face. She recognised him.
O Shiboob! said she, where is my cousin Antar?
Here he is, replied Shiboob, hard by, and with him
his friend Oorwah, and a hundred horsemen. We
arrived here last night, and I am come to procure
intelligence of you: I shall return and inform him.
Shiboob, said she, there are still three days for the
marriage with Mas-hil, son of Tarak ; but let that
rather be the means of separation. Return imme-
diately and tell him my situation; but let him not
think of assaulting the tribe, he must lie in watt
for me till I set out ; then let him rush forth, and
slay all that are with me. Do you seize the bridle


IBLA’S JOY PUZZLES HER FATHER. 259


of my camel, and we will return to our native land.
All, all, must taste of death ; bid Antar not to spare
even my father,

Shiboob having heard this, returned to Antar,
and related to him all that Ibla had told him.
Antar was in agony for three days; his disquietudes
and anguish were unceasing.

Now Malik, Ibla’s father, from the moment he
had betrothed his daughter to Mas-hil, never saw
her but overwhelmed in tears and sorrow; yet he
never rebuked her. But when she learnt this ac-
count of her cousin, her distress vanished, and she
began to eat and drink, and clothe herself in the
rich robes which Mas-hil had sent her. Her father
observed this, and made a thousand useless conjec-
tures about it. At last, he mentioned the subject
to his son, saying, My son, Ibla appears happy and
pleased ; and her sorrow is turned into joy. I am
persuaded she has intelligence of Antar; and I fear
he will encounter us on the road, and mar our for-
tunes: this Antar is my horror. So he despatched
a letter to Mas-hil—

“ Know, mighty King, that I have been harassed
several times by my nephew, and I fear he will
meet us on the road; and his attack is replete with
death. It would be better that you should come
and receive your bride, and return home with her.”

When Malik’s letter reached Mas-hil, he smiled
in astonishment. I will go for her, said he; for-
tunate if this black should come into the country,

s2


260 - THE BRIDAL PARTY SET OUT.


that I may slay him, and darken his existence, and
Malik enjoy all that can give him pleasure. So he
gave directions instantly to his horsemen and his
troops to make preparations for a journey. He him-
self mounted with a hundred black horsemen, harsh-
featured fellows; and they pursued their course
eagerly and rapidly till they reached the tribe of
Kendeh. Mas-hil went to his uncle’s, and told him
of Malik’s letter. What’s all this? said Amroo to
Malik. Who is this Antar, that he should venture
into this country and annoy this Knight, who is the
destroyer of horsemen ?

Malik returned home, and ordered the slaves and
handmaidens to make the camels kneel down, and
fasten on the baggage. Ibla was elegantly dressed;
he raised her into the howdah. The Kendehan .
women came out with her, and before them went
the richly-harnessed horses, and the slaves, bran-
dishing their swords; all headed by Mas-hil, son
of Tarak, and Malik, Ibla’s father. The people
rejoiced at this event, and Ibla pretended to be
overjoyed ; whilst every moment she lifted up the
curtain of the howdah, and looked about to the right
and left. Ibla, said her mother, who was by her
side, I could have been persuaded that on such a
_ day as this you would be drowned in tears; but I
see you all brilliant with joy: what is the meaning
of this? My mother, I was in a distant land, and
despaired of ever returning home, said Ibla; but
now I have beheld this beautiful Knight, all my wits


THE PLAN OF ATTACK. 261


are captivated by his loveliness and grace, and by
the life of my father’s head, this Knight is dearer to
me than any human being; and had I the power
over Antar, I would gnaw his flesh, and drink his
blood, for I am indeed vexed at what I have suf-
fered, and at having irritated my family. And her
mother was well pleased at the change.

Thus they continued till they reached the defiles
where Antar was concealed. Shiboob was recon-
noitring on some of the sand-hills like a cunning
fox; and he cried out to his brother, O thou black-
born, the howdahs and camels are approaching. The
instant Antar heard this, he sprang on Abjer’s back,
and girded on his irresistible Dhami, and his long
spear. Oorwah and his people did the same. Antar
wished to explain to Oorwah his plan for the battle.
O Ebe-ool Ebyez, said he, this is Ibla that is coming,
and the troops protect her. Mas-hil:her lover is
behind. Which do you prefer? Will you meet the
enemy with your men? and shall I take the bridle
of Ibla’s camel? Or, will you conduct her camel,
and guard her whilst I drive away the troops? O
Aboolfawaris, said Oorwah, let me protect Ibla,
and do you drive away the enemy from us. Antar
smiled, and said Yes; and I am the man to drink
of their cups, I am their slayer, and their destroyer.
When thus I rush out against the party, do you and
your comradcs protect Ibla, and away with her to the
valley. Let none of your men attack them till they


262 ANTAR SURPRISES THE PARTY,


see the horsemen close on me, and surrounding me;
then let them make the assault, and aid me.

And forth he issued from the mouth of the val-
ley like a gust of wind, till coming up to the how-
dah of Ibla, he shouted at the slaves, and fell into
the midst of them, plundering their souls; his uncle
was stupefied with fear and terror. The slaves
shrunk from the carnage, whilst he sung from his
saddle, and thus recited :

‘‘ This day shalt thou see a day when the battle
“ will blaze, and lives shall be cut off by the sword ;
“ a day that shall frighten all that witness it. In it
“ shall be blood, and the sharp-edged swords shall
‘‘ clash. Brave men shall drink of the cup of fate,
“ and heroes be hurled from their saddles. Away
« with laughter and jest, and mirth. They shall
& be in battle, and in the turbulent conflict. Here
“ shalt thou see me in the field of war, hewing off
‘“‘ heads with the sword, whose edge is pain. I will
“ abandon warriors on the plain of contest, laid low
“ and stretched out ghastly with anguish. Heroes
« shall be struck down; armour cleft in twain, and
“ confusion reign in the dust of the conflict.”

As soon as Antar had finished these verses, he
shouted to his uncle, Son of an adulteress, whither-
soever thou goest, behind thee comes erasing fate,
and the turbulent lion. Malik was stupefied; he
speedily retired towards Mas-hil, to inform him of
this accident, whilst Antar took the bridle of Ibla’s


AND ADDRESSES IBLA, 263


camel, and said, Health to thee, beloved of my heart!
And art thou alive, and in health ? O Aboolfawaris!
replied she. O ornament of every circle! lord of
the bold heart and intrepid soul! hero of the tall
spear! ‘Thus he addressed her:

“OQ Ibla! daughter of Malik, son of Carad,
« love of thee has sunk into my heart. Soon will
& I meet them with the tearing thrust of the spear,
«“ till my heart is appeased. I will smite their heads
& with the polished scimitar—I will hew off their
“¢ skulls, and cut their throats—I will ravage their
& cultivations and lands, and will glut the wild
& beasts with their carcases. I am Antar, noble
“ and zealous. He who is nobly born! yes; he
& that is strong in battle, shall be called on the day
“ of carnage a Shedadean !”

Foul wretch! exclaimed her mother, didst thou
not tell me thy cousin was nothing to thee, but
truly I suspected thee when I saw thee turning
about to the right and left. Now the slaves all fled
towards Mas-hil, and told him of the sad event.
His eyeballs turned fiery-red; then galloping to-
wards his troops: I am the knight of Yemen, and
Irak, he roared. He stopped not till he came up
with Antar at the opening of the valley, and thus
taunted him:

« Has a tender of camels taken my bride cap-
“ tive? And has he wounded me with the arrow of
“ separation? Has he seized the fawn that enslaved
‘© my heart with the magic of her eyelashes and


»
264 SPEECHES OF MAS-HIL AND ANTAR.


‘‘ pupil of her eyes? Hopeless were his attempts,
“ were he even to bear her away on the steeds of
‘© Qotak. I will make her slave drink of the cup
“of death with a spear! and I will annihilate
“ the Absian Chiefs with finely-edged swords. I
« will leave their lands whelmed in affliction. Wo-
“ men shall ever remember the catastrophe! I am
‘Sa lion, whose name is known from the land of
“ Room even to Irak.” .

Whilst Mas-hil spoke, Antar listened; and in-
stantly he replied :

‘© O Mas-hil, instead of embraces and kisses, be-
“ hold the thrusts with the well-shapen spear, and
“ fatal blows from the hand of the nobly-descended
s lion, high raised above his fellows. Instead of
« Ibla are the cleaving strokes of scimitars and
“ thrusts of spears, tearing out the eyeballs. I am
“ the well-known warrior, whose fame is spread
“ over every region. Behold! how horsemen smite
‘ the breasts of their antagonists, but my thrust is
“ through the throat and the eye-ball! Cowards
“‘ pride themselves on the extent of their wealth,
‘but my pride is in the steeds of Otak. See!
“ death is on my javelin’s point—See! at one
“ thrust life is extinct—See! how glory belongs to
<6 me alone, and after me, no higher honour can
“ wait the most ambitious—See! how I have sur-
& passed every warrior, and truly my attack has
& checked every foe. Now tell the Kendeyans what
“& thou hast seen, for the hour of thy death and thy


DEATH OF MAS-HIL. 265


& wane is come! Recommend to them all thy
& wishes, for if once thou meetest me, thou wilt
& never return !”

No sooner had he concluded, than he rushed
upon Mas-hil. They thrust with their spears—
they smote with their swords, and the bird of fate”
was flying over them. The dust arose in black
clouds, and Mas-hil perceived in Antar what con-
founded his senses; but he concealed his anguish,
braved every thing with patience and perseverance.
Again the thick dust rolled up, when, lo! a troop
overtook Antar from the sides of the plain: he
rushed upon his antagonist like a lion, and thrust
at’ him the spear of rage and fury; he rent open
his corslet and coat of mail; he tore out his entrails
and his heart, and he hurled him at his full length
upon the ground. Then he assaulted the troop,
and soon brought down disgrace and misery upon
them. ‘Terrified they were as they perceived the
destruction of Mas-hil, the knight of the world ;
but they engaged Antar, till despairing of success,
and seeing death was at his command, they dis-
persed away from him, and joined their rear. Ibla’s
father and brother continued their flight, till they
reached the tribe of Kendeh, and in the fulness of
their agony and distress they exclaimed, O Ken-
deyans! misfortune has come upon you; war has
suddenly overwhelmed you! death is nigh at hand.
At this the horsemen advanced thick as a shower of
rain when it pours; King Amroo mounted and


266 ANTAR EXULTS OVER HIS BODY


asked the news. They told him what Antar had
done. Overtake, said they, your nephew, before
death descend upon him, and this voracious lion
destroy him. Speak not thus, O Malik, said King
Amroo, for I am under no alanns for the son of my
sister; let your black come, he will never return.
Tis thy fears that dictate these expressions. He
then hastened to the foe, and the troops behind
closed upon him like the waves of the stormy sea,
when, lo! the troops that had accompanied Mas-hil
hurried towards him, screaming and shouting. Some
of them advanced, and told him what had happened ;
his heart was near bursting—he halted: How evil
and inauspicious, he exclaimed, has been the face
of Malik and his daughter to us! To his horsemen
he called out, and they slackened their bridles,
fixed their spears, and sought the summits of the
mounds and sand-hills. Antar, when all had fled,
stood over the carcase of Mas-hil, stretched out
like the mountain side; he smote it with Dhami,
and as he cut it in two, he thus exclaimed :

« Favourite of the songstress! I have left him
s“ dead, a plenteous prey for the spotted serpents
“& maw. My hands with a speedy thrust reached
“ him, and the blood gushed out, and he weltered
& in his gore. I rent with the sturdy spear his
“ heart; however noble may be thc hero, the spear
& is not to be resisted. I have left him a prey to
& wild beasts, that they may feed on him—that
“ they may gnaw his head and arms. I am one


HIS FURY AT BEING RESISTED. 267


« whose hands, inflamed with wine, would tear the
* regal standard from a king. I will urge my steed’
‘* into the dust, and he will plunge into it, champ-
« ing the bit and snorting; but when he sees that
“ I mind not his distress, he shows his grinders,
4 but neighs no more. I have pierced him with the
& spear, and have raised him on high on the point
« of my sharp-edged Indian scimitar.”

Neither did he cease till he saw the desert all
black, and dust extending along the plain, troops
pressing on him, and warriors shouting at him.
Heroes advanced in haste towards him. Horsemen
appeared on all four sides, each exclaiming, By the
faith of an Arab, I will not permit thee to return
home, thou foulest of blacks, for thou hast slain a
warrior whose equal the world cannot boast; and
we must destroy thee to avenge him. As soon as
Antar perceived the sparkling of scimitars and the
glittering of spear-barbs, and the din of shouts and
cries, he shook with rage and fury, so that all
his armour nearly flew off from his body: he was
scarcely sensible to whom he was speaking, or with
whom he was fighting. But as pride and ardour
seized him, he thus exclaimed:

“ When I behold the steeds pouring down in
“ numbers, and snorting, I meet them without a
“ roar. They call on Antar, and their spears are
“ like a descent of locusts on a towering sand hill.
“ They call on Antar, and their studded breast-
“ plates are like the eyes of frogs in a pool of water;


268 HIS SLAUGHTER IN THE CONFLICT.


“ but [ dash them down with the bright forehead
& star and chest of my steed, till he is all besmeared
“ with blood. But should ‘he bolt away from the
“ fall of the spear, I still urge him on; then he
& complains to me, and gently neighs. But the
“ horses are stern and sour-looking, as if their riders
“ had drunk of the cup of coloquintida.”

Anon he rushed upon the advancing troops, his
heart harder than stone, and his mind like the waves
of the sea when it roars. He smote off heads with
his sword, he dealt severing blows, and drove pene-
trating thrusts; and when the troops closed upon
him, he shouted in their faces, and they were driven
back upon their rear, tossing the riders from their
backs, till his arms slackened of their vigour, and
he beheld the day like night. Upon this King
Amroo called out to his men, and threw himself on
Antar, steady as the noblest of heroes. Matters
were in this state, when lo! a dust appeared among
the mountains, and there started forth some swarthy-
complexioned horsemen, crying out, O by Abs! O
by Adnan! And when they approached the plain,
they uncovered their heads and cast aside their gar-
ments, and exposed their lives to death ; they poured -
down like eagles, and thrust at the foremost of the
troops.

Now Oorwah, as soon as Shiboob came up to him
bringing Ibla, stationed ten men to protect her, and
with the remainder he made the attack, when he saw
the Kendehans surround Antar, and attack him


HE SEIZES HIS UNCLE. 269


with their spears and falchions. Jet us now, my
cousins, attack truly and sincerely, said he to his
comrades, for this is the first time we have ever
fought with Antar. Let us remove from him this
affliction, that he may acknowledge it as long as he
lives. It was the intention of Oorwah by this dis-
course to make them behold Antar’s exploits, and
teach them firmness for future occasions. When
Oorwah’s comrades perceived Antar’s unshaken re-
solution in assaulting the warriors, their hearts were
like mountains, and they did as Oorwah commanded ;
they endured patiently all the horrors of the con-
flict, they assaulted with the utmost impetuosity,
and exhibited the firmest courage and determination.
Again Antar’s powers expanded: where he thrust,
he slew; where he struck, he cleft; where he at-
tacked a whole body, he made it retreat. The dust
_ arose and thickened—the horses feet played with
the skulls as if with balls—and all that were present
on that day wished they had never been born, had
never stirred, and had never moved on the earth.
Antar heard his uncle’s shouts, and his voice cry-
ing out to the Kendehans, Assault this black, this
infernal black, who has slain Mas-hil; destroy him
whilst he is engaged in slaughter. Fear not those
who have aided him, for they are only common
fellows. When Antar heard these words, he at-
tacked him, urged on by his feelings, and overtook
him. Malik endeavoured to fly, but Antar grasped
hold of him, and seized him by his rings, and clung


270 THE DISMAY OF THE KENBENANS,


to his throat, and threw him down behind him.
Shiboob soon bound him fast; his son made an
attempt to defend his father, but lo! an arrow struck
his horse’s scrotum, and overthrew him. Shiboob
was on him before he could recover himself, and
bound him also, and away he went into the valley
with them both. The intelligence was soon spread
among the Kendehans, so the horsemen and warriors
came out one after the other. The numbers in-
creased against the Absians, and the succour brought
against them augmented. - Oorwah’s men exhibited
all their courage and their zeal, whilst Antar assisted
them as a father assists his son. ‘They were covered
with wounds, and took refuge in the valley and the
defiles, for they were exhausted with striking and
thrusting; and as soon as night clothed the world
in darkness, they were surrounded by infantry and
cavalry.

King Amroo also came down to the entrance of
the passage, and in his heart there was a blazing
fire against Antar. In the evening no less than
seven thousand horsemen crowded round him, and
all were talking of Antar’s exploits. My cousins,
even the Bestower of life on the world could not
have done such deeds, cried King Amroo; but if
he quits us alive after such achievements, the Arabs
will be ashamed of us, as long as the seated sit, and
the risen rise ; and we shall be considered by them
as mere beasts and savages. Oorwah’s men reposed
themselves. Some even expressed their disapproba-


WHO ARE ATTACKED BY BOSTAM. 271


tion, saying, How can we, fewer even than a hun-
dred, in this battle pretend to withstand all the
population of Yemen? but as to Antar, he is in
love. Their situation was no secret to Antar, so
he went up to Oorwah and said, O Ebe ool Ebyez,
I am aware your companions repent of what they
have undertaken; it would be better for you to
take them away, and seek safety among these hills,
and leave me alone in these difficulties, for I well
know death never advances or retards. What is
this? said Oorwah. We will never separate from
you, till the enemies’ horses trample upon our heads,
and if any one of my companions repents of the en-
terprise, let him take the consequences. They ate
a hearty dinner, and laid themselves down to sleep ;
but Antar arose and went to Ibla, and saluting her,
kissed her between the eyes, and soothed his passion
with her. And the tribe of Kendeh reposed in
sorrows and distress.

They were in this situation when a messenger ad-
vanced towards them in full speed over the sands:
Noble leaders, he exclaimed, know that the Chief
Bostam has plundered your wives and families, and
has ravaged your country and native land. So the
Kendehans returned to demand the restitution of
their wives and families. Antar, hearing their
shouts, wished to attack them, but Shiboob pre-
vented him, fearful of some stratagem on the part
of the Kendehans. Shiboob, however, in the course


272 THE ABSIANS COME TO AID ANTAR.


of the night followed them, and on his return was
communicating to his brother what he had heard of
Bostam, how he had plundered the dwellings and
tents, when a dust appeared, and black columns
arose, beneath which stood forth some swarthy
horsemen, all shouting out, O by Abs! O by Adnan!
This was an army of noble Absians, headed by King
Zoheir's sons, Shas, Malik, Noofil, and Harith, and
with them was the Chief Shedad, and his brother
Zakhmetuljewad, and a thousand illustrious horse-
men: and Oorwah’s sister was the cause of their
arrival, for when he had conducted her to the
dwellings, and enjoined her not to mention the sub-
ject to any one, she religiously kept the secret, till
she perceived the great anxiety of the men and
women on account of the absence of Antar and her
brother ; upon which, ex¢eedingly alarmed, she told
Shedad that Antar and her brother were gone to
the tribe of Kendeh to rescue Ibla, and she related
all that Antar had done in his hberality and ge-
nerosity on their return from the tribe of Ghiftan,
and also the circumstance of the messenger from
Bostam. On hearing this, Shedad went to King
Zoheir and his sons, and in great distress related
the story to them.’ This narrative brought tears
into the eyes of all present. March! said King
Zoheir, haste away! Take with you one thousand
horsemen, and assist him; and if you wish, I also


will set out. Shas and Malik were greatly pleased ;


THEY REPROACH HIM POR LEAVING THEM, 273


they selected a thousand men, and marched out
with Shedad and his brother, a flame burning in
their hearts, till they reached the tribe of Kendeh.
As soon as Antar saw King Zoheir’s sons, he
made his obeisance, and raised his voice in prayers
for them and their father. O Aboolfawaris, said
Shas, we have indeed to reproach you , for you went
away without telling us, so had any evil happened
to you, all the men and women would have been in
the greatest affliction on your account. O great
prince, exclaimed Antar, I do not wish the Arabs
should say of me, that the chiefs of the tribe of Abs
marched out with their slave, and assisted him in
the violence of his love. My son, said his father,
under the influence of your passion, you daily ex-
pose your life to death; and, moreover, the Arabs
are all your enemies. ‘Then Antar told them all
that had befallen his uncle Malik in the land of
Kendeh, and how he had betrothed Ibla to Mas-hil,
whom he had slain, and made to drink of the cup
of extinction ; and how Malik had excited the horse-
men against him. Antar’s account filled them with
astonishment ; they inquired about Malik and his


_ gon Amroo, and Ibla, and the tribe of Kendeh. As


to Malik and his son, said Antar, they are in my
possession, well secured; the Kendehans have re-
turned home. And, acquainting them with Bos-
tam’s story, he continued, I was now setting out to
his assistance, had you not arrived.
Amazed at his great success, they departed in
VOL. II. T


QA — AND ABUSE HIS UNCLE FOR HIS CONDUCT.


company with him till they reached the field of
battle, where they saw Malik and his son in a de-
plorable condition, almost dead under the pressure
of ropes and cords, so tight were they bound down.
Ah! said Shas, his heart pitying him in the presence
of the multitude, in what an unlucky hour didst
thou come into the world! Art thou not ashamed?
Thou art become a fable among the tribes. O nobles
and chiefs, by the faith ofan Arab, exclaimed Malik,
I will never deliver my daughter to this black slave
whilst I have a tongue to speak, or a limb to move.
Either then make me drink of the cup of death, or
seize her for him with the hand of power, so that
my justification may be clear to the world, and my
honour unpolluted with ignominy. What induced
you to take my son’s property, said Shedad, and
then refuse any return? and marry your daughter
to another man? But now as to this girl, we will
send her back to her country, and she shall not quit
our, dwellings till she herself requests of her own
accord to be married; then we will marry her to
whom she pleases, and we shall be free from annoy-
ance and affliction. Witness for me, cried Antar,
all here, if he returns home and conceals his daugh-
ter, I will make no demand upon him whatever ; I
will not even remain near him, but I will do what
he pleases, and live with my sister Merwa in the
tribe of Ghiftan ; and on his account I will abandon
family and home, and will wait for time to effect my
purpose. But should he marry her to any human


ANTAR PROMISES TO LIVE APART FROM THE TRIBE. 275


being, I will requite him as he deserves, and I will
hasten his departure from this world. © Abool-
fawaris, said Shas, no blame can now attach to you,
and it is impossible for any one to object to such
conditions. Well! said Malik, I shall demand of you
this concession and acknowledgment when we have
returned home. But I, said Antar, will not return
to reside with the tribe of Abs, whilst you remain
there, unless you grant me permission to do so.
Upon this Shedad got upon his legs, and releasing
Malik, kissed him between the eyes, King Zoheir’s
sons were much astonished at all this, and at his
excessive liberality, and his affection for his family
and tribe; whilst Antar endeavoured to win his
uncle with these verses :

“ I have had patience, but in my love patience
“is extinct. Tears have flowed till they have be-
“ come blood. O ye that depart, in my heart you
“ dwell—my heart thirsts after ye. What burdens
“ of anguish have I borne! Were Mount Redwa *
“ to endeavour to support them, Redwa’s self would
“ be crushed by their weight. O thou, daily in-
“< flicting me with grief, the horsemen of olden time
. would sink under such burdens. Fear not, that
“in my wrath, I will raise thee up on the point of
“ my cleaving sword ; but that thou livest, and that
“ I have not destroyed all thou hast built up, to me
“ no thanks are due. But I cannot forbear when


* A mountain in the neighbourhood of Mecca.


T 2È


276 BOSTAM INVADES THE KENDEHANS


' “filthy Arabs oppose me, for I will not be dis-
“‘ praced—my object is high in heaven. I speak
“ the words of truth in advice—he that exposes
“ himself unnecessarily to danger is never praised,
& even should he escape.”

Antar now resolved on going to the assistance of
Bostam ; and leaving thirty horsemen with Gheyadh
in the defile, he departed with the thousand newly
arrived warriors; Shiboob preceding, and showing
them the roads over the sand-hills, whilst his brother
Antar rode by the side of Shas.

Now when the messenger whom Bostam had sent
to Antar returned with the news that Antar had set
out against the Kendehans, and that he excused him
from the expedition, I cannot be satisfied, exclaimed
Bostam, with that reason, for it was from me Ibla’s
father ran away. So he selected a thousand Shiba-
nian horse, and having procured his father’s per-
mission, he departed for the land of Kendeh; and
he happened to arrive just at the time when the
marriage of Mas-hil was approaching; so he secreted
himself in the mountains, and despatched a slave to
gain some intelligence of Malik. The slave on his
return stated, that Ibla was actually married, and
that the Kendehans were employed in the marriage
feast, and on the next day were to conduct her to
her husband. Alas! cried Bostam, much distressed,
Ibla has at length slipped through Antar’s hands—
his anguish will be vain, and his enemies and rivals
will exult. But by the faith of an Arab, I will not


JUST AS IRLA HAD DEPARTED. 277


be the harbinger of good news to the Kendehans in
this marriage. I must exert myself to liberate her,
and show that I am the real friend of Antar. Re-
turn to the Kendehans, contmued he to the slave ;
and do not leave them till you see Ibla set out.
Then hasten back, and I will show you what I will
do. The slave accordingly returned, and reposed
among the shepherds, pretending to be fatigued and
ill. In the morning, when the howdahs were raised
upon the camels, and the men and women departed.
with Ibla, Bostam’s slave went back and told him
the news; and his heart was near bursting that
Antar should be thus disappointed. He instantly
mounted with his men, and invaded the dwellings
and tents about evening: there he heard the sounds
of grief and lamentation on all sides, and the shrieks
of the girls and women. Cousins, cried Bostam,
what has happened to these people ? I could almost
be persuaded my precaution had had some effect,
and that Antar had seized his bride, and had made
the tribe pass an evening of defeat in the death of
Mas-hil, and the dispersion of the Kendehans. So
come on, my cousins, plunder their flocks, capture
their well-shapen maidens, and congratulate your-
selves on this spoil and gain.

` At the word they galloped away, and brought
down the descent of Fate and Destiny; dealing
blows among them irresistible and unsparing. All
the men that had been lcft behind they slew, and
they drove away the cattle and the families, and


218 BOSTAM IS ALMOST OVERPOWERED,


they set out on their way home, saying, Now will
the Kendehans leave Antar alone when they hear
this event; and thus it was that the news reached
them about morning as we mentioned.

So they quitted Antar, and sought Bostam, for
their terrors were great. They overtook him at a
spot called Jilgil, and they surrounded him on all
sides.

As King Amroo was the chief of the Kendehan
tribe, he despatched to the habitations a thousand
lion-warriors, fearful for the calamities that might
befal them. As soon as they reached Bostam, they
attacked him and his companions with all their
force. But he rushed into the fight, and aided his
men; and doing the deeds of a nobly-born Arab,
he repulsed the troops away from his people. He
tore their chests with his barbed spear, and fought
like a terrifying lion. But the Kendehans were
greatly superior in numbers to the Shibanians, and
Antar did not come up with them until they were
in extreme peril.

Bostam felt certain of death, so great was the rush
of the horsemen ; and he was about to receive on his
chest the force of united spears, when lo! Antar
joined him with all his horsemen, saying, I was in-
deed afraid of this, for Aboolyaczan; and he made
the assault with the troops of Abs and Adnan.
The Kendehans were struck with horror; the in-
stant they saw his terrible form, their bodies shook
with affnight, and their complexions changed as they


BUT I8 RELIEVED BY ANTAR. 279


heard them vociferating, O by Abs! O by Adnan!
Antar at their head, thus exclaiming—

‘“ God protect thee, O Aboolyaczan! I am the
*¢ lion—the vanquisher of all antagonists. ‘The lion
“ of war is come to thee; its lion is at hand, and its
& exciter on the plain of opposition; the rapid bran-
“ disher of swords in the achievements of Kings is
“€ come to thee; the destroyer of heroes is at hand.
“ O Kendeh, a Knight is come against you, who will
‘¢ uproot all the delights of Cahtan; one who never
& waves his sparkling scimitar in the contest, but the
“‘ universe begs for quarter. How often have I
“ forborn! but fortune betrays me, and my enemies
“would involve me in disgrace and infamy: but
& now dost thou not see that kings fear me, and all
“ the host of heroes tremble before me? I am the
“ severer of heads in quest of glory ; I am the dis-
& comfiter of warriors and horsemen; Glory is my
“ glory; the age is my age; the time is my time,
“ and the station my station.”

No sooner had Antar finished his verses, than the:
wise men of Kendeh assembled in the presence of
the King. Know, O monarch, said they, this de-
mon is not alone, but the pride of Abs and Adnan
have come after him, and I fear some of them may
invade pur homes, and ravage our possessions, and
capture our women; and should this conjecture be
well-founded, the destruction will be eternal.

You have taken a right view of the business, said
King Amroo; and I fear, if we protect what 1s of


280 THE FLIGHT OF THE KENDEHARS.


inferior worth, the more valuable will be plundered
from us; but my idea is, that you should fight and
retreat, but beware! sliould they put you all to con-
fusion, Antar will utterly destroy you, and every
trace of ye will be extirpated.

In a short time the report was published abroad
among the Kendehans, and they fought as they re-
treated; but as their hearts were anxious about their
wives and children, they could exert themselves but
feebly in the battle.

When Antar perceived their situation, he directed
the spears against their chests, and urged the Ab-
sians on to the contest. he same did Bostam with
his followers. Now the flight of the Kendehans
became general, and they dispersed to the east and
to the west, and none arrived at the dwellings ‘but
those whose deaths were postponed.

As soon as. King Amroo reached the tents, he


shouted out to his people that were there, and again


ordered them to the field of battle; and they has-


tened eagerly to the assistance of their companions,


and the engagement continued on both sides till the
armies of darkness advanced, and concealed the
print of their footsteps. The Kendehans being
completely routed, retired to their tents, whilst Antar,
being aware that there was not one even to tighten
their girths, ordered his people to plunder their
flocks, but to spare the married women and families.

After this, Antar turned towards Bostam and
said, Truly, thou hast ever shown the excess of


`


BOSTAM AND ANTAR PRAISE EACH OTHER. 281


benevolence towards us; and never can we possibly
make you a suitable compensation. He continued
thus eulogising Bostam in these verses :

& O Aboolyaczan! O full moon! O subduer of
“ the desert and towns! Were‘the ears of all other
“ men deafened, may thine alone be opened! O
& Bostam! O thou distributer of favours out of
& nothing, surpassing all that can be imagined !
& Generous men we had of old, we shall never for-
‘¢ get them or their history ; endued thou art with
“& modesty and goodness; a compound of all that
“ beneficence and nature ever formed! And all that
€ thou givest will be stored up for thee in eternity !
& Thou art the sword of resolution! Were I to
‘6 beckon to it, it would rest sheathed in the firm-
“ rooted mountain !”

Bostam answered him thus:

“ Hail! May greetings ever welcome thee, morn-
“‘ing and evening; for thou art the death of the
‘‘ horseman of the wastes, and the most deserving
“of praises and eulogies; for God only created
& thee to be a wonder in the battle and hour of
“ troubles; no lion can cope with thee in the fight;
& no cloud can equal thee in bounty; thou hast at-
“ tained all that is knowledge, and wit, and modesty,
‘¢ and patience, in difficulties and relaxations; thou
‘¢ excellest all in generosity and munificence; and
“ hast perfected the nobleness of thy ancestors!
< Let every one that sees thee admire all that he
“ beholds of magnanimity and grandeur! O Abool-


282 ANTAR ENGAGES TO LIVE WITH HIM.


cc fawaris, thou art my succour, noble must he be
“ who is acquainted with fate! The bounty of thy
“ hand when it bestows gifts, heals and relieves a
“ man from the virulence of misfortunes. Thy age
“ is like thy resolution in action, and thy resolution
“is like thy sword in fate, When fire descends on
* thee, it is sweet, even as the dew that refreshes
“the meads! Live for ever in wealth and eternal
« glory, unchangeable and unperishable !”

Bostam imparted to Antar all the anguish he had
endured on the subject of Ibla’s marriage to Mas-
hil. Antar also related all that had happened to
him; how enraged his uncle was against him; and
that he himself had sworn to reside no longer in his
native land. You must then, said Bostam, make
your residence amongst us in Shiban, for I was the
first that gave myself up to your service. No, said
Prince Malik, we cannot possibly permit our cousin
to abandon us, therefore do not make any irre-
vocable engagement with him, so that we may ar-
range his business, and terminate his affairs in his
favour.

O Prince, said Shedad, verily my son’s residence
with Bostam is particularly advisable; let no more
dissensions disperse the tribe, and our lands be no
more devastated. ‘Thus was the matter concluded:
Bostam had determined on dividing the spoil amongst
the Absians, but they all swore they would not take
a halter of it. Let our cousin Antar have it all,.
and let him live on it during his stay with you.


SHEDAD TAKES LEAVE OF ANTAR. 283


Bostam was all astonishment at their liberality and
perfect love. Shedad advanced, and thus took leave
of his son:

“« You have formed a favorable opinion of for-
tune, when all goes well, and you do not fear the
evil that fate may bring with it. You have escaped
also in night adventures, and you boast of it; but
in the brightness of the night, often misfortunes


occur.”


284 ANTAR’S COMPLAINTS.


CHAPTER XV.


Bost am ordered his men to drive on the flocks, and
they separated in joy and happiness; and as he en-
gaged Antar in conversation and social intercourse,
on the subject of Ibla, Let no man imagine, said
Antar, that he has ever endured an equal share of
anguish with me. Then he wept, and sighed, and
complained, and thus spoke:

“ My patience and my transports exist when I am
‘‘ moving, and when I am at rest; but my love for
«“ Ibla is the companion of my heart. In her face, and
“ in the roses of her cheeks is my full moon, bril-
“ liant, sparkling, and luminous. Her figure is grace-
“ ful as the | (alef), and her light limbs are round
“ as the O (noon), and her seat of smiles is bud-
‘‘ ding as the „ (meem) ; musk is her smell, and from
& her juices (and her breath are sweet liquors
“ and perfumes. How is it that my heart ever pur-
& sues its love, as we wish for the hot water in the
“ bath? But patience! perhaps the breezes that
“ pass over her residence may blow a breath from
“ her embraces. They are resolved to betray me;
& their treachery is their faith, for perfidy is a dis-
& ease inherent in their bowels. ‘They are wicked,
“ but I have to ask their pardon—and they still


HIS ALARMS FOR HIS FRIENDS. 285


s increase their insults. I still act justly towards
“ them; but they ever deal in invectives, as if I
“ could not endure to be absent from them, and as
« if I should die for love of them, and as if I could
& not to endure say, ye have outraged me; for God
& well knows I am indeed wronged.” l
= They confinued their journey till mid-day, when
Antar suddenly checked his progress, and said to
Bostam, O my brother, my heart is very uneasy
about the tribe of Kendeh, for should they learn
our situation, and that we all have taken different
routes, they may pursue my cousins, and may
chance to slay some of King Zoheir’s sons. Do
order your horsemen to drive away these flocks,
and you and I with ten horsemen will return to-
wards my cousins, that we may be assured of their.
security. As you please, said Bostam; and he or-
dered his people to drive away the camels and
flocks; and after he had selected ten horsemen,
they set out traversing the deserts, Shiboob going
before them, pointing out the roads till they reached
the valley, where, on their first arrival, they had
been concealed. Here they attentively contem-
plated the roads and tracks, but they could perceive
nothing but the print of the horses feet turned to-
wards home. ‘Thus were Bostam and Antar: but
as to the Absians, as soon as they were at a distance
wandering over the deserts, their bosoms felt dis-
tressed on account of the loss of Antar. Well,
said Shas, to Malik, Ibla’s father, this business has


286 THE MARCH OF ZOHETR’S SONS.


turned out just as you wished, and Antar must
remain alone in a foreign land. And soon their
conversation and ‘animosity increased in violence,
when Prince Malik came up and separated them,
saying, My cousins, do not quarrel in this land, for
we are still amongst our enemies, and he about
whom you are quarrelling has preferred quitting us
to living with you. ‘Thus they continued till they
left the land of Kendeh, but Shas’s rage and in-
dignation were intense. He marched on ahead
with half of the army, and also Shedad, Antar’s
father, whilst Malik, King Zohem's son, remained
behind with five hundred men, and Ibla went quietly
on with him, for his mind was superior to Shas’s,
and he showed courtesy to all. At length they
came into a country called Riyab, abounding in
lakes, and the wild animals were ranging far and
wide. It happened that the party were in want of
provisions on account of their distant journey, and
many of them were hungry. Being much distressed,
they stated their complaints to Malik; so he told
them to mount their steeds: Come on to the hunt,
said he, and let not one return, but with sufficient pro-
visions for himself, and his comrades, and associates.
Malik mounted a swift mare, and employed himself
in spearing the beasts and stretching them on the
sands, galloping among them right and left, until he
separated from his party and his troops, and as he
was much engaged with the immense quantity of
game, he roamed far among the wilds, watching his


MALIK’S ADVENTURE IN THE CHACE. 987


opportunity. At last he halted, and cast his eyes
round the desert right and left, and whilst he was
contemplating the wastes and sand-hills, behold,
one of the desert standing in the plain, and before
him a camel lying down, and behind him a damsel,
and she held the Bedoween’s horse. As soon as the
damsel saw Malik standing on the top of a sand-
hill, she made signs to him with her hand, that she
demanded his aid. Malik understood her wishes,
but he would not assent to her demand, for, said he
to himself, haply she may be his wife or sister, and
something may have occurred, that may render it
improper to assist her, so he resolved on returning
to his party, fearful of the accidents of fortune.
But the damsel let go the horse from her hand,
and struck it on the face, and it fled over the wilds.
O Arab, catch your horse, cried she to the Bedoween.
Upon that he quitted the camel, and pursued the
horse till he overtook it; he caught it by the halter
and returned. But no sooner had the Bedoween
departed in quest of his horse, than the damsel ran
up to Malik and demanded his assistance. Where-
fore, said Malik, do you demand my protection
against him? Is he your husband or your relation?
No, said she, I and my countrymen were returning
home, when this demon met us; he slew my cou-
sins; and she wept. When Malik heard this, his
heart pitied her, for he was a prince, and the son of
a prince, and a noble Absian. Well, said he, con-
gratulate yourself on the end of your troubles and


288 18 MADE PRISONER BY FEYA2-


misery. But lo! the Bedoween returned mounted
on his horse, and perceiving Malik in conversation
with his damsel, his eyeballs started into the top of
his head; he grasped his spear, and rushed upon
him: Foul Arab! said he, what horseman art thou
that dost venture to converse with the damsels of
the brave? I am surnamed the crashing thunder
and the deluging cloud, and called Feyaz the de-
predator! Instantly each attacked his adversary,
and they commenced the fight and contest. Malik
met him with a spear, and cried out in a loud voice.
The Bedoween parried his thrust, and twisting the
spear out of his hand, he attacked him like a lion,
‘and seizing Malik by the rings of his corslet, he
cried out, O by Cahtan! and dragged him off his
horse’s back; he took him captive and bound him,
degraded and in misery: but when he remarked
the beauty of his person, and his garments, and his
armour, he was convinced he was some great per-
sonage: Youth, said he, of what tribe art thou?
Speak the truth, or I will make thee drink of the
cup of death and perdition. ‘Truth becomes the
noble, and falsehood is repugnant to the generous
Arab chief, replied Malik, I am of no despicable
birth, nor is my wealth mean. I am Malik, son of-
Zoheir, King of the tribes of Abs and Adnan, and
Fazarah and Ghiftan, and Marah and Dibyan.
Bravo, bravo! cried the other, thou, by heaven,
wert one of my chief objects; through thee will I
take my revenge, and will liberate my cattle. Upon


THE CAUSE OF HIS INSULTING MALIK. 289


this he bound tighter the cords, and fastened down
his arms and shoulders, and tied him on the back of
his horse, and marched towards his own country,
saying, Never shalt thou be released from my power,
till thou deliverest up to me thy father and thy slave
Antar, that I may sacrifice them as I would a ram,
otherwise I will execute every cruelty upon thee.
What is the reason of this? inquired Malik. Know,
said he, that I am the lover of one of our damsels,
and I demanded her in marriage of her father, to
whom I offered all my property, sheep, he and she
camels: but he refused me, saying, I will not marry
you to my daughter, unless you bring me the head
of him who murdered my son, and avenge his fate.
On whom, said I, is your vengeance to be taken ?
On a black of the tribe of Abs, he answered, he is
their herdsman, and their horseman, and their pro-
tector, for he plundered our flocks and captured our
wives and families, and he slew my son, and he is
but a camel-driver, and now I have sworn not to
marry my daughter, but to him who shall bring me
his head. Upon this I engaged to slay this son of
filth, your black Antar, and I quitted not my tents
till I had made a contract upon this point with him.
So I set out on my way to your country, and fell
by chance on this girl; I slew her countrymen, and
carried her off. Again I set out, and fell by chance
on you, Prince Malik, and through you will I suc-
ceed in my projects. When Malik heard this, he
rested all his hopes on a stratagem, and sought his


VOL. II. U


290 ME WAITS IN EXPECTATION OF ANTAR.


' deliverance by art and cunning. Arab, said he,
the road is nigh, for last night only I quitted Antar
in the land of Riyab, and with him were but ten
horsemen. Away against your enemy, if you are,
as you proclaim yourself, a noble horseman! O by
the Arabs! was all the Bedoween’s reply, for he
was highly delighted and rejoiced. If you have
spoken the truth, said he, I will release you from
this bondage. Could but my eyes light upon Antan
I would take him prisoner were there even a thou-
sand brave horsemen with him; but E shall now
rest till morning, and your black will then appear,
for as soon as he is aware of your disappearance, he
will not proceed on his journey, but will undoubtedly
come and seek you, and he must pass by this road,
for his good luck and fortune have abandoned him.
Upon this he dismounted and reposed till the day
dawned, when he lashed the damsel and Prince
Malik to the backs of two of his horses, and pro-
ceeded without further delay. About three hours
after, behold a man on foot speeding over the desert,
and before him fled the deer, whom he overtook
and grasped by the horns, and when the Bedoween
saw him, he stared at him in amazement, surprised
at the force of his muscles and the strength of his
knees; and whilst he was looking at him, behold
ten horsemen advanced towards him, all immersed
in steel, and enveloped in breastplates of bright
metal, and in front of them was a knight like an
hyena. When the Bedoween remarked the mag-


ANTAR AND FEYAZ PARIEY. 291


nificence of their accoutrements, and the excellence
of their steeds, and the smallness of their numbers,
he made towards them, eager to seize them. They
also observed with surprise the camel and the man
bound with cords to the back of a horse. The
troop halted, and the Bedoween moved towards
them to demand their object. What horsemen are
ye? he exclaimed, and to what Arabs are you con-
nected? Upon this their leader shouted out, and
he was the conquering hero, Antar, son of Shedad.
I am one, he cried, that will wither your soul!
known amongst honourable men, as the chosen
knight; the far-famed slayer—the knight of tu-
mults and uproars—the chief Antar, son of Shedad,
and what coward art thou? And who is this pri-
soner bound on that horse? Who is this damsel
that is crying out, and demands assistance? O by
the Arabs ! cried the Bedoween, shaking himself with
joy upon his horse. I greet thee—I welcome thee,
black in complexion, fair in deeds, knight of the
tribes, I am called Feyaz the depredator! I am
the tempestuous blast! I am come to assault thee.
And. he related his story; how he demanded the
dameel, and was sent by her father for her marriage
donation: he would not admit, he added, of any
thing but thy death, and the annihilation of thy
life. And who, said Antar, is this prisoner? Your
lord, Prince Malik, son of King Zoheir. As soon
as Antar heard this, the light became dark in his
eyes. Bostam soon joined him, and demanded of
uz


292 ANTAR RETURNS IN QUEST OF IBLA.


him the cause of this long parley. He informed him
of all the Bedoween had said. God is with you, O
Aboolfawaris! said Bostam, how he has inspired
you with forethought, and how he has intimated to
you the revolutions of fate !

Now Antar, as he was returning from the land
of Kendeh, in his fears for Ibla, had bid Shiboob
early in the morning to cut off through the defiles
into the land of Riyab; and Antar, followed by Bos-
tam and his people, was proceeding to the vicinity of
the land of Abs, eager to catch some news of Ibla,
for lovers and the devotees of passion sigh fondly
for news of their love, and Antar’s love in the excess
of his anxiety enchained him with the bonds of
desire and solicitude, as he thus expressed himself :

s When the zephyr gently blows, its breath re-
« lieves the sickened heart, and brings me news of
“ the damsel and of those I love, who are travelling
“ on their journey: regardless are they of whom
& they, have left behind, cast down and dead in the
“ land of love: one who has quitted their country
“ and roams anxious about. them, wheresoever they
“ drive their baggage camels. Indeed, O Ibla,
“‘ they have betrayed my vows. It is thy father.
“ that is ungrateful for favours. I have borne sor-
‘rows and absence patiently, even in my weak
“ state, and I have defied the railers. I am ac-.
‘“‘ customed to grief, so that my body, were it to.
« lose its pains, would sigh after its emaciated state..
s“ The ravens taunt it, as if it had been one that


SHIBOOB RELEASES MABIK. 293

“had destroyed its plundered young; it weeps,
& and the torrents of my tears sympathise with it—
“ it sighs, and my woes cruelly increase—it passes
“ the night in anguish for the loss of its mate, for
& whose absence it moans the live-lang night. I
& said to it, thou hast wounded the inmost recesses
“ of my heart. Ever is thy grief a mental disease.
“I have shed tears from my eyes, and my native
“ home and country excite all my interest. Ab-
“ sence has left me no soul, no body, in which,
& miserable as I am, I can live. Wert thou to
* take off the armour from it, thou wouldst see
“ beneath it only a ruined vestige; and on those
“ worn-out remains is a coffin-sword, whose edge
“ would notch the bright polished scimitar. I am
& so accustomed to the calamities of fortune, that
‘¢ all their vastness appear but trifling to me, (nu-
“ merous as they are, they appear few).” |
Thus they continued traversing the deserts till
they approached the land of Riyab, and met the
knight Feyaz, and heard his adventures, and saw
Prince Malik in his power. And Antar was oc-
cupied with Feyaz in the conflict, till the brightness
of the day darkened over their heads. But Shiboob
quitted his deer, and moved towards Prince Malik,
who was groaning from the pain of his wounds.
Alas! alas! cried Shiboob, and came up to him,
and untied the cords, and placed him again on
his horse, saying: Seek the field of battle, that you
may console your heart. As soon as Antar saw
Prince Malik, he exerted himself in the contest


293 ANTAR RETURNS IN QUEST OF IBLA.


him the cause of this long parley. He informed him
of all the Bedoween had said. God is with you, O
Aboolfawaris! said Bostam, how he has inspired
you with forethought, and how he has intimated to
you the revolutions of fate !

Now Antar, as he was returning from the land
of Kendeh, in his fears for Ibla, had: bid Shiboob
early in the morning to cut off through the defiles
into the land of Riyab; and Antar, followed by Bos-
tam and his people, was proceeding to the vicinity of
the land of Abs, eager to catch some news of Ibla,
for lovers and the devotees of passion sigh fondly
for news of their love, and Antar’s love in the excess
of his anxiety enchained him with the bonds of
desire and solicitude, as he thus expressed himself:

“ When the zephyr gently blows, its breath re-.
‘¢ lieves the sickened heart, and brings me news of
“ the damsel and of those I love, who are travelling
“ on their journey: regardless are they of whom
‘‘ they have left behind, cast down and dead in the
« land of love: one who has quitted their country
& and roams anxious about. them, wheresoever they
“ drive their baggage camels. Indeed, O Ibla,
«“ they have betrayed my vows. It is thy father.
« that is ungrateful for favours. I have borne sor-
& rows and absence patiently, even in my weak:
“ state, and I have defied the railers. I am ac-
“ customed to grief, so that my body, were it to.
«c lose its pains, would sigh after its emaciated state..
‘‘ The ravens taunt it, as if it had been one that


SHIBOOB RELEASES MABIK. 293


“had destroyed its plundered young; it weeps,
“‘ and the torrents of my tears sympathise with it—
“ it sighs, and my woes cruelly increase—it passes
‘‘ the night in anguish for the loss of its mate, for
& whose absence it moans the live-lqang night. I
€ said to it, thou hast wounded the inmost recesses
& of my heart. Ever is thy grief a mental disease.
“I have shed tears from my eyes, and my native
s‘ home and country excite all my interest. Ab-
& sence has left me no soul, no body, in which,
‘* miserable as I am, I can live. Wert thou to
* take off the armour from it, thou wouldst see
< beneath it only a ruined vestige; and on those
& worn-out remains is a coffin-sword, whose edge
“< would notch the bright polished scimitar. I am
« so accustomed to the calamities of fortune, that
& all their vastness appear but trifling to me, (nu-
< merous as they are, they appear few).”

Thus they continued traversing the deserts till
they approached the land of Riyab, and met the
knight Feyaz, and heard his adventures, and saw
Prince Malik in his power. And Antar was oc-
cupied with Feyaz in the conflict, till the brightness
of the day darkened over their heads. But Shiboob
quitted his deer, and moved towards Prince Malik,
who was groaning from the pain of his wounds.
Alas! alas! cried Shiboob, and came up to him,
and untied the cords, and placed him again on
his horse, saying: Seek the field of battle, that you
may console your heart. As soon as Antar saw
Prince Malik, he exerted himself in the contest


294 ANTAR 8SLAYS FEVAZ,


with Feyaz, and exhausted him, and smote him
through the neck, and drew out his sword glittering
through his joints. He then issued out of the dust,
and congratulating Malik, thus spoke :

s I say to my enemy when he contends with me,
“ and advances like a towering well-built bastion,
‘“ much good may it do to thee, the glass thou hast
“ drank. Thou hast laid down thy cheek where
& there is no pillow. As soon as I have unsheathed
“ my sword, its edge draws forth blood, and every
“ chief becomes its victim. I am Antar the un-
“ raveller of every difficulty, the destroyer of foes
“ with my Indian blade. Horsemen pride them-
“ selves in me in every contest, and the brave with
“ their chieftains are humbled before me. If the
“ most virtuous of my associates regard my actions,
“ they will see the multitude prostrate before my
“ glory. I am raised far above all mankind by
“ my scimitar, my spear, by my blows in battle,
“ and by my father.”

Approaching the prince, he kissed him, and ex-
alted his honour and reputation: What has hap-
pened to you, my lord, said he, has been the means
of augmenting my glory; never may the day be that
can bring evil on you, and I be still grasping the
bridle. O Aboolfawaris, said Malik, thanking him,
thou art indeed our greatest friend and sincerest
ally. May God destroy him who would estrange
your lucky stars from us, and deprive us of your


councils! Then he related all that had passed with


AND GIVES HIS PROPERTY TO THE DAMSEL. 295


Malik, Ibla’s father, and how he had separated from
them entirely, that his brother had advanced with
his party, and that he had been occupied in hunting,
and all that occurred with Feyaz. It is my opinion,
said Antar, you should return to the Absians im-
mediately, and say nothing about what has happened
to you; only tell them that you were occupied in
hunting until evening, when you chanced to meet
some Arabs, who entertained you, and treated you
kindly, so that no one may blame you. Prince
Malik having approved of these hints, Antar turned
towards the damsel who had been with Feyaz, and
giving her all Feyaz’s plunder and camels, he said
to her, Go home under my protection, secure from
every one, man or demon; and should even Persia’s
monarch oppose you, his balcony shall totter. An-
tar’s expressions made Bostam seriously reflect, and
he felt aware that he could actually execute all he
said.

Prince Malik retraced his way, and Antar marched
with him, fearful of any unlucky event, till they
reached the land of Riyab. Here Antar cast his
eyes around, and he saw birds fighting, and wild
beasts combating in the plain over the carcases of
the slain. This, said Antaf, is a bad omen; it is a
circumstance that gives evidence of death and de-
struction. And when they had advanced into the
middle of the meadow, they perceived the dead
scattered about on all sides, and blood that had
changed the hue of vegetation, broken spears, and


296 THEY FIND IBLA’S FATHER ALMOST DEAD.


shivered scimitars. Woe! woe! Antar exclaimed:
Truly this intelligence is authentic, and the revolu-
tions of fate and destiny have happened to our com-
rades. Alas! I can scarcely éxpect to overtake my
Ibla. As they turned over the carcases, they said
one to another, This is such an one—this is such an
one, till the groans issuing from a tortured heart
reached their ears—they advanced and looked about,
and lo! it was Ibla’s father, Malik! He was almost
dead ; his blood was clotted with the sand, and the
birds and the flies were hovering over him. Whither
are you going, my brother? cried Shiboob ; here is
your uncle weltering in his blood, and his iniquities
have reduced him to what he himself projected.
Antar and his followers came up, and beholding
Ibla’s father in that state, they bound up his wounds
and poured briny water upon his face. He opened
his eyes, and seeing his countrymen around him, his
life crept into his body, and his senses returned.
Of this, said Antar, I was afraid; but you still con-
tinue to pursue the road of outrage against me.
O nephew, said Malik, in a feeble voice, what is
past is past; but I will never quit you again; my
heart will study your pleasure, and I will ever be
your slave. Congratulate yourself on this good
luck, my uncle, said Antar; but who was it that
did these deeds? where is Ibla, and your son, and
the others? All, said Malik, are in the hands of
Anis, son of Madraka the Khitaamite, for he came
upon us with a thousand horse. We were in a state


ANIS OVERTAKES THE ABSIANS. 297


of excessive fatigue and distress; and, moreover,
Prince Malik and many others were dispersed in
pursuit of game, when, behold ! Anis surrounded
us with his horse, and attacked us in all directions :
he levelled his blows against the chiefs, and took the
rest prisoners.

Now this knight was a man no man could en-
counter, and a warrior of warriors: and when he
resolved. on an expedition from place to place, the
horsemen followed him, and his companions exposed
their lives for him on account of his extraordinary
intrepidity. At this time he had departed with a
thousand horse; and he roamed with them, ravaging
the Arab tribes, till he reached the land of Balka
and the mountains of Nika. He was on his return,
and before him went the slaves, the boys and camels,
and the young camels, till they reached the land of `
Riyab, where he saw the Absians scattered about
the meadows and the lakes. Anis was marching at
the head of his party, for he treated horsemen with
contempt. As soon as he spied the Absians he re-
cognized them by their clothes, and their horses,
and their standards, for the Arabs could always
distinguish each other by their horses and banners.
Now, said he to his countrymen, now you will be
talked of by both men and women on account of the
quantity you will gain in flocks, and he and she
camels, if you vanquish this party of Absians, whose
name is so great among the Arabs; and for every
one you capture you will receive an immense ran-


208 IBLA BEWAILS HER CAPTIVITY.


som. Come on—Come on! And separating the
thousand into four divisions, he attacked them,
loudly vociferating, and their horses pressed on in
crowds. When the Absians saw this, they exerted
all their powers. Anis exhibited his whole strength:
he encouraged the horsemen by his own deeds, and
by his impetuosity he overwhelmed the Absians.
He took fifty prisoners, after having slain a vast
number. Amongst the captives were Oorwah and
Amroo, Ibla’s brother. He seized the property and
the men, and departed, ordering his slaves to drive
on the horses and camels. Ibla too was made cap-
tive with her camel: she was, indeed, accustomed
to captivity, and had experienced the reverses of
fortune: and as she saw her father covered with
wounds and torn with spears, she proceeded at the
head of the slaves and women, amongst the other
prisoners. Oft she bewailed her native land in the
obscurity of the night, and thus eased her heart :

« O God of Zemzem and Mina, my heart is worn
“ with grief, captivity, and anguish; my frame is
“ exhausted, and I have no powers of body to bear
“ the garments of affliction. I have lost my father,
s who was once kind and generous. He continued
“ his obstinacy till he drank the cup of perdition.
“ Foreign hands have overpowered him with swords
“ and spears. Here am I in a strange land in cap-
“ tivity, bewailing my distresses ; and cruel Fortune
« has thwarted me, and the world has abandoned
“ me, as if there was no such beautiful person as


ANIS, A DESPISER OF LOVE, 299


“ myself in the world. O protector of Abs! couldst
“ thou see me, thou wouldst know what I endure.
“ The day on which we separated from you, I was
“ separated from all my hopes. Our warriors are
“ now plundered of their lives by the spear, and I
“ am in a strange land, suffering anguish as a cap-
“ tive. If thou hearest in the night the complaint
“ of the drooping dove, be assured it is weeping
“ for us.”

Ibla continued her tears and lamentations till the
dawn of day. Anis dismounted to repose, and or-
dering his slaves to prepare dinner, they slaughtered
the camels and the sheep, and prepared a repast ;
and they supplied also the prisoners and women
with food of camel’s flesh. But as to Ibla, she re-
nounced all nourishment, and would not sleep.

The greatest part of the day had now passed,
and but little remained of ìt; and as the companions
of Anis were describing Ibla’s beauty, and charms,
and shape, and form—Countrymen, he cried, have
I not often desired you a thousand times never to
talk of women before me,—not a free-born or a
slave,—and never to converse with me but of feats
of arms and battles? And can any thing degrade
man like the humiliation of love and passion ?

When they had satisfied their hunger, about
nightfall they travelled on till the sun rose, when
they alighted at the waters of the tribe of Helal.
And Ibla’s grief and lamentations increased upon
her, and she despaired of her cousin; and when


300 SUDDENLY ENAMOURED OF IBLA.


Anis heard her loud cries during the night, he de-
manded of his attendants about her: My cousins,
asked he, who is this damsel that was groaning in
the tranquillity of the night? O Chief, they said,
this is the Absian damsel, whose beauty and charms
we described to you. Never did we see a more
agonized heart. Night or day she Gesires no nou-
rishment : she renounces sleep: her grief and sorrows
are not to be pacified. Bring her before me, said
Anis, that I may learn her story. Upon that, the
female slaves brought Ibla into his presence; he
raised up her veil, and looked at her face; he saw
the tears streaming from her black eye-lashes; he
was smitten, and his heart fluttered with the violence
of his passion—at the instant the state of his mind
was changed. What is your name, damsel? said
he. She answered, Ibla. Who was slain that be-
longed to you? he asked. My father, she replied ;
and again she hid her face with her hands, and
threw herself upon the ground. Bring hither her
family, cried Anis, that I may demand her of them
in marriage, and be married to her; and instead of
a dower or settlement, I will release her country-
men and herself; for as soon as I saw her, I became
enamoured of her. And the mind and senses of
Anis were from this moment all occupied with Ibla;
and he suddenly tasted of love. They now veiled
her face, and introduced her relations, towards
whom Anis turned, and telling them what had
passed, was civil to them, and demanded Ibla in


GQORWAH’S ADVICE TO AMROO. ' 301


marriage. Seeing them hesitate in giving an an-
swer, Why are you silent? he asked. Magnanimous
Chief, they replied, we cannot speak for her, there
is only her brother here; her father is absent. Oor-
wah at that moment was close to Amroo, Ibla’s
brother, and he said to him, Amroo, if you wish
that Anis should be put to death, and his neck be
cut off, marry him instantly to your sister; perhaps
God will send Antar to darken his life and silence
his name, and he may still release us from captivity.
I have often experienced the effects of promising
her in marriage, and I well know what her misfor-
tunes. have produced. But where is Antar? said
Amroo. By this time he is in the land of Shiban,
and far from.us; we have behaved so ill to him,
that he has quitted us: for ever, and I am afraid:
of the consequences; for if I marry her:to Anis, I
fear that Antar may come hither and join me to my
father, were I even concealed in the apartments of
Nushirvan ; and if I do not marry her, this devil
will put us to death. Listen to me, said Oorwah ;
marry her, and do not talk nonsense. Bargain with
him that he shall not enter unto her here, until he’
reach his native land and home: tell him that she
has been wedded to her cousin some time ago, and.
lengthen out the business; perhaps Antar will come
and make his wedding so inauspicious, that it may
perhaps only be followed with the dawn of ill-luck
to him; and his stars may set in the mansions of
inversion.


302 AMROO DESCRIBES IBLA's LOVER,


Now Anis, seeing them falter in their reply, be-
came troubled. He perceived they were consulting
with Amroo, and that he was much disturbed. Do
you consent that I become your sister’s husband?
he asked. My lord, replied Amrpo, you are the
consent, and you are above consent; but know
that this damsel’s father has already married her to
her cousin, and has taken the marriage donation ;
but her father has taken advantage of him, and the
devil has coloured his stratagems with the appear-
ance of kindness and liberality, so he fled with her
from place to place; and should I marry her to you,
I dread the consequences. If I go home, I fear he
will come upon me and kill me, and make me drink
of the cup of death, were even the Kings of Abs
and Adnan to protect me, and Fazarah and Dibyan;
for he is one of the calamities of the world—no
knight can oppose him in the field, and he fears
neither man nor demon. |

Anis became furious at this description. What!
said he, is the name of this knight, for dost thou not
know all the horsemen of Arabia? O mighty Prince,
replied Amroo, this is he who slew Khalid, son of
Moharib, and brought down misfortunes on him
and his clan; who dispersed his warriors. and his
armies. To whom do you allude by this discourse?
demanded Anis. To him of whom you questioned
me, said Amroo. But what hero is he? asked
Anis. I mean, said Amroo, the Knight of the world;
myrrh to the taste; the insufferable coloquintida.


AND EXCITES THE FURY OF ANIf. 303


His name is known throughout Hedjaz and Irak,
he who killed Mas-hil, son of Tarak, and exter-
minated his tribe. But what is his name? repeated
Anis. He is the lord of the black‘steed, and the
broad scimitar and long spear, said Amroo; the
furious lion who has disgraced the necks of the Arab
and the Persian. Verily, you amaze me, cried Anis,
with this horseman and this trampling hero; but
explain to me his name among the knights of the
age. He is, continued Amroo, the noble warrior
who has vanquished the stoutest heroes with his
sword. He is the serpent of the bowels of the de-
sert, the Chief Antar, son of Shedad. I have only
told you the truth.

Upon this Anis raised up his head to those that
were seated by him, and said, Is there any one of
ye that is acquainted with this man, whose descrip-
tion frightens me? O Anis, said ‘a noble Sheikh, I
have heard of this terrible knight; and it was in-
deed a man honest in his speech that informed me
of him, and told me he was a black knight, but that
he had crushed the necks of the Arab chiefs with
his sword, and had made the kings of power bow
down to him; the Persian and the Arab fear his
might, and his uncle has only married his daughter
to him through fear of his impetuous strength: and
as soon as he inveigles him by his artifices, he-wan-
ders with her from place to place. Her father has
espoused her to a thousand horsemen, but the mar-
riage has never succeeded; and the last person to


304 ONE OF HIS FRIENDS WARNS HIM OF ANTAR.


whom he wedded her was Mas-hil, son of Tarak.
But Antar went against him with one hundred
friends, and waylaid him, and extinguished his
glory and prosperity: and he has driven away from
her every lover and every suitor, and to venture to
speak of espousing her is a sufficient cause of death.
And he who flies from him, flies cruelly wounded ;
and by the faith of an Arab, O Anis! should you
make any attempt on this damsel, I shall tremble
for you. Be not then excited by the charms and
loveliness you have beheld in her.

And would you, O Sheikh, exclaimed Anis, make
me forget my love for her by the description you
have given me of her cousin? I consent, however,
to abstain from her, until her cousin and his party
come in quest of her ; then will I try myself against
him. Accordingly, he ordered Ibla to be treated
with all honours, and said within himself, If this
girl even in misery and captivity is so beautiful,
what will she be when her heart is-at ease, and when
plumped up with good feeding ?

They journeyed on till mid-day, when lo! a dust
sprang up behind them very rapidly. My cousins,
said he to his people, bring me news of this dust,
and let me know what there is beneath it. Upon
this a hundred horsemen immediately advanced.
Now beneath this dust was the serpent of the de-
sert, the Chief Antar, with Bostam and his party ;
for ‘as soon as Antar heard Anis described by his
uncle Malik, he and Bostam immediately gal-


BOSTAM’S FIRST ATTACK. 305


loped on till they came up with the Khitaamites,
and prepared for the contest; and when Bostam
perceived the horse that had separated from the
troops, O Lion of the Forest, by the life of Ibla’s
two eyes, said he to Antar, let me engage these ad-
vancing horsemen. There are an hundred of them,
but when you in your strength are in my rear, I
would even meet a thousand horsemen in front.
Antar smiled; Do as you please, said he, for you
have adjured me by the most sacred of oaths.

Upon that, he slackened the bridle of his steed,
and encountered the hundred horse. Among them
was an obstinate warrior and a valiant lion, called
Mubadir, son of Ghaylem, and he was Anis’s cousin.
He headed the troops till they came close up to
Bostam, when he cried out, Tell me who thou art,
and whence thou comest, before I silence thy life,
and make thy head fly afar off. Bostam returned
him no answer, but plunged down upon him like an
eagle, and pierced him through the chest with the
barb of his spear, and it issued out through his
back. As soon as his cousins saw this thrust, they all
rushed against Bostam like ravenous lions, saying,
O Mubadir, now thou art no more, the tribe of
Khitaam is disgraced. They came down upon Bos-
tam like a cloud, crying out to each other, Come on,
to this demon; take him prisoner. And they se-
parated into two divisions.

Antar saw this, and attacked in aid of Bostam.
Seventy assaulted him, and thirty ja against


VOL. II.


306 ANIS’S COMPANIONS IN DISMAY.


Bostam. Antar received them with the chest of
Abjer, and where he struck he cleaved asunder ;
and where he pierced, he annihilated; and when he
shouted at the horses, their feet shook with horror ;
and when the warriors crowded upon him, he severed
their skulls.

Anis heard of the death of Mubadir; he ad-
vanced towards the dust, anxiously expecting the
return of his people with the prisoners, that he might
console his heart by slaughtering them, and avenge
his cousin, when lo! out of the seventy horsemen
that attacked Antar, there appeared only eleven;
the rest having drank of the cup of perdition.. What
is the matter? cried Anis, may the curse of God be
on the father of your beards !,

Do not reproach us, O Anis, said they, for our
actions; had we resisted, our necks also had been
smote off. And has all this happened to you at the
hands of ten horsemen? asked he. By the life of
your head, they replied, all these calamities are
owing only to one hero; but be not roused in thy
anger, be not indignant, for the like of this knight
can never be found. His blows would burst moun-
tains; his thrusts are death, and truly have we ex-
perienced horrors at his hands; for he snatches up
a horseman from the field of battle, and strikes an-
other with him, and on the instant the two are dead.

Whilst they were thus conversing, behold five out
of the thirty that assailed Bostam came up, and two
were wounded, crying out “ O misery! O rum!


PRE FURY AND PASSION OF ANIS. 307


Now Anis roared, and his heart was rent, and his
alarms and terrors increased; And what is the cata-
strophe? he cried. Talk no more, said they, for his
like we have never seen among the Arabs; and had
we followed our own wishes, we had left him alone.
Then said one of the eleven that had engaged Antar,
Wretches! had you gone with us, you would have
been well provided for; not one of ye had returned,
neither great norsmall. Anis,in the rage and phrensy
of his heart, burst into a laugh: No one, he cried,
can credit such nonsense. I think, had this been An-
tar, whom the Sheikh described; who with a hundred
horse encountered the whole tribe of Kendeh, and
slew Mas-hil, son of Tarak, not one of ye had re-
turned to mention the fact, or tell the tale. Be
not enraged, be not indignant, O Anis, they ex-
claimed, the equal of this Knight cannot be pos-
sibly found. We heard him crying out, Unworthy
cowards! I am Antar, son of Shedad. He would
tear up a horseman from the back of his horse, and
raise him like a tent-pole, and dashing him on the
earth, confound his breadth with his length.

This then is the slave, cried Anis, whom we were
mentioning this day ; and should I not slay him and
extinguish his life, I shall not gain possession of his
bride. But now he is come in quest of her, ex-
claimed they. Anis returned to the spot where they
had alighted, and his heart boiled like a cauldron ;
and they reposed till morning.

Now when the prisoners knew of Antar’s deeds

x 2


$08 ANTAR AND ANIS PREPARE FOR BATTLE.


in the conflict, joy and gladness visited them. Well,
what think you of my advice now? said Oorwah to
Ibla’s brother Amroo. Did I not tell you to marry
your sister to Anis, if you wished his neck to be
hewn off, and you and your comrades to be released?
Now see what has happened to his party; and never
will the knot of his marriage be tied, for Antar will
render his morrow unlucky, and had you given her
to him and betrothed her to him as a woman is be-
trothed, this would have been no evening to him.

And now when Bostam returned to Antar, he found
the dead strewed before him. Had we arrived, Abool-
fawaris, he cried, a little sooner in the day, not an
eye of our companions had slept in captivity and in
bondage. What is, is; replied Antar. Let us repose
and consult till to-morrow; and they thus continued
conversing till the mantle of darkness was dispersed.

And as the day shone at the return of dawn,
Anis shouted to his horsemen, and immersed him-
self in steel and a bright cuirass: he mounted his
horse, and advanced towards his troops. Antar and
Bostam were both mounted with their nine horse-
men. Anis poured down, anxious to engage Antar.
Antar also assaulted Anis, his eyes burning in the
crown of his head like firebrands. He marked him
admiring his limbs and surveying his own’shape and
form, and as he was dragging his spear behind him
he thus recited :

“« My morning draught is the cleaving of heads
“ and breasts; my scimitar Is my cup—no cup of


ANIS REVILING ANTAR. 309


“ wine. My wine is of the blood of warriors, quaffed
“ to the music of sword-blades and spears. When
“ I arise in spirits and in joy, I feel a flame of burn-
“ing coals in my entrails. I am Anis, son of
“ Madraka, styled the destroyer of men in armour!
“ In me is a heart bold in battle with heroes. My
“ custom is to chase the hungry lion from his den.
` Beware, beware! my garments, my Ibla, are of
“ steel; my sword is sharp, and my spear pene-
“trating. I shall be raised in glory among men by
“ your death; and by it they will learn my valour.”
Antar listened to his discourse, and was surprised
at the insanity of his passion. Son of a two-thou-
sand-horned cuckold, he cried, hast thou not heard
what has happened to others before thee on account
of Ibla, and in the pursuit of her, that thou too art
inflamed with love and distraction for her ?—Yes,
thou son of a coward, I have heard of thee before
this day, cried Anis; after tending camels, thou
hast been fortunate and prosperous, and thou hast
slain a number of vagabond Arabs, and hast de-
manded thy cousin in marriage by frauds and de-
ceits. But fate has driven thee to me, that I may
hasten thy destruction, and lower thy honours with
my sword, for I have vowed within myself not to
enter unto thy cousin, till I have made thee drink
of the cup of death, and joined thee to those who are
gone and are dead. And now may God favour my
revenge, and prosper my enterprise! Having ceased,
he assailed Antar, and conceived he was to attain


310 THE FURIOUS CONFLICT.


his wishes and conquer. Antar was much astonished
at his actions, and launching out into the plain, as
he galloped with him and charged, he thus replied:
- “ Behold the sport of passion in every noble per-
“ son! but I have thanked my forbearance, ap-
“ plauded my resolution, and the slave has been
“ elevated above his master: for I have concealed
“ my passion, and kept my secret. I will not leave
“ a word for the railers; and I will not ease the
“ hearts of my enemies by the violation of my
“ honour. I have borne the evils of fortune, tll I
“ have discovered its secret meaning, before even it
‘s was concealed. Fortune has been my guide where-
“ever I am. I have met every peril in my bosom,
“ and the world can cast no reproach on me for my
“ complexion: my blackness has not diminished my
“ glory. Were this not the colour of my skin, the
“ morning's dawn would not bow before me at hear-
“ing my name. Tribes talk of genealogy as an
“ honour, but the blow of the sword in’ the battle is
‘“ my glory. Others have laboured, but have re-
“ turned confounded as soon they beheld the traces
“ of my form.”

No sooner had he finished his verses than he
rushed upon Anis like an impregnable mountain ;
they commenced striking and piercing, they en-
gaged with the cleaving sword for an hour, and
then vanished from the sight, the dust rising over
them like smoke. The necks of the horsemen were


extended out towards them, and the birds of death


ANTAR LEAVES HIM WOUNDED. 311 .


hovered over their heads. Various shouts burst forth
among them, and the Khitaamites vociferated to
their lord, and opposed his disastrous fate.

Upon this, Bostam and the Shibanians prepared
for the fight. This is the day of battle, my cousins,
cried he. Ibla screamed out with a loud voice, for
her soul had revived. Haste, my cousin, she cried,
to the destruction of thy antagonist, and rescue thy
maid from captivity, for truly her situation is de-
plorable, and her friends have been slain. Antar’s
heart was sorely grieved at her complaints, so he
shouted at his adversary, and attacked him furiously.
He exhausted him; he terrified him; he drew his
foot out of his stirrup; he seized hold of him by his
girdle; threw down his horse under him, and held
him suspended in his hand hke-a sparrow.

When the Khitaamites saw their Chief a prisoner,
they made an assault hoping to liberate him, but the
eight horsemen encountered them, headed by Bos-
tam, all roaring out like lions, and driving their
spears through the horsemen’s chests. Guard your
prisoner, Aboolfawaris, cried Bostam ; and I will
satisfy you in the carnage of the Khitaamites, and
will make their chiefs drink of the cup of revenge.

Antar having captured Anis, wished to bind him
fast, but he was prevented by his violent exertions,
and he tried to escape out of his hands, so Antar
smote him on the shoulder, and almost killed him:
and having thus wounded him, he left him stretched
on the ground, and joined Bostam in the conflict,


318 THE TRIBE OF KHITAAM ROUTED.


and plied his sword among the foe. The dust and
the sand arose over them; skulls lay under their
feet; and unexpected calamities overpowered the
tribe of Khitaam.

_ In those days there were knights who could en-
counter a thousand, and even two thousand of the
most obstinate horsemen; having always the ad-
vantage, and ever unhurt. Now Antar was one of
those warriors at that period; for the adored God
had thus endowed him, and given him a lucky star
at his birth. Moreover, the historians state in their
Chronicles, that the King of Heroes had created
Antar the instrument of his vengeance over all the

giants of Arabia.

-When the tribe of Khitéam saw that his blows
were more impetuous than thunderbolts, and that
his thrusts rent open coats of mail, their resolution
failed: they abandoned their property and their
flocks, and they dispersed over the desert like wild
beasts, dastards and cowards as they were; whilst
Antar and his comrades pursued them till they drove
them out of that country and desert. ‘Three hun-
dred of them were slain, and only three of the Shi-
banians. Ibla and her maidens had released Oor-
wah and her brother from bondage, and as they re-
turned to their friends, Antar saluted Ibla, saying,
Think not, my cousin, that I forget thee, although
thy father is oppressive and hostile to me. Ibla
wept at the mention of her father: O my cousin,
she said, then truly his treachery has destroyed him.


ANIS ESCAPES; ANTAR’S REGRETS. . 313


No, answered Antar, thy father is well: I left Ma-
lik, son of King Zoheir, with him. And he related
to her all that had happened to him; how he had
found him lying among the dead severely wounded ;
what he had done to relieve his afflictions; and that
he had left with him his brother Shiboob. At this
detail Ibla’s sorrows were calmed, and her distresses
were lightened. Antar ordered Anis into his pre-
sence. _

Oorwah and Amroo hastened to the field of car-
nage, but could not find him; for Anis having re-
covered from the shock that had stunned him, and
seeing an immense number of his comrades lying
dead, instantly mounted one of the scattered horses,
and fled from the scene. Having in vain searched
for him, they returned to Antar and told him. I
was too indulgent to him, said Antar; and I was
wrong in sparing him. Oh that instead of merely
wounding him, I had put him to death.

Aboolfawaris, cried Oorwah, repent not of having
spared him. Consider yourself as having liberated
him, and taken his property as his ransom. For
he will be the poorest of all the Arabs: every
grievance and every evil have befallen him. God
has driven this booty towards you without trouble.
And all this is on account of your cousin, the grazing
fawn: for certainly you will never effect your mar-
riage with her till there shall not be a rich Bedoween
throughout the desert.

Antar smiled at this address. Drive on these


314 ANTAR’S UNCLE PRAISES HIM.


flocks, said he, and let us return to the land of
Riyab, for my heart is with my uncle and Prince
Malik.

So the Absians drove the flocks and the cattle,
Antar at their head, and Bostam by his side; and
the flame in his heart was appeased. They con-
tinued on till they came nigh unto Prince Malik,
and Ibla’s father, and Shiboob. As soon as they
saw them, they congratulated each other, and Ma-
lik, Ibla’s father, thus recited :

“ Alas! the sea of thy generosity has flowed to-
“ wards us; the mountain of thy mercy is raised
“ sublime on high. Thou art truly Antar the vic-
“ torious warrior in the day of battle, where foes
‘¢ are destroyed. Thine are labours that equal the
“ stars, ever fixed but incorporeal. God is with
“ thee. Behold the cloud of battle is spread out,
“ and the plain flows with the blood of thy foes.
“ Horses trample down their riders through the
“ dust, like the lions in the forests. ‘There are the
“ heroes disgraced by thy spear ; there thou meetest
“ them firm and staunch. O Aboolfawaris, son of
“ my brother, in the loveliness of a smiling face,
“ thou hast proved thy kindness unto me. Thou
“ hast revived me after extinction. Thou hast
“ exerted thyself, and the tribe has been annihilated.
“ Thou hast resuscitated me, after I had tasted of
“ death from wounds, from misery, and sorrow.
“ O! I will applaud thee in retirement and in pub-
“ lic to the world, to my family, and to the tribes.


THEY ALI. RETURN HOME. 315


“ Mayst thou, persevering hero, never fail; let us
“ shadow ourselves beneath thy shade—let us swear
_ “by thy generosity, the best of oaths.”

For this once Malik spoke with sincerity: for
Prince Malik had softened his heart with regard
to Antar, during the time he was left with him.
They reposed that night, joying in each other;
at dawn they proceeded homewards. But Antar
took off a large proportion of the camels, male
and female, and presented them to Bostam, say-
ing, Aboolyaczan, you have indeed overwhelmed
me with kindnesses, so take this share and seek your
own country and your family. And they bade each
other adieu, Antar proceeding home with his com-
rades. It will be proper, said Prince Malik to
Antar, to send forward your brother Shiboob to in-
form our clan of our arrival, so that my father and
all the tribe of Abs and Adnan may come out to
meet us, and our friends rejoice, and our enemies
grieve.

Antar gave this commission to his brother,
who shot forth like an eagle, till he came into the
presence of King Zoheir, and informed him of the
news. All the tribe of Abs mounted, and in an
hour they met Prince Malik and Antar. Shouts
arose from the tribe of Abs, and joy came upon
them all. King Zoheir embraced his son, and turn-
ing to Antar, already on foot: O Aboolfawaris!
said he, you abandoned your friends and native
land; you have passed your time in wandering


316 IBLA’S FRIEND, RABIAT.


about, and shall we never see an end of your ad-
ventures? My lord, cried Antar, by the assistance
of God, my circumstances are improved, and my
affairs are more tolerable: and he informed him of
all that had passed between him and his uncle in
his passion and rage, and what he had done in a
strange land, till he had rescued his uncle from
death. King Zoheir applauded his liberality, and
his exertions, and his forbearance, and his modesty ;
and when they saw the incalculable quantity of
cattle he brought with him, they knew he was born
under a lucky star: and they all went down to their
tents, and friends assembled with friends: the wo-
men and men rejoiced in the arrival of Antar, but
he did not go home till he had made a division of
the property, and given the largest share to Oorwah
and his men, and the rest he gave to his father and
to his uncles, that they might further his wishes.
Ibla returned home, to the great delight of her
friends and slaves. Ibla had conceived a great af-
fection for a slave girl that Antar had brought away
as a captive from Kendeh; her name was Rabiat,
and she was more beautiful than the rising sun.
Ibla used to seek consolation in her society, and
used to complain of all her cousin had suffered, and
for hours together she would sit and talk with her.
But Amarah, from the day of Antar’s arrival, todk
to his bed and couch of affliction, it was the con-
summation of his griefs: he renounced food and
sleep; his mother nursed him, but all her cares


REBIA ENGAGES TO DESTROY IBLA, 317


only added to his pains. O my son, she said, what
calamity oppresses thee? perhaps I may discover
the means of effacing thy afflictions. Mother, the
origin of this my feeble state and my weakness
springs from a flame in my heart, and the prime
cause of all is the safety of that Antar, son of She-
dad. Had Ibla even been slain in any one of those
affrays, then would the business have been settled
for ever. Brother, said Rebia, if thy purpose is the
death of Ibla, I will contrive a scheme for her de-
struction, and prevent Antar from ever seeing her

in. Execute, my brother, exclaimed Amarah,
this dreadful deed, and put her to death by some
stratagem on Antar. Rebia entered his tents and
began to meditate his plot (we have before stated,
Rebia was full of deceit and fraud), and having as-
sembled all his slaves, male and female, he called
them into his tents: Who of ye has any connexion,
said he to them, with the slaves and girls of the
family of Carad, let him inform me, and I will
fulfil all his wishes. My lord, said one of them,
Khemisah, Ibla’s handmaiden, loves me ardently.
Bring her here, said Rebia, and conceal her in my
tents, till I tell you what she must do. The slave
expressed obedience, and added, If I give her that
order, she will never, I am sure, on any occasion,
quit our dwellings. Rebia filled the slave's wallet
with kabab* and sugar-plums, and having in-


e Roasted meat.


318 RE SEEKS THE AID oF MOOFERRIDS.


structed him in the artful tale he should tell Khe-
misah, he sent him to the pastures with the camels,
saying, Be alone with her, and if you like her,
I will demand her of her master in marriage for
you, and if any thing particular should be required,
it shall be done out of kindness for you, and I will
marry you to her. As soon as the slave heard this,
he was overjoyed, and ran till he reached the pas-
tures, where he soon made up to Khemisah, and
told her all. She was much delighted. He brought
her home with him, and when the day was spent,
Khemisah prepared to return; but Rebia entered :
Have you forgotten me? Khemisah, said he. In-
deed I have been very remiss in my attentions to
you, but we shall be many a day together, and I
am resolved to purchase you to-morrow morning,
and will wed you to my slave, this Miftah. Now
Rebia had a much-loved friend in Shiban; they
had been long mutually attached, and he was called
Mooferridj, son of Helal. After he had taken his
measures with Khemisah, he sent to his friend,
Mooferridj, to request he would send ten horsemen
to him, that he might return by them a most va-
luable deposit. Mooferridj immediately complied
with the demand, and despatched his cousin, Sinan,
with nine horsemen, under the guidance of Rebia’s
slave, saying, Whatever he may order you, oppose
him not. The men travelled on with the slave,
and when they arrived, he showed them into a
tent in his neighbourhood, and passing on to his


IBLA TO BE DECOYED TO THE LAKE, 819


master, informed him they were come. So he let
them all into his tents, and receiving them with the
greatest attention, he entertained them for three
days. On the fourth day the men said, Rebia,
what is the urgent business for which you sent for
us? He then ordered Khemisah into his presence:
My purpose, said he to her, entirely rests with you,
and I intend it should be all settled by your means.
My lord, what is your business with me? said she-
Know, Khemisah, continued Rebia, that my brother,
Amarah, is desperately in love with your lady Ibla,
and is near his death. I visit him every day, and
ask him what it is he wants. I wish only, he says,
to cast my eyes once more on Ibla before the de-
parture of my soul from this world. Now you are
the only person that can possibly aid him on this
point. As to me I am quite puzzled, and cannot
get rid of him. As soon as Khemisah heard Rebia’s
discourse: Let your brother, she cried, walk out
this night to the lake, whilst I arrange matters for
my mistress also to go forth. Rebia smiled, and
felt assured his plan had succeeded. So he feigned
great fondness for her, and presented her an arm-
let of gold, saying, Take this, itis a free gift to you.
But she refused it, and returned home. Rebia then
went to the Shibanians and told them, how the
business was settled: Go with them to ‘the lake,
said he to his slave, and when Ibla comes forth in
the night, let the troop seize her and carry her off,
and return to their own country with her. And


320 WHENCE SHE IS CARRIED OFF.


what is this maiden’s crime? said the Shibanians.
She is an adulteress, he replied, and has clothed her
lord in shame, and he is anxious she should be put to
death in another land. Upon this, Sinan and his
people went away and concealed themselves in the
vicinity till night, and they had not been stationed
an hour there, when Ibla approached. For when
Khemisah returned to Ibla, she said, Know then,
my mistress, that your cousin Antar met me just
now, and desires you will walk out to the lake
to-night by way of exercise and recreation, for he is
very anxious to communicate something to you.
When he told me this, he went home to my lord
Malik’s, and I really cannot say whether he was in
earnest, or whether it was intoxication that set him
on this plan. Ibla waited till it was dark, and took
with her the two maids, Rabiat and Khemisah, who
walked before her till they came to the lake, when,
behold ! Sinan ran towards her, drawing his sword
upon her, and snatching her off the ground, placed
her behind him. The horsemen dismounted, and
bound the maids fast, and left them lying on the
earth; then returning to the horses, and having
` mounted, they traversed the wilds and wastes, till
they reached the land of Shiban.


ANTAR’S DISTRESS. 821


CHAPTER XVI.


Bur Antar, and his brother Shiboob, were in the
tents of Prince Malik, where they remained uncon-
scious of what had happened till about sunrise,
when Ibla’s mother repairing to the tent in which
her daughter, and her maid, Rabiat, slept, saw no
vestige of them. In an hour the intelligence spread
throughout the tribe, and Antar also heard it. Alas!
he exclaimed, what can have happened to Ibla?
His father Shedad, and his uncle Zakhmetaljewad,
mounted, and also Oorwah, and the sons of Carad,
and having scoured the desert and the hills, they
returned late in the day; and on their way home,
as they passed by the lake of Zatulirsad, they be-
held Khemisah and Rabiat fast bound with cords.
They inquired for Ibla. Early in the night, they
replied, some horsemen seized her; And who, said
they, made you quit the house? Masters, said
Rabiat, know that Khemisah told my mistress, Ibla,
that her cousin Antar wished to speak with her, and
besought her to go out by night to the lake that he
might communicate his wishes to her. When she
heard this, she was much distressed; but we came,
as desired, when, lo! some horsemen fell upon us,
and carried her off, and bound us. And you, said
VOL. II. Y


è


322 KHEMISA DISCOVERS THE PLOT.


Shedad to Khemisah, who ordered you to tell all this
. to Ibla? O! my master, she replied, take me back
to the tents and secure my protection from Antar,
and I will relate to you who was the cause of this
sad calamity. Shedad took her away, and returning
to the tents, procured for her protection from Antar,
when she stated all the story of Rebia, how he had
given her an armlet, and engaged to marry her to
his slave: but I know not, she added, whether the
troop that seized my mistress was a contrivance of
Rebia’s, or the effect of chance. The light became
darkness in the eyes of Antar. ‘Thou wretch, he
cried, and hast thou, urged by thy lust, delivered
thy mistress over to her enemies, with all the wealth
and strings of pearls, and jewels, and rubies she had
on? Had not my protection been previously in-
sured for thee, I would destroy thee with this sword.
I am convinced this last plot originates in Rebia,
and did not I stand in awe of King Zoheir, I would
ply my sword amongst that family.of Zeead, and
first of all would I slay that ruffian Amarah, and
his brother Rebia.

Just at that moment King Zoheir’s messenger
demanded their attendance, and when they were in
his presence, Malik, Ibla’s father, advanced, and
saluting him, said, It is Rebia alone who is the
author of Ibla’s disappearance; it is he who has laid
this plot; he stationed these horsemen by his com-
mand. My daughter also had on pearls and jewels,
Chosroe’s coronet and tiara. And when he had re-


REBIA DENIES IT AND DEPARTS. $28


peated all that Khemisah had stated of Rebia’s dis-
course with her, Bring me Rebia, said King Zoheir.
He came. Rebia, said the king, have you any
knowledge of the circumstance of Ibla’s misfortune?
Yes, said he, I have heard of it: so I and my bro-
ther immediately mounted, and roamed over the
wilds and wastes, but we could hear nothing of her ;
and, indeed, this is no trifling event; we must not
submit to it, or we shall incur great blame. No
more of your tricks, exclaimed Ibla’s father ; restore
to me my daughter and all the property she had on
her, otherwise must I proceed from words to blows
with you: Khemisah has revealed all your doings
and your plots against Ibla.

Cousin, said Rebia, I excuse you, for indeed you
have lost a precious jewel. Listen not to the words
of a contemptible slave-girl. She has certainly been
aware of the grudge and spite existing between us;
but we must be patient till some news of Ibla be re-
ceived, that if she be still alive we may search out
the mystery. My father, said Shas, Rebia must
certainly leave us, and go to the tribe of Fazarah
till we learn Ibla’s fate, and how she disappeared.

So King Zoheir commanded him to depart. Re- |
bia expressed his submission. I will go with the
family of Zeead, said he, and I will abandon my
country to Antar, that he may clear up the business
and realise his schemes; but one of us will have
cause to repent. So Rebia departed with his men,
their wives and families.

Y2


$24 ARTAR SENDS SHIBOOB FOR NEWS.


But Antar remained drooping his head, and in
the greatest grief and affliction returned to the
tents; and though the sons of King Zoheir endea-
voured to console him, yet his anguish only in-
creased, his eyelids tasted not of the nourishment of
sleep, neither would he stir out of the tents; and
when he was in the severest agony he sent for his
brother Shiboob, and thus addressed him :

s I have risen with a tortured heart ; weep, then,
‘¢ shed torrents of tears, O Shiboob, my brother !
« Hast thou not felt the loss of Ibla? Dost thou
“ not pity me? I have abandoned sleep during her
“ absence; my anguish and agony are multiplied.
& On her account I mount my steed no more for
“ my pleasure or for battle. Canst thou behold
“ the camel returning laden with her, the object of
“ all my hopes? O Ibla! after this separation shall
“ we ever meet, or must I only be excited by the
“ phantoms of my imagination? This is the work
“ of the family of Zeead, for they are men full of
“ deceit and filthy scum. But shortly will I attain
“ my objects in spite of them, and I will hack their
« limbs with my sword. I have no one but you to
“ relieve my sorrows—but you in the path of trou-
‘‘ bles and calamities. Go, then, to the dwellings
“ of the tribes; obtain intelligence of Ibla, and ease
“ my heart.”

As soon as Shiboob heard these verses, he in-
stantly departed, in order to obtain intelligence ;
and Antar remained eagerly expecting him, cherish-


REBIA RECEIVED BY THE TRIBE OF FAzZARAH; 325


ing affliction night and day, and passing his time in
tears and meditation.

But Rebia reached the tribe of Fazarah; and
when the Sheikh Beder knew of his arrival, he met
him with his chiefs, and rejoiced ; he raised his dig-
nity, and congratulated him. Noble chiefs, said
Rebia, verily we are greatly troubled by the oppres-
sion of this infernal slave, but we forbear on ac-
count of King Zoheir, and are fearful of disturbances.
I thought it better, therefore, to quit them, and
take up my residence under your shadow. He in-
formed them of the loss of Ibla, and the disgraces
he had incurred on her account. Beder received
him with great attention and kindness, and said to
his son Hadifah, You must be particularly attentive
to this man, for he is one of the Sheikhs of Abs and ~
Adnan; let him be conducted to one of the best
habitations. Hadifah acted accordingly, and con-
ducted the tribe of Zeead to the principal station,
and as soon as they were reconciled to their abode,
and Rebia felt secure on the subject of I bla, he was
quite overjoyed, particularly when he heard of the
precious jewels she had with her. He. formed a
thousand conjectures in his mind, and would say,
If any news of her should come to light, and that
black go in quest of her, he will rescue her, and all
that property will be lost to me, and I shall not
succeed in my expectations, I must certainly go
after her myself, and bring about her death. He
consulted with Beder on the point: It is for you to


$26 THEN GOES TO MOOFERRIDJ.


command, said he, if you wish I will attend you.
But Rebia took leave of him, and travelled on tll
he reached the tribe of Shiban, and presenting him-
self to Mooferridj, son of Halal, O chief, said he,
what have you done with that maiden that I sent
you with your cousin Sinan? She is here, he re-
plied, in my tent, but she is nearly dead. And the
garments, and pearls, and clothes, and jewels? de-
manded Rebia. I have seen nothing of them, said
Mooferridj : but O Rebia, who is this damsel? She
is Ibla, he replied, the daughter of Malik, and
Antar’s betrothed wife; and then he related all the
preceding circumstances. Mooferridj shuddered as
he listened. O Rebia, said he, I have been your
friend for years and years, but how could you have
the heart to smite me by these sour grapes? By the
protection of an Arab, had I known she was the
wife of Antar, I would not have admitted her within
my tent had she been mistress even of my life and
death. Take her away, Rebia, get me clear of this
business, and bring not upon me trouble and vexa-
tion from Antar. Mooferridj sent for Sinan; he
came, and looking at Rebia, quickly understood the
signal. Rebia inquired about the property; he
produced the whole, and nothing was missing but
what Sinan had given as a bribe to the horsemen.
When Mooferridj saw all this wealth, he trembled.
What do you intend, Rebia, he cried, to do with
this property ? Do you, said Rebia, take half, and
I will take half. Let us murder the girl, and there


IBLA RESCURD FROM AN ASSASSIN. 327


will be an end of it. Agreed, said Moofenidj; and
he then raised his head to a slave whom he had
brought up: he imparted the secret to him. He
was called Basharah, son of Meneea. O Basharah,
said he, I wish you would take away this damsel,
and carry her out to the desert, and murder her.
Bury her in the sandhills, and should any one
question you about her, say, her family came and
took her away. They remained quiet till night,
when Basharah attended to ask his master’s permis-
sion to murder Ibla, which being granted, Rebia
gave him a poniard, saying, Sacrifice her with this,
and take it as a present for yourself, that you may
remember me by it for ever.

‘Basharah mounted his horse, and speeded to the
tent where Ibla resided. He placed her behind
him, and whilst they were proceeding, Whither, she
cried, are you going to carry me in this obscurity ?
To drink the cup of death, he replied, for my master
has commanded me to kill you. On hearing this,
she wept and screamed aloud, and called on the
name of Antar through the wilds. When the slave
saw what she was about, he turned aside out of the
road, and descended into a deep valley, and made
her alight from the horse ; he bound both her hands;
he drew out the poniard, and was about to deal a
speedy blow, when, lo! a man pounced upon him
like a male ostrich, and struck him with a dagger be-
tween the shoulders, and, lo! he was swimming in


his blood. Fear not, cried her rescuer, I am thy slave


$28 SHIBOOB IS AROUT TO SLAY BASHARAH,


Shiboob. As soon as she recognised him all her
fears vanished. And where is the lion-warrior, thy
brother? she demanded. With the tribe of Abs,
replied Shiboob, suffering in your absence every
agony and anguish. I set out to search for you: I
have been wandering about from tribe to tribe these
fifty days, till I chanced to meet you here, and the
Lord of life and death brought me to you, and this
happy event just happened as I was despairing of
you, and had resolved on returning home. But I
heard that Rebia was in this quarter with Moofer-
ridj. So I said within myself, I must certainly
learn something of him, and I concealed myself in
the country till I came thus to you, and rescued you
from annihilation. And what are you determined
to do? said Ibla. I will first finish this fellow, said
Shiboob ; I will then take you away, and go home
with you. Alas! said she, I never expect to see
home unless my brave Antar is with me. Ah! where
art thou, and thou, my Rabiat, my comfort in all
my successive calamities? O Ibla, said Shiboob,
Rabiat is nearly dead with excessive grief, and the
tears she has shed for your misfortunes. Thus -
saying, he ran towards the slave to finish him. He
found him seated on the ground, listening to all
that passed, his wounds preventing him from speak-
ing; but when he saw Shiboob rise to put an end
to him, O young man, he faltered out, by the faith
of an Arab, spare me, whilst I put one question to
you, and I will give you some hints that may prove


WHO REPENTS AT THE NANE OF RaBIAT. S29


of benefit to you. Do not expose yourself to
such perils, for by whatever road you go there will
be also friends and foes. Ask what you please
and relieve your heart, cried Shiboob. Know, said
the slave, son of my aunt, I was the lover of a dam-
sel called Rabiat; she was like the rising sun. She
and I were both brought up under the favour of .
our master, Mooferridj, son of Helal, and love for
her took possession of my soul. The troubles of
the times tore her from me, and I have never heard
her name mentioned by any mortal but you, noble
born; and as soon as I heard you mention her, life
returned unto me on her account. I now request
you to inform me truly whether this maid has been
with you a long time, or only lately. This maiden,
said Shiboob, formed part of my brother Antar’s
plunder among the prisoners he rescued from Anis,
son of Madraka. He then told him how Ibla had
been made captive in the land of Riyab, and how
she had taken an affection for Rabiat when they
were prisoners, perceiving her varied cheerfulness
and melancholy. He also gave him such distinct
descriptions of Rabiat, that the slave’s grief and
anguish greatly increased. It is, it is my beloved !
he exclaimed ; but it is now near day, I fear some
unlucky accident. Tell me first what you intend to
do with Ibla? If you take her away and depart, the
horse will pursue us, and bring misery and destruc-
tion upon us, and restore us to Rebia, and he will
speedily put us all to death, and thus our pains and


$80 -BE PLACES IBLA IN SAFETY,


trouble will be thrown away. The most advisable
plan is, that you return to your brother Antar and
acquaint him.: let him act as in his wisdom he may
think prudent, and come hither; thus will our
hopes be realized. I will return with Ibla in the
mean time. I will conceal her with my mother, and
present myself to my master, Mooferridj, and Rebia,
and tell them I have slain the Absian damsel, and
that this is her blood streaming over my clothes,
this blood now flowing from my own wound, and
I will wait patiently expecting your return to this
country. How can I depend on you? said Shiboob.
How can I trust your word after the deed you un-
dertook? Let this wound which you gave me, he
cried, be my security. But you were to be excused
for that, for you knew not the secret of the story.
Being thus convinced of his sincerity, Shiboob
also felt aware he could not travel with Ibla over
the desert unless his brother Antar were with him.
Basharah is right, said Ibla: return and tell your
brother to come with a party of Absians; thus will
my afflictions cease: then we will all go off and
Basharah with us. Shiboob approved the advice,
and having stipulated with Basharah, and made
him swear by the Great Creator that he would not
deceive or betray him, he set out. But Basharah
took away Ibla, and returned home with her. He
placed her in the best apartment. He cherished
her on account of Rabiat, his beloved, and she was
dearer to him than any of his family or tribe.


AND DECRIVES MOOFERRIDJ AND REBIA. S61


So behold, ye wise, the mercy of God! his power
is manifest! How beautiful are his works! See
how Basharah went out to murder Ibla in his de-
termination, but he returned, and he would with
joy have enclosed her in his own existence! Ba-
sharah did not enter the dwellings till the lights
were all out, and all voices silenced; then he went
unto his mother, and informed her of all that had
happened to him, and having desired her to conceal
Ibla, and recommended her to attend on her, he re-
paired to his master, and congratulated him, and
Rebia, who, on seeing him and the blood on his
clothes, poured forth thanks and blessings, saying,
O Basharah, hast thou indeed done what we or-
dered thee to do? Yes, my lord, said he, I have
fulfilled all your hopes, and this blood is the proof
of my sincerity.

Rebia was exceedingly pleased and happy. He
instantly rose up, and put on Basharah his own vest
and turban. But, said Mooferridj, Rebia, we must
remain here no longer: to-morrow I will go with
you to King Numan. They reposed that night,
and Mooferrid) having recommended his wife and
family to the care of Basharah, and having also de-
livered over to him the charge of his treasures and
wealth, they departed.

In the meantime Shiboob travelled night and day
till he came near home. In his heart was a burning
flame on account of Ibla and his brother, for he had
left him in a state of the deepest misery and afflic-


$82 SHIBOOB RETURNS HOME.


tion. Antar, indeed, indulged in sorrow beyond
bounds; his melancholy increased upon him; he
was miserable and restless. King Zoheir’s sons
renounced their rides for his sake, and every one
comforted him as they could, either with their sym-
pathy or their raillery. When Antar perceived how
they railed at him, he resolved on fixing his residence
on Mount Saadi, but he stayed quiet that night,
and determined to remove the next day. About
midnight, when he was contemplating the stars, oc-
cupied with his love for his mistress, behold Shi-
boob entered. Antar could scarcely recognise him,
so much altered was he by fatigue and grief, by
watching at night, by want of sleep, by fear, and
thirst, and hunger. At the sight his heart was
nearly bursting, and he exclaimed, O my brother,
your long absence has almost destroyed me, and I
dreaded also your death. Here I am anxiously ex-
pecting you; and he sighed from his sorrowing
heart, and thus spoke in verse:

« O, my brother Shiboob, tell me quickly, per-
s haps sorrow will be effaced from my heart.
« Haste, haste, inform me, my heart is melted with
« afflictions and griefs; if indeed my hopes of Ibla
& will be fulfilled to-day before I die, let her come
& with speed. Son of my mother, what a wretch I
s am, alienated, separated, and in affliction ! Daugh-
‘‘ ter of my uncle, O how I am oppressed! Grief
“ has fixed its residence in my heart. They think
‘“‘ I can be consoled against thy love. No! by Him


ANTAR POURS OUT HIS SORROWS TO HIM, 9339


“ who spoke from the Mount, my eyes have re-
“ nounced all enjoyment in thy absence; for thee I
“ have endured reproaches and raillery. I mourned
“ thee in tears and blood—I wept for thee on the
“ plains and the mountains. For thee my frame
“ is exhausted and worn. I am become a tale and
“ a proverb by my tears—I will traverse the rug-
“ ged hills—I will follow the track of lovers over
“ every desert. Whilst I live will I pursue their
“tracks over the whole earth, or let death be
“ at hand. I will raise the dust and the storm, and
“ the sword of India shall draw blood from the heads.
“ I will empty the world of its inhabitants, and will
“ darken the deserts and the mountains. In thy
“ absence I have not raised myself on a horse—
“never has my hand grasped the spear—never,
“never have I drawn the cleaving sword—never,
“never have I succeeded in my hopes. I have
“ abandoned the cup with my companions, and
“ sweet sleep has fled from me. I have renounced
“ wine and sleep till the moment I shall see her. O
& that death would overtake me! 1 have renounced.
“ the goblets and the cups with all my comrades of
“ the tribe. Son of my mother, explain and speak,
“ for my heart is on fire;-my body is in torture;
“my strength fails, powerful and strong as I was.
- “Q Ibla, couldst thou but see me, and all the sor-
“ rows of the anguish and misery that have beset
“ me, and the constant never-ceasing grief— the
& tears—-the lamentations and sighs ;—couldst thou


334 AKD DESCRIBES HIS DESPAIR.


‘¢ but see me, then wouldst thou weep in pity for
€ the woes that have descended into my heart.
“ Alas! how oft have I borne the burdens of love
“ for thee, O Ibla! no one could have borne such.
“¢ Hadst thou loaded me even with a mountain, the
“ son of Shedad had endured it, and it would have
& been no weight; but when, O Ibla, after this ab-
“ sence shall we two again meet in the same home?
“ Forbearance is extinct, so great are the calamities I
“ have suffered by separation, absence, and sorrow.
“ The family of Zeead are my grievance; they
“ have reduced me to shame, and I am a tale
“ among them. They seem secure from the vicis-
“ situdes of night and enmity, but there are changes
“ of day and fortune, when I will destroy them all
“ in the day of battle! The blade of India shall
“‘ free me from troubles; do they not know that I
“ am the hero that has withstood every hero in the
‘¢ contest? My deeds, O Ibla, are fair; my seat is
“ on high above the planet Saturn. If TI delay any
“ longer in taking vengeance on those minions for
“ what they have done to me, let them abuse Antar
“on all occasions; let him be branded with the
“ name of coward. But have you seen the land to
“ which Ibla is gone, or the quarter, or the sand-
“ hill? -My patience is at an end, O Shiboob, and
“ my sleep has pointed at what will happen. There
“is none but you, my happy brother, to clear it up
“ without delay. So haste, explain what you have
“ encountered; conceal nothing, you lord. of stra-


SHIBOOB RELATES HiS JOURNEY 335


“‘ tagems—relate it now. Speak to me, that my
“ heart may be eased of its anxieties—you are my
“ treasure, my hope amongst mankind—haste then
_ “ to speak—be speedy in thy narrative !”

Despair not, O my Brother, said Shiboob, and
thus replied in verse:

“O Aboolfawaris! passed is all sorrow and

“ anxiety—happiness is at hand and triumph, son
«of my mother, be consoled about Ibla, she is
“ safe; no affliction or harm has ever touched her.
“ Hear my story and what I have encountered in
“ my expedition, for in it is what might astonish
“ the most experienced of mankind. I roamed
“ over the tribes and every region, the valleys, and
“ the mountains; behind them I left my track;
“ how many countries have I traversed that are
“ barren wastes, where nought is to be seen but
“ weeds and sand; I crossed the deserts like a
“ skulking wolf, and moved without trouble or pain
í to myself: into the deserts I launched, the stones
“ struck fire, and the parched sands scorched me,
“ till I reached Sanaa, and Aden, and Zebad, but
“ heard no news of her. I traversed every country,
“ every mountain, and left no one in the wilds
“ untried—but I saw her not, neither did I hear of
“ her; there were no signs, no tears. Then I went
“ to the land of Irak, and how many mountains did
“ I traverse on my journey, but I persisted in
‘¢ scouring the land, and I became like a dry camel,
‘¢ or a male hedgehog, and the desert was on flames,


336 IN PURSUIT OF IBLA.


“ and the rays blazed on the mountains, and sparks
“ of fire burnt from my eyes, till I reached the
“ land of Irak, and then in sadness I went towards
“ the tribe of Shiban: I went to them by night in
‘“¢ fear, and there I heard some news. I was walk-
“ ing out, my heart full of vexation, when two per-
“ sons appeared before me in the middle of the
“ valley. I drew my trusty dagger from my side;
“ one of them was like a mountain, and was about
“to kill the other, lying in tears on the ground.
“ I hastened on and struck him a speedy blow, ir-
“ resistible and never failing. I wounded him, and
“ then approached his enemy, fearful of the effects
“ of my blow, and the blood that gushed from him.
“ I approached the person, that I might distinguish
‘S the one I had stabbed, and who was the other:
“ when the last saw me coming forward, he cried,
“« Art thou a demon or a man? Who art thou, tell
“ me, for I see thou art full of sorrow and grief. I
“ belong to the noble Absians, said I, a tribe en-
“ nobled amongst the Arabs. Hasten, O Shiboob,
“ one exclaimed, my hope, my joy! And at the
“ voice my breath was almost exhausted; I recog-
“ nised the speech at once; I knew it was Ibla, and
“ her tears were flowing. She repeated her words like
“ one demanding relief from calamities and troubles.
“ My life is thine, son of my uncle, rescue me, she
“ cried. Be composed, said I; fear and doubt are
“ removed from thee. Then the slave too addressed
“ me, saying, I am’ Basharah, and my story I


ANTAR RECOVERS AT THE NEWS. 337


“ will relate quickly. I have a countrywoman
“ whose name is Rabiat; she is my beloved, and
* she was taken prisoner. I lost her, and my soul
“ adored her; on her account grief and sorrow
“s overwhelmed me. I have heard she is gone to
“ the tribe you have mentioned. O, master, have
“ you any news of her? I have intelligence of Ra-
“ biat, I replied; she lives with us, and passes a
“ happy life; and when he heard me he rejoiced.
« He threw himself before me, and the tears burst
‘‘ from his eyes; he stood up whilst my arm sup-
“ ported him, and he made peace with me; he said,
«c Ibla has escaped the perils that surrounded her.
“ Do you also escape under the night to your bro-
“ther; let him come with a troop of’ friends.
‘© Speed, speed away, before Mooferridj discovers
“« me; he expects me in the morning. So I have
“ come in my fears, like a blast of wind, even like
“ the lightning when it dazzles the sight. So come
& to us; let us traverse the desert in the dust with
“& some trusty Absian chiefs. Rescue your cousin,
“ and liberate her from the vicissitudes of fate and
‘fortune. I am come with this intelligence, and
« you have heard it, and all is true.”

When Shiboob had finished, Antar was all amaze-
ment, and his heart was filled with delight and joy,
and his rage against Rebia increased. He imme-
diately sent for Rabiat, and gave her information of
Basharah: You may trust to him, said she, for I
am sure he feels as much affliction in my absence,

VOL. II. Z


338 HE CONSULTS WITH OORWAH


as you do in the separation from my mistress, Ibla.
But may God destroy that Rebia for his con-
trivances! it is evident the plot is his. Antar thus
consoling himself in conversation with Shiboob and
Rabiat till the morning white appeared, sent for
Oorwah, and told him the news. O Aboolfa-
waris, said he, what do you intend to do? I wish,
said Antar, to make a dreadful impression on that
family of Zeead. This resolution, said Oorwah, is
by no means wise. The best plan is to conceal the
circumstance of Ibla’s discovery, so that my inter-
ference may not appear in the business; for it would
go to Shiban; Rebia and Mooferridj would gain
the information, and would soon manage to take
Ibla away from the slave with whom she now is;
all the world would know it; and all your trouble
would fail, and you would not succeed in your
object. Antar felt convinced Oorwah’s advice was
just. Well, my brother, said he, you and I will then
proceed with ten horsemen to the presence of King
Zoheir, and will salute him and his sons, and will
secure his faith and friendship; and when he asks
how I am, I will conceal from him what has passed,
but say to him, Sons of my uncles, a long time has
now passed, and I despair of my cousin Ibla. I am
convinced she is now entirely lost to me; I feel as-
sured that he who took her away with all that wealth
must have put her to death. I am now under great
alarms for my brother Shiboob, for should he have
fallen among some enemies, they may have slain


AND SETS OUT FOR IRAK. 339


3

him or made him captive. I am anxious, therefore,
to learn his fate. I will wander about for three
days, and then return. This is just the thing, said
Oorwah. So he sent for his particular comrades,
and they all mounted and came to him; Antar and
Oorwah also mounted, leaving Shiboob at home.
They proceeded to King Zoheir, and saluted him.
Antar related what we have stated above. O Abool-
fawaris, he said, this is highly becoming of you, and
very proper. Fate and destiny cannot be avoided,
and what is passed is irrevocable. No one in the
world has been able to petform what you have im-
posed upon yourself, but do not destroy yourself for
such trifling considerations. King Zoheir and his
sons were highly pleased at Antat’s expedition,
and all their sorrows and vexations disappeared.
Late in the day Antar returned home, and he
groaned aloud: he wished to sleep, but the excess
of his agony prevented him. He sent for Oorwah,
and told him he was resolved on the expedition, to
which Oorwah instantly assented, and communicated
the same to his companions. About midnight An-
tar set out, joined by Oorwah and his associates,
who were waiting for him, and took the road to the
land of Irak and the land of the tribe of Shiban.
By Antar’s side were Oorwah and his horsemen,
and before him went Shiboob, who showed them
the way by the springs and the lakes.

Now Rebia and Mooferridj departed for the ter-
ritories of King Numan, and introduced themselves

z2


340 REBIA ON HIS WAY FROM IRAK


to him. He received them hospitably. They re-
Jated what they had done to Ibla, and that they had
divided her property. Rebia recited some couplets
of verses. So the king gave him a robe of honour,
and paid him all manner of attention, giving him
presents and donations, and feasted him three days.
Soon after Rebia asked permission to return, which
was accordingly granted, with many presents, and
many valuable proofs of kindness and liberality.
He set out for his native land, and pursued his
journey in all haste till there only remained one
night between him and the tribe of Abs, when he
alighted, and was exceedingly pleased at all the fine
things King Numan had given him. That spot was
called Rikaya Beni-Malik. He sent on a slave to
announce himself to his brothers that they might
come out to meet him.

Now Antar went on traversing the wilds and
deserts till he also came to the place called Rikaya
Beni Malik. Let us halt here, said he to Shiboob;
but when he perceived some horses and horsemen
already there, he said again to Shiboob, Look out
and see who these are. So Shiboob immediately
went on and returned, saying, Know then, my bro-
ther, this is your friend Rebia. Antar was over-
joyed at this. My opinion, said he to Oorwah, is,
that we should assault them this very night without
delay, and make them taste of sorrow and misery.
Do as you please, was Oorwah’s reply. Cousins,
said Antar, let not one of you cry out, O by Abs,


IS SURPRISED BY ANTAR. S41


O by Adnan! but let the cry be, O by Cahtan!
They all agreed, and mounted their horses, and set
up one general shout that made the earth tremble
after it had been silent. He that was seated rose
up, and the sleepers woke, and the cry was, O by
Adnan! O by Cahtan! They poured down their
swords among them; Rebia was soon wounded,
and all his property taken. What will you do
with all these things? said Antar to Shiboob. It
will be adviseable, my brother, answered Shiboob
to drive away all these he and she camels to the
pastures and mountains, but as to these chests let
us bury them in the sand till we return home; but
these mules we will take them along with us for the
baggage. You are quite right, Shiboob, said Oor-
wah. So they turned out the camels to the pastures
with ten horsemen, and buried the chests in the
sand, and on the mules they loaded the provisions
and baggage, and then pursued their course to the
land of Irak. Antar was in an ecstacy of love and —
anxiety, and being much delighted also at this acci-
dent, he thus exclaimed: _

s My love is excessive; my patience exhausted ;
“ so take me by the hand, and do not add fresh
“ sorrow to what I already feel.. Stop, ye railers,
“ provoke me no more, for I have no support for
“ my frame but the remains of my forbearance.
“ How many nights have I complained in anguish,
“ whilst absence lighted the flame of love in my


842 SHIBOOB IN DISGUISE


€ bosom, and when the bird mourned in the dark-
ness of the night, I grasped my waist with my
‘“ hand in anguish. O bird of the tamarisk, sing
& as thou listest, for thou livest secure from the
& vicissitudes of fortune and sorrow ; thou hast only
& lost thy mate whom thou lovedst, as I have lost
‘* my love far away from home. Talk of the nights
‘< thou hast passed as the most brilliant days in en-
“ joyment, but still thou callest from the branches,
“ O songster. O, my master, fear not in the day of
“ battle when thou seest the flash of swords and
' “ coats of mail, meet the spear and the charging
« warriors; die honoured, and bow to no one. But
« let me appease myself on him who opposes me as
« long as I am lord of this breath in my body. If
“ I do not let alone the birds of the atmosphere
‘‘ hovering over the dust, no moisture will ever
“ water my heart.”

They thus continued traversing theroads, and pass-
ing the waters and the springs, till they reached the
land of Irak. Antar was led along by his passion till
there only remained between him and the land of Shi-
ban one night. It will be well, said Shiboob, to con-
ceal yourselves here, whilst I go and learn some news
for you, and meet Basharah, and I will speedily re-
turn. Away, then, Omy brother, cried Antar, and let
not your absence be long. Shiboob put on a long-
sleeved garment, and clothed himself like a slave of
Syria, and passed on till he neared the dwellings of


SEEKS AND FINDS BASHARAH. $43


the tribe of Shiban. In haste he sought the shep-
herds, of whom he might inquire about Basharah ;
for he had never seen him by the light of the day,
_ and had never met him but by night. So he was
consulting with himself about it, and in what way
he should introduce himself among the tents, when
a horseman appeared ambling along, and wander-
ing about out of the road; he sighed from an
oppressed heart, and thus expressed himself in
verse :

“ Western breeze that blows from Hadjir, O
“ breathe my salutation to my absent love. Perhaps
“ my Rabiat will return my compliment, and will
“ in mercy bestow a thought on her wanderer. O
“ Ibl:, if thy cousin is consoled without thee, fear-
“ ful of the men of my tnbe—should he abandon
£ thee, should he forget thee, I will conceal thee in
“ mine eyes from the fear of thy foes. Should any
“ accident have happened to Shiboob, should the
“ bowels of the battle-field, or the tomb contain him,
“ then to command is with the Almighty God,
“« who executes his destined will on his creatures.”

As soon as this horseman had finished, his tears
chased down his cheeks. But as Shiboob heard
him, his.heart fluttered, his eagerness increased, he
understood the words and their import, and he was
convinced it must be Basharah, so he answered him
in the following lines :

“© God has not abandoned Antar, nor that famous
“ fellow Shiboob ; but he has come to you in all his


344 BASHARAH HASTENS FOR LBLA,


« Absian ardour, and a troop has followed him—
“ tried men—each a lion, ennobled by the sword.
‘ Fierce with his scimitar, like a pitiless hyena,
“he encounters the chests of the steeds, stern as
‘‘ they are; and he cleaves the skulls of his foes
‘© with his falchion. His deeds are extolled among
“ the people like the flowering spring.”

When Shiboob had finished his verses, he con-
tinued—God has not let loose the calamities of the
time upon Antar; he is not consoled for Ibla; he
has not betrayed her ; but he has come to you with a
troop with which he will engage the whole tribe of
Shiban, were there even with them the friends of
Soliman. Shiboob ran up to him and kissed his
knee, and made himself known to him.

Basharah wept with joy at Shiboob’s arrival, and
all his afflictions vanished ; he acquainted him with
the absence of his master in the cities of Khorasan,
but that he did not depart without giving him full
power over his treasures, and his property, and his
wife and children, and family: and I am resolved
to take all his property away with me, and repair to
my beloved Rabiat. In the mean time, let Antar
and his friends lie concealed in the wide waste, and
alight in the valley of Nika, on the road to the
mountains of Radm. But as soon as we arrive, let
them rush out upon us, and ply their swords among
us; let them not spare a single slave, and then we
will proceed in safety. Wait, and I will bring Ibla


to you.


WHOM HE FINDS INCONSOLABLE. B45


Basharah mounted his horse and returned. Now
Ibla was ever in the most anxious state of expecta-
tion; night and day she wept. Basharah’s mother
endeavoured to console her with tales and stories,
and Basgharah did the same, sitting down by her, and
questioning her about Rabiat, and would thus calm
away her sorrows: and never did he quit her till she
slept. This was her continual custom till the night
he encountered Shiboob. So when he came to her
at this unusual hour, he saw her drowned in tears,
and sighing from her overcharged heart; she was
invoking her native land and home, and thus ex-
pressing herself in verse :

“ My transport is extinct, my anxieties augment,
“ and will not give way, and this is the state of my
‘‘love. By your existence—Come, come, ye travel-
“ lers, be kind, restore my heart, and have compas-
& sion on my withered frame. Say to the inhabit-
“‘ ants of Hedjaz, you have left Ibla enduring the
“« pangs of death for love of her songster. Ye have
‘Ss witnessed my condition, my separation, my foreign
‘“‘ dwelling; and with you is there no one to come
“ after me, and no one toaid me? I am every day
“ and night expiring of love ; and the song of the
‘‘ dove pains me when it sings. My sorrow, my
s irritation, my anxiety destroy me continually; so
‘ I weep in affliction when I hear you. Alas, alas!
« will Basharah come to me, will he tell me my af-
“ flictions are at an end? O sons of my uncle, will
“ ye not come to me, and will ye not think of ap-


346 SHIBOOB CONVEYS HER TO ANTAR.


“ peasing my sorrows? Ye have broken the com-
& pact, ye have denied my love; ye have abandoned
“ me as a fawn in a foreign land. If in your jour-
“ ney ye pass by the land of Aalidj, restore to me
“ my heart, and pity my agonised frame. I com-
“ plain, but there is no one to remove my grief;
“ there is no one to partake my afflictions, or share
“ my sorrows.”

As soon as he heard thes lines, he entered. O
my mistress, said he, Basharah is now come with
good tidings—and he told her all that had occurred.
May God render all your tidings good, cried she;
and may he join your virtues to your beloved!
Then he clothed her in the garments of a man of
Shiban, put on a turban and a vizor, and mounted
her on a noble steed ; he girded her on a sword, and
conducted her out of the tents till he gave her over
- to Shiboob. Take your mistress, said he; do not
stop till you are with your brother, and tell him to
be of good cheer.

Shiboob rose up and saluted Ibla, and having
thanked Basharah for his conduct, he set out for
his brother; and when he came towards him, he
found him much agitated about him ; but he started
up, and having embraced Ibla, and kissed her be-
tween the eyes, he made him relate all about Ba-
sharah and his plans, and there they remained in
expectation of the event.

But Basharah, when he returned, having delivered
up Ibla, wrote a letter as if from his master Moofer-


BASHARAH CARRIES OFF HIS MASTER'S WEALTH. 847


ridj, and introducing himself to a cousin of Moofer-
ridj, who was called Malik, son of Hoosan, Know, my
lord, said he, that I have received a letter from my
master, in which he thus states—Know, O Basharah,
the King of Persia has sent me into the cities of
Khorasan, and with me some Persian troops, that I
may reduce for him some cities that have revolted
against him. An immense number of people are
collected about me, and are greedy in seizing all
manner of property. I have therefore resolved on
escaping by flight, and my desire is, that you load
all my wealth, and treasures, and goods, and secure
them all in the mountains of Radm, and the valley
of Raml: now, I am determined to execute his
orders.

When Basharah had thus communicated the letter,
he assembled his master’sslaves, and chose out ofthem
fifty stout fellows, and having sent them to the pas-
tures to fetch him two hundred strong camels, he
entered the magazines of wealth, and took out all
the chests of goods that were there, precious jewels,
and left nothing but useless articles, tattered tents,
broken tent-poles, and patched cushions. By the
evening the packing was all finished. So he raised
the baggage on the backs of the camels, and he and
his mother set out in the beginning of the night, and
travelled on till they came nigh to the mountains of
Radm and the valley of Raml. They were just
about crossing the valley, when a troop of Absians
burst out upon them, shouting aloud; and as soon


348 THE MEETING OF BASHARAH AND ANTAR.


as Basharah heard the cries of the horsemen he was
delighted ; he goaded on his horse towards Antar,
and saluted him, recognizing him by the length of
his form, and the prodigiousness of his figure. My
lord, said he, ply thy sword amongst this filth, seize
all this property, and bring about a meeting between
me and my beloved Rabiat, so beautiful and so full
of grace: then he thus continued in verse:

“ By thee glory is exalted ;, by thee honours are
“ elevated. The Arab and the Persian can never
“ attain thy superiority. Thouhast exhibited bravery
“ and intrepidity, O warrior, and there is not a title
“ that does not belong to thee—men labour in the
‘ acquisition of wealth, but glory is thy only object.
« Fear not, thou canst not fall into calamities, for
“ all thy exploits raise thee sublime on high; thy
“ glory, the winds encompass not its extent—thy
s liberality, it is incalculable. Mayst thou live
“ for the Absians for years; may they be exalted
« in thy name, recorded in prose and verse.”

Antar smiled at Basharah’s compliments; Mayst
thou rejoice in thy beloved for many years, said he.
But Oorwah and his people put to the sword all the
slaves, and driving the property and camels, they
proceeded towards their own country, Shiboob going
before them, cutting over the sand and sand-hills.

. Ibla travelled by the side of Antar, and was re-
lating all her sufferings from the time of separation
till their meeting, and all the noble, virtuous acts of
Basharah towards her, and thus they passed over


THEY RETURN HOME. 849


the country till they approached their own region,
when Shiboob turned out of the road to the sands
where the chests were buried. They took them out,
and loading the beasts with them, they came near
home with such a vast abundance of wealth, the
kings of the age could not equal.

On Antar’s arrival, the land of Shoorebah was all
in confusion. All were in amazement at the im-
mense quantity of cattle and valuables he brought
with him, and King Zoheir’s sons went out to meet
him. As soon as Antar saw the Princes, and the
commotion of the people, he said to Ibla, Seek the
tents of thy father; whilst he himself urged on his
horse Abjer, and advanced towards King Zoheir’s
sons, and saluted them. They congratulated him
on his safety, and inquired about his expedition.
Mine is an extraordinary story, said Antar; and I
cannot explain it but in the presence of King Zo-
heir your father.

When Malik his uncle saw all these sheep and
cattle, &c. and that the whole country was filled with
their abundance, he was all astonishment, and said
to his son Amroo, Ah my son, if thy sister were but
still among the living, all these flocks would be
driven to our tents. At last he presented himself
to Antar, and saluted him, saying, O Aboolfawaris,
hast thou heard any thing of thy bride, or hast thou
returned in despair ?

My bride, said Antar, 1s with her mother. Malik
smiled, and thought he was in joke; so he went


850 BASHARAH UNITED TO RABIAT.


aside, and walked on till he came to the tents, and
tears streamed from his eyes at his separation from
Ibla, and that he had lost all these fine things, when
came forward the handmaidens and slave-girls, and
informed him of Ibla’s safety. At hearing this his
senses fled, so violent was hisemotion. He hastened
to her and saluted her, whilst she complained to him
of all she had endured from the timeof her disappear-
ance till her return. All the women, free-born and
slaves, and the virgins, all came to Antar, offering
presents on his return from his triumphs. But there
was not a happier man than Basharah, for his dearest
Rabiat had also joined the concourse of women. He
dismounted, and embraced her.

Antar ordered tents to be pitched. These are
yours, said he to Basharah; I am your protector ;
and all your master’s property is yours. Basharah
expressed his thanks, and he and Antar alighted at
the tents.


END OF VOL. Il.


LONDON:


PRINTED BY THOMAS DAVISON, WHITEFRIARS.


eS ——————— ree ee


6.0 A I “et ~


an m.


— wy, a Áo


ets P t


BS’
—


by Google as part of an ongoing effort to preserve the
information in books and make it universally accessible.


al


aie. al iid its ae
r
q å
. 9
fA
®
; =


LONDON:
PRINTED BY THOMAS DAVISON, WHITEFRIARS.


mfu i o nesae =


ş.


ms Jna,


ANTAR,


A BEDOUEEN ROMANCE.


eee
a i es


t
TRANSLATED FROM THE ARABIC,


BY


TERRICK HAMILTON, ESQ.


ORIENTAL SECRETARY TO THE BRITISH EMBASSY AT
CONSTANTINOPLE.


PART THE FIRST.


VOL. IIL.


LONDON: |
JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE-STREET.
1820.


LIFE AND ADVENTURES
OF


ANTAR.


CHAPTER XVII.


AnTaR remained in the-tents till King Zoheir sent
a messenger after him, saying, Your presence is re-
quired by King Apheir, Aboolfawaris, that he may
execute his agreement with you. As soon as he
reached King Zoheir’s dwellings, he smiled upon
him, and seated him among his sons. Welcome, he
cried; I greet thee, Champion of the Absians, on
the day of battle; protector of their wives and
children—And he felicitated him on the safety of
Ibla.

My expedition, said Antar, was only on her ac-
count, in order that I might rescue her from one
who plotted her death and annihilation; and thus
he continued in verse:
~“ O King of noble mind; O most renowned for
“ every virtue and high qualification—give up your
“ ears to attend to my discourse. However difficult

VOL. III. B


2 ANTAR RELATES HIS ADVENTURE.


“ of attainment, no one should dread any enterprise;
“ and when resolved on revenge, he should defy all
‘‘ fears. If fortune deserts me, my hand is my hope,
“ and it will succeed; and glory shall raise me above
“ mankind. I only fear you, whom no one shall
“ afflict with pain; and I respect only women. I
“ have that dependance on you, that with it I brave
“ all evils; and in you I only acknowledge one that
“ preserves his protection. So seize what is my due,
“ and aid me against a man who is a foul wretch,
“ degraded and unrespected.”

When Antar had terminated his verses, he related
to King Zoheir all that had happened to him, and he
was exceedingly surprised at such events. Ibla
then, said he, is among the living. Yes, my lord,
replied Antar; she is at her father’s: but, O King,
all is past that befel her; I would indeed have
striven to release her, had even mountains opposed
me in the form of men.

O Antar, said King Zoheir, you and Rebia will
not cease quarrelling till you have opened upon us
a door that will never close. You would have done
right to have informed me of this important point,
and I would have despatched a messenger to King
Numan, and have explained the business: Numan
would have released Ibla from the tribe of Shiban ;
‚you too would not have gone away and taken the
property of Mooferridj, who is absent in the service
of the King of Persia; and we should then have
had no farther negotiation with him.


4


REBIA’S DISMAY AT IBLA’S SAFETY. $


- My lord, said Antar, had I acquainted you with
it, Rebia would have heard of it; he would have
mounted, or sent word to have her killed; but now
the charge against him is established by her ap-
pearance ; but as to the tribe of Shiban, I will soon
show you what I will do with them, that they may
restore Ibla’s tiara and property. May God destroy
Rebia ! cried King Zoheir, and send him on the path _
of death for his insidious practices, in carrying off
by force the daughter of his uncle, and delivering
her up to a tribe that was not of her species. For
this, may God punish him in his property and his
person !

King Zoheir related to Antar all that happened
to Rebia at Rikaya Beni Malik during the night
attack—and the misery he had endured. When the
news of Ibla became public, all the women and
noble ladies assembled round her, congratulating
her on her safety, and the same evening the intelli-
gence reached the tribe of Fazarah, and Rebia
heard it. His soul melted within him, and his gall
burst, as he said to his brothers, What say you to
this? Did you not tell me, said they, that you did
not leave Shiban till you had actually accomplished
the death of Ibla? I am quite bewildered, said
Rebia, at this circumstance ; for certainly I did not
even go to King Numan till Ibla was buried in the
sand, and with my own eyes I saw her blood on the
hands of a slave whom we ordered to kill her: but,

B 2


4 THROUGH THE MEANS OF BASHARAH


indeed, should the slave have betrayed us—And he
sent for the man who brought the news, and asked
him how Ibla had been rescued. My lord, he an-
swered, I have not heard the particulars, but I saw
Antar on his return, and with him were some com-
panions and property that filled the whole land, and
by his side was a swarthy slave, tall in stature, beau-
tiful of countenance. I inquired about him, for
his extraordinary beauty surprised me. They told
me it was Basharah, and that he was the person who
had rescued Ibla from Rebia, and had taken away
all the wealth of his master, being desirous to
fix himself among the tribe of Abs and Adnan, on
account of a young girl who lived with Antar,
named Rabiat, to whom he had been long attached.

This explained the whole business, and he said
to himself, his is indeed what never entered into
my calculation ; but, continued Rebia, let King Zo-
heir do me justice, otherwise I will stir up dissen-
sions between him and King Numan, whom I will
urge to invade him with the Persians and the Arabs;
and I will say to him, When I asked his daughter
in marriage for him, he answered, I have no daughter
that can do for King Numan. This was Rebia’s
situation: but Antar in a subsequent conversation
said to King Zoheir, I request permission to send to
Rebia, in order to demand restitution of Ibla’s pro-
perty. Should he confess it, and say the devil
tempted me, and it was taken from me on the night


IBLA’S FATHER DEMANDS REPARATION. 5


attack, I will pardon him; but should he deny it, I
will punish him as he deserves. And he rose up
and went home.

Now Cais, King Zoheir’s son, was not easy about
Rebia, so he would not venture to give any answer
to Antar, for he dreaded the prospect of any dis-
turbances among the Arabs ; and all were interested
m the elucidation of this dreadful business. Ba-
sharah was all this time devoting himself to Rabiat.

At dawn, Antar told his uncle Malik and his son
Amroo to go to King Zoheir, and not to quit him till
he should send to Rebia and demand Ibla’s pro-
perty. They accordingly departed, and said, O
King, our daughter has been captured in her own
country, and carried by force to Shiban: you your-
self are witness to this. Ibla’s property has been
plundered, and you are the King of the time. We
cannot either forget the stratagem of Amarah, who
also took her prisoner, and exposed her among the
tibe of Cahtan; and now Rebia has endeavoured
to put her to death after having violated her re-
putation among the Arabs. But that is now past;
what I demand is Rebia’s punishment for his trea-
chery; otherwise, my nephew Antar will use violent
measures, and release our property from him by the
sword.

This discourse alarmed King Zoheir, as to the
troubles and dissensions that might arise in conse-
quence, so he sent for his son Cais. Know, said he,


that Rebia has brought disgrace upon this tribe, and


6 PRINCE CAIS ACCUSES REBIA,


his crime is made clear by Ibla’s re-appearance. I
wish, my son, you would go to him, and order him
to make restitution of the property, and not thwart
these people any more, before I let them requite
him for his misdeeds.

Prince Cais set off with five horsemen, and when
he came nigh to the tribe of Fazarah, he sent on a
man to apprise Rebia of his arrival. Rebia and
Amarah, and Hadifah, came out to meet him and
saluted him. For what purpose are you come? said
Hadifah. O Cais, is it for the chase in our country,
or on a visit, that we may enjoy your society? I
have only come, said Cais, on account of this man,
who has behaved ill to the tribe, and has abandoned
his friends to be insulted by his enemies. He related
-~ to Rebia all that had happened, and demanded all —
Ibla’s property. |

Well, said Rebia to Hadifah, did ever the like of
what I have endured from my tribe befal any hu-
man being? Is there in the world a severer distress
than mine? Have I indeed usurped to myself wealth
not even all the kings of the Arabs could supply?
Had not my brothers overtaken me, the wild beasts
might have eaten my carcase; and after all, they
accuse me of this infamous transaction, and Ki
Zoheir believes, to my discredit, all that worthless
insignificant slave can state to my prejudice. I never
set eyes upon Ibla, neither on a journey, nor in so-
ciety. I never took from her a single robe or jewel,


and all the world knows I used to rail at my brother


WHO PERSUADES CAIS OF HIS INNOCENCE. 7


Amarah on her account, and dissuaded him from
pursuing her; and truly I have been as much af-
fected by this cruel event—yes, just as much as her
own father. Perhaps it was some Irak horsemen
that chanced to meet her, and carried her as a pri-
soner away from home, and now have released her;
for I have just heard she has returned to the tribe
of Abs, and that God has restored all her charms
to her family. She’s an honest girl, and speaks the
truth ; but did she see me the night she was carried
off to Shiban ? and did she ever set eyes on me when
in that country? Ascertain this point, and let
Antar trust in what she says; and if Ibla absolves
me in her answer, let them demand: her property
from the tribe of Shiban, where she was disgraced
and dishonoured, but that tribe will never let Antar
possess himself of their property, or their maiden
Rabiat. But truly their horsemen and their armies
will fall upon you; their dust will rise over you,
and perhaps King Numan will assist them with the
warriors of Lakhm and Juzam, all noble people; and
will make your father repent when repentance will
not avail him; but now he is warned, and let him
look to his own affairs. |

Prince Cais listened, and he hesitated what to be-
lieve. Cousin, said he, you have spoken ‘the truth ;
I know Antar is a wretch, and that he has offended
you in this business. Now that, O Cais, you are
well acquainted with this circumstance, said Hadi-
fah, why do you not put to death this cursed slave ?


8 CAIS PROCLAIMS REBIA’S JUSTIFICATION.
\


Prince Cais wheeled about, and returned with his
associates to inform his father of Rebia’s answer.
They continued till they came near home, when he
saw his father, and his brothers, and the heroes of
the tribe all assembled at the lake of Zat ul irsad ;
he looked at them as some one thus repeated—

* ¢ Behold our spacious residence sweetly flowered,
4s it combines every pleasure of life. On the pro-
& jections of our dwellings is the narcissus, lovely
s in its sword-blades enveloped in green armour.
“ Mark how the edge of the scimitar and the point
“ of the spear surround the fair and the swarthy.
s The men are like lions when they protect their
“ young, yea, even like rapacious lions. Their
“ women are like fawns, and their children like the
‘‘ glittering planet Venus. The modest women
“ dance in security with the men, and in the enjoy-
“ ments of life there is no molestation. ‘There is
“ only among them the lion of the tribe, their chief,
“ and he is Antar.”

After Cais’ departure for the tribe of Fazarah,
Hatal, and a party from the tribe of Ghiftan, came
to visit King Zoheir, and he gave them a feast at
the lake. When Cais arrived they all stood up;
_ he mentioned Rebia’s answer, and how he depended
on Ibla’s testimony. Antar was seated there, and
when he heard Cais’ narrative, May God curse that
Rebia! he exclaimed. Restrain yourself, said King
Zoheir, O Aboolfawaris, and let Ibla be questioned.
I will go and interrogate her, said her father. Sa


MORE PROOFS OF REBIA’S GUILT. 9


he rose and went to his daughter. Questioning her,
Ibla replied, May God curse falsehood and liars! I
saw not Rebia the night they carried me off from
the lake, and I saw him not in Shiban. Malik re-
turned and told King Zoheir: Well, said he, there
is nothing then to be said against Rebia. But Ba-
sharah happened to be present, and as soon as he
heard Mahik’s and King Zoheir’s remarks, O mighty
king, he exclaimed, what is all this artifice? Was
Ibla present among the men when Rebia and my
master divided her property ? But when I returned
and told them Ibla was killed and under the sand,
then Rebia danced and capered for joy, and pre-
sented me his own inner garment and turban. Ba-
sharah. disappeared for a short time, and quickly
returned, bringing with him the garment, turban,
and poniard, with which Rebia had bribed him; he
placed them before King Zoheir: This is what
Rebia gave me, said he, for the murder of Ibla.’
When the chiefs of Abs saw this, they all exclaimed
against the nefarious and infamous conduct of Re-
bia, and they wanted to have him seized.

When Cais heard the disgrace of Rebia, his in-
dignation and rage increased. He immediately
mounted his horse again, and said, By the faith of
an Arab, never will I sit down till I have elu-
cidated this affair that will burst my gall. He
hastened back to the tribe of Fazarah, and when
Rebia saw him, he was in great consternation and
amazed at his speedy return; and to his inquiries,


10 AGAIN REBIA’S PERJURIES PREVAIL.


Cais related the story of Basharah. When Rebia
heard this he burst into a laugh, but it was the
laugh of conscious shame: in his heart there blazed
a fire of rage; he clapped his hands and appeared
much pleased. Now, said he, by the faith of an
Arab, my property that was taken from me at Rikaya
Beni Malik will come to light, for that garment,
turban, and poniard were taken during that night-
attack; and now, indeed, I have no enemy but
Antar.

` Cais was confused and astonished at the words of
Rebia. He remained that night, and did nothing
but consult about the destruction of Antar till
morning dawned, when Cais mounted and returned
home.

Well, said Rebia to his brother, what did you
think of the answer which I made to Cais? God
prosper you, said his brother, how you lied and
managed to confirm falsehoods, artifice, and villany,
and fraud !

Cais went home, and met his father at the lake,
and told him all Rebia had stated in reply, and
that the garment and turban were taken from him
during the night-attack, and that he has no other |
enemy but Antar. Indeed, my son, said King
Zoheir, I am quite bewildered about the families of
Carad and Zeead; however, put this business off
till to-morrow, when these guests will go away, and
the contest between Rebia and Basharah shall be
decided, The next day the Ghiftanians having de-


DISAPPEARANCE OF BASHARAH. 11


parted home, King Zoheir sent after Antar and
his uncles, ordering them to bring Basharah, that
Rebia might be confronted.

My lord, said Antar, when they were all assem-
bled, what is Rebia’s answer? Aboolfawaris, said
King Zoheir, Rebia says that you have the property
that was taken from him at Rikaya Beni Malik,
amongst which was this garment and turban; but
bring Basharah here that we may understand what
he has to say, and then the offender shall be
punished according to his acts. Antar jumped up
and went to the tents in search of Basharah, but he
could not find him. He asked Rabiat about him,
but she said, O my lord, since that time he was with
you at the lake I have not seen him, and he never
returned. Antar shuddered, and was amazed. He
went back and told King Zoheir, who said, He
would not have disappeared had he not been a liar,
and doubtless you are concerned in this business,
and this is not an affair becoming an Arab chief:
and King Zoheir expressed his wrath. The war-
riors of the family of Carad retired, and their shame
was great. Antar also returned, saying, I will not
quit this country till I have rescued my property
with the sword, and he thus repeated :

& Greatness has exeited jealousy, and I am
“ avoided; did not passion influence me, love
“ should not master me to such a degree. I would
“ possess myself by force of what I obtained from
“fortune, doubly armed and powerful as she is;


12 ANTAR HEARS OF HIM,


“ but should my hand be broken its power would
“ not be obeyed, for I have a heart that spurns at
“fortune. There is a time for compassion and
« likewise for ignorance, but, O tribe, I am more
‘inclined towards mercy. I cling to my kindred
“ and honour them, and conquerors are the objects
“ of my respect, and I admire them. But here
“ they remark my forbearance, and my weakness
‘¢ inflames them with hope; but I shall not be van-
‘‘ guished. I shrink from the base-minded, for I
“ know avarice should be avoided, and generosity
& sought after. It is ascertained that liberality is a
“¢ quality in man that is talked of by the good, and
“ subdues all dispositions. Ambition I have, and
& its mansion is above Arcturus, and my residence
<¢ is exalted to the skies.”

O my son, said Shedad, we are with thee, and
_ whithersoever thou goest we will accompany thee.
We will not remain in a spot where thou art de-
spised and ill treated. But stop till we obtain some
intelligence of Basharah, and let us observe the
conclusion of our adventure with Rebia. Antar
staid quietly three days, but on the fourth night,
when Antar was sitting alone, a black slave intro-
duced himself, and said, O Aboolfawaris, protect me
and realize my wishes, and I will give you good
tidings. What are your tidings? asked Antar. My
lord, he cried, haste to your friend Basharah, and
release him from the power of Rebia. And how,
exclaimed Antar, came he into his power ? Master,


AND LEARNS REBIA’S PLOT AGAINST HIM. 18


cried the slave, thus it is: When Basharah gave
evidence against Rebia, and made the affair public,
he said to his brother, What think you of this slave
Basharah, who has received our bribes in Shiban,
and is now come to witness against us here? He
then called to one of his slaves, called Marzook, and
said, Well, Marzook, you are ever talking of your
zeal, but till now I have never had occasion for your
services. What do you want, my lord? asked the
slave. What I want of you, said Rebia, is‘that you
go to the tents of the tribe of Abs, and bring me
Basharah, that I may expose him to the cruelest
tortures. The slave took with him four others, and
set out for the Absian tents, and secreted him-
self in a valley near the habitations, seeking the
lake of Zat ul irsad. Here Marzook and his
comrades remained concealed till Basharah rose
up; he was intoxicated; and as he strayed to
some distance from the tents, Marzook plunged
upon him like a vulture, and rolling him up in a
sack, carried him off-to the valley, and thence they
all repaired with him to the tribe of Fazarah. As
soon as they came into the presence of Rebia, Now,
he cried, are all my wishes fulfilled. He dug a deep
pit, and threw him into it, covering it with branches
and camel dorsers, and stationed over him a slave-giy],
called Yamama, beautiful in face and form, and much
in favour with Rebia. Early in the morning, when
Rebia went out to the chase with his brother, the
damsel came to Basharah, and as soon as she beheld


14 DISCOVERED BY SOME SLAVES.


him, love for him struck into her heart, and entered
deep into her senses and her soul. How is it that
these wretches have thus ill-used you? she cried.
With whom am I? fair maid, he asked. With the
family of Zeead, she replied. Then can I never
escape, he added. You may escape, said she; if you
will sincerely engage yourself with me, and swear to
me you will be my lover, I will release you from
this peril, and supply you with. provisions. Now
she had a brother called Masrook, who was attached
to a maiden whose master was one of Oorwah’s
men. So she said to him, What will you say to one
who will bring you to your dear Wirdeh? How
can that be? said he. Instantly run, said she, to
Antar, son of Shedad, and give him intelligence of
Basharah, and say to him, Master, bring me and my
beloved together, and I will give you information
about the designs of Rebia towards Basharah ; and
she told him all his distresses. The slave instantly
departed, and coming to Antar’s tents, he introduced
himself, and related all the above. Antar was over-
joyed at this news, and immediately sent for the
master of the girl Wirdeh, and demanded her of
him; he not only surrendered her, but gave her
also a string of good he and she camels, and after-
wards they all went to King Zoheir, to whom Antar
explained all that had passed. King Zoheir was
agitated and amazed: And what do you intend to
do? said he to Antar. I am determined, he re-
plied, to proceed to the tribe of Fazarah and release


REBIA’S HORROR AT SEEING BASHARAH. 15


this foreigner. O King, exclaimed Shas and Malik,
we will also go and settle this business. Go, said
their father; and Antar departed with the princes,
but first said to Oorwah, O Ebeool Ebyez, mount
your men, and tell them to conceal themselves in the
valley of Yaamoora. Oorwah having executed his
commands, they all proceeded till they reached the
tribe of Fazarah, who, on seeing adust arise, mounted,
as also Rebia and Hadifah, to meet Antar and King
Zoheir’s sons. What! my cousin, said Rebia to
Antar, art thou come to oppose us, or dost thou re-
pent of thy obstinacy? O Rebia, said. Antar, let
him repent who has acted ill, and let him be ashamed
of his disgraceful deeds. Produce Basharah, said
Rebia, who said I bnbed him to murder Ibla; let
him confront me in the presence of these Arab
chieftains. Be witnesses, ye that are present, ex-
claimed Antar. Drawing forth his invincible Dhami
and urging on Abjer till he came up to the pit, he
cried out to Shiboob, Bring forth this foreigner, and
immediately Shiboob descended (O friends!) and
brought out Basharah from the pit, from underneath
the pack-saddles and camel-cloths. Ah! exclaimed
Rebia in despair: and Hadifah said to him, I will |
sur up a battle between you and Antar; cry out in
my name, and see what I will do. Upon this he
shouted out, O Ebe Hidjar! Dost thou not mark
this treacherous slave? And the men encountered
each other, and the warriors engaged, and limbs
were hewn off. Antar dispersed the people, and


16 ANTAR DISPERSES THE FAZAREANS.


penetrated towards Hadifah in the field of battle ;
he perceived him exciting his men to the contest;
he engaged him, and struck the head of his mare,
and hewed it off. Hadifah was in a most deplorable
state, and his ribs were all dislocated. ‘Then he
met Rebia and Amarah, and took them prisoners,
and despatched them with Shiboob and Basharah
to the dwellings of the Absian chiefs. But when
the sons of King Zoheir saw this ternble affair, and
ascertained the treachery of Rebia, and that all he
said was false and deceitful, they wheeled round
their horses’ heads, and went home to inform their
father of the circumstance. But the chief Beder,
when the account of what Antar had done reached
him, mounted his horse, and came forwards in order
to extinguish this dissension; he saw his son Hadi-
fah on his return in a most shattered condition,
who, on being questioned, related all that had
passed, and how Antar had slain his mare and his
men. By the truth of the pillar of stone of Mecca,
he exclaimed, Antar must have had some con-
sideration for you, or he would have left you dead,
for he came to rescue his guest, and you irritated
him. He galloped on to overtake Antar, as he saw
him overthrowing his people. O Aboolfawaris, said
he, we have always heard you were a most impartial
man, but to-day we perceive you are inclined to
violence and oppression. My lord, said Antar, I
came here to release my friend from captivity, but
your people stirred up this commotion and sought


ANTAR DESISTS AND RETIRES. 17


to fight me, so to defend my own life was my
bounden duty. O Aboolfawaris, said Beder, grant
me this day this proof of your generosity, and An-
tar instantly ordered his men to depart; they de-
sisted and went home. On the way they passed by
the valley of Yaamoora, where they jomed Basharah
and Shiboob and their prisoners, Rebia and the
wretch Amarah. Basharah came forward, and kiss-
ing Antar’s hand, O Aboolfawaris, he cried, by the
life of Ibla’s two eyes, give me authority over Rebia
and Amarah that I may parade them among the
tribe of Abs. Do as you like, said Antar, for I
know King Zoheir will not keep on good terms with
me. And he thus expressed himself:

s O Ibla, thou art the light of my eyes: so com-
“ mand my existence, and rule me, thou, my ulti-
“ mate hope. If thou quittest the tribe of Abs,
“reside not in the mansions of degradation, and
“ listen not to the railers, for the land after our de-
“ parture will remain without any celebrated de-
“ fender or hero. Ask of Fazarah concerning my
“ deeds when they poured down upon me like a
“‘deluging cloud. They brandished their barbed
“ spears in rage against me, but they beheld the
“ refulgence of my dazzling scimitar. Let Beder,
“ son of Amroo, inform you what a warrior am I;
“ how I meet armies with a heart hard as a frag-
“ment of a mountain. I engaged their horsemen
“and they were dispersed, and my thrusts came
“ upon them quicker than death. My steed bore

VOL. III. E


8 KING ZOHEIR DISTRESSED AT THE FRAY.


‘ me away; and as he went he slipped among the
“ skulls scattered by the sword and spear. I took
“ prisoners the chiefs of that mighty tribe, and I
“ returned overjoyed, like one intoxicated. O se-
“ paration! my heart trembles at separation, but I
“ weep not for the separation from frends and
“ native land, but for the separation from her, in
“ whose eyes is my malady, and truly this pains me
“ and increases all my vexations. I move in terror,
“ fearful of separation, as my enemies move trem-
“ bling through fear of me.”

Oorwah felt aware he had spoken only the truth
about the tribe of Abs. Then they all marched on
till they came near home, when lo! there arose a
great dust, and under it appeared some noble Ab-
sians on full gallop, and their spears pointed.
These were King Zoheir and his sons, and his
nobles with their standards over their heads, and
horses scattered about. The reason of it was this:
when Princes Shas and Malik returned home they
made a great uproar among the tents, and related
the fray that had taken place between Antar and
the tribe of Fazarah; their father was much vexed.
I was convinced, said he, this dispute between
Antar and Rebia would not be decided amicably,
and having inquired the particulars and its origin,
Before we could reach them, said his sons, blood
had flowed, and bodies were dead. Every one now
mounted and came forth from the tents, and the
people were all in confusion, and the families of Carad


PUBLIC EXPOSURE OF REBIA AND AMARAH. 19


were in great tumult, and the women were abusing
Antar. As soon as Antar saw Kmg Zoheir and
his sons, he dismounted and hastened forward,
anxious to kiss his hand. King Zoheir stooped
down and kissed him between the eyés, and ordered
hmm to mount, and as they all departed home, Antar
told King Zoheir about Rebia, and how he had |
taken him and his brother Amarah prisoners. But
how is it, said King Zoheit, that I see them not
with you? My uncle Malik, said Antar, has taken
them. home, who said, These fellows shall remain in
bondage with me, till they restore the property they
took from my daughter. Yes, indeed, said King
Zoheir, your uncle shall do such a deed as this,
when I am asleep and under the sand ; but as long
as I am on the back of my stallion, I will not per-
mit an Arab to aggrandize you and degrade me.
And King Zoheit evinced great wrath in his coun-
tenance till they reached the tents, and behold there
came some fugitives, and behind them a horseman
with a drawn sword in his hand. They contem-
plated the fugitives, and lo! they were Shedad and
his brother. Now when Basharah took away Amarah
and Rebia, and brought them to the Carad tents, he
mounted them on two stripped camels, and placed
them tail foremost, and proceeded crying them out
through the tents, saying, This is the punishment,
the lightest punishment for those who carry off
their countrywomen to the Arab tribes. All thé
women of the tribe of Abs and Carad came to enjoy
c2


20 _ PRINCE CAIS RELEASES THEM.


the sight, and Ibla stood with her companions : she
was superbly dressed, and all her sorrows had
vanished. She was conversing and saying (whilst
Amarah heard her), This is indeed but a small chas-
tisement for you. You stole my property—you
wanted to murder me—you made a pretty business
of it—but God has requited you speedily. Amarah
gazed at her, whilst she was glancing from right to
left, and flaunting about in the most beautiful fas-
cinating manner, and her words sank into his heart
cooler than the purest water: he screamed, Alas!
alas! for thee, O daughter of Malik! Oh! Oh!
for the hour of possession! Be silent, thou dole!
said Rebia, for all this has happened to us on ac-
count of thy love, and never wilt thou desist from
thy perverseness, till every vestige of us is rooted
out. Now Cais, King Zoheir's son, had been left
behind in the tents, and when the news reached
him of what had happened to his friends, Rebia
and Amarah, his pride was roused; he mounted
and rode towards the Carad tents, bellowing like a
lion, and the foam issuing from the corners of his
lips; and when he saw Rebia, he wept, and raised
his voice, and exclaimed: Alas! the disgrace of
this violence from those bastards! Where is the
respect of kinsmen? Sons of my uncle! where is
the noble pride of illustrious Arabs? But Rebia
continued in this abject state till Cais was quite
shocked, and the whole country seemed obscured in
his eyes. So he rushed-upon Basharah, and struck


ZOMEIR DESIRES ANTAR TO QUIT THE TRIBE. 21


him with his sword; he cut him across the shoul-
ders, and left him sprawling. He cried out to
Antar’s father and uncles, and they instantly dis-
appeared from his presence, alarmed at his high
rank and dignity, but not afraid of his prowess.
And when they all left him, he untied Rebia and
his brother ; Go to our tents, said he; and he him-
self galloped after the family of Carad, till they
launched out into the desert, where, pereeiving the
troops of King Zoheir returning with Antar, they
speeded towards them: My son, cried King Zoheir,
what is this affair? What stupidity has succeeded
to modesty and good sense? He stopped and said,
What discretion is there in man, when he sees the
chiefs of his tribe degraded? And he related the
story of Rebia, and the indignities Basharah had
made him suffer, and finally said, O my father, I
will never rest in this spot till I have satiated my
vengeance against the family of Carad, and have
put Antar to death. King Zoheir was distressed,
and felt assured the sword must fall upon his tribe,
and would disperse his people among the hills and
plains; for the animosity between the families of
Carad and Zeead could not be tranquillised: O
Aboolfawaris, said he to Antar, depart with your
party from this country, for these people will not
let you alone, and you will not submit to any in-
dignity, and this disturbance cannot terminate satis-
factorily. So depart from us, and do what you please.

Antar expressed his obedience and submission; |


RZ ANTAR’S ANGRY ADDRESS TO His TRIBE,


will instantly depart, said he, with my party, and
if I am able, I will rescue my ‘property, or will die
in the attempt. Then he addressed himself to King
@oheir, and thus:

“ Am Į injured? and my spear and sword are
“ my defence, and the guide to glory is attached to
“my hit. I have a two-armed power that can
“ struggle with lions and defend me. J am ho-
“ noured wherever I go. My person is respected,
“and my station is not easily attained. I will
“ abandon these noble dwellings; but the lustre of
“ swords shal] urge me on in the obscurity of the
“ dust. Cups of wine are at my disposal, but I
s desire only the blaze in the fiery contest. I will
“ soon quit you; J want not your country, but I
“ will attack you on the wings of darkness. I will
“ seek my enemies with my lian-associates, each a
“ lion in the battle and the contest: I abandon
“sleep, unless I can kindle a blaze at night-fall
“ that will involve my foes in a blast of fire. My
“ hand falls upan their heads like torrents of flakes
“ of fire in the dead of the night. Death they shall
“ behold exterminating their friends, and far shall
“ fly their heads hewn off by my sword. My cam-
“ rades shall shake their spears in their hands, and
“ infuse death into the entrails of their opponents.
“ The brilliancy of their swords in the clouds of
“ dust shall be like the beauteous rays of the sun
“ through the rain. You have renounced my deeds,
“ but my power is my companion, and the blow of


AND STERN REPLY TO PRINCE CAIS 23


“ my Indian blade among the tents. I will aban-
“ don the base and the dastardly, and I have drawn
“ my sword for an ungrateful prince. O songstress !
“ be thy song the neigh ! for that is my music, and
“ streams of blood my wine. Towards Ramda be
“my journey, for that is my abode, and the place
“for my tents. Speak not to me of the pleasures
“ of life, for the attainment of my high ambition is
“ my health and my sickness. In glory is the de-
‘light of every one anxious for renown, not in
“ drinking nor in eating. Shall I disgrace myself
“ by submitting to dishonour, when my sword falls
“ on the necks like an ostrich ?”

Prince Cais cut short his verses; Hey, bastard !
he exclaimed, you found Ibla in Shiban, and you
come to claim her property from the tribe of Abs
and Adnan. You should demand her goods from
the people where you found her. My lord, said
Antar, put not yourself into a passion, I am going
to leave you, and shall look after my own affairs ;
but my adventures and my deeds shall soon reach
you: you shall hear how I will rescue my property 3
but as to your expression of bastard, no one but
yourself had ventured to make use of such language,
or his death would have been at hand, and his exit
from this world instantaneous. Then he addressed
him, saying,

“ I had made of thee a strong breast-plate to
“ ward off from me the arrows of my foes, but it is
“ thou that hast thrown them. In thee I placed


24 ANTAR PREPARES FOR DEPARTURE.


“ my. strong hold when ignominy should assail me
“ on all sides; but if thou canst not preserve thy
“ friendship as a protection for me, be then neither.
‘for me nor against me, at least, keep aside and
“ be impartial, and let my enemies hurl their darts
‘Sat me. From how many foes have I drawn blood,
“ and from how many men have I desired to be re-
“ moved! I dread not disgrace when alone, even
“ when the battle destroys the horses and the horse-
“ men. There are people who must either live
“ great and renowned, or must hide their fall under
“ the earth.”

As soon as Antar had finished his verses, Strike
the tents, he cried to his father and his uncles, and
prepare for departure, that the heart of King Zoheir
may be at ease, and my lord Cais have all his wishes
fulfilled. ‘They did as he directed, and they se-
parated from the troops in order to seek the tents,
when lo! loud screams arose, and plunder and
pillage commenced among their dwellings; they
hastened on their horses to ascertain what was the
matter, indignation blazing in the heart of Antar :
Verily our tribe have evinced their hatred towards
us, he exclaimed, and he drew forth his sword, and
threw himself among the tents. The cause of this
was the family of Zeead; for they, as soon as
Prince Cais had liberated them, and had set out to
meet Antar, sought the Carad tents. Amarah en-
tered the dwelling of Malik with the view of ob-
taining a look at Ibla; but Rebia wanted some


REBIA DISCOVERS HIS PROPERTY. 25


horse trappings, when lo! he saw the chests Antar
had taken from him on the night-surprise, when he
was wounded at Rikaya beni Malik : there he also
found all the precious goods King Numan had
given him: he recognised the whole. Hola! hola!
he cried out, this is the property Antar took from
me by force; it was he who wounded me, and he
nearly killed me. Now when Cais had mounted in
order to liberate Rebia, a crowd of slaves had fol-
lowed him; This is all my property, said he to
them, that I brought from King Numan: I have
now found it at Antar’s, so carry it away to your
master’s, Prince Cais, and I will give you a good
share of it. As soon as the slaves entered the
habitations to plunder the goods, the women began
to scream out ; but they seized the chests and all that
was hung upon cords; so the maids and the slaves
made an uproar, shoving each other upon the ground.
When Antar heard these screams, he entered the
tents, resolved to ply his sword among both chief-
tains and slaves. But King Zoheir seeing the af-
fair become more serious, and the disturbances more
furious, began to be much alarmed, and as it was
near the close of the day, he cried out to his son
Cais, Take away your friend Rebia, and order him
to depart from us, and to go down to the barren
desert: let him not kindle dissensions among the
Arabs, and make us to become a common proverb.
Do you too, Shas, go to Antar, and send him away
without delay, and let there be no more said to us


26 ANTAR TAKES LEAVE OF SHAS, AND DEPARTS.


on the subject. Cais repaired to the tents, and
checking Rebia, prohibited any further tumult.
So likewise did Shas and Malik; they sought the
hero Antar, and when they joined him, they saw
death glancing from his eyes: they stopped him
with gentle expressions. O Aboolfawaris, said Shas,
truly your separation from us is like the separation
of souls from bodies, but no one can avert the
decrees of the Almighty, his orders must be obeyed.
Emigration is the most advisable plan for you:
bear this event patiently, and act honourably. Do
not be too much distressed, my cousin; all you
desire in this world is Ibla, and she will be with
you. My father will certainly repent of this deed,
and calamities and horrors will descend upon him ;
and as to this property Rebia has taken away, it
will revert to you after kissing your feet and your
hands; for they will all stand in need of you. Had
I known, said Antar, that this business between us
would have, come to this pass, I would have put .
Rebia to death, and had succeeded in all my wishes ;
but now his property has come to light, and he has
it, and out of respect to you, I have not been able
to do him any harm.

Antar took leave of Shas and Malik, his distress
and agitation being extreme. He ordered the slaves
to fasten the howdahs on the camels; they did all
he told them, and they loaded them with the bag-
gage and the families, and they left not a halter
behind. They then departed, traversing the wilds


HE PLUNDERS THE CATTLE OF FAZARAH, 27


and the wastes, the plains and the mountains,
amounting in all to two hundred and fifty famed
warriors, one hundred and fifty belonging to the
Carad division, and one hundred forming the party
of Qorwah. As to Basharah, they bound up his
wounds, and raised him on a tall camel, whilst
Rabist accompanied the women. The party pro-
ceeded till midnight, when Antar, Oorwah, and
fifty horsemen alighted, saying to his father and his
uncles, Do you go on ahead with the women. But
he and Qorwah mounted at daylight and galloped
over the plains till they came to the pastures of
the tribe af Fazarah: the sun was just risen, and
the cattle were grazing. Antar rushed upon them,
. and drove away all the he and she camels, and the
high-priced horses that belonged to the tribes of
Fazarah and Zeead, and when they had launched
into the desert, Send on the plunder with thirty
horsemen, said Antar to Oorwah ; do you stay with
me, that we may encounter the troops that will
come upon us, with these twenty men. Oorwah did
accordingly; the thirty went forward with the
plunder, Antar and Oorwah slowly following them.
As soon as the intelligence of the seizure of their
cattle reached the tribe of Fazarah, they all mounted,
but Hadifah was still weak from his fall, and was
incapable of riding. The troop marched off in
number five hundred, and with them four of Rebia’s
brothers. They went on till they overtook Antar,
who, when he saw the horsemen, and heard their


28 WHO RETIRE IN DISGRACE.


shouts, turned upon them, and met them, and in less
than an hour he had slain numbers of them, and
wounded all four brothers. Oorwah and his people
also slew those who were destined to die that day,
piercing their chests with the points of the spear ;
extinction and perdition fell on the tribe of Fazarah.
Antar smote off heads and skulls, and despatched
the horsemen to the mansions of annihilation, crying
out: Ye filthy Arabs, wherever ye go, Antar is be-
hind ye: we are the persons who have taken the pro-
perty of our enemies ; who will now deliver you from
our attack ? Know, my cousins, said Haml, there is
between Antar and the family of Zeead a most impla-
cable animosity, and every one that interferes in it
is destroyed and slain; and had I been aware that
it was Antar who had seized the cattle, I would not
on any account have gone out against him. So he
turned his horse about, and he and the rest re-
turned home, abandoning the family of Zeead.
When Antar had taken possession of as many bag-
gage-camels as he desired, he drove them on before -
him, and they all proceeded together till they over-
took the cattle, and pursued the journey to Rikaya
beni Malik, where the family of Carad had alighted,
who, when they saw Antar’s dust, mounted and
saluted him, and seeing all the he and she camels
he brought with him, they were greatly delighted.
Here they halted to repose from their fatigues, and
consult about the spot where they should fix their
residence. I must, said Antar, go to the land of


“THE MOUNTAIN OF RADM. 29 ;


Irak, and must labour in the utter destruction of
the tribe of Shiban. But, said Shedad, O my son,
do you not fear King Numan? No! exclaimed
Antar, by the faith of an Arab, nor even the King
of Persia, the lord of the balcony. O my brother,
said Shiboob, if you wish to effect so much, and to
battle with kings, come with me, and I will con-
duct you to the mountains of Radm and the valley
of Raml, where ten men can defend themselves
against the universe; and when we are in those
mountains, you may engage warriors as many as
you please, and the women will be secure. ‘This is
a most judicious arrangement, said Shedad, and a
measure that cannot be found fault with; for I
have heard of that spot, that the most timid can
defend it, and its inhabitants must be safe. So
they all. agreed upon this point, and they reposed
till the might was nearly passed, when they de-
parted for that country. |

Now this mountain was on the bordefs of Hidjaz,
in the direction of Irak ; it was stupendously lofty,
and he who would look at it would imagine it was
connected with the clouds; its summits rose so high
towards the heavens, the sun could almost burn it
with excess of heat and light: on its sides were
caverns and caves, and trees, and fruits, and forests,
the haunts of wild beasts and lions, and serpents.
There was not a single road but windings and
labyrinths that would bewilder the. mind of man.
It was like a strong fortress, and were ten men to


30 ANTAR AND RIS FRIENDS REPAIR TO IT,


stand firm at the mouth of the defile, they would
prevent the whole universe from reaching them ; for
there was no other path but by that gorge and.
defile, and between it and the tribe of Shiban they
were seven days journey.

When Antar heard this description from Shiboob,
he immediately assented to his proposal, and they
set off traversing the wilds and the wastes; and he
thus sang to them:

‘“¢ Where is there a friend of sound judgment and
“ faith, now that the greatest part of mankind are
“ false? Fortune has betrayed me even where I
“ had most trusted it! And can my efforts now
“ avert calamities from me? One day they demand
“ my exertions in the field of battle, and one day
“ they complain of my excesses. If the foe pur-
“ sued me, I liberated myself, however impetuous
“ was his pursuit; and when my spear chooses, it
“« impedes every assault, and fate and my steed ex-
“ tricate me from every danger. But now, O hea-
“ vens! shall I succeed? or will the enmity of my
“ adversaries prevail? My horse, when the dust of
“ battle inclosed him on all sides, sprang against
“ the thrusts of the tribes. I will haste in pursuit
“ of the chase, though the parched earth should
<< rise in waves, or the onset of combatants environ
“ me. A party of Absians accompanies me, whose
“ high celebrity is extended over the deserts; they
“ are beautiful, like lions in every spot, when the
‘‘ blood of their enemies is clotted over their jaws.”


AND FIX THEIR RESIDENCE OX IT. 31


They continued their journey, travelling night
and day, till they reached the mountain. The women
alighted from the camels, and Antar entered the
defile, accompanied by his father Shedad, his uncles,
Oorwah and his companions; and when they had
passed the entrance they perceived ah intricate
passage, and a valley abounding in forests, and they
heard the roaring of wild beasts and the lions. It
is impossible, said Antar, to dwell in this valley un-
less we burn down its sides with fire, otherwise there
will be no security for our women against danger.
So he ordered the slaves to light a fire in the forests,
and they did so: and before evening the flames
played in all quarters: the wild beasts were fright-
ened and fled away, and dispersed. This continued
for five days, and the snakes and the serpents were
burnt. On the sixth day the flames ceased to blaze,
and they entered the valley, and all danger was re-
moved from them. Before sunset the tents were
extended out, and the women and families entered :
the mountains re-echoed their voices. And they
soon beeame familiarized to their new abode, for-
getting their native home, and their former friends
and neighbours. Three days after, said Antar to
his father, now that our property and families are
in security, and that we have no occasion to harbour
any fear of the Arabs, I am anxious to proceed
against the tribe of Shiban, and punish them for
their conduct: I must drive away their cattle, and
take their families captive. We are few in number,


32 HE RESOLVES TO ATTACK THE SHIBANIANS,


my son, said Shcdad, and far away from home, and
if we separate froni our wives and families we cannot
secure them from our foul foes. This is not to be
dreaded, said Antar, for all our enemies are ahead
of us, and we are in quest of them, they are not
seeking us» My son, said Shedad, with how many
horsemen do you intend to go against Shiban? A
hundred brave fellows will be sufficient, replied
Antar; the remainder I will-leave with you. That
is not right, said Oorwah, for the Shibanians are
very numerous, particularly when Moofernd) shall
return. That tribe cannot consist of less than five
thousand bridles, besides confederates and neigh-
bours; my opinion is we should set out from hence
with one hundred and fifty men, leaving one hun-
dred behind, and with this indeed we shall be un-
dertaking a hazardous enterprise. Antar left with
the families a hundred horsemen under the com-
mand of his father, and recommending them to be
careful and vigilant, he and Oorwah departed with
a hundred and fifty, fearless of the approach of
death, and undaunted at fate even when it descends,
for they were all bold intrepid fellows, and were
also of the tribe of Abs and Adnan; and when
Antar stopped on the road, his heart aa all
his anxieties, he burst out thus:

s“ Calamities extend their arms against me; they.
“ oppose me, but I have resisted them. Vicissitudes
“ of fortune stop and slumber, for my courage has
s drawn aside their mantle. Contend not with a


ANTAR’S ANIMATING HARANGUE. 33


“man whose deeds the boldest warriors have ex-
“ perienced in the contest ; whose steed has stamped
“over the land of his enemies when he drenched
“ther dwellings with blood.” Woe to the tribe of
“Shiban! I have visited it, and dearly purchased
“war stretched out its arm. Dust rose on high,
“and its ocean swelled, and the bickering blade
“darted forth its lightnings. My spear plunged
“ into their entrails, and burst through their armour
“and their ribs. Their women arose in lamentations
“ for their husbands, who groaned in the agonies of
“death. O Ibla! for love of thee I feel a kindling
“flame; I have its anguish in the very folds of my
“bowels. On the day of my separation the fire of
“ my spirit burst out, rocks even would have feared
“it. O Ibla, oft as the raven of the desert pours
“ its plaintive note, to hear it in the dead of night
“ fills my heart with sadness. I have quitted my
“home, and there are my neighbours, but their
“ cupidity has cut off my society from them. Soon
“ shall they see infamy when the horses of death
“rush out upon them. I am the son of Shedad
“who covets exaltation, and my ambition soars
“ above them. Soon shall my lasting celebrity be
“sung, and in its report shall warriors feel the
“ highest pleasure.”

Antar continued his verses till Oorwah and his
people were greatly pleased, and Oorwah was all
astonishment. They travelled on towards Shiban,
and death appeared easy and insignificant to them.


VOL. III. D


34 MOOFERRIDJ LEARNS BASHARAH’S ARTIFICE.


But Mooferridj, when he returned from his services
in Persia, was very happy; he brought with him

wealth fire could not have consumed. On his way
home he stopped with King Numan, and staid as
his guest for three days, and he related to him all
that had happened to him in the cities of Khorasan.
On the fourth day Mooferridj departed, seeking the
land of Shiban, very anxious to revisit his native
land; and when he reached his country, and his
uncle Malik, son of Hosan, knew of his arrival, he
went out to meet him, and congratulated him on his
safety. Mooferridj alighted, quite delighted at his
return home, and before even inquiring about his
wife, he asked for Basharah. O my cousin, said
Malik, son of Hosan, Basharah has reverted to his
base origin, and he has done a deed no one ever
did before. What has he done, my cousin? de-
manded Mooferridj. Know then, my cousin, said
Malik, that your slave Basharah did not remain
above twenty days after your departure, when he
feigned having received a letter from ‘you, stating,
O Basharah, take away all my property and my
treasures, and deposit them in the mountain of
Radm and the valley of Raml, for I have suffered
insupportable distresses in the service of the Persian
monarch, and I am in the most deplorable condition.
It is my intention to escape by flight if I find an
opportunity. So he loaded every article in the ma-
gazines on the backs of the camels, and since then
I have heard nothing of him, and I have had no


HIS RAGE AT REARING OF IBIA’S SAFETY. 85


traces of him till lately, when a messenger came to
me from Rebia, saying, Your slave Basharah is
with Antar, and has restored to him his cousin Ibla.
Antar has realized all his expectations, and has de-
livered over to him all the property he took away.
He is now established with Antar in perfect hap-
pmess and contentment of heart, and he has done
all this on account of his beloved Rabiat, a base-born
girl, I-am going to King Numan, and I shall ac-
quaint him with this circumstance; but now here
you are, so do what you deem best. At hearing
this the eyes of Mooferridj turned red, and he
clasped his hands one within the other in excess of
rage and passion, exclaiming, O Malik, did we not
murder Ibla, and did not the slave conceal her in
the desert ? How then has she appeared amongst
the tribe of Abs and Adnan? As to that, said Ma-
lik, I comprehend it not. But Sinan, son of Ab-
doolazi, happened to be present; he was a knight
of Shiban, and their champion when they were sur-
prised by assaults night or day; Know, said he, O
Mooferridj, that your slave Basharah did not slay
Ibla as you ordered him, but he deceived you by
his tale; he waited till the coast was clear for him,
when he seized all your property, and repaired to
the slave, a bastard like himself, where he leads a
life of ease and comfort. Basharah shall do such
deeds as this, exclaimed Mooferridj, when I am
asleep or swathed in my winding-sheet, but as long
as I can mount on the back of a steed and have
D2


36 HIS PLAN OF RETALIATION.


about me five thousand horsemen of Shiban, and
behind me one like King Numan, my property shall
not be pillaged; no one shall venture to dishonour
my family. Send for your allies, cried Sinan, and
those in whom you confide in your difficulties and
your relaxations; lead us to the tribe of Abs that
we may extirpate every vestige of them, and ravage
their country, and level their boundary-marks with
the ground, and leave not one of them to report the
news, having first put to death their slave Antar.
This would not be proper, said Mooferridj, for
King Numan wishes to connect himself by marriage
to the tribe of Abs and Adnan, and to wed Mooted-
jerede, King Zoheir’s daughter; he has demanded
her, and if we proceed against them without his
orders, and execute such deeds upon them, he may
blame us and be angry. But my opinion is that I
should go to Numan and acquaint him with all these
circumstances, and then he will send a message and
liberate my property for me, my he camels and my
she camels, and will give me directions to march
against my enemies. Thus will we depart under
his commands, and will slay Zoheir, and Antar his
slave; we will exterminate his horsemen and his
troops, we will capture every thing, and make pri-
soners the high and low, and we will not suffer our
property to be plundered, or that slave Basharah to
triumph over us. Do as you please, said Sinan;
lead us whithersoever you choose, and we will gratify
your wishes.


HE REPAIRS TO KING NUMAN. 37


Each returned home and renewed his vows to
his wife and family. But Mooferridj was so irri-
tated at what had happened he could not stop longer
than that day. He returned to King Numan, and
m his heart there blazed a fire of rage against Ba-
sharah, and when he reached Hirah he rushed into
the presence of King Numan like one frantic, on
account of the loss of his property. But Numan
was amazed at his speedy return. Is it well with
you, Mooferridj? said he. No! he replied, infamy
and misery! And he told him what had happened
to him through his slave Basharah during his ab-
sence, and how he had seized all his property and
possessions, and had repaired to the tribe of Abs
and Adnan, and was now established with Antar,
son of Shedad. Did not you and Rebia, exclaimed
Numan, inform me that you had assassinated Ibla,
and had divided her property? Yes, said he, but
we were not witnesses to her murder. We de-
livered her over to Basharah, and ordered him to
put her to death, and bury her in the sand, and
since that we knew nothing about it. Do not dis-
tress yourself, said Numan, for all you possessed
shall revert to you, and the man who protected your
slave shall be brought bound before you, for I am
at this moment resolved on sending to King Zo-
heir to demand his daughter in marriage, and
truly Rebia promised me to do so for me, but now
indeed the affair is more serious in consequence of
what has happened to you. At the instant he wrote


38 NUMAN'S LETTER TO ZOHEIR.


a letter to King Zoheir couched in these terms:

' Know, O King Zoheir, head of the tribes, that it is

incumbent on us to improve the state of the Arabs

It has reached me that your slave Antar has quitted

the condition of servitude, and that you have ex-

tended to him your protection, and that you style

him as you style your cousins. It would be ad-

visable for you to pursue the established customs of
the Arabs, and not bring down upon yourself de-
struction. You must order Antar to restore Moo-
ferridj his slave, and all his property, and arrange
this affair with him to our satisfaction, otherwise we
shall punish him according to his acts, and shall
send him back to tend camels and sheep. After
this demand the marriage-settlement of your daugh-
ter Mootejerede as much as you please, that we may

send it to you. Do not send this messenger back
but with a suitable reply, and act like a wise, pru-
dent man, or you may repent of what you do.

- He despatched his letter with a courier, who tra-
versed the wilds and the sand-hills till he reached
the tribe of the noble Abs, and he happened to ar-
rive just two days after Antar’s departure, so he
came to King Zoheir, and saluting him, delivered
to him the letter. He opened it and read it, and

understood its contents. O Arab, he replied, your

master mentions something about taking from Antar

the property belonging to the tribe of Shiban. That.
man is no longer under my subjection that I can

command him on any point; for between him and


HIS RAGE AT EOHEIR’S REPLY. 89


us there have arisen troubles and dissensions. He
quitted us two days ago, he and his uncles, and all
the tribe that was connected with him. We have
heard he has taken the road to Irak; had he re-
mained, the two tribes would have been annihilated.
In a short time he will be a neighbour of King
Numan’s in some direction, so let him gain in-
formation of him, and let him do as he pleases with
him. But, moreover, we have no daughter fit for
marriage; and had I a daughter I should not send
her into a foreign land, and I shall not let any one
have authority over her; and with this answer there
is no occasion for a letter.

He gave hm a robe of honour, and sent him to
a house of entertainment. But the messenger de-
clined, and retraced his steps in a great rage, and
he did not stop traversing the deserts till he reached
Hirah. He came before the king, and told him
what had passed. His wrath and indignation were
extreme; his passion blazed and flamed. If I do
not degrade him, he cried, may I never possess his
daughter ! I must positively slay every one of them :
I will destroy the whole tribe, every warrior of
them. As to Antar, he must be heard of in some
of the lands, and he sent the Arab and the Persian
in quest of him. He afterwards requested his bro-
ther’s attendance, whose name was Mozeed, but the
Arabs surnamed him Prince Aswad (black prince).
He was a shedder of blood; of excessive pride and
arrogance; immense in form and bulk. He was


40 PRINCE ASWAD, NUMAN’S BROTHER.


like a strong tower, and could receive on his chest a
thousand horsemen in the field; and when he ap-
peared before King Numan, the latter informed him
of the news he had received, and communicated
King Zoheir’s answer, and that he had refused him
his daughter in marriage. Aswad smiled—the smile
of fury and indignation. O King, he cried, you are
too mild and easy with your foes, and you excite
the Arabs against you. A king must keep up the
' respect and awe of his station, or his supremacy will
be subverted. It would be right to send me agamst
King Zoheir, to devastate his country, and over-
throw his troops and armies, and capture his wife
and sons, and I will bring the whole with me into
your presence, that you may have them at your
disposal; otherwise you will be an object of shame
far and near, and the Arabs will say King Numan
demanded in marriage King Zoheir’s daughter, who
would not give his consent to his being her husband.
This representation increased Numan’s anger and
wrath, and immediately he equipped his brother
with ten thousand horsemen of the tribes of Lakhm
and Djuzam, and directed him to set out. As
soon as Aswad had departed, King Numan cared
no more about searching for Antar, but continued
every day to ride round the town with his attendants,
and the chiefs of his government, together with
Moofernid).


THE TRIBE OF SHIBAN FLY TO HIRAH. 41


CHAPTER XVIII.


Ir was on the fourth morning after Aswad’s de-
parture, they roamed far into the desert, when lo!
a dust arose, rolling from the direction of Shiban.
In an hour the dust was divided and split, and its
blackness was converted to a piebald hue, and under
it appeared a troop of horse in full retreat, and horse-
men scattered about in great disorder. At this, King
Numan’s alarms gave way to security; for they
were shouting out, Save us! save us! King of the
age: protect us from this calamity of day and night.

Mooferridj advanced to ascertain who they were,
and lo! they were his own horsemen—his own
cousins, and his own tnbe. What has befallen you ?
said he; and what mortal has thrown you into this
confusion? Antar, cried they all, came down upon
us; last night he surprised us in the tents; he made
our wives widows, and our children orphans; he
seized what he pleased, and left what he pleased.

Mooferridj dashed his fists against his forehead;
all patience, and even his senses, vanished. Well!
at last he cried, with how many horsemen did he
come against you, that he has treated you in this
manner? O Chief, they replied, we only saw him
with a few attendants.


a
42 NUMAN PROMISES TO ALD MOOFERRIDS.


Then said King Numan, whilst the world seemed
obscure in his eyes, Tell us by what road he is gone.
By God, said they, O King, we were like drunken
men, and had not the senses of women. We should
say he was actually in our rear, and that he was
_ pursuing our very footsteps; but should not as-

sistance reach us by the close of the day, indeed it
will be evident, that Antar has captured all our
families, and has taken the road of the mountains of
Radm, and the valley of Raml. By the faith of an
Arab, cried Numan, I will seek him out, were he
even to mount up to the skies ; and I will abandon
all the free-born women of Abs to be purchased as
slaves. But, to soothe the heart of Mooferridj, he
continued, do not be uneasy at what has happened.
Set out to-morrow for the mountains with the Shi-
banians, and take as many Arabs as you please ;
but if you vanquish this accursed slave, do not put
him to death, bring him to me, him and his uncles,
that I may hang them all-at the gate of the city.
Sinan was present: O King, by thy munificence,
he cried, were I and Mooferridj not afraid of your
reproaches, we had not brought this event upon
ourselves.

They returned to Hirah, and having consulted
about this important crisis till morning dawned,
Mooferridj assembled the fugitives and his com-
panions, amounting in all to a thousand horsemen,
with whom he set out for their own country, whilst
a flame was raging in his heart against Antar. Nu-


MOOFERRLDJ FINDS H13 COUNTRY LAID WAST: 49


man also was desirous of going with them, with the
horsemen of Lakhm and Juzam. No, no! said
Mooferrid)j, it is not an affair to require your inter-
ference; and when he reached his own home, he
saw the whole country ruined and plundered, and
some few tents on the summits of the hills, and the
women weeping and wailing. At this catastrophe
his anguish increased: he inquired for his own wife
and family, but could find no one to give him any
information about them. Thus was his calamity
heightened, and his misfortune increased, and so
great was his affliction, he could not remain there
above an hour, but set out with his brave army for
the mountains of Radm, following Antar’s track.
But Antar, having quitted the mountains as we
described, continued his journey over the wilds and
wastes, till he came near to the tribe of Shiban. He
arrived early in the morning, and alighting at some
retired spot, he sent Shiboob to gain intelligence.
Shiboob darted forth as a bird on the wing, and
returned about mid-day, saying, Oson of my mother,
there are not in the dwellings more than a thousand
horsemen. How is that? said Antar. Mooferridj,
replied Shiboob, returned from the King of Persia
full of joy and delight ; but when he heard that Ba-
sharah had seized his property (for his cousin Malik,
son of Hosan, had given him every information in
consequence of Rebia having acquainted him by a
message, that you had regained Ibla, and that all
his property was in your hands) ; he suffered what


44 ANTAR'S ATTACK ON THE TRIBE OF SHIBAN.


never happened to any one before. He instantly
returned to King Numan to report this intelligence,
and to consult about an expedition against the tribe
of Abs, and to take vengeance on them. In the
excess of his resentment occasioned by this cata-
strophe, he said to his cousin, Never will I drink of
wine, till I can assuage. my heart on that base-born
Antar ; and truly that tribe since his departure are
all quite at a loss what to do, they seem careless of
misfortunes, and are asleep, and feel secure from
every calamity. The most advisable plan is, that
you should rush upon the Shibanians under the
cover of the night; and when you are near the tents,
divide into three bodies, and trample down the whole
tribe under the hoofs of your steeds. Thus will
you attain your ends; thus will you succeed in all
your projects.

By the faith of an Arab, exclaimed Antar, you
have advised well. So he immediately mounted,
followed by his men, and Shiboob preceded them
like the northern blast till the day was spent, and
night came on with impenetrable obscurity. The
lights of the tribe shone upon them; but the night
was utter darkness as it vaulted over the two hori-
zons. They formed into three divisions, and shouted
out in every direction : they poured down among the
tents and dwellings, and plied their spears and their
swords among the Shibanians. The east and the
west were in commotion. ‘The whole region was in


convulsion; the country trembled beneath them;


HE CAPTURES THE WOMEN AND RETURNS, 45


the warriors started from their pillows; the hearts
of the maidens palpitated ; the virgins were made
captives, and the horsemen expected to become
prisoners. ‘The darkness and obscurity stupefied
their senses ; all their movements and attempts were
thwarted. ‘The coward found no hole to creep out
at: the horsemen sought relief from the pressure of
the field of battle: the King of Death was firm in
grasping souls. The sword continued its execution till
the night became illumined, and the morning dawned
in its brilliancy : the Absians were still engaged ;
their garments were as if painted with blood.

It had been indeed a most dreadful night: but
Antar acquired all the glory and the honour; and
he arose lord of the land of Shiban, master of their
property and their women. He repaired to the
habitations of their chiefs, such as Mooferridj, and
Sinan, and Malik, and all the head men of the tribe;
where he captured their wives, and drove away their
daughters and children, slaying their cuckolded hus-
bands. He took three of Mooferridj’s wives pri-
soners, and four of his cousin’s daughters, all of whom
were most accomplished females. Oorwah and his
people, and the family of Carad, obtained all the
noble steeds and camels, and they departed for the
mountains of Radm, leaving their enemy’s country
ruined, and all its vicinity destroyed ; and they con-
tinued their march till between them and their friends
there was only one day’s journey.

So in the morning they came near the country


46 BUT MEETS HIS FRIFNDS ALL PRISONERS.


whose mountain sides had been burnt; when Antar
spied out ahead a tremendous dust increasing upon
them, and a lofty cloud of sand rising over them.
Do you see that dust? said Antar to Oorwah, what
can there be beneath it? Oorwah extended his ken
towards it, and he perceived a dust approaching,
rising to an immense height; it augmented, and the
black column was advancing upon them. O Cham-
pion of the Absians ! said Oorwah, I do indeed per-
ceive a towering dust coming towards you. I think
it must be some booty that God has sent to you.
Let the horses be rested, said Antar, after their hot
march. So they rested them, whilst the men pre-
pared their warlike weapons, and fixed their spears.
Antar stationed forty to take charge of the property,
and the remainder advanced like stern lions, in
number one hundred and ten horsemen. They
marched on till the dust came near to them, when
they heard issuing from it loud screams and tumul-
tuous shrieks, every thing proving some dreadful
disaster and calamity; and the general cry was, O
by Abs! O by Adnan! ‘who will protect the Absian
women? who will release their captive females ?

As soon as Antar heard these clamorous voices,
he shuddered. We are ruined, O Ebe ool Ebyez !
he cried; good God! what Arabs can have over-
powered us, and brought this misfortune upon us?
Who can have dared to insult us, lions of the dens as
we are?

Now the cause of all this was Rebia, who as soon


.
-


REBIA RESOLVES ON REVENGE. 47


as he returned to the tribe of Fazarah, and heard
that Antar had plundered his property, and had
driven away his horses and camels, went to Hadi-
fah, gnawing his hands from very passion. O Ebe
Hidjar ! said he, how careless you have been of us
this time! and how you have failed in protecting
us! and we are your neighbours. O Rebia, said
Hadifah, had I not been much debilitated by the
effects of the fall, I would not have failed in pro-
tecting your property in this emergency. I did not
know .it was Antar that had made this predatory
assault, or I would not have been kept away from
him, even had my life tasted of horrors; but I
imagined they were some rapacious Arabs; so my
brother and yours went out, and with them a body
of horsemen, whom I enjoined to make every exer-
tion in settling the business, and to bring back the
horses and property; but they returned routed and
disgraced, and when I learnt this circumstance,’ I
became as if drunk without wine : but if I do not
overtake that Antar, and gratify my hatred in his
death, I shall die without the affliction of any dis-
ease. O my cousin, said Rebia, I cannot possibly
remain here after this degradation.

So they all made preparations from that day,
amounting -in all to seven hundred horsemen, all
well-trained warriors, and they set out in pursuit of
Antar, in despite of the prohibitions of the Sheikh
Beder, for they would not listen to him, but tra-
versed the barren wastes and wilds. Know that we


48 ZALIM, SON OF HARITH.


are proceeding against the consent of our father,
said Haml to Hadifah, and we have rebelled against
the Sheikhs of our tribe. I fear this expedition will
_terminate ill, so that we shall incur the reproaches
of our countrymen, and not one of us will be able
to reside among them. My advice is, that we should
pass in our way to the tribe of Marah, our ally, in
which we confide in our difficulties and our relaxa-
tions, and take with us their champion Zalim, son of
Harith, with a party from their clan and noble war-
riors. ‘Then indeed we shall succeed in our projects
and attempts, and shall take our vengeance on that
Antar, even had he with him the tribes of The-
mood and Aad. This would be a great disgrace
said Hadifah, that we, who boast of our descent and
rank—that we, exalted among the Arab chieftains,
should not be able to redeem our rights from a
wretch of a slave, but must incite against him the
horsemen of other tribes.

Haml had been induced to address his biae on
this subject on account of the dread he felt in his
heart of Antar. Rebia joined him, for he knew that
this knight whom Haml had mentioned would ac-
complish all their desires. Now this Zalim was a
knight of the tribes of Marah and Dibyan, and he
was a great object of astonishment in those days ;
and in addition to the superiority he assumed over
the other Arab chiefs, on account of his extreme in-
trepidity, he boasted of a sword he had inherited
fromĵhis father and ancestors. It was called Zool-


His SWORD ZOOLHYY AT. 49


hyyat (endued with life), for when it was unsheathed,
it was impossible for any one to fix his eyes on it, on
account of the extraordinary effect and imaginary
sensations it produced. It was said that it had
been the sword of the great Jobaa, son of King
Himyar, who was formerly monarch of the universe :
and when it fell upon a rock, it would cleave it in
two; and did it encounter steel, it shattered it; and
when it moved, it glittered and sparkled, and over
its sides there crept the wavy forms of biting snakes.
Zalim was so delighted with it, that when he went
to bed, he had it within his arms, and by day he was
never apart from it. It is thus described in this
distich :

“In no trouble, in no adversity do I fear death,
“ when it confronts me; for how can I dread the as-

“ saults of death, and Zoolhyyat is glittering 1 in my
“ nght hand?”

So when Haml mentioned Zalim, Rebia imme-
mediately coincided with him. At last they brought
over Hadifah to their views, and travelled on till
they reached the tribe of Marah.. There they
alighted, and were hospitably received. Rebia ìn-
formed Zalim of the circumstance of Antar, and
the troubles they had endured. In the excess of
his pride, Zalim smiled ; By the faith of an Arab,
said he, the tribe of Abs deserves to be degraded on
= account of their conduct towards this despicable, in-
significant slave, and all the disgraceful events that
have befallen you are owing to your Chief Zoheir.

VOL. ni. E


50 THEY MARCH AGAINST ANTAR.


It was he who admitted him to the rank and con-
sideration of an Arab. I am not unwilling to at-
tend you on this expedition, neither does the danger
or trouble annoy me. I am only distressed on ac-
count of my sword Zoolhyyat, that it should be
contaminated with the blood of slaves, the offspring
of carcasses.

Then having entertained them for three days, he
set out with them, accompanied by five hundred
noble horsemen on celebrated steeds, eagerly pur-
suing Antar, and continually demanding intelligence
of him in the deserts and the cities, till they heard
that he was in the mountains of Radm, and the
valley of Raml. May God curse the father of his
beard, and may he be afflicted with unspeakable
calamities! Does he think thus, exclaimed Zalim,
that mountains can protect him from me, or that
the defile can defend him? By the faith of an Arab,
verily will I make him taste of the wine of misfor-
tunes. They proceeded in the right direction, hav-
ing obtained a trusty guide. But as to Amarah,
the world could not contain him, for now he felt se-
cure that Antar would at any rate be slain, and
that ibla would console him for all his sorrows; and
when they came near to the valley and the two
mountains (there being only two days between
them), a slave belonging to Rebia met them as he
was seeking the land of Hidjaz. My masters, said
the slave, in answer to their inquiries, know that
Antar is gone against the Shibanians, with one


THEY CONCERT THEIR FUTURE PLANS, 51


hundred and fifty brave fellows: and there only
remain one hundred more to protect the wives and
women ; and had not he and Shiboob been absent,
I could not have escaped.

When they heard this, they were much delighted:
Truly, said Hadifah, the business has turned out as
you wished, and every difficulty has been rendered
easy. Arabs, cried Zalim, how have we gained our
point, if Antar does not fall, and is not vanquished ?
By the faith of an Arab, our trouble is misspent, and
our pains are only increased. O Chief, said Hadifah,
we will content ourselves with capturing their wives,
and we will return home: Antar mdeed will be safe,
but if we do not kill him, we shall kill many of his
party. O Hadifah, said Rebia, let us first carry off
the goods and families we shall find in the moun-
tains, and then continue the pursuit of Antar, where-
ever he may be, and when we have extirpated him,
we will go to King Numan, and will represent to
him the necessity of his sending his brother Aswad
to King Zoheir, to drive him into his presence,
and force him to give his daughter to him. I
will give Ibla in marriage to my brother Ama-
rah, and will make a marriage-feast, the equal of
which no chiefs ever prepared: then we will re-
turn home, and be quiet and comfortable. Truly,
said Amarah, I am of your opimion on this point,
O Rebia; for I am quite sure Ibla was only created
for me, and her charms will only coalesce with
mine.

E 2


52 AND ATTACK THE PARTY IN THE DEFILE,


They continued their journey without delay till
they reached the mountain, and the dust they oc-
casioned appeared like the black shades of night.
The Absians that were reconnoitring soon disco-
vered them, and immediately gave notice of the cir-
cumstance to the horsemen, and shouted through
the mountains. Shedad and his brothers mounted
with the hundred horsemen, and the whole land
was in confusion with the screams of the women
and maideas, whilst the men hurried out to the
defile and pass, having first enveloped themselves in
steel.

The horsemen of Fazarah soon came in sight, the
troops divided, and they all made one universal
shout, making the whole country tremble. They
attacked the Absians like tall furious sea-monsters,
headed by Zalim, as he poured forth the bellow of
devouring lions, and drew out his Zoolhyyat. Ina
moment the parties encountered, and they exhibited
their fury, shouting in the name of their fathers and
ancestors, and struggling in the battle and.the con-
test; the sharp-edged scimitars and long spears
laboured among them, and foes and enemies ex-
ulted over them; but numbers multiplied upon
the Caradians after they had engaged at the en-
trance of the strait, like brave men, who fear dis-
grace; and though difficulties increased upon this
small party, they preserved the head of the defile,
and plied the thrust and the blow. But when
Zalim perceived that their courage still protected


WHO ARE MADE PRISONERS. 53


them in that spot, he dismounted with a party of
horsemen, and penetrated through the defile. There
the battle began to rage—blood was spilt, and the
fire of contention blazed till Zalim had slain seven
of the Absians, and had driven the remainder into
the valley.

Rebia and Hadifah, seeing what Zalim had
done, also dismounted, followed by their party, and
thus occupied the defile. But when the women
perceived this calamity, they uncovered their heads
and let fall their hair, and there was not one but
was convinced of captivity and misfortune; and
about mid-day the tribe of Fazarah effected their
entrance; they bound the Absians as prisoners,
and took possession of their women and property.
They drove away the camels, and they all issued
forth from the mountains. Basharah fell into the
hands of Rebia, who gave him a cruel beating.
Amarah reproached Malik, Ibla’s father. You
abandoned your family and your clan, said he, and
you have followed the advice of this black slave,
and these are some of his blessings that have now
happened to you, and he will most certainly drown
you in a sea of calamities.

Shedad heard this speech. O son of Zeead, he
cried, let it suffice that you can abuse my son in his
absence, for he would have brought down on you
his severest punishments, and know that nothing
will last, and he will assuredly come in this di-
rection. Every one of ye will feel his frown—and


54 ZALIM’S EXULTATION


every one of ye will repent of this deed. This
passed ; they pursued the tract of Antar, the women
and children going before them, but Zalim staid
behind with the chieftains of the tribes of Marah,
and boasting of his arts, he thus exclaimed :

“‘ Is it thy teeth, O lovely girl, that smile, or is
“it the lightning that draws its sword before me ?
“ Is it thy form, or the branch of the palm, that
“ waves to the zephyr, as it resembles the date-
“ tree? O daughter of Aamir, do not disdain the
“ dust whose brightness gives brilliancy in the dead
“ of the night. If thou art ignorant of me, ask the
“ tribe of Abs, when I brandished my scimitar;
“ I surprised their horsemen in the defile, my sword
“ cleft their flesh and their bones—lI drove away
“ their women when I had reduced their virgins
“ to consternation and mourning. How should a
“ worthless slave protect the wives of the noble, or
“ be able to preserve his engagements? He shall
t soon see, if he comes alive, that my sword’ can
“ act when death even is still: it is the destiny of
“ the world when crowds rush round our dwellings. ©
“ But what glory is there in this contest, that my
“ sword should descend upon a dastard slave!
“ Where in the combat is there one like me when
‘ my. scimitar flashes its fires? All mankind lie
“ beneath my sword, and with me right and wrong
‘¢ are confounded.”

- When Zalim had finished’ his verses, the horse-
men were delightcd at his poetry and prose, and


THE EFFECT OF ANTAR’S APPEARANCE. 55


extravagantly was he flattered by Rebia and the
wretched Amarah. They continued their journey
till the next day, about three hours after sunrise,
when they met the hero Antar. Amarah happened
to be in the van, looking at the women, and sur-
rounded by a body of the tnbe of Fazarah and
Marah, and talking to Malik, son of Carad, till
eyes fell upon eyes, and Antar’s slaves shouted out
on his arrival; he heard the screams of the women,
and his indignation became most violent; he at-
tacked the family of Zeead, and pierced the first
through his chest, and the barb started out between
his shoulders; he urged on, and struck the second,
and he rolled him over in the sand. As soon as
the horsemen saw this accident, their reason de-
serted them, and they felt assured this must be
Antar. So they shrunk to the rear, the despairing
Amarah at their head, crying out, Fly, my cousins!
The slaves of the family of Carad crowded together
upon them, and plied their sharp swords among
them, shouting out, Hey! Antar is come against
ye, and to-day will he requite you for your deeds to-
wards the women and children. In a short time
the men were all released from captivity. Antar
advanced towards Ibla, and saluted her; he also
ordered Shiboob to release his father’s women and
his uncle’s, whilst he and Oorwah went forwards
with one hundred horsemen to meet the foe, leaving
the remainder to protect the females.

Amarah came up to his brother Rebia and Ha-


56 THE TWO PARTIES ENGAGE.


difah, and meeting the troops, exclaimed as above,
and the whole desert was in confusion. What is the
matter with thee ? asked Rebia. What has happened
tothee? What has appeared unto thee under the black
of the dust? Antar has appeared against us, they
cried out, he is slaying our brothers and our cousins,
and has come up with the women and the children,
and taken the property, the camels, and the infants,
and had he not been occupied with Ibla, he would
not have left one of us alive, not a white or a black.
Prepare your warlike weapons, cried Rebia, and be
ready for the conflict. Zalim rejoiced in the news,
and he was much delighted at Antar’s arrival; he
gave the reins to his horse, and he galloped after
the horsemen, the heroes and warriors following
him. When lo! Antar appeared before them like
a lion in armour, and as his companions followed
him, he cried, Ye sons of ordure, you have pur-
sued us from your homes, and have gained over to
fight against me the tribes of Marah and Dibyan,
and you conceive yourselves secure from the cala-
mities of day and night. He instantly unsheathed
his sword and assaulted—the desert was in tumult—
all promiscuously crowded—attack and defence was
the word — swords made hot work—the coward
sought to fly, but found no way to escape. The ir-
resistible brave stood firm, and the scimitars neither
spared friend nor foe. The blows of Antar fell
more powerful than the stones of an engine ; he dis-


persed whole troops, and mangled them dreadfully ;


ZALIM MADE PRISONER. 57


he encountered Zalim and Hadifah in the middle
of the field of carnage, and they were also eager in
quest of him; but Hadifah being the nearest to
Antar, thrust at him with his spear, saying with
a loud voice, Take that, thou son of a slave,
I am Hadifah, the son of a free-born woman.
When Antar perceived the thrust directed towards
him, he parried it off very skilfully ; he roared at
Hadifah, and turning round the barb of his spear,
he struck him with the butt end, and sent him
rolling over on his head. He then sought Zalim,
and wanted to treat him as he had done Hadifah,
but Zalim smote Antar’s spear and broke it, and
just as he attempted to close with him, Antar
howled, and he was horror-struck; he smote him
with the remnant of the spear on his chest, and it
palsied him, the end of the spear grazed on Zalim’s
elbow-bone ; it paralysed every nerve, and forced
him to let go his sword; Antar rushed upon him,
he grappled him, and seized him by the rings of his
corslet, clung to him, and took him prisoner, and
gave him over to his comrades, wretched and de-
graded! That.is right, cried Shiboob, seize these
cuckolds, that I may bind them fast; come on!
now to the others. Antar commenced the conflict,
and he pierced the chests of the combatants; hé
exhibited all his powers, and he extended the heroes
right and left. Shiboob in the mean time had se-
cured Zalim and Hadifah. Oorwah and his people,
with his uncles who had been released, accompanied


58 JOY OF THE ABSIANS: MOOFERRIDJ APPEARS.


Antar. Rebia being alarmed, lest he should be
disgraced and overwhelmed, had nothing for it but
to scamper off and escape. Antar made hot work
in their rear, and the brave were irresistible in their
assaults. Only one hundred escaped out of the
thousand, and they were mounted on swift steeds.
The tribe of Abs returned, and darkness obscured
the land, whilst Antar stood before them, as if
bathed in a sea of blood. Having collected the
booty, they passed on, and early in the night they
came near to the mountains, and by day-break they
entered with the prisoners of Fazarah, and those
of Marah and Dibyan, all bound fast with cords.
The slave-women preceded them with the cymbals
and dulcimers, and joy was universal among them.
Early in the day they entered, and it was a most
glorious morning for them; they pitched the tents
and pavilions, and stretched the tent-ropes ; but the
happiest of the party was Basharah, whom Antar
had released from the power of Rebia. But they
had only been established one day in that valley,
when the next morning the dust of the tribe of
Shiban, with Mooferridj, arose upon them. The
troops were extended nght and left, and the war-
riors and heroes came forth. The Absians, as soon
as they saw them, prepared for the engagement ; the
polished steel glittered in their hands, and the bur-
nished armour flashed with the brilliancy of light-
ming. They rushed out of the defiles and pressed
forward for the battle and the contest. When the


HE 15 JOINED BY REBIA. 59


Shibanians saw them advancing, Do you see that
black slave? exclaimed Mooferridj; how his pre-
sumption has overpowered his reason? he has even
quitted the mountain, and intends to attack the
tribe of Shiban and its five thousand warriors, and
he has scarcely two hundred and fifty vagabond
horsemen. The fault is not his, but the fault is
with him who has obliged us to fight him, and that
is Rebia, who was the cause of all this disturbance.
Be not surprised at what Antar is doing, said Sinan,
for truly he is anxious for the carnage of death. It
happened that Rebia had decided on escaping at
the first onset, so he fled till he reached the
tribe of Shiban, and as soon as they recognised
him, they asked what was the matter; he in-
formed them of all that happened, and wept at
the severity of his misfortunes. Comfort your
mind and brighten up your eye, cried Mooferrid},
for we are marching in quest of Antar, and we
shall certainly overwhelm him, and reduce him to
distress in his property and family. Mooferridj re-
lated to him the affair of Prince Aswad and his ex-
pedition against the tribe of Abs and Adnan, and
all the arrangements of his brother King Numan.
So Rebia was consoled with this intelligence, and
he returned with them that he might enjoy the
spectacle of Antar’s destruction, and release his
brother Amarah from misery. For he saw their
number amounted to five thousand, all warriors,


60 SINAN’S FURY AT REBIA’S ACCOUNT OF ANTAR.


brave and intrepid, and with them was their cele-
brated knight Sinan, and they were marching under
the orders of King Numan. By the faith of an
Arab, said he to himself, Antar cannot escape this
time. Thus they eagerly pressed their march till
they approached the mountains of Radm, as we
have mentioned, and Antar went out to meet them,
as we have described. And Sinan said to Moofer-
ridj, that Antar would certainly seek the contest.
O Sinan, said Rebia, Antar is never fatigued, never
harassed, and in his heart he is only anxious to meet
you, and succeed in his attempts against you, and
were you even to fill the plains and the mountains,
he would still come out against you, and be only
the more eager to encounter you, for he would be
saying in his soul, that he would annihilate ye all,
high and low, and that he would carry off your
property and your plunder. When Sinan heard
this, he roared and started forth in quest of Antar,
thus exclaiming:

“ Hast thou captured my women and seized my
“ property, bastard slave, thou camel-driver! Shall
“ I remain dispirited and in disgrace, and my sword
“ sparkle, brilliant and polished? My spear, when
“ I brandish it in the palm of my hand, will dive
“ through the strong-ribbed mountain. Shame, O
“ Fortune! that a slave should conquer, and the
s chiefs and lords be discomfited! Were she im-
“ partial, this scum of men would not stride the


ANTAR ASSAILS THE SHIBANIANS. 61


“noble steeds. But, O daughter of my uncle,
“ grieve no more, though the nocturnal vicissitudes
“ have separgted us! As to fortune, it is two days
“ sweet and one bitter; and among men there are
“two sorts, the base and the noble. How many
“ exalted tribes have I overwhelmed! I have re-
“ turned, and their warriors in captivity; and how
“many flames of fire have I kindled with the edge
“of my sword on the chests of the noble com-
“ batants !”

When the Shibanians heard Sinan’s harangue, and
perceived that he was preparing for the slaughter,
his men galloped forward, most desirous to re-
lease their wives and families, directing their spear
points towards Antar, and one thousand were the -
number that followed him. Antar, being aware
of their intent, took with him his father Shedad
and his uncles Malik and Zakhmetuljewad, and
Amroo, Ibla’s brother, and altogether thirty of the
family of Carad. Stay here, said he to Oorwah,
with these hundred horsemen -and occupy Sinai,
whilst I repulse the troop that accompanies him,
and I will soon return to you. Antar made the
attack against the thousand horsemen, and rushed
down upon them, impetuous as a torrent; he
charged among them east and west, and overwhelmed
them with thrusts and blows; and he never dashed
into a division, but he dispersed it, nor a troop but
he crushed it; and thus also acted his brother
Shiboob, the dust-coloured dragon. He never sc-


62 BATTLE CONTINUES; CORWAW MADE PRISONER,


parated from his horse Abjer, but protected him
from the blows of the warriors; whilst his father
Shedad and the horsemen kept up a fierce conflict,
and in less than an hour the troop retreated from
the dust and the darkness, a hundred of them being
slain, and more wounded. By the faith of an
Arab, said Mooferridj, we have fallen into a most
dreadful misfortune, we did not lay our account
to this; in fact, thirty horsemen have been able
to effect all this destruction, and the party, though
only consisting of two hundred and fifty, will at this
rate be equal to tén thousand, and we consist of
only five thousand, and the remainder, how shall we
answer them? My advice, cried Rebia, is, that
you should attack with the tribe of Shiban, and
overpower them with the horsemen, otherwise we
cannot succeed; overtake your cousin Sinan, that
Antar may not kill him in the field of battle.
_ Mooferridj shouted out to his men, and they in-
stantly unsheathed their swords, and brandished
their spears, and the universe was in convulsion at
their shouts. ` Above three thousand joined them
in the assault, and in a formidable charge sought
. the defile and the mountain. At that time Antar
had returned to his companions, and he found
Sinan coming back with the tribe of Shiban, and
with them Oorwah as his prisoner: a numerous
host surrounded them. Now Sinan, when Antar
left him, attacked the hundred horsemen, and as-
sailed them with his sword; he routed them, and


_ BUT 18 RESCUED, AND SINAN 19 TAKEN. 68


made them retreat into the mountains, having slain
thirty. He also resolved on penetrating into the
defile, and releasing the women of Shiban; but
Oorwah again assailed him, and prevented him ;
they fought for an hour, but Sinan saw his com-
panions were cut up, and that only five hundred
stood firm with him, the remainder having taken to
flight, whilst others checked him from coming up
with Antar. Aware of this disaster, and seeing
how the shouts arose over him, his passion and fury
increased ; so he closed with Oorwah and grappled
him, stopping all means of escape, and extending
towards him his mighty arm, he seized him by the
rings of his armour, and held him fast. Thus
having taken him prisoner, and delivered him over
to some of his men, he turned about to attack
Antar, who was also in quest of him. He dis-
persed his horsemen and his troops, and as Sman
stretched out his spear at him, and cried out at
him, and thrust at him, Antar emote the spear and
shivered it: thus parrying him off till he came
close to him, he pressed on him, and struck him
with the flat of his sword, and tumbled him off his
horse. Shiboob pounced on him and bound him
fast, and tied his arms and his sides. As soon as
the Shibanians saw this terrible event, they aban-
doned Oorwah cast upon the sand, and escaped by
flight towards Mooferridj; the troops were all
scattered and discomfited. Shouts arose on all
sides, and the dust thickened to the east and to the


64 MOOFERRIDJ ABUSES REBIA.


west. Antar cried out to the noble Absians; they
were on the alert, and brandished their spears and
their swords; the thrusts were incessant and over-
powering, and the voice of the speaker was silenced :
they seized each other by the chin and the throats,
and every path and road was choked up with the
warriors. But God prospered Antar and the won-
ders he did that day, as also his horsemen and
tribe, and his father Shedad and his uncles.
Oorwah soon sprung again on the back of his
horse, and allayed his heart upon the tribe of Shi-
ban. The scimitar continued to cleave, and blood
to flow, and men to rave and fall, till the day
closed and was obscured, and night coming on,
each division retired and separated. ‘The tnbe of
Abs alighted at the entrance of the defile to guard
it against invasion or surprise; but Antar ordered
Shiboob to take Sinan to the valley, and tie him up
with the other prisoners. ‘The tnbe of Shiban also
alighted, and their ruin and rout was evident.
Mooferridj endured more than ever went to the
heart of man, on account of the capture of his
cousin Sinan, and the destruction of so many of his
horsemen. ‘Thou mine of fraud and deceit, roared
he at Rebia, by the faith of an Arab, had I thrust
at Sinan my cousin for a whole day, I should never
have gained my point against him, and never should
I have been able to touch him, ere fatigue had ener-
vated my arm; but this infernal slave has taken
him prisoner in an instant, and truly I shall pass


WRANGLING OF REBIA AND MOOFERRIDJ. 65


this night in a state of stupefaction ; for if I go out
against him, I shall become a scandal among the
Arabs; and if I do not attack him, we shall not
succeed in our expectations. Take my advice, said
Rebia, clothe yourself in brilliant steel to-morrow
morning, and march your troops against him, and
let not one of your companions remain behind ;
smite their horsemen and warriors with the sword,
tll you drive them to the defile, and then enter
after them; thus-will you succeed in your hopes;
and should every one of them slay ten of yours,
and even more, you will then even have the ad-
vantage with the remainder. This, Rebia, is ad-
vice becoming you ! he replied, this is your sagacity !
your wit! how! shall we hasten the men upon
Antar, and leave him to charge upon our flanks,
and play upon us with his sword and his spear?
By the faith of an Arab, had not the day closed
upon us, not a spot of ground would have been
left for any one, but had turned his face to the
desert and the waste. Thus they continued wran-
gling till the armies of obscurity departed. And as
soon as it was day, the Shibanians started up ready
for the fight and the contest; they fixed their spears
and prepared to exterminate lives. But the first
who shone on the plain and the scene of blows and
thrusts was Antar. He galloped and charged, and
urged his Abjer to the theatre of contention, and
thus expressed himself’:

“The morning of thrusts in the field of battle


VOL. Ill. F


66 AKTAR’S WAR-SONG.


“ (where wine is not put round in glasses), 1s dearer
“ to me than the varied amusements with the cup,
“and the ewer, and the flowers. My wine is in-
“ deed that which gushes about the spear’s point,
“ when the war-steeds trample. I am the slave, of
“ whom it shall be reported that I encountered a
“ thousand free-born heroes: my heart was created
“ harder than steel, how then can I fear sword or
“ spear? I have met the chargers, and I cared
“not: I am raised above Arcturus, and the Lyre
“ or the Eagle: when the warrior beholds me, he
“ avoids me, his courage fails, and he flies. Ye
“ have indulged, ye people of Shiban, a thought,
“ but my horse and my perseverance have thwarted
“ your imagination. Ask Rebia of me when he
“ came against me with the chiefs of Beder. I
“ took their chiefs prisoners, and only quitted them
“ when I: had dispersed them over every desert.
‘“‘ Here now I again come forth, and in you will I
“ appease my heart and allay my bosom; I will
“ seize the property of Ibla with my sword, and
“ the lord of the bdlcony shall acknowledge my
“ power.”

As soon as Antar had terminated this address, he
sought the contest, and the flame was kindled afresh
in his bosom. Mooferridj sprang on his horse's
back, and being cased in his armour, he thundered
down to the field of battle, and charging to and
fro, exclaimed: Thou vile slave, it is disgraceful,
infamous, and ignominious, to fight with thee!


MOOPERRIDJ TAKEN PRISONER. - » ©


But Antar sent forth a shout at him that would
have split a stone. Mooferridj received him as the
parched earth the first of the ran. They gave two
yells, that excoriated the ears of their horses, and
made every limb of the horsemen tremble.‘ They
commenced the engagement. Rebia was much
alarmed for Mooferridj, that Antar should over-
power him. - It was not judicious in Mooferndj to
go out against this devil, said he, and I fear some
accident will happen to him. To which Malik, son
of Hosan, replied, By the faith of an Arab, this
calamity was all owing to you. -Son of Zeead, had
it not been for you, we should never have known
this Antar, neither would our wives and children
have been made captives; and as he was preparing
` to make an assault, lo! a yell arose from under the
dust, and some one cried out, O by Abs! O by i
Adnan! I am the lover of Ibla, and I stand alone
in the world! They all eagerly gazed at the dust,
and behold Antar, who had taken Mooferridj pri-
soner, driving him as he would a camel. He gave
him over to Shiboob, who bound him fast by the
shoulders, and took him away to the other pri-
eoners. Antar perceived that the Shibanians had
dismounted, and were waving their spears and un-
sheathing their swords; but he was not to be in-
timidated at this. By the faith of an Arab, he ex-
claimed, I will put them all to the rout, and will
not leave one to know whither he is going. Then
shouting out to Oorwah and his father Shedad, he
F2


s


68 SHIBANIANS TRAMPLED DOWN BY THE HORSES.


selected fifty brave horsemen. Guard the entrance
of the pass and defile, he cried, and he roared out
to the troop that was with him, and they split the -
enemies troops into two parts, and made them drink
of death. The horror and distress were excessive,
and the day became like the night. They continued
to plunge through the Shibanians till they came into
their rear, where Antar, perceiving the horses run-
ning loose without their riders, said to his comrades,
Collect them from right and left, and turn their
faces towards their owners, then goad them on with
the points of the spears, and they will trample down |
their own masters. So they separated towards the
horses, and collected them all into one body, and
sending forth a tremendous shout at them, goaded
them with the points of their spears. A black cloud
of dust arose; they plunged among the men on
foot, and trod them down with the stamp of a
camel, whilst the Absians roared at them from
the interior of the valley. None escaped but those
whose lives God had lengthened. Lucky was he
whose horse speeded away with him and rushed
over the waste and plains.

Malik, son of Hosan, was one of those who
_ escaped, and also Rebia secured himself with a party
of his people, and he was gnawing his hands through
mortification and shame. O my cousins, all this
has happened to us on account of this dog-devil,
cried Malik to the Shibanians, pointing at Rebia;
had it not been for him we had never known Antar


DISGRACE OP REBIA, 69


nor Ibla, nor one of the race of Abs. So come on
and have at him. Thus saying, he made towards
him, as Rebia also advanced to congratulate him on
his safety, but Malik struck him with his spear
through the shoulder, and it came out under his
armpit, and hurled him off his horse on the
ground, weltering in his blood, and he thought he
had slain him. Thou son of a foul mother, cried
he, all our misfortunes originate in your hatred
towards that bastard slave. Moreover, the Shiba-
mians put twenty of Rebia’s party to death, and the
remainder fled over the country. But as to Antar,
he ordered them to open a way for the horse to the
mountains, whilst he pursued the race of Shiban till
he came up with Rebia. O Ebeool Ebyez, said he
to Oorwah, dismount, go to him and bind him:
truly his treachery has reverted on himself. Oorwah
alighted and tied his arms, and as he was going to
raise him on a horse, he opened his eyes, and re-
covering his senses, he saw Antar standing over his
head. O my noble cousin, exclaimed the wretch,
have some consideration for the relationship between
you and me. Bind up my wounds, but tie not up
my arms. I am almost dead, and indeed I sorely
repent of all I have done to you. By the faith of
an Arab, said Antar, you shall never be in a
situation to repent the foul deeds you have already
done towards me. You only call me cousin when
you have tumbled into some intolerable calamity.
So they all returned to the mountains, and all the


Ne


70 ANTAR RESOLVES ON HANGING HIS CAPTIVES.


party was relieved from sorrow, for their evening
was more propitious than the morning. He placed
Shiboob, and Jareer, and Basharah, as guards over
the prisoners; and those that were most grievously
afflicted and distressed were Mooferridj and Sinan,
for Basharah was stationed to torment them.
_ Antar reposed that night in the most perfect de-
light with his friends and troops, till the obscurity
being nearly dissolved, he assembled the chiefs,
and as they were consulting, said Shedad to Antar,
O my son, what have you resolved on doing with
your prisoners? As to Zalim, and Mooferridj, and
Sinan, I shall hang them; but as to Rebia, and the
wretch Amarah, I shall detain them in bondage
till they restore the property they took from Ibla.
He arose instantly, intoxicated as he was; his head
rested on Oorwah’s shoulder, and he came to the
door of the cavern where the prisoners were con-
fined, and said to Shiboob, Raise up this cuckold,
~that I may hang him up on the summit of the
mountains, and range these other fellows by his side.
When the party heard this they felt certain of death.
As to Amarah, he was almost dead already, and he
remained fixed in stupefaction, for when he looked
at Antar he saw his eyes red as coals. O Abool-
fawaris, said Mooferridj, delay your work, for the
end of violence is never praiseworthy. As to us,
you first took our property, captured our families,
slew our men, and devastated our country; what,
therefore, is our crime that we have merited death


I


MOOFERRIDJ RXPOSTULATES. 71


and hanging? And what crime, said Antar, can be
more enormous than this? you seized my property,
you captured the daughter of my uncle, you even
attempted to slay her, so I must absolutely extirpate
the tribe of Shiban. It was your cousin Rebia,
said Mooferridj, who told me to do so, and am I to
be adjudged deserving of extermination, root and
branch? But know that the property that I took
from your uncle’s daughter is now with King
Numan: truly the affair is well known, and the
secret now quite public, for Rebia sold the tiara and
turban for he and she camels, and I placed my slave
in deposit in the land of Irak. It will be well for
you not to be too hasty with me, that I may con-
trive some means to liberate it, and restore it all to
you; and thus I may rescue my person and my
wife out of your hands. Do what you please with
your cousin Rebia, and if you have any doubts as
to what I have said, and think I am deceiving you,
I can tell you still further particulars. On what
subject can you give me any intelligence ? demanded
Antar. Know, O Aboolfawaris, said Mooferridj,
that King Numan has sent his brother Prince As-
wad against King Zoheir with ten thousand horse-
men, and he has engaged to drag before him King
Zoheir in his grasp on account of us, and on ac-
count of his daughter Mootegerede. I am con-
vinced King Zoheir must fall, and will abandon his
‘country to destruction. But if you proceed to
violent measures with us, King Numan wiil hear of


"2 _ ANTAR CHANGES HIS PLAN,


it; he will march against you with troops and
armies, and will make you food for the birds and
beasts. As soon as Antar heard this he changed
his resolution; And when did Aswad set out on his
expedition ? asked he. About five days before our
departure, said Mooferridj, and doubtless now he
is in your country. At hearing this the light became
dark in his eyes. Alas! then the tribe of Abs is
disgraced among the Arabs, he cried: I must and
will root out every vestige of that King Numan. I
have not forgotten King Zoheir’s kindnesses, said
he to Oorwah, and I must expose my existence for
his sake, for I bear him no grudge. O Champion
of the Absians, said Basharah, by the faith of an
Arab, with respect to Prince Cais and his brothers,
and their father King Zoheir, you are considered as
much as his eldest son Shas; but no one estranged
his heart against you but Amarah, and that ordure-
born Rebia. May God curse your father and mo-
ther, said Amarah, how often do you talk to him of
us, and make him think of us? Let him alone; let
his intoxication pass off, and may his person and the
sight of him ever be absent from us! Hey! O
Amarah, said Antar, he who wishes to be Ibla’s
husband should not be a coward like you, and one
that fears death and affliction. Who is he, ex-
claimed Amarah, that wishes for Ibla, or to hear her
mentioned? and he who has heard of her would
stop his hearing for ever. Now, said Antar, that
would not be right; but when I have returned with


AND. RESOLVES TO ASSIST KING ZOHEIR. 73


that Aswad a prisoner,andhave released King Zoheir
and his sons from infamy and ignominy, I will requite
ye all according to your deserts, and I will slay you
all, high and low: and thus saying he quitted them.
O comrades, cned Sinan, this black slave must be
perfectly frantic, his senses must be disordered, to
‘march from hence and meet with one hundred
horsemen Prince Aswad with ten thousand warriors,
all armed with spears! I never in my life, said
Mooferridj, saw a more fortunate fellow than this
black slave, nor a more expert spearsman. By the
faith of an Arab, said Amarah, should Antar meet
Prince Aswad he will ride him the ride of a lion.
Were his armies as numerous as the sands and the
locusts, he .will most assuredly bring him here
pinioned.

But Antar, when he returned home, assembled
the chiefs, and informed them of Aswad’s expedition ;
and I am resolved to go to King Zoheir’s assistance,
he added. © my son, said his father, we are here
but two hundred and fifty men, and shall one like
King Numan be our foe and antagonist! How can
we proceed against ten thousand horsemen, and
abandon our wives and families? As to our women,
said Antar, there is no alarm about them; no one
will venture to approach this spot before the fugitives
of the Shibanians reach King Numan, and inform
him of what has happened to them; he must then
address the Arabs by letter, and we shall return
hither before all that can have taken place. But I


74 HE DEPARTS FROM THE DEFILE. `


have not come to this place, or rebelled against King
Numan, but on having formed a proper estimate of
mankind. I do not fear even the monarch of Persia,
the lord of the balcony; therefore, how shall I
~ fear ten thousand horse, or even a hundred thou-
sand of the bravest? And he sent for Shiboob
and said, Son of my mother, how many roads are
there hence to our country? There are three, re-
plied Shiboob. Where do they meet? said Antar.
By the waters of the tribe of Akhrem and the great
lake. Upon that he selected a hundred and fifty of
the noblest Absians, and: left one hundred to protect
the property and the families, and recommending
his uncle Malik and his son Amroo to take care of
the prisoners, and to be on the alert night and day,
he set out over the plains and deserts, Shiboob pre-
ceding him showing the way. Antar had his heart
full of King Zoheir and the Absians, and as the
journey lengthened, he thus expressed himself:
« He who is ambitious of honour bears no malice,
“ and no exalted sentiments can exist in the mind
“ of the passionate. He who is’a slave of a tribe
-& must not contradict them; he must endeavour to
“ soothe them and conciliate them when they are
“ angry. Formerly indeed I tended their camels,
“ but now I protect them when they are in affliction.
“ God has ennobled the tribe of Abs, and has en-
‘‘ dowed them with virtues the Arabs possess not in
“their nature. Their slave has left the warriors
‘“‘ overthrown in the dust, all in consternation and


HIS SPEECH ON THE ROAD. 1S


“in disgrace. Were I not to rescue them in
“ their adversities, I myself should not be safe, and
“misfortune would not always fail me. If you
“ think, O Numan, my arm cannot reach you, for-
“tune then has changed. There are serpents, and
“ their touch is soft in moving them round, but in
“their fangs is death. To-day, O Numan, you
“shall know what a youth will trample down thy
“ brother whom falsehood has encouraged. A youth
“that plunges into the dust of battle with smiles,
“and when he retires his spear’s paint is dyed with
“blood. If he draws the sword to enforce his
“ blows, the atmosphere is illumined, and the clouds
“are rent asunder. The steeds are witness for me
“how I dive among them, and that my thrusts are
“ like the sparks of a blazing fire. May God never
“remove from my eyes the noble youths; warriors
“when they alight, ennobled when they mount!
“ Lions of the den, but no fangs have they but their
“barbs and the edge of their swords. ‘Their fiery
“ steeds rise with them, and round their necks are
“ arcles of buds like the basilflower. Ever will I
“ encounter the chests of the chargers, fierce in look,
“ with the spear, till their very saddles and housings
“ery out. He is blind within whose ken appears my
“ form; he is deaf at whose mouth I raise my shout.
“ The troops shall witness for me in the day of battle,
“the sword, and the spear, and the pens, and the
“records. My star shines far raised on high, above
“ Arcturus, above the sun, above the clouds. I am


"6 SHIBOOB GOES ON TO GAIN INTELLIGENCE.


“‘ the son of Shedad, through the sublimity of his
“ virtues, in glory, in honour, in liberality, and in
“< courtesy !” :
When Antar had finished his verses the men and
the chiefs were delighted. For four days they tra-
versed the deserts and the sands, and their anxiety
was excessive; and when they reached the great
lake, O my brother, said Shiboob, lay in a provision
of this water, for there is no more ahead of you.
Now was I well assured that you were sufficiently
strong to prevent Aswad from coming to this water,
I would secrete you in this spot, for when he and
his army come here they will be almost dead with
thirst. O Ebe-reah, said Antar, by the faith of an
Arab, if every human being on the face of the
earth, long and wide as it is, were to come here, I
will not let one of them wet his fingers in this water’
till the sword has cleaved my heart, and my sight
be blinded. If so, said Shiboob, stay here, possess
yourself of this spot, whilst I go and obtain some in-
telligence of this Aswad. And he set out traversing
the barren waste; but Antar and his brave asso-
ciates alighted at the head of the water, and con-
cealed themselves in the mountains. The next day
early, behold Shiboob appeared. Glorious morn-
ing ! cried Antar, come, tell me what is your news.
O Ebe-reah! My brother, said Shiboob, I have
seen Prince Aswad and his armies, like the rolling
sea, and King Zoheir, and his sons, and the Ab-
sians all in captivity, for Aswad surprised them in


HE OVERHEARS PRINCE MALIK’S SORROWS. TI


the morning. They fought for three days, and on
the fourth day came the tribe of Fazarah, and with
them the tribe of Marah, and the armies attacked
them in all directions; so they plundered the dwell-
ings and property, and made the women and families
captives. Aswad is now returning on his way to his
brother King Numan, overjoyed at what has hap-
pened. I heard all this from your friend Prince
Malik, for when I separated from you I did not
stop in my journey over the wastes till I met the
armies, and mingled with them in the dead of
the night, when I heard Prince Malik thus com-


ng:

“ We have drunk of fears after our security ; we
“ have been thoughtless of the adversities of fortune;
“ we have tasted of ignominy now that the raiser of
“the dust of the tumultuous contest has disap-
“peared from us. In his absence we have been
“ destroyed by the oppressor, and the horses of the
“rebellious with slackened reins have trampled
“over us. Our families were protected by his long
“ spear, but its point is now broken. O hero of the
“tribe of Carad, assist us with the edge of thy
“ sword from the rage of the Yemenites. Let not
“ the accursed tribe exult over us. Our wives have
“ been taken captives like harlots. Thou art our
“ refuge at all times when the horses of death trou-
“ble us. Thou hast familiarized us to glory and
“ honour, do not break us down, for thou wert the
“builder. Our wives and our virgins are driven


78 SHIBUOB CUTS OPEN THE WATER BAGS.


“ away, and they beckon to thy noble person with
* their fingers. Tears flow from every brilliant eye
“ over the cheeks, blushing like the judas tree.
“ They cry out in their sorrows, O by Abs, O as-
‘* sist us, (sufficient are the pains we now suffer,)
& against our foes that have driven us into the
“¢ desert, and let the birds of Yemen mourn over
‘* them.”

Shiboob repeated these verses in the language of
Prince Malik, and whilst Antar shed tears at the
recital, Shiboob continued, O my brother, as soon as
I had heard these verses, I advanced towards the
Prince, and saluted him. He related to me all that
had happened. I consoled his heart, and soon after
I drew out my dagger, and I cut in pieces all the
water-bags belonging to Prince Aswad, and now
they will find no water before them but in this place,
and in three days they will reach you.

At hearing the words of Shiboob, Antar’s cares
and sorrows dissolved. Thou hast done admirably
well, O Ebe-reah, said he, and Antar felt assured
of the discomfiture of the Prince’s army. He then
commanded his warriors to conceal themselves among
the mountains and the sand-hills, and Shiboob sta-
tioned himself as their scout, gazing over the desert’
to the night and left. But as to Aswad, he marched
on, the remainder of the night, till early next day,
when he demanded of one of his slaves some water
after he had eaten his meal. The slaves stared
at each other; they turned pale, and looked to-


DISMAY OF THE ENEMY. 19


wards the ground. What is the matter with ye?
said the Prince; and what has happened to you? O
Prince, they replied, as soon as morning dawned,
we saw all our water-bags and sacks were rent open.
On hearing this, the light became darkness in the
eyes of the Prince. And who has done this deed?
cried he. We know not, most dreaded sire, said
they. He immediately ordered his messengers to pro-
ceed to the great lake and bring water. They obeyed
his directions, and the messengers set out with the
water-bags and sacks, forming one hundred brave
fellows; and the army continued their march that
day and night, and the next day, but as there was
no news of the messengers, the Prince and his chiefs
marched forward in quest of them, and to procure
some water.

As we before mentioned, Antar had stationed
Shiboob to look out; so when the messengers ad-
vanced, he informed Antar of it. They attempted
to fill their bags, and turned towards the water. In
an instant sixty were made prisoners, and forty were
slain. ‘The messengers and their bags were seized,
and to Antar’s question about the Prince and his
army, they said, They will be with you this day; we
quitted them in the most dreadful suspense, and if
they wait for us to return with water for them, the
whole army must expire of thirst. :

O my brother, said Shiboob, give me fifty horse-
men of Oorwah’s, and I will fill these bags and re-
turn to the army, and will supply with drink all the


80 ASWAD’S ARMY DESTROYED BY THIRST.


Absians, and will release them from captivity and
bondage; for know that Aswad’s troops will not be
in a state even to look at one another. Do as you
please, son of my mother, said Antar: and imme-
diately Shiboob took away the water-bags and sacks,
and selecting fifty horsemen, he departed, passing
over roads the accursed devil himself would never
have discovered, till mixing with them, he perceived
brother knew not his brother, neither a son his
father.

. The Prince in the mean time had set out in quest
of water, and a large portion of his troops had fol-
lowed him, all most anxiously seized with the desire
of drinking. They advanced towards the vicinity
of the lake, where they saw their messengers all `
slain. He was confounded, and whilst they were
in this state of horror, Antar assaulted him, and
shouted, and terrified him. He smote him with
Dhami a blow on the joints of his neck, and he
hurled him at his full length on the ground. He
dismounted to pinion him, and having bound him
fast by the arms, he made towards his army that was
dotted about the desert in tens and twenties. Antar
and his party appeared against them: all that sur-
rendered he made prisoners, but those that defended
themselves he left dead, whilst they cried out to him
` O son of Shedad, only give us some water, and take
us prisoners.

Antar listened to none of their speeches, neither
did he make any answer, even till the remainder of


ANTAR JOINED BY KING ZOHFIR. 81


the army arrived—the whole twenty thousand hustling
in crowds towards the water. Antar raved even
like a furious camel; he dashed down the war-
nors; when lo! a troop of horse appeared, amount-
ing to three thousand, all crying out, O by Abs! O
by Adnan! and at their head was King Zoheir and
his brave sons. Shiboob had effected their escape ;
for when he departed with the water-bags, filled
with water, he continued his journey till he reached
the Absian prisoners. Seeing the army each interested
in his personal wants, he penetrated through them,
and supplied the Absians with water, and ordered
Oorwah’s people to release them. In an hour all were
at liberty, and took their horses as they were by
their sides. ‘They carried off armour and accou-
trements, and corslets, and in less than an hour
they were mounted, and became illustrious horse-
men. Join my brother Antar at the grei lake, cried
Shiboob.

Upon this King Zoheir cried out to his people,
Come on, my cousins, to the assistance of the man
who has raised us from the dead, and has protected
our wives and our daughters. He galloped on, and
the Absian warriors followed him till they came up
with Antar, and they all in one voice shouted O
by Abs! O by Adnan! and they made a general
attack on the army.

Antar was rejoiced at seeing the Absians at liberty,
and he rushed amongst the enemy. King Zoheir


VOL. IIN. G


82 RASHARAH HUNG, AND IBLA CARRIED OFF.


and his associates performed deeds that would have
amazed the bravest of warriors. ‘Thus they con-
tinued till the day fled, and the army of the Prince
was entirely routed, and dispersed over the de-
sert and waste, Antar and the Absians pursuing
them till they drove them out of that country, and
then returning to the scattered horses and dis-
persed plunder, they took possession of the tents, and
baggage, and cattle. Aswad was their prisoner,
with seven thousand of the tribes of Lakhm and
Juzam; more than four thousand were slain, the
remainder escaped by flight. But Antar turned
towards King Zoheir, and he appeared as if plunged
in a sea of blood. The King dismounted, and ran
towards him, and folding him to his bosom, kissed
him between the eyes, thanking him, and extolling
him. The same did all King Zoheir’s sons; they
advanced and saluted Antar, and thanked him for
what he had done; whilst the Absians prayed for
him, and lauded his deeds. They reposed that night;
but the next day they set out for the mountains of
Radm, and the valley of Raml.

They continued their march night and day till
they reached the mountain, and they found it
totally unoccupied. Antar shuddered, and was
amazed. Shiboob gazed, and he saw Basharah hung
upon the top of the mountain. Shiboob wept bit-
terly ; Antar grieved for Ibla, and his tears streamed
in torrents.


REBIA SUBORNS AMROO, 85


CHAPTER xI X.


Wuen Antar departed in quest of Prince Aswad,
he deputed his uncle Malik and his son, and a party
of Oorwah’s people, to take charge of the prisoners,
and to protect the place. But as soon as he was
gone, Amroo entered unto the prisoners, and began
to abuse them, demanding restitution of the pro-
perty they had taken from Ibla. Alas, O Amroo!
said Rebia, art thou not ashamed of this discourse,
and art not thou, as well as thy father, utterly dis-
graced by following this cursed and perfidious slave?
Thinkest thou, O Amroo, that Antar can resist the
Arab and the Persian, when King Numan shall
send for him? What will yedo then? And more-
over, O Amroo, how canst thou reconcile it to
thy heart to marry thy sister to one, who used to
tend her camels and her flocks? Rejoice then in
the certainty that Antar will never return; for
he is gone to fight with twenty thousand horse-
men. My opinion is, thou shouldst persuade thy
father to avail himself of this opportunity before he

repents.
These words entered deep into Amroo’s ears;
Rebia’s wily ways had their efféct; and he felt |
| G2


84 WHO RELEASES ANTAR’S PRISONERS.


ashamed on the subject of his sister. But how can
we manage to escape? said he. My advice is, said
Rebia, that you refer your business to this noble
hero Mooferridj, he will take you with him to King -
Numan, and will secure his protection for you, and
when we arrive at Hirah, and shall see Prince
Aswad on his return, with King Zoheir, a pri-
soner, and all the tribe of Abs, we will mediate
for King Zoheir, and will marry his daughter to
King Numan, and marry Ibla to this valiant Chief
Amarah; then we will return all together home to
our families and friends. God bless you for this
contrivance ! said Amarah.

As soon as Amroo heatd this, he was convinced.
So he quitted the prisoners, and repaired to his
father Malik, and related all that Rebia had men-
tioned. All this is perfectly correct, said his father,
but I fear the good fortune of Antar: for we have
never attempted to oppose him, but we have fallen
into most grievous calamities; but have patience
with me till I have decided on the plan. They
waited till night came on with its obscurity. Arise,
said Malik to his son, seek the prisoners, that is,
release them.

Amroo instantly arose, and went to the prisoners,
and unbound them, and informed them of what his
father had planned. He delivered to them their
arms and accoutrements, and their horses; and
as we have said, they were the tyrants of war-


THEY ARE OVERTAKEN BY MAADL KEREB. 85


rors. So when they gained possession of their arms
and armour, each sprang forth a lion, They as-
saulted the mountain; they seized the men, and
bound them fast by the shoulders. They made the
women and families captive, and plundered the stores
and cattle; and by morning they were masters of
every thing. But the first thing Mooferrid}) and
Rebia did was to hang Basharah on the mountain
top. ‘They set their wives at liberty, and bound
the women of the family of Carad, and Ibla was
treated in the most ignominious manner, in con-
tempt towards Antar. They drove away the cattle,
and issued from the monntains, seeking the land of
King Numan.

Amarah was in ecstacy, and kept trotting round
the howdah in which was Ibla, brandishing his spear
in his left hand. They continued their journey that
day and night, but on the next day, soon after sun-
rise, there arose a dust : they halted, it cleared away,
and there appeared five thousand horse, preceded
by a knight, like a huge fragment of a mountain,
or one of the remnants of the tribe of Aad. His
feet drew deep lines over the land, such was the
length of his body. |

As soon as Mooferridj saw him, Fly, my cousins,
fly, he cried; this is the Chief Maadi Kereb, and
he wheeled round and fled, Sinan and Rebia fol-
lowing him. How can we fly, exclaimed Amarah,
and abandon Ibla, and not fight a little at any rate,


86 MAADI KEREB AND JAYDA


that she may view the intrepid conduct of the fierce
Amarah? O thou defiled mustachioed fool! follow
me, and give us none of your bark-husks*, cried
Rebia. Upon this, he threw away his spear and
fled. .

When Zalim saw what the family of Zeead had
done, May God disgrace you among men, he cried ;
you that cannot protect your women, or repulse an
‘ enemy or foe. Then he also took to flight, and
escaped.

This warrior that met them was a sturdy hero,
and an undaunted lion, one of the thousand tyrants ;
his stature equalled the tallest trees, when he stood
still and when he moved; in his hand he bore a
thundering spear, and he was the dread of all war-
riors.

When Antar had taken Jayda captive, and had
slain her cousin Khalid, Jayda obtained her liberty
and fled, and in grief at what had befallen her,
she clothed herself in black, and wept and mourned
incessantly. And Maadi Kereb, when drinking,
found his pleasures so disturbed by her lamentations
and plaints, that he resolved on an expedition, when
lo! a messenger came towards him, and saluting
him, informed him of all Antar had done, and that
he was gone down to the mountains of Radm, and
that King Numan had sent twenty thousand horse-
men against him.

* i. e. Nonsense.


SEEK VENGEANCE ON ANTAR., 87


When Maadi Kereb heard this, he was de-
lighted; he sent for Jayda. Be comforted in the
death of Antar, as a compensation for your cousin,
said he. Let us, cried Jayda, undertake the de-
struction of this perfidious slave, and let us avenge
ourselves. |

On hearing this, Maadi Kereb ordered the tribes
of Morad and Zebeed to prepare their warlike
weapons. He selected five thousand horsemen, and
resolved on departing. Jayda too was overjoyed at
this expedition to engage Antar, for she was filled
with the notion that she should kill him, and take
vengeance for the loss of her cousin Khalid; and
when they were at some distance from the tribe of
Zebeed, Jayda thus expressed herself’:

« My life is wasting, but my grief passes not
“ away. My courage is diminished, and my soul is
“ exhausted. My tears flow abundantly, and my
“ eyelids are ulcered; any sleep, now Khalid is
“ gone, is my oppression. Alas! alas! O my re-
“ grets for him who defended us with his Indian
& blade! But a slave of the tribe of Carad has. af-
<< flicted us; whose arm is fate and approaching
« death. Were there not such vicissitudes of
«c fortune, honours would not be granted to the
€ base-born slaves. O sons of my uncle! rouse the
“ dust of battle against the country of Abs and its
“regions. Drive away all their virgins with the
* point of the spear, to their infamy and disgrace.


88 THEY CAPTURE MALIK AND IBLA,


“ My fury can never be appeased without the
“ piercing spear that raises the dust of conten-
** tion, or the blow from the sharp-edged scimitar,
“ that makes the bravest gnaw their fingers with

“ rage.” f

When Jayda had finished her verses, pride burst
like a hurricane through the Heads of her warriors,
and they continued their course till they met Moofer-
ridj, and all his people fled.

When Maadi Kereb marked Mooferridj and his
flight, See these wretches, daughter of my uncle !
he cried to Jayda, when the wolf snuffs the smell of
a lion, he flies and runs in terror away. But as soon
as he saw Malik, Ibla’s father, he recognised him,
and also his son Amroo, and the whole body of Ca-
radians. Know, said he to Jayda, these are our
enemies, and Malik, son of Carad, who sent Antar to
our country to slay your cousin. ‘Thou old wretch,
thou perfidious dog, bellowed he at Malik, we have
heard the tribe of Shiban were your captives; how
is it we see you with them in captivity and bondage?
And truly they have carried off your property and
families, and this is indeed a most curious affair. O
warrior, said Malik, all you have heard is true, and
we are ourselves the cause of this calamity ; for we
have abandoned truth, and have followed fraud and
deceit; and we have been betrayed by those in
whom we confided. He then informed him all
about Antar, and how he had delivered the pri-


AND PUNISH THE ABSIANS SEVERELY. 89


soners over to them, and was gone to meet Prince
Aswad, and we, he continued, have set them at
liberty, and this fatality is now come upon us. Maadi
Kereb was amazed at this recital. You have indeed
rewarded Antar most infamously, said he; but you
know that it is Antar who has made you the com-
mon talk among the Arabs; and truly you have
acted in the basest manner. And he fell upon him
and his son Amroo with a whip he had in his hand,
till he made their blood stream upon' the ground
from the violence of his blows.

After this, Maadi Kereb and Jayda, with their
troops, returned, seeking their own country, taking
with them the property of the family of Carad,
their women and children. Ibla wept night and
day for her cousin, the magnanimous conqueror
Antar. But Jayda had ever in her mind the words
of Malik to Antar, viz.—I will not marry my daugh-
ter to you, till you bring me Jayda to hold the bridle
of her camel on the marriage night. So'she went
aside to him and his son, and beat them violently,
till their blood trickled upon the earth, and they
were nearly lifeless from excessive torture. . Thus
they indeed repented of their behaviour to Antar.
But as to the Shibanians that fled from Antar
when he took their Chief Mooferridj prisoner, they
continued their hasty course till they came to
King Numan, and related what Antar had done
tothem. On hearing this, the light became dark-


90 NUMAN’S RAGE AT MOOFERRIDJ’S RETURN,


ness in the eyes of Numan, and he was amazed
at Antar’s good fortune. Well, said he to his at-
tendants, entertain them till Prince Aswad arrives
with his prisoner King Zoheir, and the whole Ab-
sian tribe; and then I will send all my armies and
troops against Antar, and will order them to bring
him to my presence, that I may inflict on him
the severest torments, and feed the dogs on his
flesh.

He remained quiet for seven days, when the
Chief Mooferridj arrived, together with Rebia, and
the warriors, and there was not one but wept and
shed torrents of tears in detailing his condition and
his adventures, and when King Numan heard the
occasion of this disaster, wrath was kindled in his
countenance—he made them repeat their story.
And Antar has proceeded against your brother the
Prince, they added, with one hundred and fifty
horsemen. Verily, exclaimed King Numan, this
circumstance deserves to he-recorded and inscribed,
particularly if Antar should rout my brother and
his army ; then indeed there will be no resource but
for me to deliver up the kingdom of the Arabs
to Antar, and put myself to no further trouble
about it.

King Numan waited patiently in expectation of
his brother's arrival, his heart all the time enduring
unknown tortures. In a few days the army that
fled from the great lake arrived, all cut to pieces—


AND THE RETREAT OF ASWAD'S ARMY. 91.


wandering over the wilds—not one daring to look
behind him—each ignorant of the fate of his com-
panions—till they presented themselves before King
Numan, all exclaiming, What terrors! what dread-
ful events! King Numan, on seeing them in this.
condition, felt his heart on fire, and his distraction
was insupportable. What! has Antar vanquished
you? he cried. Yes, they exclaimed ; he has rooted:
out every vestige of us, and has not left of us even’
one to fight, nor a banner to wave.

Yet he would not have succeeded in his attempts
but by thirst and drought, they added ; for he met
us at the great lake. He took your brother pri-
soner, with seven thousand of his horsemen, of
the tribes of Lakhm and Juzam, and four thou-
sand were slain in the dust; the remainder fled
over the wilds, and this is our fate. As to those
four thousand, exclaimed Numan, who have been
killed, how shall we be revenged on that sturdy’
slave, and how shall we take his blood, in compensa-
tion fer the chieftains of Lakhm and Juzam? For
truly, if this news reaches Chosroe, we shall be no
longer considered or respected by him. I am quite
distracted, and know not how to extricate myself
from these difficulties. |

O King, said Rebia, write to the Arabs who are
under your dominion, and I will also write to the
tribe of Fazarah. We will all go against Antar, and
tear up every vestige of him. Thou Sheikh of


92 MAADI KEREB ANXIOUS TO ENGAGE ANTAR.


iniquity, exclaimed Numan, turning upon him; by
the faith of an Arab, thou hast indeed opened an
unfortunate door with these Arab dogs, and thou
for this disturbance deservest nought but to have
your chin shaved, and the cruelest tortures, thou
ordure of Arabs and men! But Numan ordered
letters to be written to all the Arab tribes, both near
and distant, requiring them to repair to him with
all speed, and the Vizier Amroo, son of Nefilah,
wrote accordingly to the Arabs, and amongst others
to Maadi Kereb, the Zebeedian, ordering him to
come with his troops, and he also was directed
to release the Shibanian women, and to restore
to Mooferridj the property he had captured, and
to take care of Ibla, and the family of Carad he
had with him, until the differences with Antar
should be arranged; and we, it was said in con-
clusion, will give you half the spoil, when Antar is
dead.

As soon as this letter reached Maadi Kereb, he
was greatly astonished. What extraordinary .times,
what wonderful events are these! he exclaimed.
This slave must be endued with the most admirable
qualities; and the proof is, that he has taken Prince
Aswad prisoner; and truly by this his name will be
recorded for ages: in fact, at first it was a disgrace
and a dishonour to fight with Antar, but now it will
be a glory and a boast, now that he has vanquished .
kings, and overcome the bravest. But I am anxious.


HE AND JAYDA CONSULT. 98


to outstrip the armies of King Numan, and succeed
in putting this black wittol to death. He inquired
intelligence of the messengers about Antar, and they
informed him that he was gone down to the moun-
tains of Radm.

On hearing this, he sent for Jayda, and related to
her Antar’s adventures ; and now, he added, Numan
has ordered me to attack him, and to restore Moo-
ferridj’s property. And what have you resolved on
doing? asked Jayda. As to his orders, replied
Maadi Kereb, about the restitution of Mooferrid}’s
property, I must obey; but as to his directions —
about my repairing to him, that I will not do; but
I will collect my troops, and will go against Antar
myself. I will not trouble King Numan, but will
accomplish his wishes, and I will not proceed to
King Numan, but with all the tribe of Abs driven
ahead of me, with ropes round their necks, and
Antar’s head raised high on one of my longest
spears. And who, said Jayda, must go with
Mooferridj's property? You; said Maadi Kereb.
But then, said she, I must have with me the fa-
mily of Carad, and their property, that I may
not be slack in torturing that Malik, and his son
- Amroo.

Jayda remained that night, but the next day she
mounted her steed, and taking away with her Moo-
ferridj’s property, the family of Carad, and their
goods, she set out on her way to Irak. Maadi


94 MAADI KEREB’S BOASTING.


‘Kereb, too, mounted with five thousand stout Ze-
-beedians, and went to engage Antar. He marched
at the head of his warriors hke a strong tower, thus
reciting :

s The lions of the desert are my delight and
‘© my companions; they see in me their fellow and
“ ally. Behold, the dwellings of the family of Ca-
rad are near their final doom. In the combat I
~ “have overwhelmed their horsemen on account of
“their slave, surnamed the accursed.: I will de-
“ stroy their chiefs with the thrust of the spear
“ through their bowels and their waists. You shall
“be satiated with their blood, after ye have eaten
“ your fill, ye wild beasts—so thank: me—I am
‘© Maadi Kereb, the chief of the Zebeedians, and
“ every Arab horseman is my inferior, Every
& warrior humbles himself before me, struck with
‘fear when I brandish my sword in my hand.
& Mine is the universe, and every slave therein in
& the castles and the fortresses. My force is the
“ force of the lion; they fear my power, and ap-
proach me not. I heed them not. I care not
“« for them when they oppose me; and were it not
“a heinous sin, I would say to the whole earth,
“« my right hand and my left hand should sub-
“ vert it.”

These verses proceeded from that extreme igno-
rance of the Arabs, for when any one of them
mounted a horse, he used to say, the earth tottered


| ANTAR’S DESPAIR IN THE MOUNTAIN. 95


in affright at him, and that all the’ bravest warriors
were within his grasp, and thus Maadi Kereb
sought the mountains. But as to Antar, when he re-
turned to the mountains, and saw that whole country
destroyed, and Basharah hung up and the birds
feeding on him, he was as no one had ever been
before him, such was his distress at the loss of Ibla;
yet he concealed his grief, and in appearance was
patient and resigned. O my brother, said Shiboob,
by the faith of an Arab, no one but your uncle
Malik and his son Amroo have released the pri-
soners ; indeed I was never comfortable at leaving
them behind us in the mountains, for treachery is
their nature, and iniquity can never be extracted
from their hearts; but their perfidy will certainly
fall upon them.

Antar and the Absians alighted in the moun-
tains; they pitched their tents, and raised their
standards, and crammed the caverns full with
the prisoners; and whilst Shiboob and a party
of slaves were stationed guard over them, Antar
remained quiet; but in his heart was the flame
of anxiety to learn some intelligence, and though
in company with King Zoheir he evinced the
most perfect courage and forbearance, yet when
alone he thought only of Ibla; his grief then be-
came extreme; he wept immoderately, and thus

e:
“« Who is it by whom the lands of the valley of


96 HE POURS OUT H1S SORROWS BY NIGRT.


« Ram! are laid waste? Where are his traces, O
“ northern blasts? Here I stand, and my tears
“ flood my eyes at the inutility of my demand.
“ Should I ask of the damsels of Carad and of her
“ companions for that beauty, how deceitful would
“ be the reply ! how irrelevant to my question! At
“ the voice of the raven I am melancholy, and my
“ tears flow like pearls. ©O raven, wherefore dost
“ thou call all the day long on my right hand and
“on my left? thou communicatest to me every
“ species of grief, and tellest of separation after en-
“ joyment, as if I had sacriticed thy young with the
“ edge of my sword, and had laid snares for thee.
 “ By the virtue of thy parent, rather soothe the
« wounds of my heart, and quench the flame of my
“ soul with thy song. Speak to me of my Ibla, tell
‘¢ me where she is, and what the hands of darkness
“ are doing to her. My heart roams distracted over
“ the earth, marking the traces of her camel's foot-
& steps. My body is cast among the mountains of
“ Radm, and my imagination is haunted with
‘“‘ phantoms. In the valley the bird flits on the
“ branches, and its complaints are in the extreme of
‘“‘ bitterness. I say to it whilst it continues its sor-
& rows, complain no more; is thy condition like
“mine? As for me, my tears flow, and thou
& mournest also, but without tears; and that is the
& just explanation of my state. May God execrate
“ separation and respect it not; how oft has my


JAREER ESCAPES TO ANTAR. ` 97


“ heart been shivered wjth its arrows! I have en-
“ gaged every hardy obstinate warrior, but absence
“ kills me without a contest. I am truly called the
“ Antar of horsemen, and the animated leader in
“every affair of importance and peril !”

Antar indulged in incessant grief and lamentation
- morning and evening till the arrival of his brother
Jareer; his coming was indeed like a festival, for he
informed him of all that had happened; and Maadi
Kereb, he added, is marching against you with five
thousand warriors, all immersed in steel and re-
fulgent armour. Jareer had been taken prisoner
with Ibla, and was unable to effect his escape tilt
Jayda set out to go to King Numan. Jayda indeed
did not know him, or that he was Antar’s brother,
or she would have treated him ill; for among the
Arabs it was not generally understood that Antar
had any brother but Shiboob.

Antar conducted him to King Zoheir, to whom he
related all he had heard. O Aboolfawaris, said he,
as to this knight that is coming against us, all the
Warriors are unanimous in their opinion that he is a
tyrant fire even cannot overcome; and now what are
your intentions, and what is your advice? None but
to meet this Maadi Kereb, exclaimed Antar, and all
hishost. Afterwards I will engage King Numan, and
will extirpate all the Arabs he has assembled round
him. J will raise thee to his station: then will I go
to Moodayin, and will put Chosroes Nushirvan to
death. I will exterminate all the armies of Persia,

VOL. III. H


98 THEY RESOLVE TO DIE OR CONQUER.


and will not leave one of them to wag a leg; then
will I become lord of the balcony, and will rule over
the Persian and the Arab, for I know when death
is protracted, the sharpest scimitar.cannot avail, and
man can effect what he pleases and desires, were he
even the most contemptible of slaves. When King
Zoheir heard Antar’s discourse he was amazed at
his intrepidity, and the little account he made of the
Arabs. Do as you please, he said, for we will be
guided by your actions. If you engage, we will
engage; if you fight, we will fight; if you die, we
will die. Yours is our property, and yours is all
we possess. Console your heart and brighten up
your eye, said Antar, for by the faith of an Arab,
I must absolutely put you in possession of King
Numan’s station, had he even with him men and
demons, and the fiends that rebelled against our
Lord Soliman. I will strike off the head of my
uncle Malik and his son Amroo. Thus saying, he
started out of King Zoheir’s presence, and every
night he kept the watch, but on the third night the
Absians searched for Antar, but could not find him.
King Zoheir was greatly agitated, and he said, An-
tar is surely gone to encounter Maadi Kereb and
the tribe of Zebeed; never will he let them reach
this desert.

As to Maadi Kereb, he marched on till he came
into the vicinity of the mountains, when he halted
at one of the lakes, where assembling his people
about him, O my cousins, said he, I am sure when


MAADI KEREB’S PLAN TO SURPRISE ANTAR. 99


Antar hears of our expedition, he will either not
dare to appear without the mountains, or he will
intercept our road, or he will run away when he
hears of us, and will not venture to establish himself
in this country. But I am desirous of executing a
plan, which is this: I will take with me ten warriors,
and will set out and surprise, the defile at day-break
before they have any information of us. I will ply
the sword well among them, and will allay my heart
with them till you come up and facilitate the busi-
ness for us, and make the affair easy. We shall
gain a great reputation by this enterprise, for a well-
contrived plan is more creditable than engaging in
a battle. Do as you please, they said. He reposed
till the greater part of the mght was passed; he
then mounted his horse, and took with him ten
horsemen, whose firmness in the most imminent
perils he well knew, and he set out for the moun-
tains. He travelled on till day-break, when he
heard something ahead of him, and saw a man on
foot skulking before them. Go, said Maadi Kereb
to one of his horsemen, and bring me news of this
fellow on foot. But he observed them as soon as
they observed him. Hey! young man, cried the
Zebeedian, who art thou? whence comest thou ?
and whither art thou going? I am a Zebeedian,
said the man on foot, and my master Maadi
Kereb has sent me to obtain intelligence of Antar.
Thou liest, said the Zebeedian, thou ordure-born
wretch, we are the tribe of Zebeed marching to en-
H 2


100 . SEES SHIBOOB IN THE DARK.


gage Antar, and no human being has been sent
before us. And he fixed his spear in his hand, and
was about to drive him into Maadi Kereb’s. presence,
but the man on foot had already drawn out an
arrow from his quiver, and fixed it on the handle of
his bow, and shot the Zebeedian with it on the chest,
and the arrow pierced him quivering through his
back ; he gave a scream, and fell dead. My cousins,
cried out Maadi Kereb, this fellow on foot has slain
our cousin; come on, on to him: and the nine
crowded after him, and shouted out, and sought
him in all directions. But when the man on foot
saw the troop in quest of him, he fled out of their
sight in less than the twinkling of an eye, and they
could perceive no trace of him. The Zebeedians
were amazed at his agility: This can be no human
being, said they. He had not disappeared long
when he returned, and with him a knight on a black
steed. Ye ignoble dastards, he cried, I am Antar,
son of Shedad, the vanquisher of heroes.

Now Antar, after what had occurred in the pre-
sence of King Zoheir, kept watch; but on the third
night, said Antar to Shiboob, Let us, son of my
mother, go to some distance from the mountains;
perhaps we may come upon Maadi Kereb, and I
will show him what will surprise him, for the king
has been crying up his intrepidity. Do what you
please, said Shiboob. So they marched on till they
met Maadi Kereb and his party. Shiboob slew the
horseman, and returned to acquaint his brother with


RNGAGES ANTAR. : 101


what had passed. Antar was delighted, and con-
gratulated himself, and assaulted the Zebeed heroes ;
he slew five of them, and Shiboob three with his
arrows, and only one escaped, no more, who re-
turned to Maadi Kereb, ånd told him what Antar
had done to his comrades. When Maadi Kereb
heard this, the light became dark in his eyes, and
without saying a word he rushed upon Antar like a
furious lion. Antar also received him as the parched
up ground the first of the rain, and descended upon
him like the descent of fate and destiny. They en-
‘gaged till the very tears gushed from their eyes,
and darkness involved them in shades of night.
Thrusts fell at random, and the blood flowed from
their bodies upon the surface of the earth. It
was a moment the horrors of which turned youth
to age. They continued the fight and the con-
flict till the morning rose upon them, -and in
their hands only remained the stumps of their
spears. They threw them away, and unsheathed
their scimitars, more ready instruments of death ;
they smote each other with their swords against
their shields till the whole country was illumined
by their flashes. The sweat streamed from their
bodies, and both wished they had never been born ;
they rushed at each other with the fury of lions, so
that their feet ground down even the stones and the _
rocks. Shiboob was also occupied with the horse-
man who had escaped out of the ten; neither did
he diseontinue his wiles and tricks till he had slain


102 A FURIOUS CONFLICT ENSUES.


his horse, and he became a man on foot like himself.
It was then he attacked him with his arrows, but
could make no impression on him on account of the
steel and coat of mail he had on him. The conflict
continued between Antar and Maadi Kereb like a
sparkling fire till Maadi Kereb was fatigued and
exhausted, and disgrace followed glory; for he ob-
served in Antar something on which he had not
calculated. So he was overwhelmed with shame
and repentance, for he had not suspected that he
should meet with such a reception from Antar, or
be subject to such difficulties with him. They flung
away their swords out of their hands, and slung
their shields behind their shoulders; the two ap-
proached with their horses, and wrestled on their
backs with their whole power and force till their
horses sunk beneath them, and both fell to the
ground. During this they both bellowed like the
roar of lions, and their feet pounded the stones and
the rocks whilst they wrestled and struggled, and
the sweat poured down from their bodies like the
froth of caldrons, and their feet stamped up fur-
rows like graves.. But Maadi Kereb was worn
out and exhausted, and observing how Antar en-
gaged, the tears started from his eyes from excess
of rage. Antar roared at him in a voice like thun-
der in the clouds, and extending at him his arm
like the neck of a black camel, he grasped him
by the rings of his corslet and his coat of mail,
and cried out, O by Abs, I will not be controlled,


MAADI KEREB A PRISONER. 108


I am the lover of Ibla; I will not be restrained !
and he tore him up from the ground, took him
prisoner, and dashing him again on the earth, bound
fast his shoulders. But when the Zebeedian saw
Maad; Kereb in Antar’s power he attempted to
escape by flight from the presence of Shiboob, but
he overtook him like a blast of wind, and as he
raised his hand with his dagger, the other begged
for quarter, and delivered himself up to Shiboob,
who pinioned his arms, and went with him to his
brother Antar. As soon as he came before him,
Hey ! we are on a par in intrepidity this night, said
he, for you have taken prisoner a knight and I also.
By the truth of Him who distinguishes between
morning and evening, no woman will ever bring
forth another such man as Maadi Kereb, unless in-
deed it should be the express will and pleasure of
the God of old, said Antar. By the faith of noble
Arabs, who preserve inviolate their faith and pro-
tection, exclaimed Maadi Kereb, all skill fails when
you are present in the field, and even the boldest is
but a coward before you. At that period knights
did justice to each other in their conversation, and
no one amongst them forfeited the consideration of
a hero. :

Antar bound Maadi Kereb on the back of a
horse as he said to Shiboob, Make fast also your
prisoner, and return with me to the tribe that we
may see how this business will terminate, for it is
my wish to ransom Maadi Kereb for Ibla and all


104 HIS PROPOSALS TO ANTAR.


our prisoners in the power of King Numan, other-
wise I will strike off the head of his brother Prince
Aswad, and all the prisoners of the tribes of Lakhm
and Juzam; and I will release my own people with
the edge of my sword, were they even on the back
of the clouds. O Aboolfawaris, said Maadi Kereb,
there is no occasion for these threats, for Ibla shall
be at liberty, and so shall all the women, men and
children with her, and their property, and there
shall not be lost of all that belonged to you the
value of a halter; and if you will but confide in my
word, and release me from bondage, I will restore
your family to you, and will intercede for a ter-
mination of this difference. Then will I take you
as my master and friend for ever, and perhaps I
shall be able to mediate between you and King
Numan before he marches the Arabs against you,
and a host numerous as the sands attack you; and
should you then wish for a conference it will not be
granted, for intrepidity avails not with numbers, and
good counsel is preferable to exposure to dangers.
But now you are apprised of the whole business, so
eonsider your own safety. O Maadi, I am aware of
all you have said, replied Antar; but know I have
not undertaken this enterprise or opposed King
Numan but in order to erase from me the name of
servitude, and to attain high honours; and my mind
assures me I shall subvert governments, and my
name become celebrated among the mountains and
the plains. It is only on this account I expose my


MARVELS AT ANTAR’S INTREPIDITY. 105


person to perils, and in this crisis I must seat my-
self in the very station of Chosroe Nushirvan, the
lord of the tiara and the balcony. Maadi Kereb
was amazed at the strength of his heart, and he was
convinced he must be a most potent warrior and of
no soft mould.

Antar had not advanced far when the Zebeedian
army approached, that filled the whole surrounding
region. Maadi Kereb told Antar what he had done,
and that his tribe was advancing on no other ac-
count; but, said he to Shiboob, go you away with
the prisoners, and let me attack this army alone, and
let me destroy them with the force of my arm and
my elbow. Shiboob proceeded with the prisoners ;
but Maadi Kereb shuddered, and was stupefied at
Antar’s expressions, seeing a single knight prepare
to engage five thousand horsemen. Thou brave
slave, he exclaimed, fire even cannot harm thee.
The Zebeedians soon reached the field of battle;
they saw the carcasses of their companions stretched
on the ground, and knowing they were those who
had accompanied Maadi Kereb, they cried out,
Misery and ruin! They looked round to the right
and left, searching out some one of whom to inquire
who had done this deed: they saw no one but
Antar stalking towards them, when one cried out,
Come on, here is a knight, I will ask him; but if it
is he that has acted thus to our comrades, cut him
in pieces with your swords; and they crowded on
till they came near to him. Hey, foul-born! they


t06 ANTAR ATTACKS THE ARMY OF ZEBEED.


cried, who has executed this deed on our com-
panions? Where is our chief Maadi Kereb?
Antar’s answer was that of a ferocious lion; he
roared, and he bellowed, and shouted: Ye sons of
harlots, as to your chief, I have taken him prisoner ;
and as to you, ye shall drink of disgrace and misery ;
and as to myself, I am Antar, son of Shedad, the
` destroyer of heroes. He had no sooner spoken than
he rushed upon them; he pierced the first and
hurled him over ; the second he disgraced ; a third
he annihilated his existence; and so likewise with a
fourth and a fifth; and in less than an hour the
whole five thousand halted, and the foremost fell
. back upon the hindmost, shouting at him from a
distance, not one of them venturing to come near
the spot where he stood, for if they approached, he
slew them instantly, and he killed above two hundred.
The remainder were seized with panic and alarm,
and when they saw the calamity that was falling upon
them, they divided into five parties, and surrounding
Antar on all sides, the men made at him with their
spears and their swords, but Antar uncovered his
head and assaulted them, raving like a furious
camel; his eyeballs flashed fire, and the foam poured
from the corners of his lips. He shouted forth:
O by Abs! O by Adnan! By thine eyes, O Ibla,
this day will I slay these horsemen. The Zebee-
dians were in the utmost consternation as they said
to each other: Fly not, or ye will remain a foul
disgrace among the Arabs; they hemmed him in,


THE TIMELY SUCCOUR OF THE ABSIANS. LOT


and drew blood from his body ; his horse Abjer was
giving way, and there was not space for him to ad-
vance or retreat. Antar wanted to dismount, when
lo! a dust arose, and discovered King Zoheir and
five hundred Absian horsemen, preceded by Shiboob
hke a wolf, and when they came up they attacked
and shouted, men met men, and heroes encoyn-
tered heroes, Antar recovered his power. The
cause of King Zoheir’s arrival was this: being ex-
ceedingly distressed at the disappearance of Antar,
he sent. for Jareer and asked him, how long ago it
was that he had quitted Maadi Kereb? My lord,
he replied, I only left him behind two nights.
Then, said King Zoheir, Antar is only gone with a
view to finish their business, but it will be as well
for us to join him and assist him: And I will go,
said Oorwah, with my men to his aid; and I, said
Shedad, I will accompany you, and thus said
Zakhmetuljewad, and all the Carad horsemen. And
I will also go myself, said King Zoheir, I will not
be backward in aiding our protector Antar, the
overwhelming knight. So he took in all five hun-
dred horse as we mentioned, and followed the traces
of Antar. About midday they met Shiboob, and
with him Maadi Kereb and his associates, and their
hearts were at ease, particularly when they saw his
prisoners. They saluted him, and asked him what
had happened to them. He related all that had
passed about Maadi Kereb: Overtake my brother,
he added, for he is in trouble; the Zebecdian troops


108 — DEFEAT AND FLIGHT OF THE ZEBBEDIANS.


have attacked him alone, and he is now in the midst
of an army of five thousand men.

© Shiboob gave over Maadi Kereb and his com-
panion to ten horsemen, and directed them to go
with them fo the mountains, and returned at the
head of the horse like an antelope, till they came up
with Antar, and attacked the tribe of Zebeed. By
their assault, the horsemen were drawn off front
Antar, and he rushed among the warriors. The
Zebeedians, perceiving the destructive force of Antar
and the Absians, turned away in flight, and de-
parted in haste and confusion. In an hour a thou-
sand of them were slain, and they said to each
other, We, when Antar was even alone, could
make no impression upon him ; how can we succeed
now that he has five hundred horsemen with him ?
and they wheeled about their horses’ heads, and
sought their own country. But Antar and the
Absians pursued them till they drove them out of
that land, and then returned to the scattered horses
and dispersed armour, and having collected all the
spoil, they set out for the mountains; Antar going
ahead, as if he had been immersed in a sea of blood.
When they reached the mountains, they assembled
the women and families, and all were in high spirits
at this event. They reposed that night, rejoicing
in victory and triumph, and extolling Antar till day-
break; when Antar mounted and repaired to King
Zoheir. As soon as he appeared, the king sprang
on his legs and met bim, and seating him in the


MAADI KERED’S LETTER TO JAYDA. 109


most honourable place, O Aboolfawaris, said he,
you expose your person to great hazards, and I
fear some dreadful accident will happen to you, and
you will leave us to regret you for ages.’ O noble
king, said Antar, by the faith of an Arab, verily all
these events do not hasten death, and do not avert
misfortune. King Zoheir was amazed at his words,
(and it was on this account that all the Arab horse-
men were so brave). Antar having ended his dis-.
course, directed Shiboob to produce Maadi Kereb,
and when he was in his presence: O Maadi Kereb,
said he, write to Jayda and Numan, and demand.
your ransom of them. He agreed to the propriety
of the proposal, and immediately wrote to Jayda,
and thus expressed himself:

You, whom I acknowledge as the daughter of
my uncle, know that fortune is treacherous, and the
wise are not always secure from adversity, and he
who says no one can slay me, errs in his speech. I
indeed have acted like a fool, and was not aware of
the vicissitudes of fortune. I have fallen into the
power of the knight of Abs and Adnan. Then he
explained in his letter all that happened with Antar :
he recommended her to restore all the Carad women,
adding, Treat Ibla kindly, and her father also, and
make your excuses to them; do not detain any
particle of their property; but be quick, be quick!
before death arrives.

He despatched it by a Zebeedian horseman, and
ordered him to return with all speed. But as to


110 — JAYDA GIVES THE PRISONERS TO NUMAN.


Jayda, after she had separated from Maadi Kereb,
she eagerly pursued her course, taking with her the
women of Carad, and their property and children,
till she arrived in the lank of Irak, where she saw
the numerous assembled tribes. She presented
herself to King Numan, and saluting him, delivered
to him the women of the tribe of Carad and their
property. Numan was much pleased, and to his
inquiries about Maadi Kereb, she told him he was
gone to meet Antar: By the faith of a noble Arab,
said he, if Maadi Kereb effects this, and vanquishes
the tribe of Abs and Antar, I will make him ruler
over all the Arab tribes of the desert. Rebia looked
at Ibla, and her father, and her brother, and ob-
serving how tortures had altered their condition,
his heart grieved for them.


THE CHIEF HIDJAR. 111


CHAPTER XX.


Kinc Numan stationed a guard over the family of
Carad, vowing he would not hang Ibla, but by.the
side of Antar, and that he would not leave a single
Absian alive. In the meantime he assembled his
clans, amounting to forty thousand men. The last
party that arrived were the tribe of Kendeh, com-
manded by Hidjar, son of Aamir, the Kendehan,
a man of severe morose disposition and harsh man-
ners, but whose name was celebrated for bravery,
and general excellence in arms; for he was also one
of the thousand tyrants in that age of ignorance.
King Numan went out to meet him, and treated
him and his companions with every mark of honour
and respect. O king of the world, said Hidjar,
why have you assembled all these armies? Who is
he among the Arab kings that has rebelled against
you? O chief Hidjar, replied Numan, no king has
rebelled against us. But it is that slave Antar,
that black robber, whom fortune has favoured to
our prejudice, he has destroyed our armies, and
defeated our horsemen; he has acquired glory—
ay, and such glory! At hearing this, the light
became dark in the eyes of Hidjar. O king, he
cried, who is this Antar, this camel-driver, that
you should on his account assemble these armies


a


112 NUMAN’S RAGE AT ANTAR’S VICTORY.


and warriors? For I myself, by the life of your
head, am able to take that Antar prisoner with ten
men on foot. I will bring him to you in a state of
infamy, and also all the tribe of Abs bound with
cords, and among the first shall be King Zoheir
and his sons. We well know, said Numan, that
you are able to do what you say, but all I desire of
you is, to bring me Antar prisoner, that I may
inflict on him the cruelest torments. Hidjar re-
turned to his party, biting his hands in regret that.
he had not previously attacked Antar.

- On that day arrived Maadi Kereb’s requisition
to Jayda, demanding of her his ransom in cattle;
and as soon as she had read it, she instantly re-
paired to King Numan, and presented him the
letter. He took it and read it; rage and indignation
possessed him; he summoned his mjnisters, and
consulted them about what he should do. But as
they -all remained silent, Numan addressed them
(and their silence increased his passion), I must ab-
solutely march against him with the whole force of
Arabs now assembled, or never shall I succeed. O
dreaded king, said his vizier Amroo, son of Nefeela,
I cannot approve of such a plan; for if you march
against Antar with all these Arabs and Persians,
perceiving himself thus reduced to a state of utter
desolation, he will say to you, If thou dost not leave
me quiet, I will cut off thy brother’s head, and the
heads of all those I have in my power: but, O
noble king, ponder well this very important affair ;


NUMAN'S SATRAP COMES TO ANTAR. 118


and purchase the blood of seven thousand of your
countrymen with the blood of that worthless Antar.
- But what is your advice? said Numan. My advice,
replied he, is that you should immediately release
your prisoners ; but if you vanquish him, treat him as
you please. Send him an answer to this effect. I will
exchange your uncle for Maadi Kereb; but if you
wish to ransom Ibla and the other women, release
my brother and his companions, or I will send you
her head, and will slay all the families with her.
And know, O King, were the whole universe in his
power, and demanded for Ibla, he would set the
whole at liberty. Numan, feeling convinced of the
propriety of his viziers advice, ordered him to
write the letter to that effect. He gave it to one of
his attendants, whom he honoured with standards
and ensigns, appointing also an escort of twenty
horsemen, and ordering him to proceed by the
shortest road. When the Satrap approached the
mountains, he attempted to enter the valley, but
the slaves checked him: Stay where you are, son ofa
coward, said they, till we obtain permission for your
further progress from Antar, son of Shedad. The
Satrap stopped, and his heart trembled within him
as he said to himself, Verily Antar is like Chosroe
Nushirvan himself. On the representation of the
slaves, Antar granted the Satrap permission to enter
within the mountains; and desiring King Zoheir to
st down, he stood over his head, grasping his sword
Dhami unsheathed in his hand, and deaths were
VOL. III. I


114 ANTAR’S REPLY TO NUMAN.


glaring from his eyes. As the Satrap entered, and
beheld Antar, he shuddered and was stupefied,
and in the excess of his terror, he kissed the ground
in the presence of King Zoheir and Antar. He
then presented the letter to King Zoheir, who took
it and read it, and explained to Antar the threats
and conditions it contained. But Antar’s eyes
glowed fiercely like burning coals; he roared at
the Satrap in a voice that made the barren wastes
shake to their very foundation. ‘The Satrap trem-
bled and shrunk back. Heh! thou bastard, ex-
claimed Antar, by the faith of noble Arabs, wert
thou not in the presence of this awe-inspiring king,
I would cut off thy head, and I would leave thee
lifeless, my first victim; away! disgrace and in-
famy be on the mother of Numan and the mother
of Chosroe Nushirvan. Dares Numan threaten one
hke me with his wild Arabs? Would he frighten
me with his bombastical nonsense? By the faith of
an Arab, were it not for the respect due to King
Zoheir, I would make thee drink of the cup of
death; as to his demand of his brother Prince
Aswad, and the prisoners, and Maadi Kereb, I will
release them all, that it may not be said that I fear
them. But I will not release the captives, unless,
together with my cousin Ibla, be delivered up
Chosroe’s tiara, and all the property that was taken
- from her by Rebia and Mooferridj ; and let not the
value of a halter be missing of Ibla’s property. On
hearing Antar’s determination, the Satrap retired,


RELEASE OF IBLA AND THRE PRISONERS. 118


and mounting instantly, returned to King Numan,
before whom he repeated what Antar had said. King
Zoheir then, said Numan, made no reply. No, said
the Satrap, by the life of your head, my lord, he dared
not open his mouth in the presence of Antar, but
seemed bridled and bitted. But what was it that
produced in thee such fear and horror? asked
Numan. O King, said he, you have never seen
Antar, and have never seen his eyes like balla of
burning coal. Take your own measures upon this
point, said Numan to his vizier, send away the
women of the Carad family with their property and
their husbands. He also ordered Ibla’s property
to be taken out of the magazines, so that not
an article was left to the value of a halter; he de-
livered up the whole.

Take your property, said the vizier Amroo ta
Malik, Ibla’s father, and his son Amroo: Away ta
Antar your cousin. When Malik heard the vizier
say your cousin, his rage became exceedingly great ;
and he turned towards Rebia, saying, O my cousin,
let me remain a thousand years in prison, but let me
, Dot return again to behold the face of that bastard
Antar: but, by the faith of an Arab, I must con-
trive his death ; I must destroy him by my artifices
and stratagems. Thus the chiefa of the Carad
family marched away with their wives and children,
and all their property, and the slaves. proceeded
ahead, driving on the cattle and the camels, till
they reached the mountains, when they raised loud

12%


116 THEY MEET ANTAR AT THE MOUNTAIN,


shouts, and prayed for Antar the unconquerable
knight. Antar and the chiefs of the tribe of Abs
being apprised of their arrival, they went out to
meet them, accompanied by King Zoheir and his
sons, who were delighted at their safety and the
restitution of their goods. Antar embraced his
uncle Malik and his son Amroo, saying, No evil
or calamity, my uncle, shall overtake you whilst
your slave Antar exists. O my son, replied Malik,
may you ever live to insure our prosperity, and to
protect us from all disgrace! Malik told him what
Jayda had done to him, and concluded by say-
ing, O my nephew, your brother Jareer was the
only cause of all our misfortunes; for he, in his
Wit, was cajoling Rebia till he released them from
bondage; and we were not at all aware of our dan-
ger, till the party pounced on our heads, and twisted
their cords round our arms, and had you not taken
Maadi Kereb prisoner, never should we have been
released. You are right, my uncle, said Antar, and
I have reproved my brother for his behaviour.
Antar returned to Ibla, and asked about her pro-
perty: O my cousin, she replied, I have not lost
even the value of a halter. By the life of thine
eyes, exclaimed Antar, had Numan even detained
the value of a single dirhem, I would have hung his
brother Aswad, and have put to death the seven
thousand prisoners. I would have pulled down:
Hirah on Numan’s head, and would have slain
every Arab he has assembled—I would have


HOW ANTAR RELEASES ASWAD. 117


marched to Modayin—I would have slain Chosroe,
and made his balcony totter over his head.

Having now entered the mountains, Antar or-
dered Shiboob to set at liberty Prince Aswad and
his people. Shiboob released them. But Antar
cut off Maadi Kereb’s hair with his own hand, say-
ing, O Maadi Kereb, I have cut off your hair in
revenge for Jayda’s insults towards my cousin Ibla ;
and he ordered the slaves and attendants to turn
out the prisoners bare-footed and naked, and bare-
headed ; and as they were executing Antar’s com-
mands, Art thou not ashamed, O son of Shedad,
cried Aswad, to drive us away in this condition?
We have not a horse to ride on! we have nothing to
eat or drink! By the faith of an Arab, said Antar, re-
proach me not for my conduct towards any one of
ye, for you are all going to assemble in a body
against me, and you will return a second time to
fight me, and the horses I should give you, verily I
shall have to fight you for them; as to eatables,
you will find on your way green weeds that you may
graze on, and drink out of the puddles; but we
at all events are a tribe entrenched within the
mountains, and in the day of battle a small supply
will feed us: ay, and most of ye say of me that
Antar is a black slave and a bastard. These are -
the expressions you and others make use of towards
me, and would do so were I to release you a thou-
sand times: my best plan would be to kill ye all at
once; thank God you are alive. Do not act thus,


118 ASWAD’S FURY AT SUCH TREATMENT.


O Aboolfawaris, sd Aswad, for indeed I cannot
walk on foot, no, not a quarter of a mile, so do
give me something to carry me, or put me in-
stantly to death, and deliver me from this ignominy.
Hola! Ebe Reah, said Antar to Shiboob, bring
here a she-camel, let him mount it and quit my
presence, or I shall never be able to keep my sword
off his neck. So Shiboob ran off, and with his usual
ingenuity and sagacity, he chose out a sbe-camel,
foundered and quite worn out—born lame and
blind—weazy and broken-winded—grunting, loose-
lipped, and toothless —crop-eared and spavined.
When it was presented to the Prince, his soul was
most indignant. Come, Prince, cried Shiboob,
mount, whilst I hold the bridle, for I am terribly
afraid it will fly away, for indeed it is one of that
celebrated breed of Asafeer camels. May God
curse the bowels that bore thee! cried the Prince ;
away with it, for I want it not; and he rushed out
from the mountains blasphemmg the fire. So they
travelled in the most pitiable plight, feeding on the
weeds of the earth, and drinking of the puddles,
till they came nigh unto Hirah; and as the Arabs,
whom King Numan had assembled, observed them,
they eagerly ran towards them, inquiring what was
the matter, so they related all that had happened
to them with Antar. The news soon reached King
Numan, who immediately hastened to meet his
brother, and when he saw him in this plight, his


gal was near bursting with rage and indignation.


HIDJAR PROMISES TU SLAY ANTAR. 119


He sent a noble steed for him, and mounting him
on it, took him by his side, and questioned him
about his adventures.

O King, cried out all the chiefs, lead us away
to fight this Antar. Prepare then, said he, your
warlike implements, let us depart. Who is this
Antar, cried Hidjar, that you in person must
march against him? Is there no one whom you
can depute against Antar with one hundred men,
to subdue his power and quench his iniquity?
By the faith of an Arab, exclaimed King Numan,
I myself will march against him; yet he, who shall
do the deed in my presence, shall be distinguished
and rewarded with the highest favours. This in-

igence will soon reach Chosroe; he will hear of
what Antar has done to me, and I fear he will think
meanly of me, and will consign the dominion of the
Arabs to some one else: but im three days have all
your weapons of war ready. Whilst the warriors
were preparing, said Hidjar to his people, Were I
not afraid of rebelling against Numan, I would
myself march to fight with Antar alone, and thus
put a stop to all further trouble. Let us prepare
and depart.

The above events were soon reported to Chosroe
by the enemies of Numan, who, as soon as Antar
first settled in the mountains of Radm, wrote to
Choeroe to inform him that he had taken Prince
Aswad prisoner and seven thousand men. Antar’s


120 CHOSROE SENDS AN ARMY


power, indeed, must have greatly augmented, cried
Chosroe, thus to compass such deeds; he has for-
gotten what formerly happened to him when he was
made captive by Monzar, and when he slew my
Satrap Khosrewan. We accepted his excuses, and
rewarded him with favours—we gave him a tiara
and a turban—we sent him back to his tibe—and
we thought he would be a firm friend of our govern-
‘ment, but he has reverted to the foulness of his
origin; he has even assaulted Numan, and the only
remedy is at once to tear out his lips, and destroy
all his race, or the vagabond Arabs will pretend to
predatory incursions even upon us.

_ Chosroe waited patiently till be heard of the cap-
tivity of Maadi Kereb, and that Antar had released
his women and families from the power of King
Numan, and all the property of his cousin Ibla, and
the precious jewels, in exchange for Prince Aswad,
and the seven thousand men of the tribe of Lakhm.
At this Chosroe’s indignation was kindled, and he
swore by the fire that he would slay Antar. He
ordered his vizier Mubidan to levy twenty thousand
men from Khorasan, and twenty thousand from
Dilem, and he appointed to the command a Satrap
named Wirdishan, and this Wirdishan was a proud
haughty man, whom fire even could not subdue;
and he gave the expedition in charge to him, be-
cause he could not confide in the Arab hordes,
saying, Be you their leader; exert yourself nobly,


WITH WIRDISHAN AGAINST ANTAR. 12]


that our power may be respected. Wirdishan
mounted, and over his head were raised the stand-
ards and dragons of Persia. He marched night
and day till he came nigh unto Hirah, where he
was greatly surprised at seeing the immense mul-
titude assembled.

Now that was the very day fixed on for the
march against Antar, and all the troops were ready
to the number of seventy thousand. Numan went
forth to meet the Persians, and saluted Wirdishan,
‘saying, What has so agitated the heart of the just
King, that he should put in motion one like you to
engage the Arab hordes? Numan, said Wirdishan,
accounts of your enfeebled state have frequently
been made to him, and he has heard of what Antar
has done to you; that he took your brother pri-
soner, and that you ransomed him with cattle.
This has disturbed him, and he has sent me to
you to remove this trouble from you. Verily he
has lied, who has told this of me, exclaimed Numan ;
I have assembled these armies, and this is the day
appointed for the march against him, and I will
tear his life out from his sides. This is a proof of
your weakness, said Wirdishan, for you are re-
solved on marching with seventy thousand men
against only four thousand.

After a repose of two days at Hirah, he de-
parted for the mountains of Radm, not mingling
with Numan’s troops, on the contrary, reviling and


reproaching: them.


122 JAREER BRINGS NEWS OF THEIR MARCH.


Now Antar had despatched his brother Jareer to
the land of Hirah. Return not, said he, till you
have ascertained what King Numan 1s about.
Jareer departed, habited as a slave, and reached
Hirah, where he sojourned till the arrival of
the Satrap Wirdishan; and when the armies set
out, he made all haste back to the mountains,
and came to his brother, to whom he related
the intelligence concerning the march of the nu-
merous host against him. My brother, said he, I
never beheld a haughtier fellow than that Wir-
dishan ; for he has no regard, no consideration for
any one. But Antar on hearing this gave a roar
that terrified him, saying, What a bother you make
about all this, you bastard. By the faith of an
Arab, I will not leave one of them to guide them in
their flight, were they even as numerous as the sands
in the valley of Cornelians !

And as he consulted with King Zoheir about
what was to be done, Son of my uncle, replied Zo-
heir, we have no other resource but the stroke of
the cleaving scimitars, and patience under the dark
clouds of dust. We will fight in your presence
with the drawn sword, till not one of us, not a living
soul remains. We will defend our wives and fami-
lies, till the horses sport with our skulls in the bat-
tle. O King, eminent in virtue, said Antar, affairs
have almost arrived at that pass indeed. But do
not you or your sons join to the fight till the enemy
has hacked my body with their long spears. My


AKTAR IN THE VALLEY OF TORRENTS, 123


wish is to take with me one thousand warriors, and
march against these advancing armies. I will not
permit them to reach this spot, but after spear
thrusts that shall make the stoutest quake. Son of
my mother, said Shiboob, I also will go with you,
but on condition that you attend to my counsel and
my advice ; for an affair conducted with skill is more
efficacious than the boldest feats of arms.

Why should I not listen to yout suggestions, said
Antar, when I see they are judicious? so speak;
what is your wish, O Ebe Reah? My advice, O my
brother, said he, is, that you march as you have
said, with one thousand horsemen. I will conduct
you, and conceal you im the valley of Torrents,
through which the hostile armies must pass; and
where they will be greatly crowded. When they
shght, do you rush out upon them, and shout at
them, particularly if they should halt there in the
night ; for then indeed you will see wonders in the
blood that will flow and stream, and then will necks
be hacked off in the contest. By the faith of an
Arab, said Antar, your advice, Shiboob, is excel-
lent, and the plan infallible. And immediately
setting off with a thousand horsemen of the tribe of
Carad, and Oorwah’s men, he continued his march
till he reached the valley, which not being far from
the mountains of Radm, Antar anticipated the ar-
mies of Numan by halfa day; and whilst he con-
cealed his men in the ravines, Shiboob ascended the
loftiest mountain, and stationed himself as their


-124 WHERE WIRDISHAN ALSO HALTS.


look-out, casting his eyes to the south and to the
north.

About mid-day there arose a dust that obscured
the whole region. In an hour the dust opened, and
discovered armies like the rolling waves in a tempest.
Shiboob shouted to his brother Antar—Son of my
mother, be on your guard: prepare for the conflict,
for your enemies will arrive by evening ; and this
night chiefs will purchase life by the exertion of
slaves; and it shall be a night, the horrors of which
will turn a new-born child gray.

Antar hastened away with his associates, and all
.being mounted, and armed with spears, and clad in
steel and polished corslets, they stood firm, expecting
the arrival of the armies; and the warriors were like
lions concealed in a thicket.

King Numan and his brother Aswad were in the
rear of the army as we observed, and he was greatly
hurt at the words of Wirdishan. When the ar-
mies reached the valley of Torrents, King Numan
halted without the valley, alarmed at the embarrass-
ment of the defile, and the length of the pass. The
Persians marched on, headed by the Satrap Wir-
dishan, like the most rebellious of the fiends; and
he was in the utmost anxiety to cast his eyes on
Antar; equally so was Hidjar; but they did not
enter the valley till might had obscured it with
darkness, and had thrown a gloom over all the
country.

. It was at that moment the horse thundered down


ANTAR’S NIGHT ATTACK. 125


with their riders: the dust and the clouds of sand
thickened. ‘The darkness of the night was rendered
more frightful by a tremendous storm of wind, that
blinded the sight. ‘The sand arose against their.
faces; and the whole region was in tumult and con-
fusion, from the nght to the left. The Arab and
the Persian were promiscuously crowded together.
The spot being narrow and confined, all were hud-
dled into one mass. At that instant out rushed Antar
with his troops of Absians, fearless of death, un-
daunted in peril. He vociferated in the front of the.
troops—the mountains rebounded, and the whole
valley tottered. The Absians replied with a similar
shout, whilst Antar still roared—Ye black kettles
of Persians! I am Antar, the cleaver of skulls.
The foe heard Antar’s yell, and every limb quivered.
The Persians muttered out abuse; but their voices
faltered ; they imagined the valley was going to.
crush them, and that they saw death in the spot
whence Antar issued. He roared, and horror fell
upon every horseman: lives were torn from the
indistinct forms; borsemen unsheathed the scimi- —
tar; and the black gloom of the night became
darker still. The mind was in despair; trpops dis-
appeared ; designs were glorified; falchions glit-
tered, and blood ran down the sides of the val-
ley. Every one doubted whether the heavens had
not been precipitated on the earth; they imagined
the valley was filled with swords plundering their
existence, and spears spoiling them of their lives.


196 THE CONFLICT AND CARNAGE.


Friend feared for friend; foes were appeased; and
relations grieved. Cowards wished they had wings
with which to escape by flight ; and the water-mills
of war turned round. Blood gushed from jugular
veins; shrieks and screams re-echoed ; blood burst
from wounds, and crowds waved like the sea. The
east and west were in obscurity; skulls were hewn
off from necks; and the thrust of the spear fell at
random. Blood streamed upon the ground and
earth; and from the terrors of that night youth be-
came gray-haired—torments descended upon them.

In an hour the Persian troopers retreated on their
rear; and the Chief Hidjar exclaimed, O my cou-
sins, let us seek the spot whence we came; truly we
have erred, in not halting with King Numan: and
thus saying, he retired.

But as to Antar, he was hard labouring in the
cause of destruction and carnage; he left them
wielding their swords one against the other, and
sought the extremity of the valley, accompanied
with Oorwah’s men, and his uncle Zakhmet Uljewad,
and his father Shedad, and a party of the tribe of
Carad; all were directing themselves against the
Persians, to overwhelm them with insupportable
calamities. ‘They smote off the heads of every op-
ponent, and left them dead.

They were in this situation when the Chief Hidjar _
came ambling on the back of his horse, waving in
his hand a falchion, sparkling through the intense
obscurity of the night. I am the Chief Hidjar, he


HIDJAR IS MADE PRISONER. 127


cried ; but he had not time to finish his harangue,
for Shiboob had drawn an arrow from his quiver,
and had fixed it on his bow. He shot it at Hidjar,
and the arrow pierced a mortal part of his horse,
which stumbled, and hurled him with the crown of
his head on the ground; and as he endeavoured to
spring on his feet, lo! the Chief Shedad rushed upon
him, and wounded him in the arm with his sword ;
and when he attempted to seize him—No, no! I
am Hidjar, the son of Aamir, he cried. Worthless
art thou, exclaimed Shedad—unavailing are thy
words; neither is there any glory in whom thou
dost boast: and he dismounted and bound fast his
arms.

Rebia and Amarah were behind him, and when
they saw what had befallen the Chief Hidjar, and
heard Antar’s yells, they trembled for their lives.
Fly, my gallant brother, fly! cried Rebia to Ama-
rah—or Antar will make us drink of the cup of
death, and extermination. So they fled, and Hadi-
fah with them, for Antar had not recognised them.

The battle raged till midnight ; the horses sported
with the skulls of the horsemen, and the valley of
Torrents beimg too confined for the multitudes, the
Persians were routed in the presence of the Arabs.
Scimitars were plied among them; spears plun-
dered them of their lives. At that moment ad-
vanced Wirdishan in front of the Persians, sur-
rounded with a body of his host. In his hand he
wielded an immense mace, and he came on bellow-


128 _ DEATH OF WIRDISHAN.


ing like a lion; and in the excess of his alarms and
horrors, he scowled round to the right and to the
left. On that night were slain only five Absians.
Wirdishan having regolved on flight, Antar pounced
down upon him, and drove his spear through his
right side, and it issued out through his left, and
hurled him on the ground. When the Persians be-
held the fate of their Chief, they wheeled about
their horses and fled.

Now when the darkness became illumined, and
the day dawned on the survivors, the foe, horse and
foot, rushed out of the valley, whilst Shiboob over.
threw them with his arrows, and Oorwah with his
people pierced them with their spears till their
numbers were diminished, and all hope of relief
cut off. |

Antar and his warriors returned to the valley of
Torrents, where they saw the blood flowing as if in
large rivers, and as to the groans of the dying and
wounded—no one pitied them. The whole valley
was full, crammed with the wounded, and the over-
thrown, andthe lifeless carcasses. Away with’ the
spoils of the dead, said Antar ; and depart, and drive
the prisoners to the mountains ; for this night may be
reckoned a night indeed—for by the faith of noble
Arabs who keep their promises and engagements,
were I not afraid that King Zoheir might be un-
easy at our absence, I would attack King Numan
here also, and would not leave one alive in this de-
sert, were even Chosroe Nushirvan himself with


ANTAR’S SONG OF TRIUMPH. 129


them. It will be better for us to fight in the moun-
tains, said Oorwah.

On that night they had made eight hundred pri-
soners; and when they had collected the scattered
horses and dispersed arms, they returned seeking
the mountains. Antar was overjoyed at what had
passed, and he meditated on the horrors he had en-
dured. Oorwah being by his side, he addressed him
thus : |

“ Hail, O Oorwah ! O valley of Torrents, hail—
“hail, for ever hail, my cousin! How many are
“the youths, whose heads on that night became
“ prey, beardless as they were! How many heroes
“ saw the horrors of death, who hoped to see the
“morrow’s dawn! Death served them with the
“cup of absinth, with my sword, and then said,
“ Much good may it do you. O what a night I
“ passed with those who beheld dcath with pride,
“ Absian heroes, who when they are ranked—their
“ rank degrades all that is most high and eminent.
“ When their steeds were spurred over the plain, a
“ peal of thunder was in their movement. Shouldst
“ thou ask of me, O Ibla, thou wouldst hear intel-
“ hgence that would cure even an unknown malady.
“ I drove away thy foes when theycame, all haughty
“warriors, seeking my destruction. I assuaged
“ my heart among the Persians, and I have slain
“that imperial Wirdishan. I have tempered my
“ sword with the blood of glory, that flowed like a


VOL. III. K


130 NUMAN'S ARMY IN DISORDER.


“ torrent through the valley. Tell Numan, I am a
“lion, with my sword and my spear. My drink is
‘Sof the blood of warriors, when their horsemen
“ have drank of the cup of extinction. Demand
“ justice on the day of battle. Should the foe out-
“ rage, I will redress the wrong. Verily, glory is
“in the day of contention. When my thrust over-
«& whelms the assaulting tribes, I glut the birds with
“& their carcasses, as I destroy them with the edge

“ of my scimitar. I am appointed for the welfare
“ of the tribe of Abs, their glory is } mine—their
“ honour is mine.”

As to King Numan, he had halted as we men-
tioned, on the outside of the valley with his Arabs,
resolved to move in the morning and join the Per-
sians, when lo! the fugitives from the valley of
Torrents rapidly advanced, exclaiming, Misery !
woe and destruction! Instantly the horsemen sprung
towards their horses, and inquired the news. They
related what Antar had done to the Persian forces,
that he had slain Wirdishan, and had routed his
whole army of Arabs and Persians. Struck with
dismay at this news, Numan’s forces determined on
immediate flight, fearful of death and annihilation.
He himself also mounted, alarmed that his troops
should run away in disorder: and the horsemen
having remained on the backs of their horses quaking
through fear of Antar, the irresistible hero, till
morning dawned, Numan ordered them to. march ;


(9
NUMAN PURSUES ANTAR TO THE DEFILE. 131


so they proceeded, headed by Prince Aswad, at
whose side rode Maadi Kereb. Enter not the valley
but with great caution, said Numan, for I calculate
something of this kind may still happen to you.

On this account they balted at the head of the
valley, and made the Arab tribes march in first,
who went forwards brandishing their swords in their
hands, but in the greatest terror of Antar, son of
Shedad. They entered the valley, and heard the
groans of the dying, and saw the torrents of blood ;
and they were astonished at Antar’s masterly con-
trivance ; and though there was net one but was in
the utmost consternation, affection for Antar sunk
deep into the heart of Numan, and he felt very de-
sirous of the marriage with the daughter of his king
Motegeredeh (he had once demanded her, but his
messenger had been sent back unsuccessful); for
he thought within himself, were I related by mar-
nage to this tribe, my power would be strengthened,
and my influence increased. _

He thus marched on till he approached the
mountains, but Antar had reached them first, with
his prisoners and plunder. All exulted in his ex-
plats; the delight was universal; and their hearts
were quite merry at the result of the engagement.

Antar advanced towards King Zoheir, and kiss-
ing his hand, related what he bad done to the Per-
sians, and how many he had slain, and how many he
had captured. King Zoheir was highly gratified.
O King, said Antar, it is still our duty to prepare

x 2


132 ANTAR’S ORDERS TO THE SLAVES.


to engage the armies of Numan, and protect our
‘women and families.

So Jareer was directed to order the Absians to
take their arms, and issue out into the open space in
front of the mountains, ready for action. Let the
slaves, said Antar, be divided on the two sides of
the defile, and order them to collect a great quan-
tity of stones, and every one they see going forth to
fight, they may let pass; but those they see return-
ing, they must stone to death: and if they should
see that we are all crowded promiscuously with the
enemy, and that we are retreating, then too they
must hurl at us the largest fragments of rocks, and
prevent us from re-entering the defile.

Jareer having communicated Antar’s- orders,
they prepared for battle, and issued from the valley
into the open space, like wild beasts starting from
their dens. ‘They mounted their horses armed for
the conflict, having slung on their long spears, and
girded on their polished scimitars. The slaves also
came forth, and stood at the entrance of the defile,
and the head of the pass of the mountain, armed
with bows and arrows, fierce as male camels. King
Zoheir and his sons also mounted, and over his head
floated the eagle standard. The battalions ad-
vanced, and the squadrons were drawn up. The
race of Carad stood forth, and at their head was
Antar, like a lion on horseback.

It was scarcely mid-day when the army of King
Numan approached like the billows of the tem-


PREPARATIONS FOR BATTLF. 183


pestuous ocean. Numan advanced, and over his
head waved the ensigns and banners; and as he was
about to halt, the drums were sounded, and the
earth trembled far and wide. As soon as they came
up to the mountain, they vociferated in one uni-
versal shout, that deafened the hearing, and made
the hearts of the timid quake. The Absians an-
-= swered them with a still louder shout, and dashed
their spear-heads against the ground.

' King Numan’s pavilion was pitched just opposite
the mouth of the mountain. Mooferridj also halted
with the Sbibanians on the right of Numan; the
tnbes of Zebeed, and Khitaam, and Morad; and
on the left were the tribes of Zeead and Fazarah ;
and on their left were the four thousand Kendehan
troopers, whose hearts were greatly exasperated at
the capture of their Chief Hidjar.

Antar stood in front of the Absians like a ferocious
lion. He took his feet out of his stirrups, and
crossed them over the neck of Abjer: he leant upon
his tall spear armed with death, for he was entirely
unconcerned at the multitude of theadvancing forces.
He smiled, and seemed exulting on the back of his
horse. His father Shedad was on his right, and
Oorwah on his left, and the race of Carad behind
him. No sooner did the tribe of Kendeh see him
than their rage increased; they advanced, and the
tribe of Shiban, and his furious adversaries to the
number of five hundred followed; all rushed upon
Antar, seeking him with their spears and their


184 -CONFLICT COMMENCED.


swords, On to the fight, O Ebeool ebyez! cried
Antar to Oorwah, do you and your men trample
down these paltry fellows.

Oorwah did as he directed, and met them with
one hundred of his men, and they commenced the
battle and the conflict. ‘They thrust at each other
with the barbs of their long spears; the dust rose
and thickened, but as the numbers increased against
Oorwah’s people, Antar strengthened them with a
hundred more horsemen of the Caradians, with
whom went his uncle and his father. Now was
their fury let loose; the horses dashed against each
other, and skulls flew off from bodies. Antar stood
behind his men, and whenever he marked any of
them falter, he assaulted the foe like a lion in
armour; neither did he desist till he had driven
away the enemy, when he returned to his post again
to watch over the safety of his friends. Swords
continued to Jabour, and blood to be spilt, and men
to fight, and the flame of war to blaze, till the day
closed, when the tribe of Kendeh were completely
broken, and were in the greatest alarm and distress ;
many of them escaped by flight, Oorwah and his
men having vanquished them by the encouragement
of Antar. More than seven hundred of the Ken-
dehans were killed, but only twenty of Oorwah’s
brave spear-armed heroes.

On their return Antar met them and congra-
tulated them on their success. You know, my
cousins, he cried, you cannot rise to honours but by


FIRST VICTORY OF THE ABSIANS. 135


patience in adversity ; and now indeed this day you

are clothéd in robes of fresh glory, and only those
friends have been slain whose deaths could not be

deferred: it is not the steel that decides in such

pomts. O Aboolfawaris, said Oorwah, we could not

have routed the foe but by your aid; this affair is
all owing to your intrepidity and your good for-

tune, for in our troubles we had recourse to you,

and your arm would have prevailed had even moun-
tams moved against us. Antar thanked him for his
compliment, and they all returned to the mountains

As to King Zoheir, he felt himself emboldened by

the events of that day, and rejoiced in the victory
over his foes. He bestowed abundant praises and
thanks on Antar, meeting him with joy and congra-
tulation. O Aboolfawaris, said he, we shall never
doubt about the discomfiture of our enemies as long
as you live for us; whilst you exist we shall never
experience adversity or calamity. Antar dismounted
from Abjer, and wished to kiss King Zoheir’s hand,
but the king bent down towards him and kissed
him between the eyes. Know, O king, said Antar,
that I have made a calculation of our forces and’
that of the enemy, and we are superior to them in
numbers. King Numan’s army consists of seventy.
thousand bridles, and we amount to four thousand,
but every one of our men can trample down a thou-
sand of Numan’s, so by this calculation we are even
numerically superior to them. O Aboolfawaris,


136 THE ARMIES IN BATTLE ARRAY.


you are right, said King Zoheir, for where in all
Numan’s thousands is there a knight like you to
encounter and destroy ?

In the meantime King Numan had alighted in
his magnificent pavilion, and was-in consternation
at the deeds of the Absians and their hero Antar.
This is a fortunate man, he said to himself, for he
has made war his habit, his meat, and drink. They
reposed that night till morning, when the men arose
for the battle and the combat. King Numan
mounted, and he placed on his nght his brother
Prince Aswad, and Maadi Kereb and Jayda, with
twenty thousand horsemen, and on his left were
Mooferridj, and Rebia and his brother, with the
tribe of Fazarah, with twenty thousand more, and
he himself stood in the centre with the remainder of
the army. Antar also drew up the Absians right
and left, centre and flanks. He stationed Oorwah
and his men on the right, and with him one thousand
horsemen; and on his left were his father Shedad
and his uncle Zakhmet ul Jewad, to whom he added
one thousand horse. He himself advanced, and
with him were one thousand also: he went round
to all the heroes, exclaiming that he would lead
them to the contest.

When all the forces were drawn up, and every |
one was in his place, behold the chief Amarah
urged his piebald steed between the two armies, and
exclaimed in a loud voice, What is it, my cousins,


AMARAH’S HARANGUF. 187


that drives you on to your own destruction? What
have you seen in this black slave that you dare the
enmity of King Numan on his account, and have
even roused the anger of Chosroe against you? Do
you think that this perfidious slave is able to defend
you against all these armies that are assembled
against you? And you, O King Zoheir, who call
yourself the king of the tribes Abs and Adnan, of
Fazarah and Ghiftan, of Marah and Dibyan, have
you deigned to ask assistance of a black slave, a fel-
low so worthless and mean? By the faith of an Arab
you have clothed us in shame: you had best de-
liberate again on the state of your affairs. “Avert
your decided fate; separate yourself from Antar;
seize the bastard, and deliver him to me that I may
make him over to King Numan, and secure his
protection for you. Then let us all join in one
party, and return all of us to our native land, and
we will wed Ibla to him whose rank equals hers,
and whose connexion equals hers—the great chief
Amarah for instance, whom all the Arabs know;
and thus you, Zoheir and your tribe, will be saved
from perdition and destruction. Amarah had not
finished his harangue when up came Shedad, and
exclaimed, May thy mother soon mourn for thee!
may thy family and all thy tribe witness thy anni-
hilation! thou. foul coward! thou son of a two-
thougand-horned-cuckold ! thou Amarah. How oft
has he defended thy women from the sharp sword
and lacerating spear! But the best thing we can do


138 SHEDAD’S REPLY: JAYDA’S SORROWS.


is, to ply our edged swords and tall spears till either
these Arabs slaughter us or we slaughter them ; till
either you exterminate us or we exterminate you.
Ay, and they wiil do it too, my brother, cried
Amarah to Rebia; by the faith of an Arab, I
heartily wish I had not come out into the plain, and
had not ventured on a word, for I cannot possibly
stand this battle and this contest. So he threw
away his spear out of his hand, and shrunk back
amidst the shouts from the tribe of Carad. Antar
longed to fall upon him, but his father prevented
him, saying, O my son, it would be an indignity to
yourself to stir a step against this cuckold.

They were thus engaged in conversation, when,
lo! Jayda appeared in the midst of the plain like a
. strong tower immersed in steel; her heart and soul
ulcered with anguish. She was robed in garments
= of black on account of Khalid; and when she was
between the two ranks, she thus expressed herself:

“ O by my tribe, tears have festered my cheeks,
“and in the greatness of my agony sleep has
“ abandoned me. These mourning garments have
‘© debilitated my energies, and sickness has weakened
& my bones and my skin; for I had a hero whom
“ a black slave by his oppression and violence made
“ to drink of death. The full moon indeed fell to
“ the earth when the arrow was aimed at him, sped
& from the hand of the slave. Now he is gone: I
“am left to my afflictions and griefs, and I endure
“my distresses in solitude. The sword mourns


ANTAR ATTACKS HER TRIBE. 139


“ him, now he is gone, and in the sheath it bewails
“ its condition. O thou dead ! mourners have wept
“ him in the mountains of Fala and the land of
“ Nedjd. He was like a branch in form—the re-
“ yolutions of fortune cut him off—alas! how cut
“ him off! O by my tribe, who will assuage my
“ sorrows, and will regard his engagements with
“ me, now Khalid is gone ?”

Jayda had scarcely finished, when the tribes of
Zebeed sent forth one general shout that made the
mountains tremble; they remembered the death of
their chief Khalid; they poured down upon Antar,
uncovering their heads and lightening their gar-
ments, to the number of five thousand, and about
two thousand of the tribes of Lakhm and Juzam
followed them ; they all attacked, led on by Maadi
Kereb bellowing like a lion. Antar observed their
assault: he took with him three hundred horsemen
of the tribes of Abs and Carad, and met the seven
thousand ; and whatever he smote he cleft in twain,
and wherever he thrust he slew. ‘The horses closed
upon him; he yelled at them, and they dispersed,
hurling off their riders. He raved as raves a camel ;
his eyeballs were fiery red; foam swelled from the
corners of his lips, so that every one that beheld him
exclaimed, God! how dreadful! ‘They were now
in the fiercest of the contest, when Jayda excited
the warriors against him, and rallied the men back
to the conflict. He rushed upon her like a ghoul
or a hungry wild beast, and descended upon her like


140 FLIGHT OF JAYDA AND MAADI SEREB.


the descent of the most voracious lion. Jayda would
have fled, but he overtook her, and pierced her
through the sides; he broke two of her ribs, having
burst through her double armour. In her love of
life she threw her arms round her horse’s neck, and
sprang beyond the dust. When Maadi Kereb saw
Antar and what he had done to Jayda, he shouted
at him, and rushed upon him, exclaiming, Hola!
thou bastard, dost think thy every attempt will
succeed? This day I will take my vengeance of
thee, and will in thy death wipe out my disgrace.
But Antar met him and roared at him ; he hemmed
him in, and closing all means of escape, he drew
forth Dhami, and struck Maadi Kereb a dreadful
blow. The sword fell on Maadi Kereb’s helmet
and cleft it, and also the wadding and the edge of
the sword even reached Maadi Kereb’s head, and
wounded him severely, and nearly killed him. At
last he threw his arms round his horse and fled, the
blood streaming down his face. As soon as Prince
Aswad saw what Antar had done, he made an
attack against Oorwah with his twenty thousand,
which Antar perceiving, he said to Shiboob, Go to
King Zoheir, and tell him not to quit the mouth of
the defile, but to send me one thousand of his war-
riors that I may'meet King Numan and his whole
army. Antar shouted on Abjer; he encountered
the horses’ chests, and poured down on them like
the rush of a torrent; he slew the men; he de-
stroyed the warriors, and overwhelmed them with


s ABSIANS AGAIN VICTORIOUS, 141


his shouts and his roars in disgrace and ruin, hack-
ing their joints. But when the thousand arrived
they made one universal shout of O by Abs, O by
Adnan! ‘lhey assailed the armies and the horse-
men; men encountered men, and heroes heroes;
blood flowed and streamed ; the long spears laboured
and also the polished falchions. None were to be
seen but the slayers and the slain; the destroyers
and the destroyed. Every horseman roared in ter-
rors, and the king of death despatched his mes-
sengers to grasp lives. In a short time every re-
source was resorted to. Every sharp sword con-
tinued its blows till the heart and mind were be-
wildered, and the earth rocked under the weight of
the armies, and the undaunted heroes of Abool-
fawaris Antar.

This continued till evening came on, when of the
Princes’ army were slain ‘an innumerable and incal-
culable host ; the remainder took to flight, for im the
contest with Antar they beheld death and perdition.
The Absians returned exulting in their victory and
triumph, and extolling Antar till they came to King
Zoheir, when Antar dismounted, and wished to kiss
the king’s hand, but he had also dismounted, and -
meeting him, kissed him between the eyes, saying,
Admirable are thy deeds, O protector of Abs and
Adnan, thou hero of the age! By the faith of noble
Arabs, you have this day appeased all my sorrows.
By the life of thy head, O king of the age, said


142 RETIRE IN JOY TO THE DEFILE.


Antar, I must absolutely drag that King Numan
from beneath his ensigns and standards, and must
make you reign in his stead over all the Arabs!
After this they entered the mountains, and reposed


with their wives and families.


GHASIK COMES TO NUMAN'S AID. 148


CHAPTER XXI.


Arter the retreat of the army, Numan summoned
tohis presence Amroo, son of Nefeela, and consulted
with him about making peace with the Absians.
My advice, replied he, 1s, that to-morrow morning
you repeat the attack ; perhaps they will be discom-
fited, and will demand peace, and that would be
more suitable to your dignity. Numan approved
of his vizier’s counsel. ‘The next day both armies
started up, eager for the combat. King Numan
mounted and arranged the standards over his head.
Thus also did the Absians, headed by Antar, the
lord of battles. The ranks being drawn up, An-
tar was anxious to exhibit himself in the field of
battle, when lo! a dust arose, and veiling the land,
seemed suspended over every quarter of the atmo-
sphere; and there came forth a renowned warrior of
immense bulk, like an elephant or a towering palm-
tree. The combatants gazed at him in amazement,
for he was a victorious warrior, one of the haughty
tyrants of Arabia; his name was Ghasik, son of As-
hab; and he was followed by twenty thousand
horsemen. King Numan had long been accustomed
to make him presents, and previous.to his expedition
against the Absians he had sent to Ghasik to request


(144 MIS TAUNTING CHALLENGE.


his‘ assistance. Now Ghasik was one of the thou-
sand proud tyrants in that age of ignorance, and
his form was one of the wonders of that period. He
fought with various weapous as a horseman and on
foot, and when he ran on foot he would outstrip the
snorting steeds. His countries were Tahl and Zal,
and he and his tribe worshipped the great dogstar.
When Numan’s letter reached him he read it, and
having understood it, he called out to his people,
and instantly set out for the land of Hirah. On his
arrival he was told that Numan had already marched,
so he proceeded after him till he came up, as we
have described; and when Numan knew of his ar-
rival, he went out to meet him, and told him all
that had happened: how the tribe of Abs had de-
feated his armies and horsemen. O king of the
age, said Ghasik, this day will I make the Absians
mark the horrors I will perform. He dismounted
from his horse, and threw off his armour and his
coat of mail, till he remained only in his common
clothes, his head uncovered and his feet bare. He
snatched up two darts that were like sparks of fire ;
he stood forth between the two ranks on foot and
unarmed; and as he approached the hostile armies,
O tribe of Abs, he cried, stand forth knight to
knight, or ten to a knight, or a hundred to a knight,
or a thousand to a knight; and if you still desire
less odds, attack me with your whole force that I
may encounter ye all alone, and may repulse ye
with the force of my single arm and my single


ANTAR REMOVES ZOHEIR’S FEARS. 145


elbow. And here I am, without armour or polished
mail, for I know that where death is protracted,
armour avails not. When he had thus spoken, he
swaggered over the plain of heroes till the senses of
the wisest and the oldest, as well as of the youngest,
were confounded, and thus spoke :

“ Armour repels not the javelin of death ;
“stand forth, O noble heroes; stand forth, and be-
i aod the battle ofa youthtul hero, firm and resolute

‘in the scene of contention.”

King Zoheir was stupefied and amazed at t Gha-
sik’s deeds and heroism ; but Antar, perceiving the
state of King Zoheir’s mind, exclaimed, O king,
what means this apprehension and alarm? Calm
your mind ; brighten your eye; for by the protec-
tion of an Arab, I will put to the rout the whole of
this army, were they even as numerous as the scat-
tered locusts; and were I conscious that my single
arm would not suffice, I would take ten warriors,
with whom I would dash into the midst of King
Numan’s forces, and I would drag him away either
alive or dead, prisoner or a carcass. ‘These words
comforted the heart of King Zoheir, and he re-
covered from his fears and his consternation; and
just as Antar was about to dart forward against
Ghasik, a horseman anticipated him, and attacked
him. He was a celebrated one among the bravest
Absians, and one.of their most illustrious knights.
He rushed upon Ghasik and attempted to charge
him, but Ghasik gave him not time to wheel round ;

VOL. III. L


146 GUASIK’S HEROIC ACTS.


he shouted at him, and smote him with one of his
: javelins; it fell between the paps and issued out
between the shoulders. The two armies were
astounded at the blow, for the weapon passed through
the horseman and the stcel armour he wore. A
second stood forth against Ghasik, but he overthrew
him; a third, he deprived him of life; a fourth, he
united him to his comrades; and a fifth, he left him
despairing of existence: and thus he continued till
he had slain twenty horsemen. But Antar was
afraid that were he now to oppose him the Arabs
would say, Antar stood forth against a knight with-
out armour or polished mail; or Ghasik might
even say, he attacked me when I was fatigued.
Whilst Antar was reflecting on this dreadful affair,
lo! his father Shedad stood forth. Ghasik per-
mitted him not to charge, but took him prisoner in-
stantly. No sooner saw Antar the fate of his father
than a fire blazed in his heart, and he resolved on
the attack, but Oorwah anticipated him. Ghasik
had now called for his armour, in which having clad
himself, he met Oorwah and assaulted him; he
soon wearied him, and thwarted all his efforts, and
stretching out his arm like the neck of a black
camel, he seized him by the rings of his armour,
and grasping him in his hand as if he were a spar-
row, he threw him to his slaves to secure with cords,
and they placed him by the side of Shedad. Fired
by this double calamity, Antar rushed upon Ghasik
like a devouring lion. Ghasik received him as the


HIS STRATAGEM TO CONQUER ANTAR. 147


parched up land the first of the rain. These sturdy
warriors fought like ravenous wild beasts; they
began the blow and the clash, the retreat and the
advance, till the senses and the minds of all present
were bewildered. They continued till mid-day,
when Ghasik repented of his rash expedition, and
of his combat with Antar.

I have no other resource, said he to himself, but
to practise a stratagem on him; so, desisting from
the conflict: Hola! O Antar, he cried, I have
heard that you are one of those knights that love
fair play, but this day I perceive you act not im-
partially towards me. Eh! what justice do you
want? demanded Antar. You have engaged me,
said Ghasik, when I was fatigued, and I now wish
. toreturn and change my horse, then will I come
back to attack you, and I will not quit you till this
affair be decided. You shall rot escape, said Antar,
if you wish it: surrender yourself, that you may be
aransom for the warriors you have already taken ;
or by the faith of an Arab, and by the life of Ibla’s
two eyes, with me the most sacred of oaths, I will
make you a proverb among men! What! cried
‘Ghasik, shall I surrender myself to you without
fighting ? Will not the Arabs say, May God curse
the father and mother of Ghasik—what did he see
in Antar that he surrendered himself without: a
blow? But if you are one of the horsemen that
love justice, draw the spike out of your spear,
and I will take off the spike out of mine ; then let us

L2


148 HE WOUNDS ANTAR, BUT iS SLAIN.


engage in the field of battle, and he who touches his
antagonist three times, let him do what he pleases
with him. Antar thought him sincere. Just as
you please, said he. Ghasik took off the spike
from his spear, and Antar did so likewise, believing
he should thus be on a par with him. Thus was
Ghasik strengthened in his courage, and he again
had recourse to his stratagems; he snatched from
under his thigh a javelin, and shook it till it coiled
round his hand ; he aimed it at Antar, saying, Take
that, thou slave! thou wretch! As soon as Antar
perceived Ghasik had deceived him, he tried to
avoid the javelin, but he could not; it struck him
on the shoulder between the armour and clothes.
Antar was severely wounded ; he roared out at
Ghasik in a voice that made the mountains totter:
Thy blow has failed; now prepare, coward, for the
blow of the voracious lion. He assailed him, and
pierced him with the spikeless spear he held in his
hand, and he drove it right through his back qui-
vering; and Ghasik fell dead.

When Numan saw what Antar had done, and
how he had pierced Ghasik with a mere staff through
the chest, driving it out at his back, rending the
steel and the corslet, he said to his attendants:
Verily, such a thrust no one could drive—no,
neither man nor demon, not even the fiends who
rebelled against our lord Soliman. Our character
is blasted by this knight, whose equal the age can-
not produce: Now is the time to order a general


NUMAN’S ARMY ATTACKS THE ABSIANS. 149


assault, cried they all, now that Antar is wounded.
King Numan did so, and the twenty thousand made
the attack as if in one body. But when Antar
reached the mountains, King Zoheir came up to
him and kissed him between the eyes, thanking and
extolling him. He entered the valley, having first
recommended King Zoheir and the Absians to stand
firm at the entrance of the defile till his wound was
dressed ; then will I return to the contest, he added ;
and he entered the tents, and extracting the javelin,
cauterised the wound. In the mean time Ghasik’s
army had assailed the Absians with a force amount-
ing to twenty thousand bridles. The Absians re-
ceived them with undaunted hearts and Arabian
courage. Men met men, and heroes heroes—blood
streamed and flowed—joints were hewn asunder.
Numan, perceiving the steadiness of the’ Absians,
commanded his left, to the number of twenty thou-
sand, to join him. They made an attack like the
attack of a single individual. Soon the numbers
increased upon the Absians, and their cries for as-
sistance became louder; but as they were in the
thickest of the fight, the chief Antar appeared,

shouting in a voice that made the mountains trem-
ble, and the hollows resound: Worthless dastards !
Antar, the son of Shedad, is coming. For when
his wound was dressing, Ibla came to him; she
bound it up, and wept over him. Weep not, said
he, for by the life of thine eyes, and the black of
thine eyebrows, I care not for those wounds ; to me


150 ANTAR REAPPEARS IN BATTLE,


they are swecter than the draught of wine: but, for
thy sake, I will put to confusion the armies of King.
Numan, had he even with him all mankind, and the
fiends to boot. He and Ibla were thus conversing,
when lo! Shiboob appeared like a male ostrich:
Hola! son of my mother, he cried, join the Ab-
sians, for King Numan has ordered all his armies
to attack them on every side and direction. Antar
bellowed and roared; he started from the ground
on to the back of his Abjer, and sprang forth seek-
ing the engagement, till he reached the scene of
horrors, and joined the Absians, who were worsted
in the presence of that immense concourse of war-
riors. So he shouted as we have mentioned; and
he assaulted the enemy with a heart that bounded
at encountering dangcrs : at his attack, sorrows were
erased from the heart of the Absians; and as they
heard his roar, their souls revived; their courage
was renovated, and they fought in a manner to
startle the boldest. As to Antar, where he struck
he cleft asunder; and where he thrust, he de-
stroyed; and when the heroes resisted him, he
yelled at them, and made them shrink back in
horror. He wrested a horseman from the back of
his horse ; he raised him in his hand like a pole, and
whirling him round as a sling, he struck a second
with him down; he precipitated the two, and made
them drink of the cups of death. The warriors fled
in dismay before him, and every one was horror-
struck at his strength.


AND DRIVES BACK THE FOK. 151


When Numan saw ‘how Antar and the Absians
had routed his army, he ordered his right to attack,
and they also amounted to twenty thousand. This
mighty host, calculated at sixty thousand, assailed
the Absians, King Zoheir always assisting them
with 2 hundred after hundred, till not a single one
remained. But their hearts were encouraged by
Antar, for they knew he was a resistless hero and a
dreadnought lion. At that period the tribe of Abs
was the most renowned among the Arabs for cou-
rage; and at that moment they were fighting the
battle of life and death, and they encountered the
forces of King Numan with hearts to which death
was sweet and easy. The two armies were mingled
together; the sword and spear laboured among
heads and carcasses; blood flowed like lakes; God
glorified that awful, dreadful day! where the steel
armour alone defended bodies, and God prospered
what Antar performed in his intrepidity ; he over-
whelmed them in disgrace and ruin, and executed
deeds that will be commemorated for ages, for
deaths were at hand, predestined by the will of the
God of good and evil. The battle continued: to
rage between the two armies till the day fled with
the light, and night came on in obscurity, and the
warriors were separated, after ay had filled the
earth with the dead.

Numan descended to his pavilions, as he said to
bimself, Were I related to the Absians, every one on
whom the sun shines would stand in awe of me; and


152 NUMAN’S ANXIETY TO MARRY MOOTEGEREDEH.


Numan had scarcely alighted when the Arab chiefs,
and Prince Aswad at their head, came unto him:
O King of the world, said they, our opinion is, that
you put to death these two fellows we have in our
power (they were Shedad and Oorwah); I will
slay them to-morrow, said he, and Prince Aswad
rushed from Numan’s presence in a great passion ;
but when they were gone, he sent for ‘his vizier
Amroo, son of Nefilah, and imparted to him all the
love he felt in his heart for Mootegeredeh, King
Zoheir’s daughter. What do you wish? said the
vizier. 'To marry Mootegeredeh, and make peace
with the Absians ; he replied, for were I assisted by
such a tribe as this, or a hero like Antar, I should
by their means strengthen myself against the deserts
and the cities. O King, said the vizier, with respect
to the marriage rely on me; but on condition, that
you order into your presence Shedad and Oorwah,
robe them in garments of honour, and treat them
kindly. I will then lead them to King Zoheir, and —
will demand his daughter for you, and I will not
return till all matters are arranged. Numan ap-
proved of his vizier’s advice, and he reposed that
night in tranquillity, for his heart was at ease.

As to the tribe of Abs, when they returned to
the mountain; Console your heart and brighten
your eye, O King, said Antar,.by the life of your
head, to-morrow I will decide their fate: I will
disperse this army were it as numerous as the sands ;
and King Zoheir was comforted.


HE RELEASES SHEDAD AND OORWAR. 158


‘Thus they entered the mountains, and slept that
night till morning, when the chiefs of the Ab-
sians mounted, brandishing their sharp-edged swords
and slinging on their lances. King Zoheir and his
sons also mounted, and over his head floated the
eagle standard : they were drawn up in front of the
mountains like lions of the cavern, and before them
stood Antar like a rock. He seated his body on
the back of his horse, and drawing his feet out of
the stirrups, he folded them over the neck of Abjer.
King Numan, as soon as it was day, prohibited any
further hostilities; he sent for Shedad and Oorwah,
and investing them with robes of honour, he pre-
sented them some fine steeds with housings of gold ;
and as he imparted to them his love for Moote-
geredeh, he required them to assist his vizier Amroo ;
and when they had promised to do so, he directed
his vizier to accompany them. The vizier accord-
ingly set out with Shedad and Oorwah, and re-
paired to the tribe of Abs. __

When Prince Aswad saw what King Numan had
done, how he had released Shedad and Oorwah, and
had sent his vizier to the tribe of Abs to negotiate
a peace, he was highly enraged and indignant, and
he said to the Arab chiefs, Be calm, till I see what
more passes between them. If he makes peace with
them, I will write to King Chosroe, and com-
municate what my brother Numan has done, that
he has made peace with the tribe of Abs, and con-
nected himself with them by marriage, though their


154 LOHEIR ACCEPTS NUMAN’S PROPOSAL.


slave was wounded, and they had retired to the
mountains, and there was nothing more to be done
but to take them prisoners. My brother has acted
most shamefully, and he has betrayed the impenal
government on account of his worldly lusts. I am
now convinced it was Numan himself who ordered
the Absians to lie concealed in the valley of Tor-
rents; and it was he who plotted the death of Wir-
dishan: never will I rest till I have contrived his
death, and I myself rule over the Arabs, and then
will I search out the Absians under every stone and
every clod of earth. But the vizier Amroo con-
tinued his way with Shedad and Oorwah, till they
approached the tribe of Abs, who, on seeing them,
advanced towards the vizier and saluted him: he
presented them the robes of honour, and the noble
horses for King Zoheir, saying, King Numan salutes
you, and demands your daughter Mootegeredeh in
marriage, so that the two tribes may be only as one
tribe: he desires you to demand as much as you
please of cattle and he and she camels, &c. King
Zoheir made no reply, but turned towards Antar ;
What is your opinion? said he. O King, he re-
plied, the man has released my father and my
friend, and has subdued my pride by his liberality.
As to your daughter, she must marry some one,
and she cannot find a nobler match than King
Numan, for he is the Vicegerent of King Chosroe
Nushirvan.

In conformity with Antar’s opinion, King Zoheir


ASWAD ESPOUSES HADIFAH’S SISTER. 155


gave his daughter in marriage to King Numan,
saying to the vizier, I accede to King Numan’s
wishes out of respect to Antar the victorious lion.
The vizier, much delighted that Mootegeredeh’s |
marriage was settled (and from that day love for
Antar entered into his heart), returned to King
Numan, and told him the whole affair was arranged
to his satisfaction.

When the prisoners on both sides were restored,
Antar sent for the chief, Hidjar, and having cut his
hair off, released him. But when the tribes of
Lakhm and Juzam and the Arab chiefs saw what
Numan had done, they first complained of it to his
brother Aswad, and then returned home. After
this the tnbe of Abs quitted the mountains with
King Zoheir and Antar, and the chrefs, and all re-
paired to King Numan, who sprang up on his feet,
and received them in the most distinguished man- -
ner, investing them with beautiful robes. Prince
Aswad marked all this, And I, said he, I will con-
nect ‘myself to the tribe of Fazarah. So he de-
manded Hadifah’s sister, for he was much attached
to that tribe, and he acted towards them as his
brother had acted towards the Absians; he clothed
them in robes of honour, made them presents, and
distributed gold and silver. They remained seven
days in that spot, feasting and carousing; when
Numan having made a hollow peace between the
tribes of Abs and Fazarah, he ordered the march,
recommending the speedy conclusion of the affair


156 ASWAD’S TREACHERY.


with Zoheir’s daughter ; and Prince Aswad having
also enjoined the same to Hadifah. The tribes of
Abs and Fazarah set out for their respective homes
and deserts; and King Numan also departed, and
when he had reached the throne of his glory, he
thought no more of the calamities of fortune. But
the Persian troops that Antar had routed in the
valley of Torrents, and whose chief, Wirdishan, he
had slain, did not stop in their flight till they came
to Chosroe, and related to him all that Antar had
done to them ; how he had slain their chief, Wir-
dishan. We fled and sought protection, they added,
in the tents of Numan, but he ordered us to be
driven out, and we have heard that it was he who
sent to Antar, and recommended him to lie in am-
bush for us in the valley of Torrents, and not a
creature has ever given us any advice but Prince
Aswad. |

This account excited Chosroe’s rage and in-
dignation, and he swore he would absolutely put
Antar to death and all the tribe of Abs, and that
he would not leave a head or a tail of them. They
were thus conversing, when despatches were brought
in by Mubidan from Prince Aswad. Chosroe or-
dered them to be read; and as soon as he had
heard their contents, the light became dark in his
eyes. He turned to the eldest of his sons, whose
name was Khodawend, and ordered him to mount
with a hundred and fifty thousand horsemen, Per-
sians, Turkomans, and Dilemites: March, cried he,


CHOSROE’S SON DISGRACES NUMAN, 157


to the land of Hirah; seize Numan and all the
grandees of his government, and appoint his bro-
ther Aswad to the viceregency over the Arabs; and
after that, he continued, march against the tribe of
Abs and Adnan. Bring me all their men—all their
property—all their women—that I may hang every
one of them on the tower of the palace, and in front
of them all shall be the slave called Antar. Khoda-
wend expressed his submission, and immediately
rose up and gave orders to the resolute knight, the
undaunted warrior, named Zerkemal, the brother
of Wirdishan, whom Antar had slain: but he,
when the news of his brother's death arrived, cut off
his hair and took refuge in the mansions of fire;
and on this day Khodawend ordered him to select
the horsemen for him, and in less than three days
he chose out one hundred and fifty thousand horse-
men, Persians and Dilemites, every one like a lion
when he springs; and on the fourth day the
standards of Khorasan and the imperial eagles
waved over his head. Chosroe came out to bid him
farewell: and having given instructions for his con-
duct, sent with him his chief minister Buzurjmihr.
They continued their march till they came nigh
unto Hirah. Numan went out to meet them; but
at the sight of the troops he was confounded, and
he was certain it was the army of resentment. He
had no other resource but to dismount in the pre-
sence of Khodawend ; and as he kissed the ground
and did homage, Khodawend ordered him to be


158 AND RAISES ASWAD TO HIS THRONE.


seized, and also a number of warriors his relations.
He appointed his brother in his place, and having
encircled his brows with one of the imperial tiaras,
he made him King over the Arabs, saying, Know
that the just King has heard that you are a faithful
adviser of the imperial government, so he has made
you ruler over all the Arabs of the desert. There-
fore, instantly address in writing all the tribes, both
distant and near, and observe who obeys you, and
who rebels against you. ‘Those that submit I will
favour; but as to those who rebel, I will mareh
against them, and will tear their lives out of their
bodies, and then we will proceed against the tribe
of Abs and Adnan, and will not leave a man alive
among them.

Aswad was overjoyed, and exulted at the good
news. He wrote letters to the Arab tribes, ordering
them to appear at Hirah for the purpose of joining
in the warlike expedition against the tribe of Abs
and Adnan. Among those to whom he sent was
Maadi Kereb, the Zebeedian; and he said to him
in his letter, If you wish to be revenged on the lion
Antar—to arms! to arms! He moreover informed
him of all that had happened to his brother Numan
at the hands of Khodawend, the son of Chosroe.
This letter he sent by one of his carriers, and then
he applied himself to the execution of his duties
towards Khodawend.

During all this time Maadi Kereb in his heart
had endured what no man ever suffered before. All


DIREED TAUNTS MAADI KERED. 1§9


the Arabs derided him, and praised Antar, and he
made a secret vow in his own mind never to mount
a horse, and never to appear in battle, till he should
take vengeance of Antar, son of Shedad. Amongst
the many others who came to him and reproached
him, was one called Direed, son of Samah, and his
relation Sebeea, son of Harith, surnamed Zoolkhi-
mar. Direed had lived four hundred years, and he
survived even to the coming of our Lord Moham-
med, shaded in clouds, on whom be the greatest of
blessings and most perfect happiness! Old as Direed
was, he was strong-limbed—fierce in battle—patient
in difficulties, and on this account the Arabs called
him Rihat-ool Harb (millstone of war). When he
presented himself to Maadi Kereb with Zoolkhimar
(lover of the veil tied round his sword-hilt), he as-
signed him a dwelling; he slaughtered camels for
him and his comrades, and he ate and drank with
him.

On the third day Direed being in high spirits with
wine, and singing, he began to banter Maadi Kereb,
jeering and taunting him in the grossest terms for
having been taken prisoner by Antar, and he thus
expressed himself in verses:

“ Those, whose protector you were, O Maadi,
“ are now disgraced ; their hopes are disappointed ;
“ their wives are covered with shame: for should
“he not blush who has aimed at glory, and has
“fought with a slave who has captured him?
“ Abandon the scimitar, you cannot wield it; talk


160 HIS UNSATISFACTORY EXCUSES.


“no more of the honours you once recorded : it is
“ not for every one who brandishes a sword in his
“ hand to enjoy a high reputation, or to inspire fear
“ in his attacks. There is not death in the barb of
“ the spear, but its employers must instruct it in
“ the plunder of souls. Die then of grief, or live in
& disgrace and despair! Watch no more the nights
“ you have watched. If you are still noble-minded
“and high-spirited, march against the demon of
« Hidjaz, and assault him. Fear not the warriors
« when they come. Besides him, there is no one
“ against whom any precautions are necessary. ‘If
“ you fear, demand succour of Sebeea, and you
“ will see a lion in war with blood-dyed talons, who,
‘‘ when he draws his sword, its edge rends the
« earth; with it he bears down souls, and it de-
« fends those that seek its aid.”

On hearing these verses, the heart of Maadi
Kereb melted like lead, and he began excusing him-
self to Direed ; he told him what Antar had done
to Hidjar, and spoke of the armies and the warriors
he had destroyed; how he had slain Ghasik and
Wirdishan, and had surprised by night the troops
of Numan. Zoolkhimar smiled; O Maadi Kereb,
said he, all this proceeds from your inability and
your fears, and 1s the consequence of your alarms
and your terrors. You console yourself with the fate
of others. May God curse him who cannot reduce
Antar to disgrace, or scatter his limbs over the
barren waste! By all that will succeed, or have


HIDJAR JOINS PRINCE ASWAD. 16)


preceded him, O Maadi, you must unavoidably
wash off this garment of disgrace and ignominy,
otherwise your affairs cannot be retrieved, and you
will be exposed to most galling difficulties; but if
you wish, I will go with you, and. you shall see
how I will treat him, and how I will scatter his
limbs over the hills and the plains.

Having remained five days with him, they re-
turned to their own country ; and soon after Maadi
Kereb wrote to the chief Hidjar an account of all
these circumstances, and they all swore they would
root out the tribe of Abs and annihilate them.

About that time arrived letters from Prince
Aswad ; so they departed, revenge their sole ob-
ject; and being greatly pleased at the captivity of
King Numan, and the expedition of the Persians
under Khodawend, they quitted their native land,
and set out for the tribe of Abs and Adnan. But
the first that commenced his journey was Hidjar,
for he was resolved to be beforehand with the troops
of Chosroe, so that he might acquire high glory to
the exclusion of others. In the mean time the
Absians, having thus connected themselves by mar-
riage with King Numan, returned home; and as
they consulted about the state of their affairs, they
augmented their stock of he and she camels, and
lived in security with their property and families.
Now Antar had recovered from his wound; one day
Oorwah came to him with some other noble horse-
men, and said, O Aboolfawaris, arise and demand

VOL, IIL : M


162 NUMAN’S DISGRACE MADE PUBLIC.


Ibla in marriage, and let this trouble be removed
from our hearts, for now there can be no opposition
to your wedding. J will not do that, said Antar,
and I will not wed my cousin till Numan weds
Mootegeredeh, and when King Numan’s happiness
is complete, then consult about me as you please, so
that the freeborn and the slaves may all rejoice. They
were thus conversing and deliberating about such
matters, unsuspicious of the circumstances that had
happened to King Numan, when in a few days ar-
rived a messenger from Amroo, Numan’s minister,
with a letter acquainting them with the circum-
stances, how the dominion of the Arabs had been
conferred on Prince Aswad ; how he had written
to Chosroe, and had given him information un-
known to his brother Numan ; and how Khodawend
had marched, and had seized Numan.

This news excited great consternation among the
Absians, and as a confirmation of this intelligence,
letters to the same effect reached the tribe of Fa-
zarah, who were in transports of joy, and passed
their time in feasting, and drinking evening and
morning. Now that Aswad is our relation by mar-
riage, observed Hadifah, he will certainly avenge
us: now shall we extirpate every trace of the tribe
of Abs and Adnan; now will we plunder and ra-
vage their lands, and now will we slay them young
and old. Rebia happened to be with them; © my
cousins, said he, all are preparing for war; and
whatever tribe comes first, do you join them. Oc-


THE ABSIANS AGAIN QUIT THEIR HOMES. 163


eupy every road against the Absians; surprise them
before the Persians can come up with you; and
seize upon their lands and their pastures.

King Zoheir sent for his son Cais, and having
assembled the whole tribe, Know, said he, that the
Vizier Amroo has informed us that the son of Chos-
roe is marching against us with the forces of the
world. Our departure from the mountains, said
: Antar, was not a wise measure. Our only resource
is to. retire to a spot where we may protect our
women and families. Then will I encounter the -
Arab, the Persian, and the Turk, and the Dilemite,
till I have exterminated them; and I will show you
what I will do with this new upstart king; and soon
will I commute the purity of his enjoyments into
affliction. My advice, said Shiboob, is, that you
depart for the mountains of Adja and Selma, for
they are even more inaccessible and stronger than
the mountains of Radm: and when you are there,
no evil can affect you.

The Absians approved of Shiboob’s advice, .and
as they were all unanimous for a removal—To-
morrow night we will depart, said King Zoheir.
The next day the Absians struck their tents, and
having raised the howdahs on the camels, they drove
away the cattle; and they departed traversing the
wastes and the sand-hills. But Antar ordered two
of his slaves to proceed to the land of the tribe of
Fazarah, and directed them not to quit their country
till they perceived what new plans they were adopt-


M Ì2


164 THE JOY OF THE TRIBE OF FAZARAH.


ing. ‘The slaves set out accordingly, and the Ab-
sians sought the mountains, where they pitched
their tents, and soon familiarised themselves to that
country.

The slaves soon reached the land of Fazarah, and —
they found the whole tribe shouting with joy, for
on that day a letter had arrived by a messenger
from Prince Aswad, informing them of the march
of Khodawend, and the armies of Persia; and now
: you may gratify your Sereg agamst the Absians,
he added.

As soon as they heard this intelligence, they sent
to inquire news of the Absians; but finding they
had already removed to the mountains of Adja and
Selma, My idea, said Rebia (that mine of treachery,
fraud, and deceit), to Hadifah, is that you should -
acquaint your relation Aswad with their flight ; and
let us join the very first that arrives here, and
march against them.

They were thus deliberating, when lo! a dust
arose and darkened the whole land, and there ap-
peared the Chief Hidjar, and with him ten thousand
of the tribe of Kendeh. The tribes of Fazarah and
Zeead went out to meet them, and accommodated
them with habitations, and treated them in the
most distinguished manner. Hidjar questioned
them about the Absians, and when they informed
him of their flight to the mountains of Adja and
Selma, he expressed his regrets at not meeting them
in their own country: Be not afflicted; O Chief


AMARAH’S EXULTATION. - 165


Hidjar, said Rebia; we will march with you, and
we will assist you in taking vengeance; for the Arab
and the Persian are coming against them in every di-
rection, and they cannot possibly escape death and de-
struction. We must now exert ourselves to extirpate
every vestige of them, and to ravage their lands;
and every tribe that comes to us we will join. O
Rebia, said Hidjar, we want not the assistance of
the tribes, for we have a party sufficiently strong ;
and soon will arrive Maadi Kereb, the Zebeedian,
and with him Direed, son of Samah, the Djeshmean;
and Zoolkhimar, the Himyanite, accompanied with
intrepid armies.

Rebia and the tribe of Fazarah were rejoiced at
this news, and the Chief Amarah rubbed his hands
in the excess of his joy. O my brother, said he,
now indeed this black bastard cannot escape; and I
shall now obtain Ibla, and shall be made, happy ;
for really she cannot suit any one but me; and her
charms are only to be compared with mine. Rebia
laughed at him; O Amarah, said he, my heart tells
me Antar will put to the rout all these armies, and
he will not even let the first fall back upon the last;
for I know of Antar what no one but myself knows.

Now the slaves whom Antar had sent to the land
of Fazarah, when they saw the Chief Hidjar and
his companions, and heard all their discourse about
the Absians, set out for the mountains to join
Antar, to whom they communicated what had hap-
pened, and all the plans of the enemy.


166 ANTAR’S PLAN OF. DEFENCE.


Antar on hearing this intelligence instantly arose,
his courage, all on fire, and repaired to King Zoheir,
and informed him of all he had heard of Hidjar and
the tnbe of Fazarah. O Aboolfawaris, said he, we
must now indeed make peace with them: but what
is your opinion? O King, said Antar, we will leave
here one thousand horsemen, with your son Cais, to
defend the women and families; we will march with
the remainder, and will surprise the tribe of Faza-
rah and Hidjar, and will soon overthrow all their
iniquitous projects. That would be well, said King
Zoheir; and they immediately put themselves in
. readiness, and marched with three thousand men,
leaving Cais, with one thousand, enjoining them to
be on the alert, and on their guard.

Antar rode by the side of King Zoheir with
Oorwah and his people, and his uncle Zakhmet Ul-
jewad ; and when they were at some distance from
the mountains, Antar reflected on what had occurred
to him, and thus expressed himself :

“ Our country is laid waste, and our lands de-
& spoiled : our homes are ravaged, and our plains are
“ devastated. Let us halt, let us mourn for them ;
‘s for there is no friend in that quarter, and the
“ country isruined. Fate has fallen upon our com-
‘‘ panions, and they are dispersed as if they had
“ never alighted at their tents. In sportive merri-
“ ment they tucked up the garments of joy, and
“ their spears were spread along their tents. The
“& wand of happiness was waving over us, as if for-


SHIBOOB LRARNS THE PLANS OF THE ENEMY. 167


“ tune had been favourable, and our enemies thought
“not of us. O Ibla, my heart is rent with anguish
“ on thy account: my patience is fled to the wastes.
“Oh Hidjar! Hey, I will teach thee my station;
“ thou shalt not dare to fight me—disgraced as thoy
“art. Hast thou forgotten in the vale of Torrents
“ the deeds of my valour, and how I overthrew the
“ armies, undaunted as they were? I precipitated
“them with the thrust, and I abandoned them and
“ their carcasses to be trampled on by the wild
“beasts? Shall I not behold thee in anguish to-
“ morrow ?—Ay; thou shalt not escape from me
“ to the arms of thy beloved. I will leave the brutes
“of the desert to stamp over thee, and the eagles
“and the ghouls shall mangle thee. I am Antar,
“the most valiant of knights—ay, of them all; and
“* every warrior can prove my words. If you have
“a milch-camel, milk her; for thou knowest not to
“ whom its young may belong.”

When Antar had finished, they continued their
march till they came within two parasangs of Faza-
rah, when Shiboob directed them to dismount, whilst
he himself set out for the land of Fazarah. Re-
turning at midnight, he told his brother Antar and
King Zoheir that the enemy had quitted their tents,
and were assembled to the number of twenty-five
thousand ‘Horsemen, under Hidjar, their guide and
counsellor’: and their plan, he continued, is to ex-
tirpate yotattd' ravdge your country; and by morn-
ing they will meet you. uM


168 ANTAR SURPRISES THEM.


Antar selected one thousand Absian horsemer.
Go, said he to his uncles and his father Shedad ;
go by night with King Zoheir, by this road to the
right, and surprise the enemy. He also gave Shas
a thousand men, and sent him by the left, he him-
self proceeding with the remainder by the direct
road, till they all approached the hostile army, and
perceived their multitudes that filled the whole de-
sert. They were in perfect ease and security,
and never calculated on the possibility of an attack
from the Absians, till the shouts came upon them
from all directions, and the herald of calamities cried
out over the whole land. ‘They started from
their tents, and sprang on their horses’ backs, many
of them without arms. They scarcely knew with
whom they were fighting, with whom they were
engaging, or with whom they were talking. But
in their fears of Antar, they all drew their swords,
and fell upon one another, and soon also lahoured
the swords of the Absians upon their shoulders.

When the Chief Hidjar heard the voice of Antar,
he knew him, and cried out to the Kendehans, O
my cousins, stand firm against this bold black slave,
for he has only a small body of men with him; and
be thinks he will serve us in the same manner he
did in the valley of Torrents. But I am aware,
that the battle turns one day for you, and one day
against you: you have only to resist steadily this
black slave, that we may put him to death, and our
name be for ever renowned. ‘The dust in the mean


HIDJAR CHALLENGES ANTAR. 169


time increased, and the horses trampled over the
bodies. It was a night to them abounding in sor-
rows and tumults.

The three parties of Absians cried outy O by
Abs! O by Adnan! they drove frightful thrusts till
the horses were unable to charge from fatigue, and
dawn was nearly rising on the tribes. But Antar
did not discontinue the contest, assisted by the Ab-
sians, till morning dawned. Great part of the Fa-
zarah army fled and retired, horror-struck at the
blows of the lion-warrior Antar. Still Hadifah and
Rebia remained with a few Kendehans, who stood
firm, encouraged by their Chief Hidjar. Above
three thousand of the tribes of Fazarah and Ken-
deh were already slain, and only thirty horsemen
of the tribe of Abs. l

By daybreak the two armies having separated
from each other, and the troops having alighted,
Hidjar advanced in front of his people, and ex-
claimed, I must defy Antar to the contest, or shame,
disgrace, and infamy will overwhelm me. He waited
till the meridian heat was abated, when he mounted
his horse, and stood forth between the two armies,
and every eye was directed towards him as he thus
expressed himself :

s“ It is only the thrust with the spear that can
“ relieve my affliction, and the blow of the scimitar
“ on the chest, and the skull. When the mind can
“ submit to infamy, words are only words without
“deeds. Fortune consists of two days; this is the


170 ANTAR COMES FORTH,


‘¢ coloquintida of sorrow ; the next its food is sweeter
“ than honey. You dastard, you have clothed me
“in shame; but had you done me justice, you
“ would have trembled before me, and have pro-
“ strated yourself in disgrace. To-day your chiefs
“ shall bear witness to my superiority, when I make
“ you drink of the cups of extinction. You made
“ me captive in the dark confusion of night, in the
“ valley of Torrents, by fraud and deceit. Come
“ forth—let alone nocturnal stratagems—give me
- fair play. Now I am on the alert, I will be a lion
“ without his equal—ay! a lion, a deluge, a sea,
“ to whose shore there are no bounds; and mine is
‘a youthful heart hewn out of a mountain.”

When the Chief Hidjar had finished, he sought
the combat. O King, said Antar, as he stood by
the side of King Zoheir, verily I must settle this
affair with Hidjar; for without his death, his army
will never be routed. And he started out against
Hidjar, his head uncovered, and on his body only
his ordinary garments. He had thrown aside his
armour, and his polished corslet, in contempt of
Hidjar. He called out, Eh! thou hast abused me
for treachery and stratagem; truly such is the na-
tural disposition of thyself, and thine own tribe; for
thou didst come’ against us with the Arab and the
Persian. It was only the judgment-sword of heaven
that overtook thee in that plain and waste; and
now thou art come against me with the tribe of Fa-
zarah, and hast assembled against me a countless


AND ADDRESSES HIM. 171


host; but I have surprised thee, that I may extir-
pate thee root and. branch; then will I return to
engage the rest, numerous as is the host that seeks
us, and though our party is but small. Thou art
clothed in armour, and I am in these simple clothes ;
my head uncovered, and bare my feet. And thus
he continued — .

“ Verily, thou hast falsely accused me of deceit
“and of treachery in word and deed. Thou art
“ now on the alert; meet me; thou shalt see a war-
“nor firm and resolute, fearless of peril. I am he
“ before whom the lion of the den humbles himself,
“ in fearof whom Chosroe himself trembles. I showed
“thee in the valley of Torrents what my sword
“ could execute on the chests and the skulls. Wir-
“ dishan was there; and the sons of horsemen fol-
“lowed him like a deluging rain. The horses
“ quaked under their saddles, and they drank of
“ death from the velocity of my spear. And thou
“ shalt be driven into disgrace and calamity without
“ a friend to aid either in word or deed.”


172
í HIDJAR MADE PRISONER.


‘CHAPTER XXII.


Anrtak, having finished, shouted at the Chief Hid-
jar and rushed upon him; Hidjar met him, and
these two obstinate heroes began the .combat and
the contest ; the thrust, the blow, the give and take,
now in sport, now in earnest; the approach and re-
treat, till the warriors were amazed at their ma-
næuvres. Fatigue at length fell on the arms of
Hidjar, for he saw that Antar was an irresistible
hero, and he repented of his expedition into that
land. Antar, perceiving his situation, closed upon
him till stirrup clashed against stirrup, and grasping
him by the rings of his armour and his corslet, he
| yelled in his face, O by Abs, I will not be controlled ;
I am the lover of Ibla; I will not be restrained. He
seized him in his hand as if he were a sparrow, and
dashed him on the ground. ‘Shiboob pounced upon
him, and having bound fast his shoulders and his
arms to his sides, drove him away to the tnbe of
Abs. And as he looked at Hidjar he saw he was in
tears like a woman. Eh! O Hidjar, said he, what
is it that thus distresses thee? God curse thy father
and thy mother! What, wilt engage in hostilities,
and now that thy turn of fortune has caught thee
dost weep like a woman? O Shiboob, said he, my


HIS DISGRACE AND REPENTANCE. 173


tears flow not from my fear of death, or at the oc-
currence of misfortunes; but as I reflect on the re-
volutions of Fortune and rapid execution of her re-
venge, I weep. To no one is she constant: she
never beautifies but she deforms, and she never
causes a smile but she accompanies it with a tear.
How is that, O Hidjar? said Shiboob. Know then,
O Absian, he replied, I had demanded some time
ago in marriage the daughter of the Lord of Hou-
ran, and on her account I had exposed my life to
every difficulty and danger; but he would not af-
fiance me to her but through the intercession of
King Numan, and just as I was about to be married,
King Numan wrote to me ordering me to march
against your brother Antar when he was in the
mountains of Radm. So I went against him—but
that is all over; and when Numan made peace with
him he released me, having first cut off my hair. I
returned to my family, and asked my uncle to per-
form the marriage ceremony, but he said to me,
Antar has taken you a prisoner, and I will never
marry you to my daughter till you take vengeance
on Antar. About that time came the news of the
seizure of King Numan, and a letter from Prince
Aswad ordering me again on a hostile expedition
against your brother Antar. I set out against him
in the full expectation of accomplishing my ven-
geance; but I have fallen a second time into his
hands, and shame is increased on shame.

Well ! O Chief Hidjar, said Shiboob, will you, in-


174 HE AGREES TO RE ANTAR’S FRIEND,


stead of serving Aswad, go with my brother and aid
him in releasing King Numan? Then will your
business succeed to your wishes, and you will be
raised to the highest dignities, for truly King Numan
has been ill requited, and he has fallen into captivity
and disgrace. Now, O Shiboob, said Hidjar, I do
intreat you to intercede for me this once with your
brother, and preserve me from his grasp, then will
I, by the faith of an Arab, submit to him, both
myself, and my people, and my tribe, even until
death ; and if after this I ever betray him, may
the mother of Hidjar be no more a freeborn woman !
O Hidjar, replied Shiboob, I will engage for you,
and I will ensure you my brother’s protection. But
I require of you to swear to me by Him who ren-
dered the lofty mountains immovable; the Giver of
life and death; that you will never betray us either
in word or deed. And Hidjar took the oath re-
quired by Shiboob, an oath very binding among the
Arabs at that period; and it is said that if a man
ever swore that oath, and afterwards perjured him-
self, the evening would not shine on him before he
would bark like a dog, and the flesh would drop off
- his bones, and he would die.

Now Sinboob having bound Hidjar by this oath,
set him at liberty; he restored to him his arms and
armour, and produced his horse. Hidjar mounted,
and returned to the scene of contention.

As soon as the Kendehans saw their chief at
hberty, they rushed upon Antar from all sides and


AND ATTACKS HIS FOES. 175


directions, and the Absians also attacked ; men met
men, and heroes heroes. At that moment King
Zoheir beheld Hidjar, and supposing he had escaped
-by force from Shiboob, he called out to his attendants
to seize Hidjar, and drag him back into captivity and
disgrace. But Hidjar dismounted from his horse,
and running towards King Zoheir, he kissed his
feet in the stirrup, relating to him all that had
passed with Shiboob, and saying, Wait, O king, I
will show you what I will do; and Hidjar again
mounted, crying out in a loud voice, My cousins,
hold back your hands from the blow of the sword,
for I have sworn to the Absians to be one of Antar’s
friends for ever, in order to release King Numan.
The tnbe of Kendeh no sooner heard the voice of
their chief than they withdrew from the contest,

and were rejoiced at their deliverance from the pre-
sence of Antar. They turned upon the tribes of
Fazarah and. Zeead, destroying them with the
sword, and the thrust of the tall spear. As to Antar,
he was hewing down the heroes with his falchion,
and revolving in his mind Hidjar’s treachery,
when he saw him perform these acts, and as he per-
ceived his party annihilating the tribes of Fazarah
and Zeead, he was delighted at this alliance with the `
chief, who no sooner beheld him than he dismounted,
and attempted to kiss Antar’s feet in the stirrup,
saying, O Aboolfawaris, lct the blood shed between
us be forgiven! God knows all hearts; and may he
curse the father of Hidjar if after this he assists the


176 FLIGHT AND DISMAY OF FAZARAR-


foe against you, or ever again harbours evil against
you! Antar thanked him for his kindness, and
having vowed eternal friendship, they assaulted the
remainder of the tribes of Zeead and Fazarah, and
pierced them as they fled with their long spears, and _
cut them down with their sharp swords; and they
did not stop driving them away till they had forced
them back on their tents, when they returned to
the scattered horses and dispersed arms, and set out
on their way back to Aja and Selma, Hidjar riding
by the side of Antar, and rejoicing in his society.

But the chiefs of Fazarah, with Rebia, were re-
maining quietly before their tents expecting Hidjar
would return to them with Antar as a prisoner, when
lo! their companions arrived, routed and in flight;
they shuddered. Rebia was in great consternation.
Alas! said he, sons of my uncle, what has befallen
ye? What has happened? And they related the
whole: that Antar had taken Hidjar prisoner, and
that he had become one of his companions. Rebia
was horror-struck ; he shuddered and fled, fearful
of death and extinction. But as to Amarah, he
flung his spear away out of his left hand, and went
off at a full gallop, looking behind, terrified at An-
tar, exclaiming as he went, O that I had indeed,
kept myself clear of this party !

As to Antar, when he returned from the pursuit
his heart was at ease with respect to the tribes of
Fazarah and, Zeead, for he had obtained of them all
be wished and desired. He set out on his return to


AKTAR’S JOY. IN VICTORY. 177


the mountains, and as he meditated on the horrors
he had endured, he thus expressed himself: _
“Ah! O Ibla, keep thy engagement; the past
“ is past; it is enough to be kept apart from thee !.
“ Youth is not faded, and we are not yet become
“old. Fortune has not vanquished our youth ;
& our sharp scimitars have not failed; our iron
‘¢ fingers can still wield them! Ask the Fazareans
‘ of us when we assuaged our hearts among their
‘¢ warriors. We let alone their women, but they
“ were disordered; and before dawn they were
“ tearing their cheeks with their hands. We have
“ filled their country with alarm, and the two tribes
“ are become our slaves. We have mounted above
“ the Pleiades in their sublimity, and our valour
& cannot be increased; and when our babes are
“© weaned as infants, our enemies shall bow down to
“them in subjection. He who would attempt to
& oppress us shall see in us the obstinacy of lions;
‘we will surround them with the thrusts of the’
“ lengthened spear when battle rages in our hearts.
“We will kindle our flames in every contest till
“ their bones and their flesh shall melt. We will |
“shoe our horses in every land with their en.
“ sanguined bones and their dried skins. Our mill-
‘¢ stones shall grind down the tribes. We have
“ left their cultivated lands a barren waste. But on
‘“‘ the day of generosity we have given away all we
‘ possessed, and have filled the country with our
“ liberality and kindness. Who is there to give in-


VOL. Yt. N


178 HIDJAR COMPLIMENTS Him.


s formation of us to Numan that soon his deliver-
“ ance will arrive? Behold the Persians have re-
c turned discomfited ; they have fled with subverted.
“ standards; the spear’s barb laboured in their rear,
“ and they float in blood like the human hearts.
« They shall exalt him as their king, and Chosroe
“ shall fall; he shall endure what Themood suf-
« fered. I am the slave that encounters deaths; in
“ truth, the knight of the noble steeds. In my am-
“ bition I will exalt myself to the Pleiades by my
“ never-failing fortune and illustrious deeds. I am
“ Antar, and my name shall for ages be celebrated
“for sound policy. Mine is a happy star from
« God, who created all mankind his slaves.”

As Antar stopped, King Zoheir and his brave
companions, and the hardy Kendehans, expressed
their delight; but the Chief Hidjar, quite amazed,
looked in Antar’s face: O Aboolfawaris, said he,
God has truly combined in you all intrepidity,
‘liberality, and eloquence, and every noble quality,
and has closed them upon the Arab and the Persian.
And he who can recollect these verses will never
require a companion at night or.a friend by day.
` And these verses were called by the Arabs “ con-
vivial, social;” and they are among the chosen
pieces of Antar, the lord of battle.

As to Maadi Kereb and the tribe of Zebeed, as
soon as they heard of the departure of Khodawend
and Aswad against Antar, and that King Numan
was in durance, he summoned five thousand of his


DIREED’S ADVICE AND FORETHOUGHT. 179


tribe, and having written to the Chief Hidjar, order-
ing him to join him im the land of Abs, he himself
hastened away to Direed and Sebeea, to demand
their aid and assistance. And when Maadi Kereb
alighted at Direed’s, and had related all that had
happened to King Numan, and the departure of
Khodawend and Prince Aswad with the Persians and
the Arabs against the tribe of Abs and Adnan, the
ight became dark in the eyes of Direed; and turning
towards Maadi Kereb, If this system, said he, should
really be persevered in against the Arabs, those
fithy Persians will soon overpower us, and our
women will be sold in the cities of Turcomania and
Dilem. As to me, I will never encourage this con-
duct against the Arabs; for I will address the tribes
in writing, and inform them so. I will not move
hence till I hear what has passed among the tribe of
Abs and Adnan, and the account of King Zohen’s
admittance of Antar to their connexion, for by the
faith of an Arab, were not Antar among the Ab-
sians, I would instantly proceed myself to assist
them against the invasion of the Persians. But
I am afraid of the upbraidings of the Arabs, that
they will say, Direed, son of Samah, lord of the
tribe of Howazin, entered the service of Antar, who
was.a slave and a shepherd. But as to you, Maadi
Kereb, I cannot possibly march with you, now that
the Persians have seized the person of King Numan.
I will not violate the sanctity of the sacred shrine ;
for I know that Prince Aswad will not enjoy his
N2


180 MAADI KEREB PURSUES HIS MARCH,


dominion long, and never will they prosper who
‘submit to him; and moreover, between me and
King Numan there is an engagement which I cannot
falsify.

These words created great distress in Maadi
Kereb’s mind, and his resolution wavered. But in
three days he departed, and having assembled ¢en
thousand horsemen, he set out to attack the tribe of
Abs and Antar; but in his way he passed through
the territories of Hidjar, where he heard of his ex-
pedition against the Absians, and that he had been
joined by the tribes of Fazarah and Zeead ; and we
have learnt, they added, that the tribe of Abs has
fled to the mountains of Adja and Selma; for as
soon as they understood the Chief Hidjar had
marched against them, Antar and King Zoheir set
‘out with two thousand horsemen, with the design
to surprise the tribe of Fazarah and the Chief Hid-
jar; therefore in the mountains there only remains
Prince Cais with one thousand warnors to protect
the women. This intelligence delighted Maadi
Kereb. Oh! exquisite! he cried; and turning to
his companions, he added, Truly all I wished and
expected has succeeded : and he congratulated them
on the plunder and the accomplishment of their de-
sires; and they instantly departed, traversing the
plains and the wastes till they came near the moun-
tains.

Prince Cais had stationed scouts om nthe summits
.of the heights and defiles, and as soon as they saw


à


-AND ATTACKS PRINCE CAIS. 181


the dust, they immediately gave him notice; and
he ordered all the warriors to mount—they obeyed;
and with Cais at their head, they hurried to the
mouth of the pass like lions in a den, where, per-
ceiving the desert waving like the sea with troops
and armies, Prince Cais despatched an Absian horse-
man to inquire the news. He spurred on his horse
till he came among them, and cried out in a loud
voice, Tell me, O Arabs, who ye are before the
` battle rage between us. O Absian, said Maadi
Kereb, advancing, ye are of little shame that have
admitted to your connexion the offspring of a slave-
woman. Verily your destruction is at hand, the
Arab and the Persian are in quest of you, and my
advice is that ye surrender yourselves to me without .
fighting. But as to your question about our rank,
we are the tnbe of Zebeed, and I am Maadi Kereb.
I have stirred up against you all who have blood or
vengeance to demand of ye.

The Absian on hearing this returned to Cais, and
reported the circumstance. Rage was kindled in
the countenance of Cais; he thundered from the
mountains, and behind him followed the noble
Absians whose intrepidity was proverbial. They
shouted so that the mountains were in convulsion,
the .universe was agitated at their roars, and the
face of day was blackened. The blasts of death
were blowing with tempestuous gusts—the army
of Maadi Kerel rushed upon the Absians—men
met men, and heroes heroes. Blood streamed and


®


182 MAADI KEREB’S CHALLENGE.


flowed—limbs were hewn off—horrors increased.
Maadi Kereb penetrated through the Absians, for
he was one of the thousand tyrants of that age of
ignorance ; he dashed down heads under his feet, he
cut off wrists and fingers, and performed deeds that
confounded the reason. The Absians were engaged
in a. sacred war, and they preferred death to flight,
and would not live objects of shame among the
Arabs. For in those days the Absians were the
firebrands of war in bravery.and undaunted spirit ;
they dreaded ignominy. The day seemed closed
upon them, and the land was obscured in their eyes.
They continued the engagement till the day fled,
and darkness came on with thick obscurity, when
they returned to the mountains, and Maadi Kereb
halted at the entrance.

Cais assembled the Chiefs; Cousins, ‘said he, my
advice is that we continue the fight till my father
and Antar return. They approved, and kept on
the defensive till daylight appearing and the stars
vanishing, the enemy arose up against them. Maadi
Kereb advanced in front, and wishing to exhibit his
courage, Hola! tribe of Abs! he cried, where is your
black slave, whose aid you seek, and of whose force
ye boast? Let him stand. forth this day, and pro-
tect the women, and by the truth of Him who orders
the rain to fall, and the desert to be clothed in green,
I will leave for myself and ye too a tale to be re-
corded, and an example to be cited for ages. And
he twisted and tossed about his spear in a style ta


CAIS REPROACHES HIM. 183


amaze the stoutest heart. But Cais observing
Maadi Kereb’s excessive vanity, Desist from the
fight, he said to the Absians, whilst I go forth against
this coxcomb, that prides himself above his fellows.
And he urged on his horse till he. stood before
Maadi Kereb; How long this presumption? he
shouted out, for thou art the very person our cham-
pion took prisoner: he reduced thee to disgrace,
and was so kind as to set thee at liberty, having first
cut off thy hair; he treated thee nobly, but his
generosity was thrown away on thee, and thou hast
acted like a low-born coward. Were Antar here,
he would fight thee, and would tear out thy life from
between thy sides; and though he is absent to-day,
he will not be long absent ; to-morrow he will come,
and thou shalt see the calamities he will bring upon
thee, and how he will punish thee, for truly thou
hast sinned against courtesy ; that is, if thou escapest
safe from my presence, and thou bearest no marks
of my spear. Cais thus continued in verse:

“« Had you.any generosity, O Maadi, you would
“ not have come with horses and horsemen to attack
“us, Our Knight took you prisoner ; he pardoned
“ you, and thought you sincere, ingrate as you
“are. You are returned; all kindness was thrown
“ away on you, for when a dastard is trusted, he
“ becomes a traitor. We are Princes, and you per-
“ ceive the rest of the world in the blow of the sword
“ are comparatively but slaves. God has fayoured
“ the Absians, and has ennobled them with the


184 THEIR UNEQUAL COMBAT.


« honours of crowns and tiaras: had he granted us
“ the power, the land should flow with beneficence,
“ so that Noah would imagine he had given us the
4 flood. Even Chosroe lives in fears at our great-
* ness; he dreads us, and the princes of the earth
“ tremble at us.”

When Cais had finished his verses, Maadi Kereb
vociferated at him, and attacked him. Cais re-
ceived him as the parched up earth the first of the
rain. The contest raged between them in the thrust
and the blow ; horrors and dreadful acts took place
between them. But Cais was no match for Maadi
Kereb in skill and prowess, and when the Absians
saw the situation of their Prince, they resolved on
. making the assault, and by their aid to deliver him
from his foe, when lo! the Zebeed warriors attacked
at once, and endeavoured to finish the affair, and
accomplish their hopes, and plunder the property;
but the Absian heroes also assailed, and they were
In one promiscuous confusion on the plain of bat-
tle: the penetrating spear was at work, and also
the Indian blades. Calamity was thus removed
from Cais, for he was near his destruction and death.
He escaped from his antagonist, but not by flight.
Maadi Kereb had wounded Cais in two places; but
when the armies rushed upon one another, Maadi
Kereb’s attention was called off from him, and he
routed the warriors till he drove them back to their
moantains, having slain. upwards of two. hundred
men. Still the Absians stood firm at the entrance; the


ANTAR AND HIDJAR MARCH TOGETHER. 185


two armies continued to fight and smite till evening
came on, when Maadi Kereb returning with his as-
soclates, reproached them for having made the at-
tack. They alighted, and reposed till morning:
Come on, cried Maadi, come on; plunder the Ab-
sians, before any Arabs arrive to prevent you.

At the word the horsemen mounted, and prepared
for the battle of swords and spears; and as soon as
day dawned on the Absians, there burst upon ‘them
the united cries of women and children: they un-
sheathed their swords, they shook their oak and
resigned themselves to death.

When Maadi Kereb observed the conduct of the
Absians, he dismounted, and his warriors did so like-
wise. ‘The Absians too followed their example, and
every hope, every expectation was extinct. Grief
fell upon the brave; the dust rose, and clouded
over them; the party became quite a proverb; and
they continued in this state till evening.

But Antar and Hidjar returned to the mountains.
Antar was overjoyed in the society of Hidjar,
and when they approached, O Aboolfawaris, said
Hidjar, it occurs to me that { ought to precede you,
because I had engaged myself with Maadi Kereb,
to make a joint attack on your country with him,
and Direed, and Zoolkhimar. I fear, he may have
taken his road by the mountains: now I think, it
would be advisable to send on Shiboob to see what
is going on, and let him return quick.

Antar immediately ordered Shiboob to advance


186 ALARMED ABOUT THE ABSIANS


.towards the mountains, which he instantly did: he
gave his feet to the winds, and sought the wide de-
sert till he reached the mountains, where he heard
the cries of the Absians, and Maadi Kereb shouting
to his people, “ to-morrow, ye shall plunder the
enemy!” As soon as Shiboob had recognised Maadi
Kereb, he hastened back to his brother. Know, son
of my mother, he cried, Hidjar was correct in his
supposition—our friends are reduced to extremities,
and there only now remains to drag them out from
between the mountains. Eh! Ebe-reah! said An-
tar, who has done this? Maadi Kereb, he replied,
and with a world like the sands: and when I ap-
proached the mountains, I saw Maadi Kereb going
his rounds, promising his people the pillage of all
the property of the tribe of Abs! At hearing this,
the light became dark in the eyes of Antar. O, by
the Arabs, he cried, it is absolutely my bounden
duty to make an example of that Maadi’ Kereb, and
those Zebeedians, for those who will benefit by the
warning.

He was about to put his horse on a full gallop,
but the Chief Hidjar prevented him. Whither art
thou going, O Aboolfawaris? he cried. To fight
with Maadi Kereb, said Antar. I request of you,
O Aboolfawaris, said Hidjar, by the life of Ibla’s
two eyes, that you will let me only march against
him. I will requite him for his deeds; I will
frighten him with your strength, and the greatness
of your power. If you approve of this, it will be


MEETING OF HIDJAR AND MAADI KERKE. i87


the best plan, and I will bring him to you a pri-
soner. Qo as you please, said Antar.

Upon that, the Chief Hidjar set out with his
noble Kendehans, and he travelled from midnight
till the dawn of day, when he reached the mountains,
and perceived the engagement. Woes of battle be
on you, O Maadi, exclaimed Hidjar; misery to you,
and to yours, henceforward. Could Antar come
and behold the state of his cousins, he would not
leave a Zebeedian alive: and he galloped down from
the end of the desert, and the tribe of Kendeh fol-
lowed eagerly, seeking the scene of contest.

When Maadi Kereb saw the armies advance, he
thought they were of the tribe of Abs. He called
out to his nearest attendants, and rushed towards
the approaching forces; and behold! he saw the
Chief Hidjar. No harm to ye! he exclaimed ; for
this is the Chief Hidjar, and I have been expecting
him, that we may totally exterminate the tribe of
Abs. He urged on his horse, and his heart was
filled with joy. Welcome, I greet thee, my dearest
brother, my truest friend, he cried. By the faith of -
an Arab, thou art come exactly in time to take thy
share of the plunder.

The Chief Hidjar smiled: Your design is frus-
trated, O Maadi, said he; truly, you imagine my
extraction different from my father’s and grand-
father’s, for liberality should not be lost on man-
kind; and he who is nobly born and connected,
does not act like a base coward. How is this, said


188 . THEIR CONVERSATION.


Maadi Kereb, you are bound to me, O Hidjar, by
an ancient covenant. Ay, said Hidjar, by the lord
of Zemzem, and the sacred wall, if you listen to my
advice; otherwise, I must fight you with my sword
and mv spear. Maadi Kereb stared in amazement
in Hidjar’s face, for he knew not what had hap-
pened. But the Chief Hidjar related every circum-
stance about Antar, describing his liberality and
courage, and how he had taken him prisoner, and
delivered him over to Shiboob, and how he had set
him at liberty on his taking the oath, and I assure
you, continued he, O Maadi, were Antar to give me -
this day his camels, I would tend them; and were
even mountains to turn on me I would encounter
them; and if, O Maadi, you can submit yourself to
what I have submitted, make a contract with me on
this point, and be one of Antar’s adherents, else,
come on to the fight and the combat, and away with
all dissimulation.

Maadi Kereb was in great consternation, and his
rage blazed the more. Eh, then, O Hidjar, he cried ;
hast thou entirely disgraced all thy race on account |
of Antar? Away with such folly, said Hidjar, for
I will not permit you to speak thus of Antar; he is
superior to all mankind, male and female, and in this
age is Antar unequalled ; for, to engage a thousand
horsemen, or ten thousand horsemen, or a single one,
is all the same to him ; and his soul aspires to nothing
but conquest over all the Arab warriors. I used
to think myself the knight of the universe till I en-


© MAADI KERKEB GAINED OVER, 189


gaged him; but in him I perceived prodigies; and
as soon as he made me prisoner, Shiboob gave me
protection, and assured me of: security, and Antar
set me at liberty, as if I had never entertained any
evil intention against him. When I perceived this,
my soul was subdued. I became one of his com-
rades. So, Maadi, think no more of assisting the
Persians, but eagerly seize this opportunity, for I
have left Antar behind; King Zoheir and all the
tribe of Abs are coming after me. He then told
him that Antar had sent on Shiboob to observe
what they were doing, and he returned, continued
Hidjar, giving us an account of all you had done to
his cousins. Antar wished to march against you,
but I dissuaded him out of regard for you. So
adopt this plan before death be at hand; do not
expose your life to dangers and perdition.

On hearing all this, Maadi Kereb recollected the
words of Direed, and he knew this would be his
` advice: O Hidjar, said he, how can you softer the
hearts of the Absians towards me, after all I have
done just now? That business, said Hidjar, will
not tell against you, for I will be a mediator in this
affair, and you will moreover be a strong support of
this tribe, particularly when we have released King
Numan, you and your party will seize the property
of the Persians, and will hew off their heads, and
you will become also a champion of the sacred
shrine. Hidjar continued to urge Maadi Kereb on
this subject, till he gained him over, and he con-


190 . ALL DIFFERENCES ARE SETTLED.


sented, and he swore by the oath by which the
Arabs swore.

Maadi Kereb returned towards his tribe, and ac-
quainted them with the event, and they were greatly
delighted. But the auxiliary Arabs that were with
him dispersed and sought their homes, fearful that
Antar would put them to death. Thus the tribe of
Kendeh joined the tribe of Zebeed.

Prince Cais and the Absians were in the greatest
distress at the arrival of Hidjar, for they thought
he would. assist Maadi Kereb. Their shouts and
screams increased, but Hidjar sent a horseman to
inform them, and quiet their alarms, and by evening
arrived the tribe of Abs with King Zoheir and
Antar. The chief Hidjar met them with Maadi
Kereb, and informed them of his adhesion. Maadi
Kereb advanced and kissed Antar’s and King
Zoheir’s hand, saying, O Aboolfawaris, all blood
between us is forgiven, and the merciful God knows
all hearts. O Arabs, said Antar, we have only
acted thus out of our partiality for King Numan,
and on account of the sacred shrine, for if the Per-
sians possess themselves of it, they will root out
every vestige of the Arabs from every region. All
present agreed in the truth of this observation, and
thanked him for his conduct. He clothed them all
with honorary robes, and the tribes being mixed to-
gether, they entered the moumtains, amounting
to fifteen thousand warriors, proverbial for their
prowess. They reposed that night, and in the


JAREER’S ACCOUNT OF KHODAWEND. 191


morning they slaughtered he and she camels, and
made entertainments and feasts for seven days. On
the eighth day came Jareer from the land of Hirah,
and told his brother Antar about the armies of
Arabia and Persia, describing to him the various
tribes and nations that were assembled. Well,
Jareer, said, Antar, who are those who have sub-
mitted to Prince Aswad, and with how many thou-
sand has he set out? O son of my mother, he re-
plied, those who have submitted to Aswad are all
those with whom there is blood and vengeance against
you, and those who hate King Numan. But he
did not form any regular plan till Rebia came to
him with Hadifah and the tribes of Zeead and
Fazarah, and those ‘who accompanied them were in
tears in the presence of Aswad, and demanded his
immediate departure to extirpate every trace of ye,
and to ravage your country. He assented, and
swore that he would not leave an individual alive in
your country, not even a fire-blower. Khodawend
had determined on dividing his forces into two
armies, one against you, and the second against
Mecca. But when Rebia and the tribe of Fazarah
arrived and acquainted him of Hidjar’s having
made peace with you, they advised the Prince to
march his whole army against you at once; And
let us take, said he, all the tribe of Abs prisoners
in disgrace and misery. Khodawend approved of his
proposal, and ordered the army to march. They
have only left one thousand Persians in Hirah asa


°


g


192 - ‘THE CHIEFTAINS CONSULT.


guard over King Numan and the few horsemen.
who remain his friends. I did not quit them till
the universe was in confusion with the glitter of
arms, and swords, and corslets.

Antar shouted at Jareer, Eh! enough of your
description of those greasy caldrons and Persians,
he cried; by the faith of an Arab, I will disperse
their armies;-I will not even let the first join his
nearest neighbour. And he proceeded to King
Zoheir, and informed him of the news. War;
war alone must be our object, said the King, we
must defen! our women and our families; but we
do not know whether these who have associated
with us will fight with us cordially, or whether
they be false companions. O King, said Antar, by
the faith of an Arab, let us but exchange a single
look, and should only ten horsemen of ours be
killed, then will they seek each other's blood in
revenge and slaughter.

Upon this they mounted, and quitting the tents,
informed their allies of the advancing armies,
and that two hundred thousand horsemen were
marching against them. Great indeed would be
the disgrace, said he to Hidjar, should we permit
these Persians to trample down our land under the
hoofs of their horses, and King Numan not regam
his dominions. What is your determination, O
Aboolfawaris? said the chiefs. My determination is
to meet them, said he. But, said Prince Cais,
Jareer has informed us, their armies are most


$


,HIDJAR DETACHED TO RELEASE NUMAN. . 193


numerous, and Khodawend is on his way against us ;
and when he quitted Hirah, there were only one |
thousand Persian horsemen left behind; now it
strikes me, that about one hundred of our horsemen,

mounted on swift strong horses, should be detached ;

let them march to Hirah, where they may put the
Persians to the sword, and release King Numan;

thus shall we succeed in our views, for this army
cannot reach us for some days, and should it arrive,
we shall be able to cope with them till King Numan
returns, when many of the tribes will join him. All
present highly approved of this proposal. God be
with you and your father, and may Lat and Uzza
bless you! cried they all. It will do, said Antay,
I will myself undertake it with ten horsemen! O
my cousin, said King Zoheir, your departure from
the Absians at this moment would be very unad-
visable, particularly as Hirah is very distant, and
we are but a small party. Noone but myself, said
Hidjar, shall go to King Numan. Antar thanked
him: that will do, said he, you ought to go. Take
Oorwah and his men with you. Hidjar assented,

and made ready that very day with one hundred of
his own tribe, and he also took Oorwah and his
people, who being mounted on swift noble steeds,
departed for the land of Hirah; and when they
were gone, Antar, accompanied with Maadi Kereb
and two hundred horsemen, daily roamed away
from the mountains, to ascertain what was going
on. They continued thus fcr ten days; but on

VOL. TII. o


194 ATTACK ON THE PERSIAN VAN.


the eleventh day, behold a dust arose that closed
up the whole region. There appeared five thou-
sand horsemen, the advanced guard of the Persian
army, with a knight called Shahmerd, and he was
en irresistible tyrant, and an untractable devil.
This, said Maadi Kereb to Antar, must be the ad-
vance of the Persians. My advice is, said Antar,
that we make a dash at them, and so saying, he
urged on his horse Abjer, and drew up his men.
Maadi Kereb did so likewise. The Persian chief
saw them advance, and he could not make them
out; as he said to his people, I cannot imagine what
this small party can mean, for if it 1s the advance of
their forces, whence can they have heard of us?
They must be coming to demand our protection.
However, let one of ye go forward and inquire.
The Persians still advanced to the number of one
thousand. Maadi Kereb shouted to his hundred men,
and wished to assault them. But, said Antar, no,
my brother, be not off your guard, and do nothing
that may prove disadvantageous. How is that?
said Maadi Kereb. Ay, said Antar, for if you
deign to meet a thousand Persians with a hundred
Arabs, our reputation will be lost amongst those
greasy kettles: let you and I attack this thousand
with ten men alone, and destroy them im the desert ;
let us fill their hearts with terrors. I will attack
them alone, said Maadi Kereb, and will disperse
them with my arm and my wrist. Antar attacked
the right, and Maadi Kereb the left, and they were


THE PERSIAN LEADER'S AMAZEMENT. 195


immersed in dust; they both roared out like lions ;
all eyes were fixed upon them. The right was
driven in confusion upon the left. The Persian
leader, observing the two knights attack the thou-
sand, was amazed and startled; he instantly dis-
mounted, and worshipped the sun in blasphemy
and pride, saying, Let I and you laud the unity of
God! Do you see, said he to his companions,
these two knights of the sheep-drivers, engaging the
thousand Persian horsemen? This is the stupidity
of the Arabs, said his comrades; soon will you see
their heads laid low.

He remained gazing for an iam when lo! the
Persians rushed out from beneath the dust, flying
away, pursued by the roars of Antar and Maadi
Kereb, like peals of thunder in a cloud; and they
continued their flight till they stopped before their
chief. Eh! how is it, he cried, that two horsemen
of the shepherd Arabs have attacked a thousand
knights of Persia, and havè routed them as a wolf
the sheep? He shouted to his five thousand, and
they rushed upon Antar and Maadi Kereb, who
received them as the parched up earth the first of
the rain. Joined by the Absians and Zebeedians,
Maadi Kereb exhibited in the contest such in- `
trepidity, that Antar was greatly astonished; for
he only looked on and encouraged the warriors.
He was, however, on the watch for Shahmerd,
whom he saw brandishing a mace in his hand as he
invoked the fire. Antar shouted at him—he bel-

o 2


196 ANTAR SLAYS HIM, AND RETIRES.


lowed at him—he made him quake, and terrified
him—he drove his spear through his chest. ‘The
spear penetrated through him ten joints of a reed
out at hig back, and hurled him dead to the earth.
But when the Persians saw their chief a corpse, they
wheeled round in flight, and retired in haste, and
escaped, whilst Antar and Maadi Kereb returned
with their comrades to the scattered horses and dis-
persed arms, and property and baggage.

On their-way back to the mountains, exulting in
their success, Antar thanked Maadi Kereb for his
part in the combat, saying, By the faith of an Arab,
had we informed our friends, and waited for them
here, never would we have quitted the field till we
had made a more serious impression on the foe. O
Aboolfawaris, said Maadi Kereb, our fighting be-
fore the mountains will be more judicious; (and
Maadi Kereb was afraid that Antar would remain
in that spot with only two hundred opposed to two
hundred and fifty thousand warriors, all armed with
spears). Antar assented; and he travelled on, thus
expressing himself:

“ Stop at home, if thou art in sorrow about
“ its lands, then perhaps thine eyes may weep im
“tears. Ask of the baggage-camels, when they de-
“ parted, and when they will return! Dwelling of
“ Ibla! She is far away from thee! She sighs, and
“ my eyes are in agony at her sorrows. O land of
“ Shoorebah ! may the clouds moisten thee !— May
“the pouring rain bedew thy soil!—May the


ANTAR’S ADDRESS TO HIS BELOVED. 197


“spring clothe thy lands in robes of flowers !—
“ May the country be perfumed with their fra-
“ grance! How often have I embraced in thee the
“lovely virgin, whose companion was revived in
“ the obscurity. The sun, when it rose in splendour,
“ worshipped her charms, and her appearance il-
“ luminated the darkness. Death, daughter of the
“ noble-born! is like a garden, and my spear is its
“branches and its roots. To-morrow there shall
“pass from my hand to the Persians a cup more
“ bitter than the poisons of medicines. I will make
“them taste-of thrusts that shall disgrace their
“ chiefs, and shall make unweaned infants turn
“grey. When the armies of Chosroe pour down
“ upon me, thou shalt see what will become of their .
“limbs. I will fight them till they, high and low,
“ shall be exhausted, and shall complain of the hor-
“rors of the dust. I will leave their flesh for the
“ ravenous lion, and their horses and their armour
“for my comrades. O Ibla! were Death a sub-
“ stance, 1t should bend and bow down before me.” :

As soon as Antar had finished his verses, Maadi
Kereb was in amazement at his courage and his
eloquence. May God never abandon your mouth,
said he, and maf no one ever harm you! And they
continued seeking the mountains till night had
darkened the land. | |

Now as they had been a longtime absent, King
Zoheir and the Absian chiefs mounted, and went
in quest of them till they met them. And Antar


198 PERSIANS AND ABSIANS ENGAGE.


related to King Zoheir how they had treated the
advance of the Persian army, and how they had
routed them, and that he had slain Shahmerd. To
rout the advance, said King Zoheir, is an indication
of victory and conquest, and we ought to offer our
thanksgiving to the God of Old, the Creator of
mankind. They entered the mountains, and told
the horsemen what had happened, and the Ab-
sians were delighted; they reposed that night tll
daybreak, when they rushed out, demanding the


combat and the conflict, and lo! the Persian ar-


mies appeared, and their dust rose on high till the
whole country was obscured. The wild beasts fled
from their dens, and the standards appeared. To-
day, said Antar to his associates, will the glories of
warriors be conspicuous. He stationed over every
troop a knight, whilst he superintended them all
like a lion. .

When the Persians advanced and saw the small
numbers of the Absians (but they were like fero-
cious wild beasts), they poured down upon them
like a deluging rain. The Absians received them
with blows that stupefied hearts, and thrusts that
blinded the vision. Antar stood apart from the
scene of battle protecting his men; sometimes he
rushed to the right, now to the left, and having
overthrown the heroes, he retired to his post. And
whenever he perceived his party hard pressed, he
was ready to assist them. Maadi Kereb observing
this, acted in the same manner. The battle com


KHODAWEND’S LETTER TO ZOHEIR. 199


tinued thus till mid-day. Consternation fell upon
the Persians, when, lo! Khodawend approached with
the great body of the army, and seeing the conflict
raging, he called out to Zerkemal to withdraw the.
army from the contest, saying, We will establish
ourselves here, and despatch a messenger to the
Absians, for they have always paid us great respect ;
and perhaps now they have repented of their con-
duct, they will probably return to their allegiance,
and seize the person of that slave, the worthless
Antar. Upon this Zerkemal called off the army
from the Absians. And the Persians alighted in
their tents, and the land and the desert were filled,
and whilst they were reposing, Khodawend ordered
a letter to be written to the tribe of Abs command-
ing them to submit; and let it be mentioned that in
that case I will stand as mediator between them and
my father, but if they resist I will not spare one of
them either high or low. Accordingly the vizier
wrote a letter to King Zoheir to the above effect,
stating, —K hodawend is advised to destroy you, but
he has had compassion on you; he has resolved on
acknowledging you the supports of his government,
and the abettors of its greatness. Feel therefore
the value of this intention, and presume not to
thwart the imperial government.

Having folded the letter, he gave it to a satrap,
and ordered him to depart. He also honoured him
with ensigns and standards, and gave him an escort
of twenty Persian horsemen, with an interpreter


200 ANTAR SLAYS THE MESSENGER,


called Ocab, son of Terdjem. The tribe of Abs
had alighted, and not one remained on horseback
but Antar and Maadi Kereb, who on observing the
satrap, Antar said to Maadi Kereb, O chief, verily
there is a satrap advancing towards us, he probably
wants us to surrender ourselves to him that he may
take us and hang us on the balcony; I rather wish
to begin with them before they commence with us.
They were in conversation, when lo! the satrap
came up to them; he did not salute them, but
asked for King Zoheir. He inquires for King Zo-
heir, said the interpreter, for he has a letter from
Khodawend for him. We, O Arab, said Antar, have
read your letter before its arrival; in it your prince
orders us to surrender ourselves without fighting or
contending. Pull that satrap off the back of his
horse, said he to Shiboob; ay, and the rest too.
Seize all their property; and if any one dares `
struggle with you, treat him thus—and at the word
he expanded his arm, and pierced the satrap through
the chest, forcing the spear out quivering through
his back, and he hurled him down dead. When
his comrades saw what Antar had done, they cried
out for quarter, and surrendered themselves to Shi-
boob, who bound them fast by the shoulders. As
to the interpreter, he shuddered. May God requite
you well, said he, for you have answered us before
even reading the letter. If this indeed is the
honorary robe for a satrap, let it not be so for an
interpreter; for I have children and a family, and


BUT SPARES THE INTERPRETER, 201


I am but a poor fellow. I only followed these Per-
sians, but with the prospect of gaining some misera-
ble trifle. I never calculated on being hung; and
my children when I am gone will remain orphans.
So he wept, and groaned, and complained, thus
expressing himself:

“ O knight of the horses of warriors that over-
“throw; their lion, resembling the roaring ocean.
“ By your awful appearance you have disgraced
“ heroes, and reduced them to despair. As soon as
“the Persian sees you he is dishonoured; if they
“approach you, and extend their spears against
“ your glory, they must retreat, or there is no se-
“curity. Have compassion then on your victim, a
“ person of little worth, whose family will be in
“ misery when he is gone. Not the thrust of the
“spear or battle are among my qualifications. I
“ profess no fighting; I have no cleaving scimitar. .
“ My name is Ocab: but indeed I am no fighting
“man, and the sword in the palm of my hand only
“ chases pelicans.”

Antar laughed at Ocab’s verses. O Aboolfa-
waris, said Maadi Kereb, it would be foul indeed to
hang this fellow. He has confessed his crime. An-
tar let him go. Return to your family, said he,
and go no more to the Persian, or you will be in
danger; for when they see you safe they will accuse
you, and perhaps will put you to death. You are
very right, my lord, said he: by the faith of an
Arab, had I known these Persians would have been


202 WHO RIFLES HIS MASTER, AND ESCAPES.


thus worsted I would not have quitted you; and
probably I might have managed to secure some of
their goods, and have returned with it to my family.
Sheikh, said Maadi Kereb, this business has failed :
but, come, take the spoils of this satrap, and re-
turn to your family, and pass not your evening a
dead man. Ay, my lord, said Ocab, he is a wise
fellow who returns safe to his friends. So he ran up
to the satrap, and despoiled him. Round his waist
was a girdle and a sword, and when Ocab saw all
that wealth he was bewildered; and having com-
pletely rifled him, O my lord, said he to Antar, I
will never separate from you again. I wish you
would ‘present me to your king, that I may kiss his
hand, and offer him my services: then indeed I will
for ever cleave to your party, and whenever you
slay a satrap I will plunder him. Antar laughed
heartily: But, said Maadi Kereb, O Aboolfawaris,
you have slain the satrap, and now King Zoheir
cannot consult with him. O Maadi, said Antar,
whenever any one comes to order us to surrender
ourselves to him we will hang him, and not parley
with him. Antar joined King Zoheir, and gave
him the letter; he read it, and was much agitated.
My lord, said Antar, what is the answer? Hang-
ing and beheading must be the answer, said
King Zoheir, so that Khodawend may send us no
more of his satraps. I have done so, said Antar ;
and going out he saw that Shiboob had hung most
of them; only three remained. He ordered him to


KHODAWEND COMMENCES THE BATTLE. 206


shave their beards, and cut off their ears, and sling
the heads of those he had hung round their necks,
and send them back to their prince. Shiboob did
as his brother ordered: .one of them died on the
road; two arrived, and their clothes were of the
cornelian dyes; and when they stood in the presence
of Zerkemal they grunted and blasphemed, saying,
the fault is Khodawend’s, who condescends to nego-
tiate with these Arabs. Zerkemal introduced them to
the prince, and informed him what had passed. Kho-
dawend, on hearing this, swore by the fire that they
must bring before him every Arab fettered, with
their hands bound round their necks, or he would
put to death every Persian he had with hm. He
passed that night in great anxiety for the appearance
of day; and soon the men shouted among the
troops; the horsemen mounted; the two armies
prepared; the dust arose and obscured the land;
the trumpets resounded, and shouts were raised ;
the imperial standards advanced; the Arab horse
pranced, and the tribe of Abs also were eager for
the contest in defence of their women and families,
but they did not move far from the entrance of the
mountains. Antar attacked the Persian, and scat-
tered away their skulls. He wished on that day to
keep off the Persians from the assault, but the
armies could not be controlled ; they shouted in their
jargons, and raised their voices; but Khodawend
prevented his Arabs from attacking with the Per-
sians. Prince Aswad came forth, and also Rebia


204 CARNAGE AND CONFUSION,


and Hadifah, and they stood just without the scene
of battle, enjoying the spectacle of the contest be-
tween the Absians and Persians. ‘The universe
was in convulsions. The sun, with the violence of
the dust, was veiled; the earth shook; lives were
plundered; men were bewildered ; swords clashed ;
the senses fled; blood flowed; the land was in
tumults; the dust rose in clouds; the dead were
trampled on with fury; the brave advanced, the co-
wards shrunk away. Antar and Maadi exhibited ail
their powers on that day. Khodawend was amazed.
And they continued in that perilous confusion till
the day fled, and the night came on in obscurity.
The whole country was crammed with the dead.
The armies of Khodawend alighted at their tents,
whilst Antar and Maadi Kereb returned in front of
their troops, resembling the flowers of the Judas
tree, so smeared were they with the blood of the
horsemen. ‘They remained on guard till daylight,
when the armies drew up for the battle and the
contest. The Absians stood forth, and in front
were Antar and Maadi Kereb like the lions of the
waste. Khodawend commanded the Persians to make
the attack against the Absians. Instantly the com-
plexion of the beautiful changed ; the cries were in-
cessant; the gates of success were closed upon the
Persians; the battle raged; shouts were vehement.
The coward thought of his life, and screamed.
Skulls were chopped off by the sword; the king of
death was eager in the pursuit of souls; energy was


IN A DREADFUL CONFLICT. 205


Caa


excited; all sport was at an end. The horses were
drenched in perspiration; great was the agitation ;
heads were smote and were cleft in twain. The
stumbling and slipping were universal; swords and
shields were shattered; hands and necks were
clipped off; spears dashed through the eyes; and
the heart of Amarah burst.


`


206 -DESCRIPTION OF PHIS


CHAPTER XXIII.


Tuis day is thus described :

“ A day alone in the revolutions of time to be re-
« corded in the tales of the historian. Wars com-
‘¢ menced, and every evil fell upon the Persian and
“the Arab. The army of Persia came with their
« horses, and the troops filled the whole country to
« destroy the Arabs, and all the inhabitants of the
‘¢ barren wastes. The Absians, and the armies
“ of the conquering Zebeedians, met them. The
‘horses of death rushed among them, and the
‘ herald of fate vociferated aloud. Dust rose upon
“ every side; and the brave heroes vanished from
“ the contest. The lightning of the scimitars flashed
« like the stars in the obscurity of night. The blows
“ of the sword were heard like thunder roaring in
‘‘ the rolling clouds. The thrust of the spear rent
& open every bosom, and wrenched out the eyes.
“ The knights bellowed in the contest like the lions
“ of the deserts. They galloped over the plain,
‘and exhibited their enmity to their foes. The.
“ youths of war raved in the battle—men, endued
“ with every martial quality. ‘They rejoiced in
« hearing the sounds issuing from the stringed in-
“ struments of the combatants. Brides seemed to


FURIOUS ENGAGEMENT. 207.


“ stand among them, sparkling with every exquisite
“beauty: as their forms appeared brilliant before
“the combatants, heads flew off as offerings, and
“ the men were hacked to pieces by the overwhelm-
“ing spear. The blades and lances played a tune,
“and the dancers moved to the clash of the edged
“sword. They were delighted in listening with ec-
“ stasy. They danced, and eould not be quiet. The
“ cups of death passed round with wine of the liquor
“ of perils: it intoxicated them, and carried them
“ off speedily; and whilst they were singing they
“ were dispersed. The falchions clashed, and again
“they returned to the destruction of dearly-prized
“lives. Where they fought, there fell the requisite
“ punishments upon them for drinking the prohibited
“draught. He who could see them fell, or was
“trampled under the noble steeds. He who could
“ see them threw himself dismounted on the ground,
“ and there sought the plains and the deserts. Of
“one were the limbs hewn off; of another was
*‘ pierced the heart with the thrust of the spear.
“ They remained with their faces upon the earth,
“and they drank of the wine of perdition. The
“ravens made their complaints among them, as the
“ owl mourns in its notes. The horses of death
“were eager among them, and the carcasses of the
“ Persians were crushed under them. They were
“ exhausted with the contest, and the horses of death


“ galloped over them.”


Thus they continued to fight, and thus were they


208 THE BATTLE CONTINUES.


annihilated in battle. The two armies continued
the contest of blows and thrusts till the day closed,
when they separated, the whole country being filled
with the dead. But, on the return of dawn, they
again started for the combat, and the hundreds and
thousands being drawn up, and the ranks being ar-
ranged, Antar stood forth, and appeared on the
back of Abjer, and he was like a strong tower, or a >
block of iron. King Zoheir, and his sons, and the
other horsemen and troops followed him; his father
Shedad, and the family of Carad, preceding him.
The tribe of Ghiftan thundered behind, and then
came all the warriors and knights. O Aboolfawaris,
said King Zoheir, numbers and an immense multi-
tude oppose us! What say you? O King, said An-
tar, by the faith ofan Arab, I will verily show you
this day a battle and a contest future ages shall re-
cord. I will exterminate the boldest of these heroes.
And Antar began to encourage his heart with these
verses :

“« I am the Absian, the slayer of cowards. In war
«is the time of my glory. I remember my Ibla in
“ the hour of battle, and love of her inspires my
“heart. J have assaulted the foe with the chest of —
“ my charger in the day of battle, at the hour of l
«& the concussion of multitudes. I have broken down
“ their tribes with the edge of my sword, and their
“ blood has flowed like pouring clouds. Never have
“ I turned away the chest of my steed from them.
‘¢ My dependance is on Ibla, and my noble passion.


ANTAR'S MARANGUE AND ONSET. 209


“ I said to her, turn thee away, and depart, for the
“destruction of troops is my duty. When the
“ movers of terror come down upon us, and the ar-
“mies assail in quest of death, and the troops of
“ Arabia and Persia crowd round the great King,
“it is then my noble steed with its hoof of rock
“drives against them; and his rider is a youth of
“ the race of Abs, whose father and mother are de-
“ scended from Ham. The horse rush upon the |
“ stern intrepid warriors, the harbingers of terror,
“like male ostriches; in their hands are Indian
“blades and spears: then bursts forth a blaze of
“light, and it is the lightning flash in the thunder
“cloud. ‘They press on, they present the dreadful
“combat; and then glows a flame like a burning
“fire. I have slain Wirdishan, and he was a stout
“ warrior, bold in the encounter on the day of as-
“sault. I have left his women to mourn him in
‘‘ misery, and he is weltering in blood on the plain.
“ This day too will I slay the son of Chosroe, and
“with him Aswad, thou son of a coward. I am
“ Antar, and my reputation is known far and wide,
“ as I tear open heads with the rage of my scimitar.”

When Antar had finished his verses, he rushed
upon the Persians, and roared; he assaulted, and
with his shouts he made the deserts and the sand-
hills rock, and the country trembled at the howl of
the ferocious lion. That day Antar rushed upon
the Persians, and as he vociferated, the mountains
resounded, and hollows re-echoed. The horses


VOL. III. P


210 THEY FIGHT AND RETIRE,


started back in confusion, and hurled their riders off
‘their seats. In fact, the whole country was ob-
scured ; and the Just overshadowed the land: men
burst down on one another; skulls were hewn off;
bowels were wrenched out, spears were shivered,
and swords were shattered. Blocd deluged ; lives
were plundered; horsemen conversed in various
tongues ; darts were sped with rapidity. The noble-
born were in their glory; the base retreated; the
brave advanced: heads flew off; the dead were
tossed about. On that day the very breathing was
checked, and the scene exceeded all calculation. They
continued to fight and to contend, to thrust and to
smite, till God permitted the day to depart, and the
night to throw around its veil of obscurity. Then
the two armies separated, for they were exhausted
with striking and piercing.

The tribe of Abs returned, and Antar at their
head, like the flower of the Judas tree, from the
blood of the horsemen that streamed down him.
King Zoheir, and his sons, and the tribe of Abs in
general, could utter no other word but the “ Great
Antar,” and the victory and triumph were 2 attributed
to him.

The two armics reposed that night till morning
dawned, when the Persians leaped on their horses’
backs, and were drawn up in the left, and right, and
centre, and flanks. The tribe of Abs also issued
from the mountains, and the men hastened to their
posts, when lo! Antar burst forth to the contest,


ANTAR’S GLORY AND BOAST, 211


on his horse Abjer, like a savage lion, or a wave of
the sea in a tempest. He rushed against the right
of the Persians, and overwhelmed it with disgrace
and infamy, and again he returned to the plain,
when lo! a knight of Dilem came down upon him
like a roaring lion; but Antar only said, accursed
be your mother and the mothers of all who
worship fire! and he struck him on the jugular
vein, and separated his head from his shoulders.
Again he galloped and charged, demanding an an-
tagonist: a second stood forth, he slew him—a third,
he hurled him over—a fourth, he soon despatched—
and they continued in this state till the sun being
about to set, he turned away from the field of battle,
after he had slain about two hundred and fifty horse-
men, and taken seventy prisoners: and as he exulted
in what he had done, he thus expressed himself:

“ When I wish, I steep my lance in the dye of
“ vermilion; and I overthrow the vehement horse-
« men with my spear. Iam the son of the noblest
“ of men to the east or to the west; by my strength
‘© I conquer in battle, and in the attack. I am the
“ knight of war that never flinches.. I hew off the
‘¢ heads of the armed men, and am filled with glory:
“ I am a knight whose equal the age will not behold,
‘¢ unrivalled for my feats, my conquests, and my
“ liberality. I am the wished-for knight, the shouter,
« the vociferator; I am the piercer of the brave in
¢¢ the day of assault. I am the object of horrors in
‘c every fight: I am the grasper of souls, the dis-

oe Pe


212 AND EXULTATION IN BATTLE.


& solver of every enchantment. I am the destroyer
& of heroes in every dust; I am he that makes the
“‘ warriors drink of the poison of serpents: I am
s the knight of knights, my ambition soars on high,
“ and it is elevated to the sun of Paradise. O Ibla,
« T am the furious horseman, the vanquisher of the
& powerful, the stern and the intrepid. I swear
“ by the procession, by the pillar, by the stone, by
€ the temples, and by their supports, and Zemzem,
“ that I wiil raise the war in the field of contention,
“and that I will annihilate heroes, piercing them
“ with my tall spear. I will raise the glory of Abs
& above all mankind, by my generosity, by my am-
«“ bition, and my resolution. When the warriors
‘¢ cry out in the battle, who is there? I cry out, I!
“ and death is hurled against death. Should the
“ circumference of the world assemble against them,
« I would meet it on that day, as if the earth were
“ but the circumference of a dirhem. Truly, in the
& battle of bitterness there is a lion of the tribe, and
‘‘ when I am engaged, the valour of the most for-
‘¢ ward is conspicuous. I am the lion, but I am not to
“ be trifled with; I am the sea, but I am not to bè
“ tasted. I am he who encounters deaths laughing,
« whilst my foe meets me with not even a smile.
“ Not every one whom a steed ennobles is a knight;
& not every polished two-edged instrument is a
“ scimitar. Rise, my Ibla, and behold thy Antar
“ this day—the lion, when all the armed multi-

& tudes rush upon him. O Khodawend, return,


HIS HAUGHTY CHALLENGE, 213


“ expose not your life to dangers with the champion
“ of women, or you will repent. I am Antar the
“ Absian, the knight of his clan; I destroy in my
& assault the pillars of the tribes.”

At hearing these verses, the Absians with one ac-
claim cried out, May God never split your mouth,
and may there be never one to harm you! Antar
thanked them, and dismounted. ‘They entered the
tents, and remained on the watch till next day, when
the warriors again mounted. The men were drawn
up, and as Khodawend, mounted on his most valua-
ble steed, stood observing the Absians, lo! Antar
started forth between the two armies, exclaiming,
Where is the combatant? Who is the champion?
This day is the day of universal agitation ; this is
the day for the elevation of funerals! Will no one
dare to meet me? Ye caldrons of cowardly Per-
sans! Be not afraid; come forth—one knight to
pne knight—ten to one—hundred to one—thousand
to one: and if you think it but little odds, come all
of ye, attack me, that I may encounter ye all with a
staff with which I used to tend the he and she
camels; and I will disperse ye among the wastes
and the sand-hills. |

When the Persian army and Khodawend heard
Antar’s harangue, amazement and terror fell upon
them. This, said Khodawend, is the grossest indigs
nity: when lo! one of the priests of fire advanced
towards Khodawend, and kissing his hand, O Prince,
said he, do not despise this hero, whose intrepidity.


214 | -CONFLICT CONTINUED.


is quite proverbial. Take my advice, and rush upon
him with all your armies, Persian and Arab, or this
swarthy knight will exterminate us all.

Upon this, Khodawend ordered the whole army to
attack, and they, after the manner of their fore-
fathers, made the assault as if one man, Arab and
Persian, Turcoman and Dilemite. But Antar met
them with blows irresistible and infallible, like a
voracious lion, when he roars and bellows.

When King Zoheir saw the attack of the armies, -
and how they surrounded Antar on all sides, he
ordered the tribes of Abs, and Kendeh, and Zebeed,
to the assault. They altogether made a rush at the
Persians, and the ocean of death waved and dashed
till the hair on the head and the locks below the
ears turned grey. The valiant heroes fought, the
cowards were in dismay and fled; beards were
dyed with crimson.blood ; lords became slaves; and
there passed among them what no pen can describe.
The supports of life snapped, and were thrown
down: the day darkened over them, and blinded
them; the heroes roared and ee ; wrists and
heads were hewn off.

Khodawend beheld in the tribe of Abs and its
swarthy horsemen a fury of battle he had never ob-
served neither in Arab or Persian. The conflict
continued to rage, blood to be spilt—the flame of
war to sparkle, and men to slay, till night coming
on, the armies separated, and the surface of the land
was covered with the dead: for on that day above


ANTAR'S ADDRESS AT ITS CONCLUSION. 215


ten thousand Persians were killed. Khodawend re-
tired, surrounded by his warriors of Dilem. The’
tibe of Abs also returned with more than two
thousand prisoners. Khodawend ordered his Satraps
to take care of the Absian prisoners, amounting to
about one thousand. Thus they reposed, anxious
for the dawn of day. But Antar on quitting the
battle was like the Judas flower; and as the mibe,
of Abs preceded him, he thus spoke:

“ O my Ibla, heed not the calamities of night,
“and let not nocturnal disasters afflict thee. Fear
“ not death, for it is overpowered by the command
“ of him who ordains every act. By thy life, wert
“thou to behold the foes that charge upon me, O
“thou essence of loveliness, as they empty their
“quivers, and rush on with every lion-hearted,
“ long-mustachioed warrior, as they rave whilst my
“ Abjer, in the midst of their hell-flames, outstrips
“the winds in the season of the northern blasts;
“ and as they roll on in waves like the ocean around
“ me—and as they attack brandishing their spears,
“ then am I the undaunted lion. I fear them not—
“ I heed them not—and when thou seest the light-
“ning of death flashing from the blade of my
“polished scimitar, and cups of death circling
“round from the barb of my well-proportioned
“ spear, Antar, under the shadow of the dust, will
“ cleave off the warriors’ heads with his sword, and
“when the pointed lances goad him, he will fight
“on the right and on the left. I am the death


216 PRINCE WARCAH WOUNDED.


“¢ that overthrows mankind! the rock-ribbed moun-
“ tains yield to my impetuosity. Let the Imperials
“ come with all their armies, broad-chinned, and
“c their mustachioes plucked out, we will charge
“ among them with our _hard-flanked, high-
“ blooded steeds. We will encounter their fronts
‘ with the thrust whose fall would level the towers
‘© of mountains, I am Antar, in form hike a lion,
“ and I dread not the utmost fury of my foes.”
= As soon as Antar had finished, King Zoheir
hastened towards him, and kissed him between the
eyes, and thanked him, (for on that day he never
expected to see him escape alive from the arrows of
the Persians). He afterwards sought his sons, and
perceived three of them were wounded, and Warcah’s
eye had been grazed. Warriors, said Antar, had
they not fought with arrows, we would have ex-
“ terminated their hosts, and we would have left
them as a warning to all beholders. When they
had secured their prisoners with cords, and brought
them into the mountains, By the faith of an Arab,
cried Antar, in revenge for Warcah, I will verily
take Khodawend’s life. ‘To-morrow will I attack
him under his banners and his standards, and I will
either take him prisoner, or leave him abject and
degraded. They retired to their tents and lighted
their fires, and the two armies were on the watch.
Khodawend ordered the Satraps to examine the
troops, and when it was ascertained that ten thou-
sand had been slain, and two thousand made pri-


MAAD!I KEREB’S EXPLOITS. 217


soners, his bosom was violently oppressed, and he
was in the greatest consternation. The fire is en-
raged at you all, said he, and you have merited this
disgrace. What! has this catastrophe befallen you,
youso superior in numbers? By this calculation, had
they even amounted to one-fourth of your force,
they would not have left one of ye alive. By day-
light, the two armies being drawn up in order of
battle, a knight came forth from the Persian army
like a fragment of a cloud, mounted on a close-
haired charger: from his neck hung an Indian
sabre, and a thin spear was slung over his shoulders,
and he wore a defensive coat of mail, short-sleeved ;
and he came on in a most impetuous style, till he
had reached the middle of the plain, when Maadi
Kereb rushed down upon him, and not permitting
him even to gallop or charge once, he smote him
with his sword, and left him dead. A second
started forth, he slew him—a third, he hurled him
headlong—a fourth he crippled, and a fifth, he ac-
celerated his departure from the world; and so on,
till he had killed fifty horsemen, when the sun in-
clining to the westward, the two armies separated,
and sought their tents, and the picquets protected
the sleepers till the day dawned in smiles, and the
two armies prepared to renew the fight and the con-
flict. The ranks were drawn up, and the thousands
were disposed opposite each other. When lo! a
horseman appeared on a bright roan horse, and
sought the contest. Antar stood forth against him,


218 ZERKEMAL’S TREACHERY PUNISHED.


but Maadi Kereb anticipated him: this knight was
the brother of Wirdishan, whom Antar had slain
in the valley of Torrents. Ocab saw him, and he
went up to Antar; O my lord, said he, this is in-
deed a mighty Satrap! Maadi Kereb attacked him ;
they both assaulted and struck; they retired, and
they closed, and they continued the combat, till the
day closing in, they were about to separate unhurt,
' after they had fought a battle that would have
turned infants grey.

Zerkemal was full of rage in his heart, that he
had not accomplished his wish against his foe; and
as Maadi Kereb was returning towards the Arab —
army, the Satrap remained quiet till he had turned
his back upon him, when he proved his perfidy, for
he shouted and hurled at him a penctrating javelin,
convinced it would overthrow him. But Maadi
_Kereb, hearing his shout, quickly turned his shield
over his back, and the javelin fell upon it more fatal
than the fall of a thunderbolt; it pierced right
through to his body and wounded him. Maadi
Kereb fainted and fell on the ground. The Satrap
was in the act of dismounting, when lo! a yell
struck him like the crushing thunder: he turned
behind him to meet the knight, and as he advanced
he shouted at him; but the other again roared so
that he blinded him; he poured down upon him,
and frightened him, and pierced lim. The spear
stuck in his ribs, he fell’to the earth weltering in his
blood. This was the swarthy knight—the skilful


ANTAR'S GRIEF AT MAADE KEREB’s wouND. 219


combatant— the roaring lion—the captain of knights
—the chief Antar, son of Shedad. For when he
saw Maadi Kereb thus betrayed, he resolved on
punishing the Satrap for his deed. He hastened
towards Maadi Kereb, and having extracted the
javelin out of his back, he bound up his wound,
and placed him on his horse, and gave him over to his
companions. It was now dark, and Antar returned
to the tents, his grief excessive on account of Maadi
Kereb. But as to Khodawend, his rage and in-
dignation increased to’ such a degree, his passion
nearly choked him.

O Prince, said Aswad, this is not the plan by
which the government will last long in your hands.
The warriors of Hidjaz are at all times of very in-
ferior numbers, but every one of their knights will
overthrow a whole tribe; and if you do not permit
us to attack them in all directions, we shall never
gain our object. I will not attack them, said Kho»
dawend, but with knight to knight, and ìf you can-
` not bring me them one after the other, I do not
want any assistance of you. All this, said Rebia, pro-
ceeds from Antar’s good luck, so that at last he will
= vanquish us. :

They reposed till the dawn of day, when the
horsemen started on their horses’ backs; the chiefs
advanced, and Antar stood forth on his horse Abjer
like a resolute lion. Shiboob had told him all that
had passed between Khodawend and Aswad; for
he had insinuated himself among the Persian troops,


220 THE COMBAT RENEWED.


and having obtained intelligence, he returned to his
‘brother. By the faith of an Arab, said Antar, I
will exterminate the tribe of Fazarah, and the
armies of Persia, were they as numerous as the
sands of the desert, and I will slay that cuckold
Aswad and all his troops with the weight of my
scimitar. I will restore Numan to his dominions—
I will destroy all the inhabitants of Khorasan : And
he hastened away to the plain, King Zoheir and his
sons, and his father Shedad, and his uncles, fol-
lowing him, and also the tribe of Ghiftan galloped
forwards: the tribe of Abs amounted to five thou-
sand, and the tribe of Ghiftan to three thousand,
and the whole of the army consisted of eight thou-
sand, all sturdy lions. But Antar made his well
known assault, and poured out his usual roar. The
battle began to rage, and blood to be spilt, and men
to be slain—and the flame of war to blaze—and
the world to be obscured—and heroes to dash
against each other—and skulls to be dispersed—
and spears to be shivered—and swords to be shat-
tered—and blood to stream in torrents—and lives
to be plundered—and fires to burn—and horsemen
to pierce—and the brave to be exalted in gloyy—
and the base to retreat—and the Persians to be pre-
cipitated—and hands to fly off—and the dead to be
kicked about—and the horses to charge in suc-
cession—and the enemy to be routed—and on that
day the consternation was universal, and the battle
put at nought all calculation—the combat was fu-


ANTAR'S CARNAGE AMONG THE FOR. 221


rious ; calamities and misfortunes were innumerable ;
the easy became difficult. Antar pierced right and
left, and filled the land and the sands with carcasses :
he drove right through the army, and slew numbers
of their heroes, and he never relaxed. King Zoheir
also attacked with his sons, and they penetrated
through the left. Antar’s uncles triumphed on the
night: thus they continued till night brought on
darkness; and as Aswad retired, he took no notice
of any one, for he was intent on horrors and ven-
geance, and so it was also with Khodawend, for he
was quite stupefied at the fury of the contest, and
he shuddered in terror. As soon as the armies
alighted at the tents, they ate their dinner and re-
posed till day shone.

The first that stood forth in the plain was the
knight of the swarthy Abs, and challenged to the
combat; but as no one sallied out against him, he
rushed upon the Persian right, and hacked among
them with his scimitar; he raved, and he issued
from the dust, having slain seventy brave horsemen:
Again he returned to the conflict and carnage, and
assailed the heroes with the thrust of his spear.
Come forth, ye caldrons of Khorasan! he cried,
aim your swords and your spears at me; and
though the horsemen rushed upon him with the
utmost impetuosity, he plundered them of their
lives, and stretched their carcasses upon the ground ;
and he ceased not to thrust at them till they all
shrunk back, when he rushed against the left,


299 ANTAR AGAIN ENCOURAGES HIS PRIENDS


where fought the Arab tribes.: He dealt death and
perdition among them, and slew them till the day
closed, and he only quitted them after he had as-
suaged his soul among them; and Shiboob, like an
unavoidable calamity, always preceded Antar, the
springing.lion; but they all returned from the field
of battle towards the tents as night was coming on.
The two armies reposed, keeping on the watch;
but the day dawning, Antar came oi into the
plain, and thus spoke:

« Question the mountaineers of me, O Ibla! ask
“ of them what the Persians have suffered from me.
‘<I have destroyed the multitudes that came upon
“me with billows of troops, men and demons.
“ They wished to devour us, hungry as they were;
“ but we have glutted them with blows and thrusts.
“ We have eaten, but they have not eaten ; for they
“ came against us seeking death at our hands. We
“ have dispersed their troops from the women more
“ beautiful than seraphs. How many horsemen
“have I laid low with my sword, and thcir hands
“ were stained, but not with henna! How many
« warriors have I abandoned, whose wives must
& mourn in tears their dissolution ! How many va-
s“ liant heroes have beheld my thrust, and have
“ cried out, Hold, O son of Shedad! My heart has
& been created harder than iron. Mountains may
& pass away, but I shall not pass away. I am the
“ strong bulwark for the race of Abs when their
s“ enemies erect their fortresses. My complexion,


THE BATTLE RAGES. 9938


“it is true, resembles the night, but my deeds are
“ more brilliant than the rays of the sun. Among
“ the horsemen there is not niy equal; how then can
“ I fear man or demon? My dark complexion is my
“ parentage; my father and my mother are my sword
“ and my spear when my genealogy is required.”
When Antar had finished his verses, behold As-
wad in front of the Arab army ready to attack him ;
and as they assaulted him, Go to King Zobeir, said
Antar to Shiboob, with my compliments: demand
of him one hundred horsemen, that with them I
may cut down the enemy, and disperse them among
the deserts; but let him not stir from the entrance
of the valley. Shiboob departed to execute his
orders, whilst Antar assaulted the armies : horsemen
engaged horsemen; the equals in glory contended ;
the shouts were dreadful among them; spears la-
boured again$t hearts and lives; the blades of the
swords clashed; slaughter and wounds were incal-
culable; exertion was roused, and all jest was at
end; the cowards mourned for themselves, and
wept; and the eyeballs of those in health sunk deep `
mto their sockets; the brave cried out, Flinch not !
Whilst they were in this tumult, behold from the
quarter of the desert there appeared a dust, which
filled the whole region; the armies stared at it with
attentive gaze to discover what it might be: ‘when,
lo! it was Aboolfawaris Antar, and in his hand was
a prisoner like a camel, and behind him was Shiboob
the subtle lion. The horsemen all looked at the


Ui ANTAR TAKES ASWAD PRISONER.


prisoner on whom this infamy had fallen, and be-
hold, it was Prince Aswad ; for he was the first that
attacked in front of the Arabs, and rushed upon
Antar with the view to make him drink of the cup
of perdition, but Antar frustrated his intention by
his impetuosity, and he assailed him, bearing his
shield over his bosom. He hurled him on his back,
but the Arabs rushed on, anxious to rescue him;
still Antar engaged them till Shiboob returning, he
gave him over to him, and he drove him before him
till he brought him clear beyond the scene of battle.
Antar ordered Shiboob to bind down his arms, and
drive him on to the mountains, whilst he himself re-
turned to the havoc and the destruction of heroes.

Maadi Kereb had continued ill with the pain of
his wound till this day. He now mounted his
steed, and plunged into the dust, exciting his cousins
to the contest, and to follow Antar, the son of
Shedad.

As to Khodawend, his bosom was stifled, and he
said to his satraps, Let not the Persians fight in
company with the Arabs. The armies continued
to advance and engage, and the sword and spear
laboured among them till the day fled. Discom-
fiture fell on the Arabs, and they returned to their
tents, pursued by the thrusts of Antar, for they
were indeed annihilated, and their old and young
were in amazement. The Absians and the Zebee-
dians retired, and they had filled the land and the
desert with the dead. As Khodawend marked the


PREPARATIONS ON EITHER SIDE. 225


catastrophe that had befallen him, Now, indeed,
said he, the imperial government is mangled. Now'
the Persian warriors are disgraced, and after this-
event I cannot blame Numan who connected him-
self by marriage with this tribe. O prince, said one
of his satraps, attack them with your whole army,
so that we may engage them with darts and arrows,
and pen them up in the mountains, otherwise they.
will bring down infamy and disgrace upon us, were
we to be assisted even by the whole force of Kho-
rasan. Upon this he ordered his officers to instruct.
all the warriors on this point, and to direct them to
exert their united powers in the battle. Having
reposed, they prepared their arms and their weapons,
till the morning appearing, they started for the con-
test and carnage. Khodawend mounted, and he
gave a shout that made the deserts ring. They
waved on to the right and left, and prostrating
themselves before the sun at its rising over the sum-
mits of the mountains, they blaspliemed the great
Creator, and then advanced with their bows and
arrows, and unsheathed their polished scimitars.
The Absians arose that morning, exulting in their -
victory which Aboolfawaris Antar had gained for
them; they were all ready to mount, and attack
with their spears, but Antar prohibited them, say-
ing, O my cousins, this day will not be like other
days. Assemble and stand firm at the entrance of
the defile, and beware of separation or dispersion,
but bear with perseverance the moment of the
VOL. III. | Q


226 ANTAR FIGHTS ON FOOT.


onset. Engage them fiercely this day, and be not
as they imagine you are, though the Persians drive
against your horses, and seek to destroy you. Just
then the armies of horsemen rolled upon them like
the billows of the ocean, and the commotion was
terrific among them. The day became like a night
of total darkness; the horsemen were mixed con-
fusedly, singly, and in pairs; the arrows struck the
jugular veins of the steeds. (Asmaee reports, I have
heard from one of the Arab chiefs m whom con-
fidence may be placed, that this day was such that
no one before him or after him ever saw its like,
for they fought till their bodies fell dead ; the blast
of death withered them ; the heads of the slain were
dispersed.) But Antar having selected one thou-
sand horse, pursued the conflict, and encountered
` horrors, till he drove away the troops from the Ab-
sians, and scattered them among the wilds and the
wastes. When he shouted they were dispersed far
and wide; and when he attacked they were put to
the rout; and thus he continued his dreadful deeds .
in front of that valiant army till consternation falling
upon them all, he dismounted from the back of his
horse, and rushed rapidly towards the Arabs with
sword and shield. The tyrants of Persia shouted
round him, and the whole atmosphere resounded.
The scene bade defiance to the description of the
most acute. The high-blooded chargers pranced
over skulls and necks; the swift-sped darts, and
the thin-bladed scimitars and the quivering lances


DISCOMFITURE OF THE ABSIANS. 227


penetrated through the tribes of Zebeed and Ken-
deh; and they endured intolerable horrors in the
combat with the Persians. They tasted the bit-
terest draughts; and the swords continued to play
till the sun disappearing in the west, and the night
coming on with impenetrable obscurity, the armies
retired from the field.

On that day the Persians lost twice as many as
the Arabs, but still this diminution was scarcely ap-
parent, so vast was their host. As to the tribe of
Kendeh, they were quite cut up, for they were with-
out their chief, and his substitute was obliged to
fly; so likewise the tribe of Zebeed, they were not
in good spirits on account of the wound of their
knight; even Maadi Kereb had determined on
flight, fearful of death and perdition. As to Rebia,
he was congratulating Hadifah on their victory,
saying, If the like of this day occurs again to the
Absians, every vestige of them will be eradicated.
O Rebia, said Hadifah, they are indeed invincible
warriors. Never will they be vanquished whilst
this slave remains alive among them.

The tribe of Abs thus returned, but in a most
deplorable condition; many of their men were
wounded. King Zoheir consulted Antar about en-
termg the mountains, and fighting by their wives
and families, but Antar swore he would not move
till he had conquered those foul wretches; For if,
said he, a thousand horsemen will stand with me I
will defend this spot, were even man and demon to

. Q2


228 BATTLE OF SEVEN DAYS.


assemble against me. They talked all night, but
with the first rays of light the horsemen marched
rapidly to the contest. They put on their instru-
ments of war, and made a most formidable attack,
at which the mountains resounded. The Arabs at-
tacked; the chief Antar was at their head. They
commenced the blow and the thrust; horsemen
were slain; flames blazed; the multitudes mixed
promiscuously ; they fought with sword and spear ;
anxiety fell upon all; the eyeballs rolled round;
in every spot they sought for refuge and retreat;
spears scooped out the eyeballs, and the scimitars
flew against necks; the sabres of death flashed and
sparkled like lightning; sword blades and shields
were cleft in pieces. Now, they continued in this
frightful state for seven days entire; on the eighth
day the Absians were unable to contend in open
field, though they engaged still among the sand
hills and defiles, and their destruction seemed in-
evitable. Antar was wounded in three places ; still
he protected the tribe and repulsed the foe, till
afflictions falling heavily upon them, the women
screamed, and tears burst from their eyes`in copious
streams, for the oceans of Persia were rushing upon
them from every quarter, whilst Rebia shouted to
his Arabs in a voice every one might hear, Eh!
come on! he exclaimed. Plunder the goods ; cap-
ture the damsels, all like rising full moons; cut in
pieces that Antar with the edge of the cleaving
scimitar; tear his carcass with the barbs of the


' THE ARRIVAL OF NUMAN. 229


quivering spears ; and as he cried out, he just turned
his head round, and lo! he perceived a cloud of
dust encompassing the whole region, approaching
swifter than instant death. Rebia was quite con-
founded at the sight, and said to Hadifah, Doubtless
this is the dust of Chosroe, who is coming with all
his host, as he has been long without news of his
son; the evil destiny of the tribe of Abs is at hand,
and every vestige of them will be rooted out. But
whilst he endeavoured to ascertain what the dust
really meant, it opened, and behold there was a va-
lant army like the waves of the ocean, headed by
King Numan, and by his side rode the Chief Hid-
jar and Oorwah; and soon after the army galloped
forwards, crying out, O by Lakhm, O by Juzam!
your misery and destruction are at hand, ye Per-
sians! for King Numan is come. Rebia heard this
exclamation; amazement fell upon him; all the
joy he felt fled, and misery and grief were let loose
upon him. He looked at Hadifah, and he too was in
the greatest consternation: They have set at liberty
King Numan at last, he cried; and they are come
with him to assist the tribe of Abs and Adnan, and
_I am convinced no one can have released him but the
Chief Hidjar. .Soon will he reproach us for our con-
duct. towards him; he will indeed requite us, and
‘say to us, As soon as you knew of my confinement ~
and my downfall, you assisted my brother, and you
fought against my friends :. so now we have nothing
for it but ‘to conciliate him as well as‘we can, or


230 HIDJAR’s ATTACK ON HIRAH.


death and destruction will overwhelm us. Stand off
from the contest of blows and thrusts, he added,
addressing the Arab tribes, for truly King Numan
is arrived; he has been ‘released from fetters and
chains;-he is come in spite of the power of his
enemies and his haters. The Arabs listened to this
harangue, and looking at the army that filled the
desert, they informed each other of the state of the
case, and retired from the combat, crying out to
King Numan, O thou triumphant!

But as to the rescue of King Numan, it was ef-
. fected by Hidjar and Oorwah. As we before men-
tioned, they travelled with two hundred men till
they reached Hirah, when they plunged their
swords into the necks of the slaves and the shep-
herds, who screamed and shouted; upon which
sallied forth the horsemen of Khorasan, with the
satrap whom Khodawend had left to guard Numan,
and with him were one thousand Persians. They

commenced the engagement, headed by the satrap ;
but Hidjar encountered him, and heard him mut-
tering in his Persian dialect; he understood him
not, neither did he make him any answer, but he
pierced him through the chest, and the barb issued
sparkling through his back. Oorwah struck the
second horseman, and levelled him with the earth.
The tribes of Abs and Kendeh shouted out their
distinct patronymics as they transfixed the Persians,
through their chests and their ribs. Hidjar fell
impetuously upon them, and destroyed them with


THE ARABS REJOICE IN NUMAN’S RELEASE. 91


the blows of his sharp scimitar. The riders were
hurled off their horses; and the Persians saw the
descent of calamities. Their numbers were soon
diminished, and their strength and energy failed.
A few of them fled; most of them were slain; and

Hidjar entered Hirah with his troops, and releasing
Numan from captivity, related to him what the
tribe of Abs had done for him. Numan thanked
Hidjar, as he said to himself, I was persuaded no
oue would release me but the Absians and Antar.
They set at liberty also the thousand horsemen
that were imprisoned with him; and on that very
day having sent a messenger to his friends, and
written letters to his allies, he waited a little to ar-
range his affairs, rejoicing at his deliverance from |
bondage; but on the second day by sunrise armies
` advanced like the rolling ocean, and in an hour
more he had an army collected of seven thousand
brave horsemen, with whom he instantly departed,
traversing the wastes and the deserts, alarmed for
the virtuous Absians, till they reached Adja and
Selma. And when Numan arrived he had not less
than twenty thousand men with him.

We have mentioned the event, and how the
Arabs returned to their allegiance. Rebia too ad-
vanced towards him, and, kissing the ground, made
his excuses; so did Hadifah and the tribe of Faza-
rah, for they feared some direful misfortune would
overtake them.

As to Khodawend, he expected his death, and


232 NUMAN’S EXCUSES TO KHODAWEND ;


retreated from the contest, as soon as he saw what
had happened. The Persians, too, being alarmed
lest Khodawend should be murdered, surrounded
him on all sides through fear of the Arab king, for
Khodawend’s force was now reduced to fifty thou-
sand worshippers of fire, the remainder having
drank of the cups of extinction.

The tribe of Abs issued from the defiles like lions
of the den, and in front of them stood Antar, the in-
vincible hero. The Absians looked about in alarm
at the horsemen and their numbers, fearful they
would want to plunder their property and goods;
but King Numan prohibited them from doing so.
After this he proceeded to seek Khodawend, ac-
companied only by Hidjar and Oorwah. Fear not,
most revered prince, said he, any hostile movement
against you with these nations, for we are indeed
the slaves of the imperial government, and the ser-
vants of the Persian kings. As to myself, O prince,
I cannot see in me that crime that you should seize
_my person, except indeed my connexion with this
Absian tribe; and have you not seen in their con-
test during these days something to confound man-
kind? It is on that account I have sought their al-
liance, for not one of them can be slain without the
destruction of a whole body of heroes, and I never
intended by means of this tribe to endanger the
other tribes of Arabia; but I acted like a provident
man, and I had arranged matters in the best man-
ner in my fears for your safety. Your father has


WHO YIELDS AND RECEIVES HIM KINDLY. 233


listened to the words of my enemies, and seized me
on account of a transaction on which he was misin-
formed. I have only rescued myself, and am come
here, urged by my fears lest the Arabs should harm
you, for they are a people that comprehend not the
value of kings; but now what is past is past; and
the sight of the eye 1s better than the hearing of the
ear. Let your mercy and the mercy of your father
be not denied me, for I cannot acknowledge in myself
any crime that has merited such severity. Be you
reconciled to me, and I will be the protector and
defender of your. government, otherwise the desert .
before me is extensive and wide. At any rate I will
not separate from you till I have dispersed from
you these armies; and I will attend you to your
father in the firmest confidence. Khodawend, on
hearing this address, meditated, and hung down his
head towards the ground in excess of shame, for he
was a rare and noble youth, as indeed were all the
Chosroes, for they were the monarchs of the world
from the beginning of time till now.
Khodawend dismounted, and affairs being amica-
-bly arranged, his alarms were converted into se-
curity. I will not move, said he to Numan, but
with my stirrup against your stirrup: and when I
reach my father’s presence you shall see what I will
do with you and your associates, for I never under-
stood your worth till I felt your power. But I de-
sire of you to bring me Antar here, that I may
overwhelm him with my kindnesses and‘ bounty,


934 ANTAR’S RELUCTANCE TO SPARE HIM.


and make of him my coat of mail against the cala-
mities of fortune.

Numan turned towards Oorwah, and having in-
formed him of all the circumstances, ordered him to
go to Antar, and bring him, with King Zoheir, and
all his warriors. Congratulate yourself, O Aboolfa-
waris, said Oorwah, on the most exalted honours,
and the highest glory; for Prince Khodawend re-
quests you will attend him. The Absians had re-
strained themselves from the contest as:soon as Nu-
man appeared, and they were in that uncertain state
when Oorwah came and announced the event. Praise
be to God, said Zoheir, who is the cause of our de-
liverance from death and destruction! We must
now indeed go to Khodawend ; perhaps this business
may be arranged after all these dissensions, and evil
and wickedness vanish. What say you, O Abool-
fawaris? O King, said he, to my taste there is no-
thing more advisable than the slaughter of Khoda-
wend by the sword, and the massacre of all his
Persians. However, O King of the time, I will not
thwart the general opinion on the subject ; and not
to distress your royal bosom at such a moment as
this, I will reply with obedience and submission.

Then King Zoheir took him and departed, ac-
companied with his sons, and in all one hundred
horsemen, whilst Oorwah, going ahead, related all
the circumstances that had passed, and how Numan
had been liberated. But Antar went on like one
going to give false evidence; and when they reached


THE PRINCE TREATS THEM HONOURABLY. 285


the Persian armies, the Satraps and the Dilemites
stared at Antar as he burst asunder the troops in
front of King Zoheir and his sons; and his spear
was slung across his shoulders.

They continued in procession till they came up
to Khodawend, when they dismounted and saluted
him. Khodawend was astonished at such behaviour.
O noble Arabs, said he, reproaches at such a crisis
would only produce irritation, and the mention of
what is passed would occasion animosities. I have
only sent for you, to pardon you the blood of my
troops, and to ask also of you a remission for all my
past deeds. I accept you as supports and friends;
and he ordered his slaves to bring forth some high-
mettled steeds, which they soon introduced, with
also a great quantity of honorary robes and presents.
The flames of their’ hearts were extinguished, and
distresses were cleared away; for the Ruler of the
World is awful, and his bounties eagerly desired.

O munificent Prince, said King Zoheir, we are
indeed the slaves of your government, now and of
old; but when a man sees his disgrace before him,
it is incumbent on him to cast it off from his. person
by the exertions of mind and body.

Khodawend presented Antar his own sword, that
was one of the swords of Chosroe, and was worth
the capitation-tax of Egypt and Irak, when well cul-
tivated and populous. He ordered him also five
high-blooded horses, with housings of gold, and
turning towards Numan, he said, Take Antar with


236 ALL REJOICE AT THE RETURN OF PEACE,


us to our throne; for I wish to satiate myself with
looking at him, and hearing his discourse.

Numan expressed his submission, and he was
overjoyed at this fortunate event, for he was still
afraid of Chosroe, and he wished to take Antar with
him to his city. So the business fell out just as he
. had wished, and before night every thing was peace-
ably settled; they prepared feasts, and their joy was
complete.


RECONCILIATION OF THE TRIGES. 237


CHAPTER XXIV.


Numan now exerted himself to liberate Prince As-
wad, and when they had released him, he kissed his
brother’s hand, and apologised for his conduct. Nu-
man also made peace between him and the Absians,
and the tribe of Fazarah, and Antar, and also Re-
bia, and Amarah, saying, O Aboolfawaris, peace
between cousins is the best of proceedings; and now
nothing remains but to settle your own private af-
fairs. O King, said he, I will not consent to marry
the daughter of my uncle till after your own nup-
tials, no, not till your wishes are accomplished, and
your festival completed, and Chosroe be reconciled
to you without any ill will. But should not all these
events be satisfactorily terminated, I will make his
very balcony totter over his head. I will slay all
that dwell in Khorasan, and I will make you in his
stead king of the age and the time.

Numan expressed his thanks to Antar, and they
all remained together three days, but on the fourth
day they prepared for departure, when, said Numan
to Zoheir, Depart home, and make ready for your
daughter's marriage till my messenger arrives. Do
you too, said Prince Aswad to Hadifah, go home,
and prepare for your sister’s marriage. .


238 CHOSROE’S PRESENTS TO ANTAR.


Khodawend then marched with the armies till they
reached Hirah, Antar riding by his side. Numan
alighted at his palace, and his family. were de-
lighted at seeing him. He gave a magnificent en-
tertainment to Khodawend, who two days after
departed for Modayin, and his heart, after all his
fears, felt secure.

Now Antar and his companions remained witb
King Numan fifteen days, but on the sixteenth day
came the presents, and valuable goods, and articles
beyond all calculation or description. For Khoda-
wend, when he came unto his father, found him in
the greatest anxiety for intelligence. Know, O my
father, said he, we have injuriously treated King
Numan, and we have listened to the suggestions of the
treacherous, and rebels, and of his enemies: for his
connexion with the Absians was a proceeding highly
judicious and commendable ;. and King Numan is
` the only one that consults the good of our govern-
ment, for he has a most correct judgment; and
_ likewise Antar, son of Shedad, whose equal is not
to be found: and my desire is, O my father, that
you would send him a magnificent honorary robe, if
you wish for the stability of the imperial govern-
ment.

- Thus he informed him of all the circumstances of
the battles. Mubidan also seconded him in this
affair, for he loved King Numan. So Khodawend
did not cease importuning his father till the business
was settled; and being pacified, though at first he


ANTAR QUITS NUMAN. 239


was vehemently enraged, he sent the articles by Mu-
bidan, who repaired to Numan, who met him with `


all his warriors, and prayed for the'ìmperial govern-


ment: he detained him seven days at Hirah. The
greatest part of the presents were for Antar, and
also for Oorwah and Hidjar; and when all these
favours flowed upon Numan, he felt secure, great
as had been his former fears.

Antar soon after asked permission to return home.
O Aboolfawaris, said Numan, your departure from
me is like the separation of father and son: but I
cannot detain you from home on account of your
love for Ibla. So he granted him leave to go, after
he had conferred on him presents no words can de-
scribe.

Antar set out with his companions, seeking the
land of Hidjaz; and they continued their journey
till they reached the first country of Hidjaz, where
they halted for the night, at a water called Kywam.
And though Antar was desirous of taking the night-
watch, Oorwah would not let him. O Aboolfawaris,
said he, I will take that duty from you to-night in
this desert. Antar assented, and Oorwah having
selected five of his own horsemen, marched out
when it was quite dark. They roamed to some
distance in the wastes, and went their rounds till the
night was quiet, and all was in repose: and as the
fresh breezes blew upon them, drowsiness over-
powered their senses. They all fell asleep, and not
one of them wagged his head till day dawned and


240 ABJER LOST AND FOUND.


shone, when they returned to their companions, and
roused them from their slumbers. They arose, and
prepared for departure, but they could not find a
single horse. Alas! alas! exclaimed Antar, we
have been surprised in the obscurity of the night,
and have been robbed of our horses: he questioned
Oorwah about what had happened to him during
the night; but Oorwah was confounded, and hung
his head down to the ground through exceeding
shame. O, said Antar, this affair would not even
disconcert a woman; and I feel perfectly easy and
unconcerned about finding my horse Abjer. So he
turned to his brother Jareer; Hie thee away into
this barren wild, son of my mother, said he; and
return not till you have discovered their track, and
if in your way you chance to meet some Arab horde,
ask them for a horse for me, that I may mount—
(Shiboob was absent when this event occurred, for
Antar had sent him home with the women, and
gave him charge of Ibla, being alarmed about her
on account of that vile family of Zeead).

As Jareer was about to follow the track, the
neigh of Abjer was heard, in his movements out-
stripping the northern blast. As soon as Antar saw
him, he was delighted, and cried out, What joy !
He shouted towards him, and he replied with a
neigh, gratified at his master’s voice. Immediately
he fastened the housings on him and mounted, say-
ing tò Oorwah, Do you and your men mount on
these camels, and drive on till we have developed


ANTAR FINDS SHIBOOB IN THE DESERT. 241


this affair. And they travelled on till the ‘heat
exhausted them, and the desert seemed on fire.
Antar was about to halt, when lo! a man on foot
appeared from the midst of the defiles, speeding
away like a cloud in a storm, although both his
hands were tied; about his neck was a long rope,
and behind galloped a troop of twenty horse, -and
he appeared bewildered, like one afflicted with a
sudden calamity.

When Antar perceived the man on foot bounding
_ along like a fawn, he bent his course towards him.
Come, come to me, O Aboolfawaris, exclaimed the
unhappy wretch, I am your brother Shiboob, and
what has happened to me would even melt the
stoutest heart.

At this Antar’s heart quaked; he was greatly
agitated, and his two eyes appeared like horse-
leeches, till he came up with him. He instantly
loosened the cords, and untied the rope about his
neck. O my brother, he cried, no Arab shall ever
live to enslave thee. Nothing of that has happened,
said Shiboob; but both your story and mine are
very extraordinary. Thank God, who has sent you
to this spot, or I and Harith, King Zoheir’s son,
must have drank of the cup of death; for he is a
prisoner too, and I am dreadfully alarmed about
him. I have left him with the companions of these
horsemen, but I cannot possibly tell you any thing
till I am perfectly convinced of security.

Antar was confounded, and turning his eyes at -

VOL. III. R


242 AWIS, THE ROBBER,


the advancing horsemen, he gave a shout at them.
He attacked them like a lion, and pierced them with
his spear: he soon laid low sixteen of them, and the
other four escaped by the speed of their horses. He
returned, and asked Shiboob what it was all about.
My narrative will be very long, said Shiboob, if you
do not first tell me who is with you in this country.
Son of my mother, said Antar, Oorwah and his men
are with me. So he informed him of all that had
occurred ; how they had quitted King Numan, and
had come down to this spot, and how their horses
had been stolen. Son of my mother, said Shiboob,
this circumstance of the robbery of your horses has
been the means of our salvation; for the fellows
that stole them are forty thieves who followed you
from the land of Irak, and their chief is the nuisance
of the Arabs; heis quite an insufferable fellow. I
could recognise him amongst the whole race of man ;
he is called Awis, son of Saala, the robber. This
morning the tribe of Zohran, with whom I have
been a prisoner, encountered them: they slew thirty
of them, the remainder fled; and whilst the tribe
was occupied with them, I ran away into this de-
sert, till you came up to my assistance. Now, as
to the robbers, they had followed Antar and his
comrades from the land of Irak ; and when Antar
was returning with all that wealth, Awis, son af
Saala, happening to have a glimpse of it, assembled
forty robbers. Well! said he to them, if you are
‘indeed desirous of wealth, and the accomplishment


STEALS THE HORSES BY NIGHT. 248
L


of your wishes, let us follow this black slave; let
as expose our lives against him, and let us exert
ourselves to obtain this vast property.
That night therefore Awis approached with his

associates. How long, said he, must we be traversing
these wastes ? we cannot bother ourselves any longer.
Upon that one of them advanced towards Antar
and his companions, and found them all asleep.
Much pleased at this, he returned to give informa-
tion to Awis. My opinion, said he, is, we should
content ourselves with their horses, and leave their
men alone, and not bring a war dust upon us. They
all agreed to his advice, and finding the horses
grazing, they mounted some, and drove away the
others; but they had not quitted the desert ere i
daylight shone, when Abjer, not knowing these fel-

lows, and missing his master, burst loose from the
person who led him, and galloped over the plain;
the men hastened after him till he came nigh unto
Antar. |
My brother, said Shiboob, it would be well to let
Abjer rest a little till Oorwah and his men come up
here, that they may mount these horses that we
have gained, for the enemy will of course follow me
over the desert. Antar approved of the plan, and
he let Abjer graze in the desert, and as he was
quite amazed at Shiboob’s narrative, he directed
him to state how he and Harith were made prisoners.
Theirs was a wonderful adventure; for when the
Absians returned home, they waited in expectation

R2


O44 LARNA, DAUGHTPR OF BEKIR,


of Antar’s joining them from the country of King
Numan, and a great dread of the tribe of Abs had
made its way into the hearts of the Arabs. Now it
happened that one day Prince Harith went out to
the chase, and with him a party of Absians. They
had wandered away to some distance from the land
of Shurebah in search of game. And as they
roamed about the wastes and wilds, east and west,
they came to a valley called the valley of Sandhills,
where they beheld a large party of the tribe of
Zohran. Harith questioned a slave; My lord,
said he, we are of the tribe of Zohran, and our chief
is Bekir, son of Moatemid, and whilst Hanth was
in conversation with tue slave, a fawn fied away
‘before him. Harith called out to his horse, and he
made towards it; but having missed it, he passed
by a lake where there was a party of the Zohran
women. Now the cause of their removal from home
was this. This chief Bekir had a daughter called
Labna, and she was more beautiful and lovely than
the full moon; her suitors were numerous, and
many demanded her of her father, but he would not
bestow her on any one. She had a cousin, who
was Jareer, son of Cadim. Labna detested him on
account of his harsh manners, although he was
brave in the field. He demanded her of her father,
but he refused; and there arose such an hostility
between them, that their removal was absolutely
necessary. So they traversed the wilds and the
deserts till they reached the land of the tribe of Abs


a


AND HARITH, SON OF ZONHEIR, 245


and Adnan, and asked the protection of King
Zoheir, which he readily granted. The damsel
Labna, on the day Harith passed by the lake, was
in company with her maidens. * Harith beheld her,
and became enamoured; and she likewise saw him,
and all her limbs were in a tremor, and her agita-
tion was great. So she addressed her maidens to
take off their attention, exclaiming in verse:

“O truly ‘mine eye has had a glance of the
“ youth who has passed me, employed in the chase
“ of the fawns;—he is gone, but his charms have
“ captivated my heart ;—he is gone, and my heart
“ still burns the more.”

When Harith heard this, he looked behind him, -
and love for her took possession of his whole frame.
His companions, as soon as they perceived how he
was affected, checked him: O Prince, said they, we
observe you are discomposed and dejected. Yes,
said he, I wish to return home; and when he reached
his dwelling, his mother came to him and said, My
son, what has distressed you? I went to bed last night,
said he, a little indisposed, and what is come to me
noone but the Searcher of all secrets knows. But
when his mother had quitted him, he sent for his
nurse, and informed her of his situation. She
listened, and promising to assist him in his troubles,
she set out for the valley of Sandhills, where she
saw the tents, and introducing herself among the
women, she feigned being on a visit to them. At
length she came up to Labna, and addressing her,


246 THEIR LOVE AND SEPARATION.


acquainted her with the state of Harith. She
started up on hearing this, and also imparted her
situation to the nurse, who said, I wish you would
come to-morrow night to the lake. Labna expressed
her thanks, and the old woman departed home to
Harith, who was most anxiously expecting her.
She informed him all about Labna, and the love she
felt for him. ‘This relieved Harith’s anguish, and at
the close of the day he took the old woman with
-him and set out; and when they reached the valley,
‘he secreted himself among the Erak * trees. Labna
too waited till evening, and then with one of her
maidens went away to the lake, where she found
‘ Harith, and threw herself into his arms. They re-
mained till daylight, and this became the spot of
their future assignations, till one day he happened
to ride out towards the valley of Sandhills, but he
perceived no vestige of the tribe. In the greatest
agitation and astonishment he returned home, and
he became like a living corpse. The cause of this
removal was a messenger, who came to them from
their chief, reproaching them for their migration,
and he was called As-hath, son of Dharnah. Not
being aware of their total removal from their
country, he waited for some time till he heard
they had gone down to the tribe of Abs and
‘Adnan. So he sent after them, saying, As to
Jareer, son of Cadim, I have seized his person on


* Trees, with the leaves of which they feed camels.


SHIBOOB’S CONTRIVANCE,” 24:7


your account, and I desire you will return to your
native hand.

Labna’s father, hearing this message, was de-
lighted to revisit his home, and his rage wasquenched.
But when their departure was ascertained by Ha-
rith, he informed Shiboob of all that had happened,
and of his present situation. Shiboob pitied him. |
They waited till it was dark; Harith saddled his
horse, and enveloped himself in his armour and
rich corslet, according to his custom. Shiboub too
grasped his bow and quiver, and filled his port-
manteau with arrows, and they both set out for the
land of the tribe of Zohran; and on their arrival,
said Shiboob to Harith, Do you lie concealed here.
But he himself departed for the tents, clothed like
a poor infirm beggar; and he disguised his designs
very cunningly till reaching the tent of Labna’s
father, O mistress! he exclaimed to an old woman,
have you any victuals? Yes; wait for me a little,
gaid she. She came out and said, Here, take these
- bean-shells, you famished fellow, and pray to the
mistress of joys for a happy meeting of lovers; per-
haps your prayers may be accepted. Are you a
stranger in this land? said Shiboob. No, said she ;
but my mistress has a lover with the tribe of Abs,
and she is out of all patience on his account. Is
it not Harith, son of King Zoheir? said Shiboob.
Yes, answered she, and I see you know him. Yes,
he returned, for he is my master; so he told her all
the story, and of Harith’s arrival. Let him stay


248 HPRITH CARRIES OFF LABNA.


where he is, said she, for her father has resolved on
marrying her to Kheitaoor, who has even sent the
whole of the marriage dower to her father, and there
are only three days now to the wedding. The maid
ran to Labna in haste, and told her of her con-
versation. Return, said she, and tell him to-go
back to his master; assure him that I will join him,
and that he must take me away with him. She
arose as soon as it was dark, and all the family were
asleep, and went to Shiboob, taking her she-camel
with her, on which he loaded all she possessed.
Lead this camel, said she, and go with it to your
master. Away went Shiboob, and Labna followed
him till they met Harith. Come with me, cried
Shiboob to them. Labna mounted her camel, and
Harith his horse, whilst Shiboob held the camel's
bridle, and they set out traversing the wastes.

But Labna’s father and mother, when morning
dawned, sought for Labna, but she was not to be
found. They raised a hue and cry, and informed
Kheitaoor, who mounted with a party of his war-
riors, and questioned Labna’s father about the cir-
cumstance. My lord, said he, I heard on my return
from the tribe of Abs, that Harith, the son of King
Zoheir, was in love with her, and he must have car-
ried her off. By the faith ofan Arab, cried Kheitaoor,
I will overtake him by sunrise, and will slay Harith
and all the tribe of Abs. Having stationed some
troops in different places, he himself set out with
five hundred stout horsemen.


CHECKED IN THEIR FLIGWT. 249


But as to Shiboob, and Harith, and Labna, they |
travelled under the veil of the night till morning
dawned in smiles, when they reached the vale of
Fawns and the mountain of precipices; this was a
lofty mountain, and perfectly inaccessible but by
one road. Arrived at the meadow beneath, they
were desirous of alighting near it, when lo! ten
slaves came towards them from the mountain’s side,
shouting and running impetuously. In front of
them was a black slave like a lion. These slaves
had occupied this mountain as a refuge and a safe
retreat in their escapes after the perpetration of
murders; and when they were hard pressed they
climbed up the mountain, and defended themselves
on its summits. Their chief was called Habis, and
as soon as they saw Shiboob, and Labna, and
Harith, they made at them, calculating that the
horseman would escape by flight; that they should
put the man on foot to death, seize the camels, and
enjoy the damsel. But they knew not that this
man on foot was a blaze of fire and a crashing
thunderbolt : for as soon as Shiboob perceived them
hastening from the mountain top, he met them re- |
solutely, and smote their chief with an arrow on
the chest, forcing it out quivering through his back.
The slaves, seeing their chief dead, shouted at Shi-
boob, and all their wrath was excited against him.
Harith galloped after him to assist him, but an
arrow fell on the chest of his horse, and down
he fell. Harith instantly sprung on his feet and

|


250 SHIBOOB SLAYS THEIR OPPONENTS.


exerted himself to the utmost behind Shiboobon foot,
whilst Shiboob practised all his arts, hurling them
over with his arrows, and slaying them one after the
other till six of them were killed, and only four sur-
vived. ‘They made bitter reflections to themselves.
I cannot think this can be a mortal man, said one,
he must be indeed a devil, and he dwells hereabouts ;
for our chief used often to say he had seen a ghoul
in the plain, and we ever bantered him about it.
Talk not now of that, said another, let us escape in
- haste to the top of the mountain, and they fled ;
_ but they soon perceived that Shiboob had arrived
before them at the head of the pass: Ye dastardly
Arabs, he cried out, whither would ye fly? Your
death 1s at hand. The first he struck down with
an arrow on the chest, and it issued out through his
back: he came up with a second, rushed upon him,
and smote him with his dagger through the heart,
and laid him prostrate; but the other two fled over
the barren waste: so Shiboob returned to Harith,
who thanked him for his exertions. O Ebe-reah,
said he, I am now left on foot in this desert, and
the way is long.

They were thus conversing together, when lo! a
troop of horsemen appeared, headed by Kheitaoor,
and he was like a tower or a fragment rent from the
mountain’s side, and Labna’s father was riding by
his side. When Labna saw this, she was in despair.
Here then is certain death, said Harith, and we
have no other resource but this mountain where


THEY ARE AGAIN PURSUED. 251


these slaves retired ; for if we were at its summit, we
should be secure. And I, said Shiboob, will empty
my quiver before me, and will show you a little
of my skill, and I will defend you against the in-
habitants of the whole world, wide and long as it is.
I will disperse this party over the sand-hills, Let
us only ask for succour from the Lord of the Foun-
tain Zemzem, and the Shrine. Do as you please,
said Harith, but how shall we ascend this mountain ?
and will not our fears and terrors enfeeble our
exertions? Be sure of success, said Shiboob, and he
went up to Labna and took her upon his shoulders,
and went off with her on foot, till he reached the
skirt of the mountain, whence he clambered up
with her till he was on the heights. ai fol-
lowed him.

But when Labna’s father and his ry saw that
Shiboob was like a bird, they were amazed, for he
ascended the mountain till he approached the sum-
mit. The party in pufsuit overtook Harith on the
mountain’s skirts, for he was weighed down by his
armour. He defended himself, and exhibited his
prowess till numbers thronged upon him, so they
took him prisoner, and Shiboob was in- the deepest-
affiction. The troops alighted in the meadow
under the mountain, and afterwards rushed one
after the other to ascend, in order to accomplish
ther hopes with respect to Labna and Shiboob.
‘But Shiboob overthrew them with his arrows till
darkness came on, when they returncd, thwarted in


252 HARITH 18 TAKEN.


all their attempts, many of them wounded. Upon
this Kheitaoor and Labna’s father halted, in the
greatest alarm at Shiboob’s arrows. We are indeed
quite nonplused by this devil, said Kheitaoor, all
' we have for it is by daybreak to seize hold of
Harith and prepare for hanging and torturing him ;
and we will say to Shiboob, if you do not surrender
our daughter to us, we will hang Harith, and make
his dwelling in the tomb. Here we will besiege you
till we catch you, and we will take your life from
between your sides. So they bound Harith fast,
and stationed over him two black slaves.

Harith laid himself down, suffering the acutest
grief and affliction. But Shiboob returned to Labna
and comforted her heart, vowing to her he would
ransom him with his own existence; and he re-
mained quiet, till being convinced that the influence
of sleep prevailed over the party below, hedescended,
sliding down on his back till he was at the bottom
of the heights, where, having recourse to his stra-
tagems, he made a minute scrutiny nght and left,
and at last perceiving the slaves were asleep, he
approached them and despatched them all. Con-
tinuing the enterprise on which he was bound, he
crawled along on his hands and feet till he entered
the tents, where he heard Harith thus speaking:

“<Q my tribe, the fetters of captivity have bound
“ me fast; there is no escape for me from these gall-
« ing chains. ‘They pounced down on me early in
“ the morning, or their thin blades would soon have


| SHIBOOB AEUENE: HIM. 258


“« despoiled my life. O my cousins, I had not con-
“ gratulated myself on a day’s meeting, when se-
“ paration befel me. Fortune has overthrown me
“ with a deadly arrow, and for its sting there is
“ no panacea. O my cousins, seek to revenge me
“ when I am gone, where the high-spirited steeds
“charge. Tell Antar, the son of Shedad, that I
“ cannot escape from their hell-flames ; he will be
“ a match for the foe with his irresistible sword, to
‘him all lovers weep their sorrows. Alas! for
“ Labna! what anguish must she endure in my ab-
“ sence when separation shall afflict her! I ima-
“ ined we should all live happily together in se-
“curity, and all our flames would be quenched.
“ But Fortune has tormented us with separation ;
‘ there is no faith, no covenant with: Fortune.”
When Shiboob heard these verses repeated by
Harith, he knew that he felt assured of death and
perdition; his heart grieved for him; he advanced
towards him—he found him tied down—the slaves
about him were asleep—he came closey—he rent the
fetters from his feet, and cut away the handcuffs—
he calmed his apprehensions. Follow me, said he,
and do as I do; and he went crawling along on his
hands and feet: they continued stepping over the
fellows asleep, till they were beyond the tents, and
then they pursued their way in the greatest haste
till they reached the summit of the mountain. As
soon as Labna saw Shiboob and Harith with him, she
was delighted at his contrivance. Shiboob took out


254 FRUITLESS ATTEMPTS OF THEIR PURSUERS.


some victuals, and they reposed in comfort and hap-
piness till the day dawned, when Kheitaoor starting
up from his pillow, sought Harith, but he could
not find him; he only saw the handcuffs cut away,
and the slaves murdered and lying dead on the
ground. Eh! ye wretches, he cried to his people,
behold the prisoner was fast bound, and a single
person has released him from the midst of ye, and:
yesterday he destroyed your bravest warriors; how
will you now defend yourselves or your chief? This
is all your doing, and he resolved-on putting to
death the other guards; but Labna’s father pre-
vented him. These men are not to blame in this
business, said he; we were in fault, that we did not
station a guard over the mountain’s side. We shall
never succeed in seizing him, if we do not all mount
against him, and slay this devil, for he has already
killed fifty of our men, and we shall be a disgrace
to the end of time. ‘They set out with the whole
party, who were ordered toascend the mountain ; they
accordingly began to climb, shouting, but alarmed.
When Shiboob saw this, he emptied his quiver
before him, and strung his bow; he bent down on
one knee, and shot his arrows against their chests
and their necks; the men fell down like leaves,
Harith quitted Labna, and threw immense stones
down upon them from the top of the precipice; in
a short time fifty were killed. So Kheitaoor retired
in despair and disgrace, writhing in agonies of
terror. The tribe of Zohran, he exclaimed, is


THEY SUCCEED IN SECURING SHINOOB. 955


rendered infamous among the Arabs. By the faith
of an Arab, were I to encounter a thousand horse-
men in the field, it would be an easier task for me
than this devil. And he turned towards the war-
riors, and told them they must struggle in the con-
test. They continued in this state till darkness
came on. |

On that day all Shiboob’s arrows were expended
by the number he had shot, and the men and chiefs
he had slain. Kheitaoor stationed ten horsemen on
the skirt of the mountain, whom he ordered to lie
concealed among the rocks, saying in the height of
his passion, Whoever shall sleep, him will I destroy.
I will be near you, for I am convinced that this
devil has expended all his arrows: however, he will
not abandon his design; he will therefore come -
down this night against you when the people are
asleep, and will steal away your arrows. I expect
therefore you will watch him till he descends, then
seize him. But beware, should he escape from you, _
I will strike off all your heads; for in his speed he
will outstrip the winds, and I have not a horse that
could overtake him. |

Thus he stationed the men, and enjoined them to
be on their guard. As to Shiboob, he was all
anxiety till might came on in obscurity, when he
started on his legs, and hastened down the moun-
tain till he reached the bottom of the heights; but
he had scarcely recovered his breath, when the men
sprung upon him, and surrounded him on all sides.


256 HARITH AND LABNA TAKEN. SHIBOOB ESCAPES.


He rushed against them like a lion when he terrifies,
and in his hand he held his dagger; and though he
slew numbers of them, they at length took him pri-
soner.

The intelligence soon reached Kheitaoor: the
whole party arose and struck lights. ‘Thou art
fallen at last, thou devil, said Kheitaoor: and hav-
ing ordered his shoulders to be tied well down,
Labna’s father and the rest started away for the
mountain.

Harith saw all this, and he was convinced of dis-
grace and misery. He immediately drew his sword
out of the sheath, and fought as long as he had
powers and strength, till he had slain ten slaves, and
brought down perdition upon them, and also two of
the Arab chiefs. At length numbers overpowered
him, and they took him prisoner, and they bound
him miserable and dejected. Bekir advanced to-
wards his daughter, who was trembling like a reed;
he dragged her by the hair to the bottom of the
heights, and would have slain her, had not Kheitaoor
prevented him.

They halted in that place till day dawned, when
they lashed Harith to the back of a horse, and
fastened a long rope round Shiboob’s neck, and
stationed a slave aver him to haul him along. He
endured it all very patiently, till coming close to
him, he gave him a kick on the stomach, and dashed
out his bowels. He darted forth‘into the deserts,
and they all endeavoured to gallop after him in a


ANTAR ENGAGES KHEITAOOR. Q57


body, till the robbers rushed upon them from the
barren waste, and with them Antar’s horses. Hav-
ing slain them and carried away their horses,
Kheitaoor and his companions returned in pursuit of
Shiboob till they met Antar. As soon as Kheitaoor’s
eyes fell on Antar, he attacked him ; galloping and
charging he sought the contest, and thus addressed
him: | |

“ Lord of the noble black steed, and the sword,
“and the penetrating spear, if you indeed succeed
“in destroying any of our horsemen, fortune must
“have betrayed the invincible lion. When she
‘ offers a slave the cup of sweetness, she errs, in
“ giving him to drink any thing but coloquintida.
“ Tell me what you have seen; and know that
& mine is a never-failing scimitar in the revolutions
“ of fortune. In every land I have left for the wild
“ beasts and the birds a sea of blood shed by my
“ sword. When I am present in the fight on the
“ day of battle I exterminate every lion-warrior ;
“ when I even retreat the foe trembles in horror;
“ and you might see the whole earth in the circum-
« ference of a dirhem. So have recourse to some
“ subterfuge that you may escape by it, for apolo-
“ gies cancel even the most heinous offences.”

Antar heard Kheitaoor’s address, and laughed
exceedingly, and thus replied in verse:

© Verily I say I will slay your horsemen, and I
will leave their flesh as carrion for wild beasts,
“ for my spear indeed complains of the inconve-

VOL. III. s


258 DEATH OF KHEITAOOR.


“ mence of thirst; but now I have met a day when
& it shall be moistened with blood. What! have
“ you not known my power? truly, the warriors of


~ & all the cities of Persia confess it; and the heroes


“ of war on the day of battle die at the mention of
“ my intrepidity and liberality.’ When I lose my
“ way over the desert in my nocturnal solitude, my.
“ only company is my sword, resembling inevitable
“ fate. It is never drawn but on its separation
« from the shéath a sea of blood gushes from its
“edge. My piebald steed has a white crescent on
“ its forehead, like the dawn of day, and its black
s is like the sable raven. These two are my sup-
“ port on the day of contention; and the barb of
“& my spear sparkles like a speckled serpent. How
“ many heroes have I abandoned as food for the
“ wild beasts and every ravenous lion.”

Antar had not finished his verses when he rushed
upon -Kheitaoor, and frightened him; he shouted
at him, and made him tremble; he pierced him
with his spear between the paps, and drove it out
through his back, and Kheitaoor fell dead weltering
in his blood. When his companions perceived what
calamity had overtaken him, they rushed on from
all sides; Antar met them with a frightful assault,
and laboured among them like a blazing fire. In
an hour forty of them were slain, the remainder
fled and sought Labna’s father. But Antar re-
turned like a raving lion to his brother Shiboob,
and his object was accomplished upon his enemies.


FURY OF LABNA’S FATHER. 259


Just at that time came up Oorwah and his men.
They were greatly surprised at seeing the scattered
horses of the enemy, and were exceedingly re-
joiced. O Aboolfawaris, said Oorwah to Antar,
whence are these horses you have obtained ? Antar
related the adventures of Shiboob and Prince
Harith’s captivity. On hearing this they alighted
from their camels” backs, and having mounted the
high-blooded horses, they went up to Shiboob, and
saluted him.

But as to the fugitives, they ained to flee
away over the desert from Antar till they reached
Beker, son of Moatemed, to whom they announced
Kheitaoor’s death, detailing every circumstance,
and the destruction made among the horsemen:
Eh! and who, said he, is the warrior; who is the
dreadful lion that has slain him? A black knight,
said they, mounted on a black steed, as if hewn out
of a black rock, and in his hand is an Indian blade;
and we heard him, as he fought among the horses,
crying out, Ye base cowards, I am Antar, the son
of Shedad. May God curse your fathers above all
men! exclaimed Labna’s father. What! has all
this happened to you by a single knight, and he a
black slave, powerless and insignificant? Know,
said one of them, that this is the knight whom horse-
men have described as overthrowing alone a thou-
sand warriors in the plain, vanquishing them by his
intrepidity and superiority. Labna’s father shud-
dered. What sayst thou? hecried. Who ever be-

s2


260 HIS PARTY ROUTED.


held a single horseman attack a numerous host?
Return with me, and I will show thee what I will
do. Mount these steeds, he cried to his horsemen,
and make towards this slave with your scimitars and
your spears. |

- And they put their horses on their speed, and
followed him, when behold, the dust of the Absians
sprung up, and their shouts arose, and they ad
vanced like fate and destiny. It is my opinion,
said one called Jifal to Labna’s father, that you
should let me pass over the desert, taking ten
horsemen with me, that I may bear away Harith
and your daughter, and convey them home; and
do you attack Antar with the remainder. Take
as many men as you piease m you, said the
other.

On that Jifal returned, and with ten horsemen
departed, travelling on till they reached the place
where they had left Harith and Labna; but they
could see nothing of them, and no appearance of
their track. We are'indeed disappointed in our
pursuit, said Jifal, and Labna has escaped us.

They -passed on, when lo! shouts arose in their
rear. ‘They turned about to see the cause of this
uproar, and behold their own horsemen and Arabs,
all seeking flight, pursued by the tribe of Abs and
Adnan. Jifal struck his horse’s rump, and fled to-
wards his own country, followed by his companions.
The fugitives were scattered in tens and twenties,

and they continued in this state till night advanced,


HARITH FOUND IN THE MOUNTAIN. 261


when Antar coming up with the Absians, What
think you of this affair? said he to Oorwah; we
have routed the foe, and have succeeded in our at-
tempts; but we have not released either Harith or
Labna, and I am afraid they have carried them
away, and have sought their own country, and if
Harith should be delivered to As-hath, the business
will become desperate,. and he will be put to death
for Kheitaoor: Shiboob indeed is gone on before
us, and till he returns this is a serious affair; for if
I pursue these fellows till I destroy them, I shall be |
separated from my brother Shiboob; and if I stay
here till I have some intelligence of him, I fear
Harith will be exposed to peril, and every vestige of
him erased. | a |
Whilst they were thus conversing, they heard
some men shouting from the mountain, and saying,
Come hither, O Aboolfawaris, for we have found
Harith, and he is indeed despairing of life. Antar,
on hearing this, took Oorwah with him, and having
ascended the mountain, Antar called out to Harith,
who opened his eyes, and mourned his sad state,
relating what had happened to him. The cause of
it was this: when the fugitives came groaning to
Labna’s father, and related Kheitaoor’s death, Be-
kir mounted, and sought the contest with his com-
panions, having left his nephew Jireer with Harith
and Labna, and two stout slaves. Instantly, Jireer
unsheathed his sword, and making at the slaves,
smote them with his cleaving scimitar, and slew


262  SHIBOOB OVERTAKES LABNA’S RAVISHER,


them all. He sprung at Harith also, and struck
him with his sword, and dreadfully wounded him ;
and then mounting Labna on one of the fine horses
(thinking Harith was dead), he abandoned him, and
rode away on his own high-mettled steed, with the
design of going with Labna to some of the noble
Arab kings, and to defend himself against accidents
under his protection. In vain Labna shrieked
aloud, and looked about to the right and left, pray-
ing for succour.

As to the subtle Shiboob, he set out in quest of
Harith, and did not stop his progress till he came
to that spot, where he saw no human being, but the
slaves murdered. Advancing towards them, he also
perceived Harith lying between them, groaning
piteously. At this sight Shiboob stood aghast with
horror: O my lord, said he, who has done this?
Harith’s heart was strengthened at seeing Shiboob ;
so he told him what Jireer, Labna’s cousin, had
done. Shiboob took him in his arms, and ascend-
ing the mountain with him, on the summit he found
a ravine, in which he laid him down, placing him
in security: Shiboob then questioned Harith about
Jireer; What road has he taken? he asked. He
directed him to the quarter, and immediately Shi-
boob left him in the mountain, and let loose his feet,
seeking the barren waste, and following the tracks
of Jireer. He continued his course till he overtook
him by break of day, and heard Labna’s screams ;
she was weeping, and in the greatest affliction.


AND CONVEYS HER TO HARITH. 268


Shibòob was delighted at seeing them; he hasted
towards them, swift as the twinkling of the eye, and
smote his horse on a vital.part. The horse plunged
with him, and threw him on his head. Shiboob
sprung upon him, and stamping on his chest, stabbed
him with his dagger, scattering wide his entrails,
and annihilated his existence.

Labna, in the excess of her lerrora was bewil-
dered; and when Shiboob came up to her, she ex-
claimed, Who art thou, O Arab? I am Shiboob,
said he; and he gave her an account of Harith, and
soothed her heart. He returned with her till he
joined his brother Antar, whom he found just as he
had brought away Harith from the mountain. On
seeing Shiboob they were in ecstasies of joy, and
grief and sorrow quitted them. lLabna ran up to
Harith, whose life, as soon as he saw her, returned
to him; and thus reunited to her, his happiness was
complete, and he forgot in her society all the pain
of his wounds.

Antar remained the rest of the day in that spot
in security, and by dawn of day he departed with
his horsemen, seeking the land of the tribe of Abs
and Adnan. But, as his love for Ibla burst upon
him, he thus rhapsodised :

“ Oh! is it the fragrance of musk ? is it ¿êr * ? is
“it a voice, or the breeze warbling over the desert,


“ that sings of her? Is it a flash of lightning ? or


* Oil of roses.


264 AS THEY APPROACH HOME


“ig it her teeth in the wastes, resembling the full
‘ moon when it rises? Is it the branch of the tama-
“ risk that sweetly waves in the wilds? Is it the
“ stem of the spear, or her form? Is it the narcis-
“ sus of the gardens, endued with visual powers, or
“ her cheek, like the untouched apple? I rave `
“ through love of her; but let my railers see the
“ torrents of my tears, to which there is no end!
« O- Ibla, my heart for love of thee suffers tortures ;
‘¢ this frequent separation, and these echoes, fill me
“ with grief. O Ibla, fear not thy enemies, for
“against the destiny of God there is no oppo-
‘¢ sition.” |
When Antar. had finished, the horsemen ex-
pressed their delight at his prose and verses; they
_ travelled before him, traversing the wastes, till there
only remaining one day between them and the land
of Abs, Antar sent on Shiboob to give notice to
King Zoheir of the safety of his son Harith. Shi-
boob set out by dawn of day, and about midday he
returned. It is impossible that you can have re-
turned, having ever reached home, said Antar. O
my brother, said Shiboob, I reached home, and
saw all the horsemen dispersed about the country,
mounted on their steeds. I inquired what was the
matter of one of them, and he informed me that
King Zoheir rode out with his son to congratulate
and meet: his brother Asyed, on his arrival from
Mecca on a visit; and we have now heard, he


added, that they have been taken captives. On this


THEY HEAR OF KING ZOHEIR’S CAPTIVITY. 265


account, the horsemen have mounted in order to
release them; and he who has plundered them is a
notorious knight, and an obstinate warrior, accom-
panied by a troop of noble horsemen. And hast
thou heard, said Antar, in what country they were
detained prisoners? Yes, said he; the troop came
upon them in the valley of Irak trees. This is a
most extraordinary circumstance, said Antar, that
our Princes should be taken prisoners, and perdition
come upon them. Certainly, no one has ventured
on such a deed but one fearless of mankind, and
unintimidated at death:

` Antar sent Harith and Labna with twenty war-
riors to the dwellings and homes; but he himself
with his men set out for the valley of Irak trees,
preceded by Shiboob.


266 KING ZOHEIR MEETS ASYED.


CHAPTER XXV.


WHen King Zoheir missed his son Harith, he sent
out his slaves in every direction, and he remained _
anxiously expecting their return till the happy
tidings of his brother’s arrival reached him. Asyed
was one of King Jazeema’s sons. He was a learned
man in that age of ignorance, and he generally pass-
ed his time at the sacred shrine and Zemzem. He
was full of virtue and liberality, loving justice and
equity, and detesting violence and oppression. He
every year paid a visit to the tribe of Abs, teaching
them the distinctions between right and wrong, and
arranging their affairs, and when he arrived this
time, he sent forward to King Zoheir to announce
his approach. His brother went forth to meet him
with three hundred horsemen, all like stern-faced
lions, and all his relations and uncles, for King Zo-
heir was the father of ten, the brother of ten, the
paternal uncle of ten, and the maternal uncle of ten.
They continued driving away the wild animals over
the wastes and the sands till evening came on, when
having halted in a valley till day dawned, King Zo-
heir marched on without any apprehensions, till
meeting his brother Asyed in the sandhills of Erak,
he and his attendants dismounted and saluted


ASYED GIVES VENT TO HIS. GRIEF. 267


him. My love and affection for you, said Asyed,
have exceedingly distressed me, otherwise I should
not have quitted the fountain of Zemzem, and the
holy mansion, and the sacred shrine. They proceeded
towards the middle of a valley, which was called
the valley of Tamarisks. The wild beasts and the
deer fled before them. King Zoheir looked about
and observed his brother Asyed, who was pointing
with his hands towards the trees, and the tears were
streaming from his eyes; burning sighs burst from
his heart, and as he poured forth the groans of a
woman deprived of her canari he thus addressed
the trees: .

“ O trees of the Tamarisks, where do ye behold
“them? Do the people of my vows dwell in your
“ neighbourhood ? I look all around, but the hand
“ of ravage has destroyed them; yet never have I
“broken my former protestations, I have not be-
“ trayed them ; my vows were made to one like the
«full moon, resembling the branches and ‘boughs
“ of the Tamarisk, —but I am alone and solitary,
“ though once we met, and here, now they are gone,
“ are only the owl and the raven. O trees of the
“ Tamarisk, whither are they gone? They are
“ gone, and in my heart passion has left a burning
“flame. If ye ever, after being watered, complain
“of drought, my tears to-day shall form a lake
“ around ye.”

When Asyed had finished his verses, his sighs
became more frequent, his countenance changed, and


268 HIS REPEATED EXPRESSIONS OF SORROW.


his agony increased ; his brother advanced towards
him, having heard his discourse, and asked what was
the matter, but he observed him still pointing to
the trees, and thus exclaiming:

“ O trees of the Tamarisk, in the name of God,
“ tell me what ye know, for I am overwhelmed with
“ inquietude. Pity the tears of a distracted lover,
“ whose eyes weep over these devastated plains.
“ ‘Te valley is abandoned; but there was an inha-
“ bitant like the fawn, richly robed. Speak to me
“ of Selima, of Robab, of Zineb, and those, resem-
“ bling brides, in the sand-hills. ‘They have aban-


“ doned me in misery—they are gone, and I weep


. “over the remains of these desolated scenes. The


“ raven moans over the vestiges of these spots,
‘‘ where no more are seen the tents of my mistress
“ and the horsemen. Take then, ye boughs of the
“« Tamarisk, my tears, that flowing would moisten
“ the saturated as well as the parched up soil. Al-
“ though the covenant between us is dissolved, yet
“ my love for thee bids me not despair ; ; I live in
“ hope that God will make us meet in joy, as if we
“ had never been parted.”

King Zoheir was so struck by his grief, that he
ran up to his brother Asyed, and interrupted his
speech, saying ; I cannot permit you to finish these
verses, till you inform me what affliction has befallen
you. I conjure you, by the sacred shrine, to tell me
what this means. O brother, said Asyed, if I tell
you my story, you will have an indifferent opinion


ASYED’S STORY. 269


of my discretion and honour; but indeed I am not
much to blame, as I did it in the days of my youth.
Know then, my brother, that the year our father,
King Jazeema, made his pilgrimage, I accompanied
him, and when our pilgrimage was expired, as we
were on our way home, we happened to pass by this
place, in which I saw a vast quantity of wild beasts
and deer. My father rode on and went home, but
I remained for the sake of the chase. Thus occu-
pied, I remained till the meridian heat overpowered
me, and the sultry air became so excessive I re-
turned also, seeking the track of my father ; but I
chanced to pass by this tree, and when I reached it
I saw a very old Sheikh beneath it, and with him an
immense quantity of camels, and also his daughter,
who was tending them at the pasture. She was the
most beautiful and most elegant of forms, and as
soon as I came up to him I saluted him. What do
you want, young man? said he. I only said, Will
you accept of a guest when he comes? Welcome, said
he, to me, in wjnter and in summer. But, young
man, every one according to his means On hear-
ing this, I resolved on alighting at the lake, in order
to drink and water my horse. But the Sheikh pre-
vented me, and called out to his daughter, who
brought me some fresh camel’s milk and gave me to
drink, and also watered my horse. I remarked the
beauty of the maiden, and I perceived her moving
in the plains of loveliness. Her father, too, ob-
serving the symmetry of my horse and my rich gar-


‘


270 HIS STORY CONTINUED.


ments, brought me some victuals. Excuse my scanty
offering, said he, for I am a poor man, and the libe-
ral pardon when they see the apology is sincere O
Sheikh, said I, this is the greatest charity ; but if
you will accede to my wishes, I would request you
to accept my proposal, and gratify my desire with
regard to your daughter, and you shall then go with
me to my tribe. I am anxious you would receive
me as her husband, and I will take you to my land
and family ; speak to me and bestow her. By Him
who has created her and fashioned her, I added,
take all I have about me as part of her marriage
dower ; and I took off my sword belt and my horse
trappings, which were all of gold. The Sheikh at the
sight of this was much surprised and delighted, and
came towards me without hesitation, and giving me
his hand for the marriage, drove away the camels
and cattle, and went to his own dwelling, and I ac-
companied him; and on our arrival he slaughtered
all the sheep he possessed and some she camels, and
rejoiced in me as no one ever rejoiced before, and
married his daughter to me that night. I tarried
with them three days, and afterwards I informed
them who I was. I staid some time longer, and
quitted them, bearing in my heart the greatest at-
tachment for them, and intending to return to them
with abundant wealth. Having reached home and
_ joined my family, I despatched a slave to conduct
my wife to me, and sent with him a great quantity
of camels and sheep to this valley and desert.. I re-


THE PRINCES SURPRISED AFTER A FEAST. 271


mained, anxiously expecting them, till my slave re-
turned in despair, and brought back all my property.
I asked him what was the matter? I have seen no
one there, my lord, said he. I staid some time quiet,
and despatched emissaries to all the Arab tribes, and
expended amongst them much gold and silver, but
I never could obtain any intelligence of her. And
even now, my brother, I bear her in my memory.
It was on her account I attached myself to
Mecca and the sacred shrine, till I this day beheld
these remembrances of her, and now all my sorrows
come upon me anew ; and whilst I meditated on the
past, I was anxious that you should come with me
to this spot, that I might renew the vows made so
many years ago. King Zoheir, on hearing this nar-
rative, was amazed at the revolutions of the days and
nights. He dismounted, and ordered the slaves to
clear away that spot, and spread carpets for them
under the tamarisk trees, and the horsemen soon re-
turning from the chase, bringing with them hares and
deer, they.made a sumptuous feast, and expressed
great delight in the presence of King Zoheir and
his brother Asyed, making the time pass pleasantly
for them, and availing themselves of the delicious
hours in joy and delight; and they kept carousing
till the cups of wine overpowered them, and dark-
ness came on, and there was not one but fell asleep,
in which state they remained till the nocturnal wan-
derers on the watch surprised them. A troop of


Q2 ` ZAMBAA AND WARCA ALONE ESCAPE.


horses came upon them about the break of day, and
perceiving the spoil, and no one to protect it, they
surrounded them on all sides, and took them pri-
soners. Now these horsemen belonged to the tribe |
of Cahtan, and were called among the Arabs the
race of Cayan, and their chief was a brave knight,
an intrepid warrior, well skilled in the art of war
and battle, named the Chief Nazih. As soon as
these horsemen had fallen into their power, they
returned home, and none escaped of all King Zo-
heir’s sons and brothers but Zambaa and Warca with
three slaves, who matle their way home, and raised
an uproar among the dwellings, and instantly the
horsemen mounted, all seeking the valley of Tama-
risks. The whole tribe were involved in universal
mourning, and loud were the groans and lamenta-
tions; it was at that crisis that Shiboob arrived,
when he found them oppressed with affliction, and
‘the horsemen already on their way to the valley of
‘Tamarisks.

On Shiboob’s inquiring what was the matter,
they informed him of all that had passed, and what
were their plans. He immediately returned and. told
his brother Antar, the lion hero, who sent Harith
and Labna home, whilst he himself with his com-
panions departed in order to release King Zoheir.

But as to the tribe of Cayan, they continued
traversing the deserts till the forenoon, when the
meridian heat oppressing them, they halted to


NAZIH’$ JOY AND STORY. 273


repose by the side of a lake called the Lake of the
Waste. Here King Zoheir recovered from his in-
toxication, and also his sons and brothers, and the
other horsemen, but they found themselves in fetters
and disgrace. What horseman art thou? said King
Zoheir, turning towards the knight of Cayan, and
to what Arabs art thou connected, that thou hast
braved the princes of the tribe of Abs and Adnan?
By the future and the past, we have not fallen into
your power but by the will of fate and destiny, so
we will ransom our lives with whatever thou pleasest,
and we will thank thee ; avail thyself of the friend-
ship of such as us.”

Nazih, at hearing this, started on his saddle and
swaggered about: O God, thanks be unta thee ! he
exclaimed, I did not know that you were of the
tribe of Abs till this moment. With you will I ter-
minate all my sorrows. At last fortune has had
pity on me. Youth, cried Asyed, surprised at these
expressions, what have we to do with such lan-
guage? Hast thou’ any revenge against us thou
must satisfy? I have no debt, no retaliation against
you, said Nazih, but I will proceed with you to one
who is your enemy and foe. He is my lord Obad,
son of Temeem, with whom I was brought up an
orphan till I attained this high station. I am ena-
moured of his daughter Dhimya, and am wrecked
in the sea of love for her. On her account I en-
dure battles and perils, and have exhibited my


VOL. IIT. T


214 HE MEETS ANTAR IN THE DESERT.


prowess against the inhabitants of Sana and Aden.
Besides you, I have found no opposition ; but he
is most anxious to have hold of one of ye. Yet I
have always heard every one say, Beware, approach
not the tribe of Abs; but now ye have fallen mto
my hands, and I will through ye succeed in my
‘designs. Conduct us outof the road, cried he to his
comrades, that neither friend nor foe may meet us.
So they did as he directed, and Nazih was over-
joyed, marching in front of the horsemen, till dark-
ness overspread the land, when they halted by the
waters of the tribe Akhrem ; and as they were near
home, they imagined their important concerns would
succeed, for King Zoheir despaired of safety, and
so did his brothers and his associates. At day-
break Nazih set out, passing over the barren waste
till the forenoon, when lo! a dust appeared in front
of them that involved the whole region for an hour.
Soon after the dust opened, and there appeared
underneath it a man on foot like a bird when it
flies, like a leopard when it maddens. Behind him
were horsemen clad in iron, like the calamities of
extermination. Ahead of them was a black knight
on a black steed; he was girt with a well-pro-
portioned spear, and his roar was like the roar of a
fon. He was the knight of the swarthy Abs, and
their brightest ornament—the serpent of the bowels
of the desert—the chief Antar, son of Shedad.
How is it, exclaimed Nazih, that this party has


SHIBOOB’S SUPERIOR KNOWLEDGE. S15


been directed to this spot? They seem but a small
number of horsemen, their fate has driven them to
death and perdition. l
The guide who had conducted them through
these ways was called Aboolgharat, son of Aboolfita,
the most intelligent man of the time for traversing
the wastes and barren wilds. O Nazih, cried he,
our hopes are frustrated—our pains are baffled—
our object has failed—we have forfeited the aid of
heaven, and we have encountered here the slave of
the tribe of Abs, and not one of us will effect his
escape; but as to your expressions, of how this
party was directed to this place, I know that Antar
has a brother called Shiboob, by his mother Ze-
beeba, and he is the calamity of calamities; the
misfortune of misfortunes ; for when he departed with
his brother from the land of Irak at the beginning
of the night, he did not halt with him in the morn-
ing but in the land of Syria. As tome, I know
the roads and the ways no one of all the tribes but
myself ever knew; and I am well aware, from my
own feelings, when I am in company with any one
that can puzzle me, or distract or confuse me in the
wilds. But after all, my advice is, that you release
the tribe of Abs from bondage, and relieve us from
battle and contest, first securing protection from
them: do not engage this great warnor, for he is
not like these horsemen you have hitherto encoun-
tered. Nazih bellowed and foamed: What mean
‘these words? said he, am I with a hundred horse-
T2


276 NA2IR’S CHALLENGE


men of the tribe of Cayan, and they Himyarites
and brave heroes, and shall I fear the contest with
this black devil? This day shalt thou see how I
will bring: destruction upon him. I will make an
example of him amongst mankind. And he rushed
towards Antar, galloping and charging to and fro;
he thus burst out:

« Away! ye that reprove me, I will not listen to ©
- ye, my railers, I will not answer either by word
“ or deed. Let me die young; the swords of India
“that tear out life are preferable to a life of dis-"
“ honour and infamy.: It is not the approach of
‘¢ the day of battle that alarms me; it is not flight
‘¢ that shall rescue me from death. Who is he that
“ avoids it, though death should encounter him?
“ Death is sweeter to my heart than honey. I —
‘* have indeed taken captives the chiefs of a power-
‘ful tribe. I am a knight, and the world can
“ testify it.” |

Nazih having finished his verses, Antar com-
menced his attack upon him, and as he charged
him, he thus expressed himself:

“& O antagonist, that wouldst desire a contest
“ with me in the battle, and wouldst aim at me in
“ the confusion of spears! How many armies, how
& many camps have I routed! and have assaulted
“ when the water-mills of war were revolving!
“ The lightning of my sword flashes through the
“ dust, and its brilliancy sickens the eyes of all be-
“ holders. The barb of my spear falls on the chests


AND BOAST; ANTAR’S INDIGNATION. . 277


“* of the east and west, till they are all mangled, and
‘¢ I will defend the tribe of Abs for ever till I die,
*“ and their name through me shall be renowned.”
Antar again turned upon Nazih, and attacking
him, exclaimed, Eh! what a coxcomb art thou
amongst thy fellows! thou must be frantic! What
Arab art thou? But this day I will silence thy
presumption ; I will make thee an inhabitant of the
tomb, and I will make thee feel the ill-luck of thy
resistance against the tribe of Abs and Adnan, and
of thy daring violence against the prince of the


age. i

By the faith of an Arab, said Nazih, I havedhe
tained unbounded good from the tribe of Abs, and
I have captured every one of their chiefs and
` princes, and soon will I bring down annihilation on —
thee. At hearing this, Antar’s passion increased,
and he rushed upon him, eager for his death. Nazih
met him and fought him; they engaged till their
limbs were powerless, and the perspiration streamed
down their bodies, and the blood flowed from their
wounds. Indignation seized the heart of Nazih;
he rushed at Antar and thrust at him, quick as the
twinkling of the eye, aiming at Antar’s chest; but
in this thrust the spear came short, and as it was
falling between the eyes of Abjer, Antar warded it
off with his shield, but it wounded him in the thigh ;
then indeed was his wrath roused; he pounced
down upon Nazih, and struggling with him till he
quite exhausted him, he stretched forth his arm


218 NAZIN TAKEN; THE PRINCES RELEASED.


towards the belt of his armour, and dragged him
off the seat of his saddle, and took him prisoner.
Shiboob ran up to him and received Nazih from his
hands; he bound fast his shoulders, and tied down
his arms and his sides, whilst Antar shouted out
to his horsemen, and ordered them to strike and
thrust. So they attacked the tribe of Cayan, and
plied their swords and their spears among them ;
and the dust arose over their heads. Perdition
fell upon the horsemen of Cayan, and the horse-
men of Yemen, and they were overwhelmed
with perils. The Absians slew thirty of them,
and took seventy prisoners. In the mean time
Shiboob, seeing them all occupied, hurried to-
wards King Zoheir and his associates, and released
them, slackening away from them the tightness of
the bow-string. Antar also soon came up with
his comrades and saluted King Zoheir, who told
him what had passed. O King of the time, said
Antar, it is incumbent on every one to give way to
the changes of fortune, for it is ever treacherous.
But pour forth your thanks to the great God. for
your deliverance, and your release from this perilous
situation. Antar also related all that had happened
to him in the land of Irak, and how his horses had
been stolen from him on the road, and how he met
Shiboob, and Harith, and Labna, and the tribe of
Zohran; how he released them all, and slew Khei-
taoor. O Aboolfawaris, said King Zoheir, my son
Harith lives then? Yes, said Antar, and is now
with his family and relations. Glorious indeed are


THE BRACELET; NAZIN’S STORY. 279


thy works, O Aboolfawaris, said King Zoheir, for
I had despaired of my son. But now conduct us
home. King of the age, said Antar, it will first be
advisable to. cut the throats of these dogs. So
Shiboob went up to Nazih first of all, who was in
the greatest agony; he stripped him of his clothes,
and his body appeared whiter than hail, and above
his wrist was a bracelet of cornelian, and on it were
shaped two images of burnished gold in the form of
Lat and Uzza. As soon as Asyed saw this bracelet
he recognised it, and perfectly recollected it; and
as Shiboob was proceeding to despatch Nazih,
Hold, my cousin, he exclaimed, a little for me, and
he advanced towards Nazih; his agony of mind in-
creased; he took the bracelet in his hand, he kissed
it and wept over it; he sighed and sorrowed.
Whence had you this bracelet, young man? he
quickly asked. Nazih shed a torrent of tears;
Know, my lord, said he, I was brought up an
orphan among the tribe of Cayan. Who was your
father? demanded Asyed. O my dread lord, said
Nazih, I never knew who was my father; neither
do I know of what Arab tribe he was. I was
brought up as a poor fatherless orphan by the
charity of my master Obad, son of Temeem. He
has a daughter called Dhimya, and I have loved
her from the days of childhood. On her account I
have engaged my equals, and have subdued horse-
men, and although I am mad to demand her in
marriage, modesty has prevented me ; and oft I say to


280 ` HIS STORY CONTINUED:


myself, I shall be this evening in his tent, then it
shall be done ; and again, to-day I will demand his
daughter, but I have never ventured yet, and were
I to drink of the draught of death and perdition, I
shall never approach him, however great my in-
fluence is over him, and however serviceable I have
been to him. But in my heart I conceal my love
for his daughter, and it is only to my mother I
complain when my sorrows oppress me; and my
mother, she sometimes says to me, O my son; you
can never find any relief for this passion tll
you make an attack upon the tribe of Abs and
Adnan, and are roused to seize some of their chiefs
and bring them here, then may your plans succeed.
For, O my son, your master Obad has an old ven-
geance against them; and if you do not march
against that country, you will never gain your
point. Mother, I said to her, I hear every one
extol the tribe of Abs for their irresistible steadiness
in the day of battle, and they are the knights of
extermination and of instant death. But my mo-
ther still would say, good luck is oft in penury, and
victory comes from God; and moreover, if you
have fears, you must ever live atrifler. But take
with you this bracelet, on which is the name of the
Lord of heaven and earth; your father gave it me,
alas! alas! on the night he was wedded to me—
and he said to me, Preserve it! So if you succeed
in your wishes, praise be to the God of Zemzem
and the shrine; and should you be taken prisoner,


ASYED DISCOVERS HIS SON. 281


this will liberate you from bondage and infamy.
I took it from my mother and bound it on my arm,
and I set out on an expedition against the vagrant
tribes with these hundred men, and I did not dis-
continue my journey over the deserts till I came to
the spot, the valley of Tamarisks, where we over-
came you and succeeded in our attempts. There
indeed shone clear the proof of my mother’s say-
ings, and with you I was traversing the wilds and
the wastes till I encountered this black, this dreadful
warrior, and infamy fell upon me, and now you are
come to cut. off my head.

As Asyed listened to this tale, a shuddering came
over him; he gazed at Nazih very minutely, and
tracing the well-known features, he clasped him to
his bosom, and kissed him between the eyes, ex-
elaiming by the truth of the sacred Shnne, Thou
art my son !—thou art a part of my heart! I gave
this bracelet to thy mother Selma, and my name is
inscribed thereon, and thy mother only sent thee to
this land to gain authentic intelligence of us. O
my brother, added he to Zoheir, the times have
changed and turned round, and what was lost is
come back to me: it was of this young man’s mother
that I spoke to you. All that were present, when
they heard this story, were in amazement. But Antar `
dismounted and received Nazih with great kindness,
and kissed him between the eyes, for he was a true
lion warrior, and a noble knight. Nazih was much
pleased: O tribe of Abs, said he, mdeed you are


QBS  ABOOLGHARAT CONFIRMS THE DISCOVERY.


the mine of liberality and generosity, and he who is
connected by birth to you can never care for death.
I indeed rejoice in your parentage, and in my union
with your lineage, and I will be as a slave among
you. Yet must I interrogate my mother about my
father, that the truth may be fully proved, and I
realise all my expectations.

_ Make no such delays, O Nazih, said Aboolgharat,
you have no occasion to inquire of your mother on
this subject, for I am better acquainted with it than
any one. I was the person who conducted your
master Obad to this country; he invaded it, and
took your mother captive. We returned home im-
mediately under alarm that the tribe of Abs and
Adnan might overtake us, and on our arrival we
divided the spoil, and your mother fell to the lot of
your master Obad; and as soon as her pregnancy.
became evident, he questioned her about her situa-
tion, and who was her husband. My husband was
slain in the valley, said she. Thus she concealed
her story, and never revealed the secret to any one,
fearful of death and perdition. This man is your
father, and you are his son; but this is no time for
talking at length, for we are about to have our
heads cut off. At hearing this the noble Nagzih
smiled, and his heart pitied his people when they
communicated to him his real situation; but Asyed
hastened and untied his handcuffs, and did the same
to the others, and mounted them on horses, and
they all set out for the land of the tribe of Abs,


NAZIN’S JOY AND REGRETS. 288


Nazih travelling by the side of his father Asyed,
who talked pleasantly with him, and gave him ac-
counts of his mother. Now that it is certain that
you are my father, said Nazih, I have no more
anxiety on your account ; but I must bring my mo-
ther here. I am, however, distressed when think-
ing how I shall remain with you among the tribe of
Abs and Adnan, and my mother in the tribe of
Cayan will suffer death and infamy ; particularly
when Obad hears I am an Absian he will not let
my mother survive a day, and I shall die of sorrows
for her, and regret for his daughter Dhimya. O
my son, said Asyed, it appears as if I must either
abandon your mother in the hands of foes, or you
drive Dhimya from your heart: but let us say no
more till we reach home and join our tribe. Thus
they travelled on, highly gratified, till evening, when
they halted at the waters, and: waited whilst the
horses were refreshed. ‘They took their dinner,
and again mounted their steeds, and passed on
during the darkness of the night tll morning shone,
when they reached the valley of Tamarisks; but as
soon as the sun rose they perceived the camp of the
tribe of Abs, who were hasting over the desert in
pursuit of King Zoheir, for every family was in
movement. And as King Zoheir and his party ap-
proached, the first that espied them was Rebia; he
had also set out on that expedition, hoping that King
Zoheir would receive his deliverance at his hands,
and thus would his past actions be erased from his


284 DEBATE ABOUT SELMA AND DHIMYA.


heart: but he was disappointed. The tribe ad-
vanced and saluted King Zoheir, and inquired the
cause of his captivity, and how it had happened. He
related the whole to them, and also the story of
Nazih, at which they were in astonishment. Re-
bia came up-to Antar, jealous that King Zoheir had
been released by him, and said, O Aboolfawaris,
there is no day but we see you in it, for you are in-
deed the daily food of friends. May no evil, no
harm ever reach you! for you are our polished
sword and our long spear. Antar thanked him.
About evening they set off: they crossed over the
desert, and reposed that night in the valley of
Erak. In the morning they resolved on pursuing
their way: O king, said Asyed, I will go with you
to the tents, and thence I will proceed to liberate
my wife Selma, and will gratify my son’s designs
upon Dhimya, for unless I effect this he will never
feel happy in staying with us. If such is the case,
said King Zoheir, we will all proceed to the cities
of Yemen with our warriors and armies, and we
will not return till we have accomplished our pur-
pose. No, said Antar, by the faith of an Arab no
one but myself shall proceed on this expedition, for
I do not see the necessity of your taking all that
trouble and anxiety. On hearing this, Rebia
thanked him for the loyalty of his spirit. Admirable!
my cousin, said he; and I and my brother also, we
will go with you, and will expose aur lives on this
occasion. 3


ANTAR RESOLVES OX THE EXPEDITION. 285


Now this speech was only meant to excite Antar
to the expedition, for he was vexed at him, as all
his plans had failed through him ; so he wished him
to expose himself among the cities of Yemen, in the
full expectation that the calamities of fortune and
perils would put an end to him. Antar thanked
him for his speech, though well aware of his malice
and insidious motives. i

We cannot agree with you in this respect, said
King Zoheir, we will not let you go into Yemen to
endanger yourself on our private necessities with
only one hundred horsemen: take with you a thou-
sand of the most tried warriors, that our hearts may
be at ease about you. O great king, said Antar,
were I even going ‘to the conquest of the cities of
Syria, or to fight with the Chosroe of Persia, I
would not take so many as a thousand horsemen. I
do wish it may .be publicly announced that your
slave Antar invaded the cities of Yemen, and those
countries, with only one hundred horsemen, every
one indeed a hardy warrior; and that he executed
his objects, and returned with affluence and plunder.
But my heart does not feel happy that I should un-
dertake this expedition before my Lord Harith has
wedded his bride Labna.

Now Harith was recovered of the wounds he had
received ; he was quite well and in good health. They
continued till they reached their native land, and
universal joy and delight was the result of their ar
rival. They made entertainments and feasts, and per-


286 - . wUMAN’s PRESENTS TO ZOHEIR.


fect happiness and felicity dwelt among them. They
slaughtered cattle for the banquets; the liquor and
the wine went round; the damsels beat the dul-
cimers; and the high and low were in full glee.
Labna was married to Harith; he entered unto her,
and he was happy. After feasting seven days, An-
tar prepared for his expedition and passage over
the desert, in order to finish the affair so interesting
to Asyed and his son Nazih. He took with him
his father Shedad,’ and three hundred horsemen of
the race of Carad; Asyed also went with him, de-
termined on success. King Zoheir accompanied
them to take leave, and when they reached the val-
ley of Erak they left King Zoheir behind, and
quitted him there. He returned home, and Antar
departed for the cities of Yemen. |

But as to King Zoheir, he had not rested two
days after Antar’s departure when Numan’s mes-
senger arrived, and with him innumerable camels,
and robes, that amazed the eye, and also a thou-
sand Asafeer camels. When King Zoheir learnt
the arrival of the messenger, he went out to meet
him, and welcoming him to his dwelling, made him
dismount, and treating him hospitably, inquired
about King Numan’s health. And when he had
described to him all the goods and presents destined
for him (and indeed the quantity was immense),
King Numan, he added, salutes you, and desires
you to send him your daughter, merely herself;
but not a single article of your own property, for he


MARRIAGE OF NUMAN AND ASWAD. 987


does not require of you either goods or presents.
King Zoheir upon this made a long panegyric on
King Numan.

Aswad’s messenger also arrived about the same
time at the tribe of Fazarah, who did the same to-
wards him as King Zoheir had done with regard to
King Numan’s. The cymbals were struck up in
the hands of the damsels, and they remained in this
state seven days. On the eighth day the howdahs
were raised on the backs of the camels, decorated
with splendid velvet. ‘The ladies were lifted in, ac-
commodated on silken cushions and couches. The
standards and ensigns were unfurled, and the men
rode round them like lions. Hadifah accompanied
his sister with one hundred horsemen, and King
Zoheir sent his son Shas with his daughter; and they
continued traversing the deserts, the Arabs treating
them as they passed, till they reached Hirah. And
when Numan heard of their approach he went out
to meet them, his brother riding by his side, and
surrounded by troops; the drums were beaten on
all sides, and this was a day of joy and pleasure, the
like of which was never known in the whole world ;
for Numan gave away alms, made presents, distri-
buted gold and silver, prepared magnificent enter-
tainments, and had tables covered with meat. This
continued in the same manner for ten days, and
Mootegeredeh was married to King Numan, and
the hour and the time were most propitious; and


Maria was also married to his brother Aswad, and


288 PRINCE SHAS AND HIS CAMEL.


theirs was a state of happiness never experienced
before by man; each realised his hopes, and all
their friends and well-wishers rejoiced. In three
days the Arabs separated, and every one took his
own road, and every chief sought his own clan.
Aswad invested Hadifah with an honorary robe,
and also the chiefs of the tribe of Fazarah. So also
did King Numan towards Shas; he bestowed on
him rich presents, and gave him splendid robes, and
treated him in the most distinguished manner.

When Shas saw this, and all the rich presents
that were produced before him, O king, said he, do
not bestow on me any article of your property, not
even to the value of a halter. We only coveted
your connexion on account of your glory, and the
honour of your name. Numan thanked him; and
having loaded the she camel that had conveyed his
bride with aloes, and amber, and musk, and per-
fumes, he also wished to send with him an escort of
troops to attend on him and protect him. But, said
he, are you not my relation? King Zoheir my fa-
‘ther? the tribe of Abs my countrymen? and the
protector of our lands and our property, the Chief
Antar, son of Shedad? and shall I go with an es-
cort? No! by the faith of an Arab! So he bade
them farewell, and departed in company with Ha-
difah and the tribe of Fazarah. |

Now Shas had no one with him but the slave that
drove his camel; and when they were at some
distance from Kufah they began to converse about


SHAS SEPARATES FROM HADIFAH. 289


the weddings and the feasts, and each of them
talked about his connexion, and what had. occurred
during the entertainments. Hadifah was quite ex-
travagant in his eulogium of Prince Aswad, ex-
tolling him greatly, and preferring him to Numan.
Shas was now aware that they wished to irntate him
by their discourse ; but as he was anxious to put a
stop to any enmity or ill will between them, he se-
parated from them, feigning a desire to indulge in
the hunt and chase. As soon as Hadifah saw this,
he said to his cousins, Let us away over the wastes
and the wilds, and let us escape from danger and
destruction ; perhaps some one may fall upon him
who will cut off his, head, and will take his horse
and his armour, for he is also one of Antar’s friends.
Thus they passed over the deserts, and Shas fol-
lowed behind, who being thus separated from Ha-
difah, travelled alone, amusing himself on the skirts
of the waste, and rejoicing at having avoided their
misconduct, till he reached the waters of the tribe
of Aamir, where he arrived in the obscurity: of the
night, and as he was exceedingly thirsty, he was
much troubled. By the side of the lake there was
a huntsman chasing the wild animals as they passed
to and fro; he was called Thalaba, the son of Aarid)j.
He was extending out his nets, and fixing them by
the water-side, and as Shas came up, the wild ani-
mals being. frightened away, the huntsman was
much annoyed, and he cried out to Shas, Who art
thou? thou hast spoiled my sport, and hast driyen


VOL. ITI. U


290 WE 18 MURDERED BY THALABA.


away the beasts from me. Fear not, young man,
said Shas, for I will reward you for what you lose.
But have you a drink of water, that I may quench
my thirst? Ay! you shall have water from me,
said the huntsman, but not water that shall: moisten
your thirst or relieve your entrails. Shas, on hear-
ing this, was very angry, for he was a prince and
the son of a prince. You dog of the tribe of Aamir,
said he, were you not a poor miserable fellow I
would punish you in the manner that kings punish.
But the huntsman immediately drew an arrow from
his quiver, and fixing it on the centre of his bow,
aimed it at Shas by the sound of his voice, and it
struck him through the heart, and it hurled him
dead off his horse. The slave, when he saw his
master fall headlong, left him there, and departed
home to the tribe of Abs, making all speed in his
flight. Then came up the huntsman, and examined
him, and looked at his horse, and lo! its trappings
were of gold; and perceiving the garments of a —
mighty prince upon him, he was in the greatest
agitation. He dug a hole for him in the sand, and
buried him; but he took away the horse and the
camel, and hastened home, and when he came to
his wife he acquainted her with the circumstance,
and directed her not to discover it to any one. He
slaughtered the camel, and distributed the meat,
concealing the property and perfumes, and the fine
horse. And thus it was all over with Shas.

In the meantime Hadifah reached the tribe of


. |
KING ZOHEIR’S GRIEF AND VENGEANCE. 291]


Fazarah, and the whole universe could not contain
him, so excessive was his joy. King Zoheir heard:
of his arrival, and his heart was in a flame about his
son Shas, till the slave also came back and informed
King Zoheir of the murder of his son. Great m-
deed was this affliction. His tears, his lamentations
were incessant; he tore off all his clothes. The
news soon reached his mother, and his brothers, and
his comrades, and their distress equalled his. The
whole clan was absorbed in tears, and sobs, and
groans. The next day arrived Rebia; and in three
days more King Zoheir assembled in haste all his
lion warriors, and prepared two thousand horsemen
that would have infused fears even into the genii
and the fiends. And they departed, traversing the
burning sands, seeking the land of the tribe of
Aamir; and at their head rode King Zoheir, his
heart ulcered with grief, and by his side was Rebia ;
and they continued their successive marches till they
drew nigh to the land of the tribe of Aamir; and
when their dust appeared, Ghashm *, son of Malik,
mounted, and went out with a party of his people
to meet King Zoheir, and saluting him, O great
king, said he, art thou come to our land to take your
pleasure with us, and to hunt in the vicinity? O
Ghashm, said King Zoheir, we are not come on a
Visit or as guests. We are come with no other pur-
pose but to extirpate you with the sword. What,


* Surnamed the Brandisher of Spears.
uz


292 i HE RETURNS ABASHED.


said the Brandisher of Spears, has produced this
enmity between us, that we should deserve such
violent measures at your hands after such friend-
ship? Ay, said King Zohcir, for my son Shas, on
his return from his relation, King Numan, was
slain at your waters. O king, said Ghashm, who
told you this? The slave that accompanied him,
said King Zoheir, informed me of his murder and
his destruction. And would you, O great king,
added Ghashm, take away a man in health for one in
sickness? and have you believed a base slave to our
prejudice? and had even the slave told the truth,
how many thieves and robbers are there in our
neighbourhood ! But if, notwithstanding this, you
are resolved on shedding blood, God forbid that
hostility should arise between us! But if you will
not assent to my proposal, and you are certainly a
man of honour, at least have pity on the widows and.
the infirm. King Zoheir, on hearing this address,
returned, alarmed at the consequences of violence
and oppression. He hastened his march till he
reached home. But his son Cais was extremely af-
flicted, and wept bitterly, saying, I will not permit
the blood of my brother to pass away in vain. Į
myself will undertake this business. It happened
that this was a year of drought and scarcity, and
the people were in total want of every thing. So
Cais selected two she camels, and loading them with.
dried dates, and wheat, and butter, sent for an old,
grey-hcaded woman, from whom there was no sort


CAIS’S PLAX TO FIND OUT THE MURDERER. 293


of deceit concealed. Take these two camels, said he
to her, and go to the land of the tnbe of Aamir, but
take special care not to discover yourself; buy no-
thing in exchange but rarities and valuable articles,
and when any perfumes fall in your way, inquire '
whence they were imported.

As soon as the old woman heard Cais’s instruction,
she understood the whole affair, and she departed
with a heart proof against ail perils. He, however,
sent with her some one to-conduct her ‘to the tribe
of Aamir, and when she reached the dwellings, she
roamed about and offered for sale her stock of wheat,
inquiring for excellent perfumes in exchange. They
produced all the perfumes they had, till she came, in
her rounds, to the families of Ghani and Kellab;
and, moreover, she importuned the whole tribe of
Aamir till she reached the house of Thalaba, son of
Aaridj, the huntsman. He himself was, at that
period, away from his wife, who, in his absence,
being in want of provisions, and seeing this stock
brought by the old woman, cried out to her to come
into her tent; she conducted her in, and offered
her for sale some aloe wood, and musk, and amber,
and as she inhaled the fragrance of them, the bar-
ren waste was scented with their odour. The old
woman was quite amazed at the extraordinary qua-
lities of these perfumes, and their fragrance quite
intoxicated her. O my mistress, said she, this is
indeed a rarity not to be purchased with wheat.
‘The God of old knows miy intention, and may I


P


294 THALABA'S WIFE IMPARTS THE SECRET


never lose my daughter! For God’s sake, do now
take all my stock, and relieve me from any further
trouble and delay. But tell me whence was this
perfume brought you, for in no place whatever have
I ever seen any thing like it; such as this is not to
be found at any merchant’s or perfumer’s. I will
not inform you on this point, said Thalaba’s wife,
and I will not reveal the business to you unless you
promise me, by him who fashioned the human frame,
that this affair shall not proceed from you to any
human being, and that you will not acknowledge it
to any one, man or woman. The old woman ac-
ceded to her proposition. O aunt, said she, my
husband is called Thalaba, the son of Aaridj, the
huntsman, and he gained, in this pitiful business,
what no one of the servants of God ever gained be-
fore, for one day he was by the side of the lake
hunting. It was night, when a youth called Shas,
son of King Zoheir, passing by, frightened away the
wild beasts, at which my husband was very angry
and abused him ; the youth spoke in terms that ir-
ritated him, so my husband struck him with an ar-
row and slew him, and when the business was over
my husband went towards him and perceived the
whole catastrophe. A slave had accompanied Shas,
and there was also a black-eyed camel, laden entirely
with these perfumes. The slave, on seeing what
had happened, fled away, and my husband, having
first buried Shas in the sand, immediately came
home, and with him the horse and camel; heis now


TO AN OLD WOMAN, WHO TELLS zonEIR. 206


gone to sell the horse and the trappings in some of
the Arab hordes, and will bring me back some gold
and silver. Now, were you not a foreign woman I
should not have informed you of this extraordinary
story. But still I will not let you go after this meet-
ing, till you have given me your promise not to tell
any one. I am a foreign woman, said the other, and
am very old, and I live in the land of Yemen, and
I have never heard any one mention the tribe of
Abs or their king’s son, Shas. So she made the re-
quired promise, and took away all her perfumes, and
put them on the two camels ; and, bidding her adieu,
she departed much pleased at what she had done.
She instantly set out for the land of Abs, and she
thought she should never reach home, so eager was
she to execute Cais’s commission, and inform King
Zoheir of his son’s death, till she actually arrived
and related the surprising circumstances that had
occurred to her. Now, do what you please, said
she, and make whatever arrangements you choose.
And what man slew him? said he. Thalaba, the
huntsman, said she; and she informed him what
Cais had done in his ingenuity, and showed him the
perfumes. King Zoheir wept and sobbed, the tears
streamed and flowed, whilst he thus gave vent to his
grief in verse :

“ The vicissitudes of fortune have thrown me
‘í into misery and wretchedness, and fortune has
“ ever evinced its treacherous disposition. I am in-


“ volved in affliction by it, as if I were the friend of


296 GRIEF OF ZOHBIR AND REBIA.


“ intoxication, produced by excess of wine.. It has
“ left me in solitude ; I have no one to assist me.
« O that I were with him; united to him in the
“ tomb. When the messenger of Shas’s death ar-
“ rived, grief took possession of me, and I am
“ bewildered. O Shas, thou hast cast a grief into
“ my heart that will not pass away, were even my
s life to pass away. Think not, O vengeance, that
“ thou shalt sleep, now that he is gone. Let not the
‘‘ goose imagine it shall escape the vulture. Soon
“ shalt thou see the Absian warriors plunge into
« deaths, and seas, and horrors. The kings of the
“ earth shall see that we are able to take vengeance
“ on their boldest heroes.”

To arms! to arms! cried King Zoheir to those
that were about him, and he mounted that very day,
accompanied by all the chiefs and Rebia, who thus
exclaimed, in verses :

‘ I was heedless of the nocturnal depredators, and
““ my heart is insensible to joy. A calamity. has
“ befallen me that has taught me afflictions, and the
‘< heaviest sorrows. O my tears, flow fast from your
“ stores for the loss of our hero. O my tribe, I have
‘‘ lost one who was my sword, and my right hand,
“ and left hand, in the battle. He was a crown on
s“ the heads of the tribe of Abs, brilliant as the full
* moon ; but that moon is on the wane and is lost,
“ now that the hostile hand has aimed at him the
“ fatal arrow. O tribe of Aamir, do ye not dread
“ the assault, that would even endanger the summits


THEY INVADE THE TRIBE OF AAMIR. 27


“ of the caverned mountains. O land, now Shas is
“ gone, what can protect thee? Will the heavens
“ shadow thee from destruction? Our steeds are
“ fearless in the contest, and our swords are death’s
“ harbingers in the battle. The barbs of our spears
“ bear witness that the heights of glory are our
“ mansions of honour. The kings of the universe
“ are our slaves. They serve us, and we are the
“lords. Shall they venture to oppose us? and we
“ are on our thin-flanked coursers, like dragons.”
When King Zoheir looked round at his sons and
saw not Shas, he wept bitterly. They hastened
their march, and a burning flame was concealed in
their breasts, till they reached the tribe of Aamir.
Their chief and ruler was called Khalid, son of
Giafir, and their knight that protected them in the -
days of trouble was the Brandisher of Spears,
Ghashm, son of Malik. The family of Gham had
also a skilful warrior whose name was Rebia, son of
Ocail, and the family of Kellab had also a horseman
called Jandah, son of Beka. These three tribes
resided in one land, and their waters approximated,
and they were nearly related. But. at that time the
chief, Khalid, was absent with Prince Aswad, in the
land of Irak, who bad also married the daughter of
his brother, Akhwas, and her name was Saad ; and
when Khalid heard of Aswad’s marriage with Hadi-
fah’s sister, he took with him some of the chiefs of
the tribe of Aamir to visit him, and when he was
about to return, his niece would not let him go. O


298 IN RETALIATION FOR SHAS’S MURDER»


my uncle, said she, stay with me till I see how I like
my situation; for, indeed, if I am annoyed, I will
return to my own country and my family. So he
staid some time with her, and it was during his
absence these events occurred, and King Zoheir
invaded the tribe of Aamir, where he found the
dwellings without their warriors, and there was no
one but the Brandisher of Swords with a few men.
Now, when they saw King Zoheir return, they rode
out to meet him, and made a very humble address
to him, inquiring the cause of his return. He in-
formed them of the stratagem Cais had adopted, in
order to succeed in his object; he also told them
that Thalaba, the huntsman, had slain his son Shas.
On hearing this, and ascertaining it to be true, they
searched for Thalaba, but could not find him. Upon
this they sent for his wife, and ordered her to con-
fess; she acknowledged what her husband had done,
and produced all the perfumes she still had. King
Zoheir was highly incensed, and his eyeballs started
into the crown of his head. O tribe of Aamir, cried
he, I demand of you one of three conditions. First,
that you return me my son as he was; but if you
cannot effect that, fill then my outer cloak with the
constellations of heaven; and if you cannot effect
that, I demand of you the whole tribe of Ghani, that
I may sacrifice all their children and their parents.
O my lord, said they, verily you insult and outrage
us, and demand of us impossibilities ; for he who
requests what no human being can perform, oppresses


D
Q


REBIA THWARTS THEIR ARTIFICES. 299
and tyrannizes. It is impossible fpr any one to
revive the dead or kill the living, but Him who out-
spread the earth and vaulted the skies; but as to
your proposal of delivering over to you all the tribe
of Ghani, it is a thing you in your senses could
never suppose we should do, for you are a generous
king, therefore do not exact the living for the dead.
But as to exciting war and dissensions among us,
heaven forbid that we should ever have recourse to
such a proceeding, and that we should exchange our
security for alarms and fears. But we will pay you
ten times * the price of blood, and we beg of you to
set at liberty our women and our daughters. Thus
the tribe continued till King Zoheir was duped and
relented. Consulting with Rebia about the aban-
donment of retaliation and their return home, Oking,
said Rebia, what is this you say ? How can we raise
our heads among the Arabs, if we permit the blood
of Shas to pass unrevenged ? And, unsheathing his
sword, To arms! to arms! he exclaimed, and rushed
with his drawn sabre among the tribe of Aamir,
whilst the sons of King Zoheir, also joining in a
similar shout, extended their spears and plied their
scimitars among them. ‘The shouts arose on all
sides; the tribe of Aamir put on their arms and
defended themselves ; the battle became furious, and
many were slain and wounded. Blood flowed and
streamed, and the dust uprose and sickened the eye-


* Ten camels was the price of blood in those days.


300 : ZOHEIR 18 AGAIN DUPED,


balls of the shouters. Heads were severed from
bodies ; the tribe of Aamir just kept off the contest
from their children, but were reduced to great dis-
tress as the confusion and uproar increased. The
tribe of Abs cut through them by the force of their
steeds, and slaughtered numbers of their horsemen
and troops. On that day the only one that could
tight on the offensive, and repel the attack, was the
Brandisher of Spears, for he was one of the renowned
heroes and celebrated warriors; but observing the
tribe of Abs, how they overpowered him, and the
numbers of his own party, how they were cut up,
and alarmed for their total annihilation, and the
destruction of his country, he took with him a party
of his tribe, all noble horsemen, and repaired to
King Zoheir, who was under the standards; he
dismounted and paid obeisance, and kissing his hand,
O dreaded king, said he, do not the deeds of a
coward, for you are a great prince. Draw back vour
swords from us, that we may extract this tribe for
you from the midst of us, and may separate from
them and deliver them over to you. Do not destroy
us for the crimes of others, leave us quiet in our
lands and territory. All I request of you is, to
delay for the remainder of this day, and to-morrow
morning come on and the tribe shall be yours. He
continued to engage his compassion in this proposal,
and so humiliated himself, that King Zoheir was
induced to agree to his request. I grant you, said
King Zohcir, the term of this day, so that no blame


AND IS OBLIGED TO DESIST FROM WAR. 301


or reproach may attach to us. And he immediately
directed his slaves to order back the troops from the
contest. The Brandisher of Spears returned to his
tribe: Now then, said he, entrench your women and
families on the summits of the mountains, for I have
circumvented King Zoheir in my discourse. Let us
occupy a strong post for some days, till the sacred
moon ‘shine upon us, when battle and contention
must be stopped, and these unexpected oppressors
must depart. Moreover too, our Chief Khalid may
arrive from the land of Irak, and he will avert from
us this insupportable calamity.

The tribe of Aamir, on hearing this, were con-
vinced of the expediency of the measure. So they
all hastened away, and struck their tents and dwell-
Ings, every one carrying away his property, and
placing his family in security among the mountains.
Before daylight, the whole country was abandoned,
and they moved like waves towards the hills.

By the dawn of day King Zoheir mounted, and
when he saw what they had done, he was aware that
the Brandisher of Spears had deceived him. He
was furious with passion, and marched in haste
against the Aatmirites, with his men, and be-
sieged them in the mountains. All that fell into
his hands he made to drink of the cup of death and
extinction, for the troops were greatly exasperated.
They continued in this state for five days, and then
arose the sacred moon. It was the month of Redjeb,
which the ignorance of the Arabs sanctified. War


802 THE MONTH REDJER.


ceased'during that time, and had it happened that
any one had killed his father or his brother, it was
never spoken of to him, and he could not be brought
to trial. The Arabs went every where unarmed ; and
for that reason it was called the deaf and dumb
month, for the ears were insensible therein, and the
Arabs, laying aside their arms, repaired to the holy
Shrine, and made a pilgrimage, demanding forgive-
ness of sins.

When King Zoheir perceived the rising of the
moon, and that the month of Redjeb had com-
menced, his heart was in flames, and burned with
rage. He abandoned the contest, not to give an
evil example among the Arabs.


PILGRIMAGE OF MECCA. | $08


CHAPTER XXVI.


Tue Absians were returning home, when, said
King Zoheir to his son Cais, Fetch me hither your
mother, that we may visit the holy Shrine, and pass
these days there: and thence I will return to these
dastards, and will extirpate them with the sword.
Cais accordingly departed, and went home. King
Zoheir afterwards repaired to Mecca, after having
waited for the arrival of his wife, and a party of fe-
male attendants; and they halted in a part of the
sacred valley, which had beén the quarter of the
Absians for ages; for the Arabs had ever possessed
there each their respective abode.

At this time also the Chief Khalid returned from
his visit to his niece, and as he was passing with his
followers by the sacred Shrine, he sought the fulfil
ment of his religious duties, previous to his pro-
ceeding home. So he made also a pilgrimage with
a party of Aamirites, and amongst them was the
Brandisher of Spears. They all met Khalid, and
informed him what had passed, and the plans they
had adopted; how King Zoheir had invaded them,
to seek vengeance for his son Shas, and the numbers
he had slain.

At this recital Khalid’s eyes became like fire:


304 MEETING OF ZOHEIR AND KHALID.


Woe, woe unto thee, O Zoheir, son of Jazeemah!
he cried. Alas! that I was not present when thou
didst perpetrate that villanous deed. Truly thou
hast taken advantage of my absence, and hast slain
some of my family and my tribe; but if I do not
requite thce for thy acts in the dusty fight, I am not
of the loins of Giafer. He reposed, and at dawn of
day he went round the Shrine and the portico, and
met King Zoheir in the circuit. He no sooner be-
held hin than his very entrails were on fire. Zo-
heir, he exclaimed, thou hast indeed accomplished
thy iniquitous projects against the tribe of Aamir ;
thou hast availed thyself of the inferior numbers of
their troops. Thou hast violated our wives, and
our noble matrons. Truly, I have had my revenge,
replied Zoheir, and I have quenched my fury: had
it not been for this sacred month, I would not have
left among you either an old or a young one, and
I must root out every vestige as-soon as these days
are expired. Dost thou not fear, said Khalid, that
the vicissitudes of fortune may turn against thee, and
against thy family, and that thy vestiges may be
rooted out as those of thy predecessors ?

Then went Khalid towards the Caaba, and prayed,
O Thou, who hast raised these columns, and hast
consecrated the glory of this place, and hast made it
a sanctuary for the Arabs, let not this year pass
away before my hand rest on the neck of Zoheir ;
grant me but to reach him, and through thee I will
vanquish him. But Zoheir, in the excess of his


KHALID BURNS FOR REVENGE. 305


presumption, thus said, O Lord, let not this year |
pass before thou grantest me the accomplishment of
my designs. Let my hand rest on the neck of
Khalid, and no assistance do I require against him.

Now, as he spoke, there was a crowd of Arabs
around him, and as soon as they heard these words,
they kissed the columns of the sacred shrine, and
turning towards King Zoheir, In this very year
thou wilt expiate with thy life the words thou hast
spoken, cried they all. Did I not respect these
days, said Zoheir to them, I would drink of the
blood of Khalid, as guests drink of wine. And
Khalid turned away from him, and all the Arabs
separated. Khalid, after remaining at Mecca three
more days, set out to his own country with his tribe,
and thus exclaimed in verse—

‘© Prepare, O Zoheir—come to the field—let our
“ blood flow—let the forbidden now become legal.
“ O tribe of Aamir, brandish with me the parbed
“ spear, and unsheath the sword. Incur not dis-
“ grace in the day of attack ; sell your lives, and die
“ honourably. If infamy establish itself in our
“ dwellings, haste away and quit the tents. O tribe
“ of Aamir, the time is eventful; raise the sword
“ against your foes. Lay low Zohcir and his sons,
“ when they quit Zemzem and the shrine. Draw
“ upon them the sharp scimitar, tear off their flesh
“ and their bones, that we may destroy the sup-
“ ports of Abs, as our brother laid low Shas. Let
& us make their wives widows, and by the death

VOL. III. x


806 RIS PLAN OF ATTACK.


& of their heroes let us make their children or-
& phans.”

When Khalid had finished his verses, he pressed for-
ward his march, his heart boiling with a blazing flame
against Zoheir, and with him was the Brandisher of
Spears and ten horsemen. On reaching home, they
perceived that their families had come down from
the mountains, and had pitched their tents on ac-
count of the sacred month. But in many of the
dwellings there were wailings and lamentation for
the horsemen that had been slain. Khalid went
down among them and consoled them. On that
very day he assembled the three tribes, and in-
formed them what had passed with Zoheir in the
land of Mecca; and I am resolved, he said, to at-
tack the tribe of Abs, and I will not stop till I have
succeeded in my project, and when.I have slain
Zoheir, I will repair to their lands, and I will exter-
minate their families and their tribe; for Antar is
absent, and they seem fearless of calamities.

The Aamirites assented, and prepared for the
march, amounting to five thousand brave horsemen.
And when there was only a short space of the sacred
month remaining, they terminated all their prepara-
tions in seven days and departed, Khalid having
first sent different parties by different routes, and
appointed a leader toeach. Haste then, said he, on
this expedition, and let us all meet in the land of
Howazin. So they separated, and set off for the
spot he had pointed out to them, where they con-


ZOHEIR’S FATAL IMPRUDENCE. 307


céaled themselves, and remained in anxious expect-
ation of the event. But as to King Zoheir, the
pilgrimage being now over, he returned with his
followers, and his heart was boiling with rage against
Khalid. He continued his march till he reached
the market of Ocadh, where he halted among the
Arabs, who entertained him for three days; and
quitting them in security, he pressed on under the
influence of Fate, till he came to the land of Howa-
zin, where he halted at the waters about the even-
ing. He took his repast, and did not repose till
night. O my father, said Prince Cais, march with
us during the night ; perhaps we may avoid the tribe
of Aamir, for you indeed have stamped on them the
foulest disgrace, and I fear for your sake their Chief
Khalid. King Zoheir, on hearing these words, ex-
claimed, What sayest thou, O Cais? Who are these
vile Aamirites, or Khalid, or all the inhabitants of
the barren waste? By the faith of an Arab, I will not
str hence for three days. Cais, when he heard this,
felt aware that death was at hand. But he roused
his companions for the contest, obliged as he was to
yield to his father’s authority.

At the dawn of day, whilst King Zoheir was sit-
ting among his tribe, behold a horseman advanced
in haste from the quarter of the tribe of Aamir,
and that horseman was the brother of Temadhur,
King Zoheir’s wife, and he was come-as a spy from
the tribe of Aamir. He had long since established
himself among them, and married one of their

x2


308 AMROO, SON OF SHIREED,


women; for he detested King Zoheir, because he
had banished him from the country; and had not
his sister Temadhur been present, Zoheir would
have put him instantly to death. So when King
Zoheir drove him away, he took refuge among the
tribe of Aamir, and settling himself among them,
married there, and adopted all their habits, never
ceasing to abuse King Zoheir. We have men-
tioned that Khalid was waiting in ambush for Zo-
heir; O my cousins, said he to his comrades, who
of ye will go to the waters of the land of Howazin,
and procure intelligence for us of Zoheir, son of
Jazeemah, so that our labours may not be lost, nor
our projects fail? O Khalid, they replied, for such
an expedition you need no one but Amroo, son of
Shireed, for he is a relative of that tribe, and orme
of them; and he is the only person that can procure
“mtelligence for us: he has a very good excuse when
he sees them that can give no umbrage, for he can
say to them, I am come to congratulate my sister
on her return from Mecca. Thus he may observe
where they have halted, and tell us of their march.
But I fear, said Khalid, he may betray us, and im-
part to his tribe all we have done. Upon that score
there is no fear, said they ; his hatred to King Zoheir
is unquestionable. On this,.he ordered him to his
presence, and telling him what he wanted, Amroo
thanked him, and assented, saying, I will bring-you
the required news, provided you will make this
condition with me—it shall be a covenant between


GOES AS A SPY TO KING ZOHEIR. 309


me and you, and for it I must take the firmest
engagement and promise. They agreed to his pro-
posal, saying, Explain to us your demands.— When
you have slain King Zoheir, said he, and you have
succeeded in your wishes, capture not my sister
Temadhur, and slay not one of her sons.—Let this
be a sacred covenant between you and us, said
Khalid; and he promised all he required, request-
ing his aid in the accomplishment of their hopes.

Amroo quitted them about midnight, and in the
morning he reached the waters of Howazin; and
as soon as King Zoheir saw him, he recognized
him. Father, this is my uncle, said Cais; he is
hastening towards us; I am convinced he is a spy
from the tribe of Aamir.

And before Cais had finished, Amroo arrived,
and congratulated King Zoheir on his pilgrimage :
he then repaired to his sister, and saluting her,
seated himself. O uncle, said Cais, what has brought
you here ?—I am come on a visit to you, said Am-
roo, and to congratulate you on your pilgrimage.
I have also some news for you; which is, that
Khalid son of Giafer, on his return from Mecca,
assembled all the Aamirite chieftains, and related
to them what happened with your father at the
sacred shrine: he wept torrents of tears before
them: revenge and rage rose in tumults in their
hearts, and they have combined against your wicked
and iniquitous designs. Unanimous in their reso-
lution to waylay you on your return from the


310 CA1$ SEIZES HIM,


sacred shrine, they marched out some days ago,
and are five thousand in number. They heard of
your having halted at the market of Ocadh; and
out of my alarms for you I am come to congratu-
late you, and give you this information.

Well, Amroo, said King Zoheir, what have we
to fear? We are able to meet our enemies; and if
they have sent you as a spy, return and tell them
that I will not move hence till I meet them and
destroy them, high and low.—Great King, said
Amroo, you still hate me; your detestation is not
yet extinct. So I have lost my pains, though I
was willing to make peace, and even my kindness
to you is received as an act of baseness. I have
only been induced to this deed by my fears for my
sister, that she should be made captive, and infamy
be heaped on me, east and west: but now that I
have seen her my heart is at ease, and if I again
return to you pardon not my offence. He then
moved towards his horse, in order to mount and
return. Cais would not permit him to execute his
purpose; but he sprung at him like a hissing ser-
pent, and threw him under him, and secured his
arms. Uncle, he cried, I will not let thee go from
us, and I will not let thee escape out of our power,
till we have passed over this country, and we ap- .
proach our own land.— What is this, my son? said
his mother. Why hast thou seized the person of
thy uncle, and thus repaid him for his visit to us?
O mother, said Cais, let me alone in this affair; do


AND LETS HIM GO UNDER CONDITIONS. 311


Not question me. I will not release him till he
gives me the promise of God and his engagement
that he will not mention us to any human being,
and will not give any information of us either to
man or woman.—My brother, said Temadhur, give
the required promise to my son Cais. Upon this
Amroo, having sworn and bound himself by oaths
that for three days he would not mention any one
of them, Cais untied the ropes, and granted him
Ins liberty : but he requested of his sister Temadhur
some provisions, to feed him till he reached home.
She gave him some bread and milk, and he mounted
his horse and departed.

As soon as Amroo was gone, and vanished among
the sand-hills and the mountains, Zoheir turned
towards his son, to rebuke him. What is this thou
hast done with thy uncle? cried he; this is all
through fear of death or the foe.—Y es, my father,
said Cais; for when a wise man has an enemy, he
sleeps not by night. His father’s expressions. con-
vinced Cais that death was at hand ; so he went out
with the horsemen, and stationed himself on the
look-out for the enemy.

But as to Amroo, he urged on his march in-
cessantly till he reached the tribe of Aamir. They
mounted, and met him; as also did Khalid, though
he believed he should never see him agam. And
when he came up to hm, he asked him how he
was : he gave no answer; but turning aside towards
some erak trees, he alighted beneath them, and


312 THE SECRET DISCOVERED.


placed down on the ground before him the bottle
that contained the milk. Amroo pointed to the
trees with his hand, and thus addressed them:
Thou form, that canst return no reply, and under-
standest not what is said, and canst not distinguish
between right and wrong, truly I have been pro-
vided with milk from a hated tribe. I wish thou
wouldst taste thereof, that no harm may come to
me from drinking it. O my cousins, said Khalid,
the man has fallen among the tribe: afraid of him,
they have bound him by oaths that he will not
speak of them, nor give any human being in-
formation of them: he has thus engaged himself by
oath, and had it not been so, he could not have
escaped from them. The wisest plan is for you to
taste this milk, and try his food; if it be sweet, it
is fresh milk, and Zoheir is near us; if it be sour,
and the victuals tainted, then the party is distant
in the barren wastes. Accordingly, some of the
horsemen approached and drank of the milk, and
it was fresh camels’ milk. They informed Khalid :
You have proved the fact, said he, and I am con-
vinced Amroo only left them in the land of Howa-
zin ; and it is my advice that we march against them
instantly. Let us seek them, and disperse ourselves
over the desert in search of them; and if we fall
upon them in this desert, we will bring down death
and extinction upon them; and if we do not meet
them, we will return to the high road, where we
must find them halting somewhere to repose.,


CONTEST OF THE TRIBES. | $138


Thus Khalid formed his plans for the execution
of his purpose, and urged on over the plains and .
wastes till it was night; when they returned to the
high road, and continued their march till they
reached the waters of Howazin by morning.

Cais was stationed as the scout; and as soon as
he saw the dust of the tribe as it drew nigh, he
returned to his father. Be on your guard, O father,
he cried, for there approaches what you cannot over-
come.—What is the matter? said Zoheir. The
dust of the foe is at hand, said Cais; there is the
tribe of Aamir, and Khalid son of Giafer: and his
tears burst forth in torrents as he spoke. But his
father mounted his horse, having first clothed him-
self in armour, to meet his foes and his enemies.
Weleome, welcome to Khalid, the son of Giafer the
Aamirite, he cried, and galloped forward on his
horse Caasa, followed by his sons and his troops.

When Khalid saw this formidable array, he called
out to the tribe of Aamir, and excited their ener-
gies for the stroke of the cleaving swords. Upon
this, shouts were raised, swords were drawn, spears
were extended ; all shouted, and attacked, and ex-
claimed, and vociferated. Fury boiled in every
bosom; patience and perseverance were evinced by
all. The scene was dreadful; multitudes crowded
promiscuously ; discourse was at an end. The
cowards fled; round them revolved the cup of
perdition. The dust thickened like clouds. Zoheir
roared and bellowed : he gave vent to all his feelings,


814 DIFFICULTIES OF THE ABSIANS.


and poured forth his fury and his pride: he assailed
them, and exposed himself to dangers. But be-
fore mid-day the Aamirites resolved on flight, for
they saw in the Absians what amazed their senses.
Not one of the Aamirites could stand firm in that
terrific hour but the Chief Khalid, son of Giafer ;
for he preferred death to flight.

At that moment arrived another division of the
tribe of Aamir, every one of them eager for the
battle; and as soon as they appeared their hearts
were comforted, and they attacked: for among
them were Knights whose equals the age could not
produce, Rebia, son of Ocail, and Jandah, son of
Beka, and their companions were the champions of
the tribes. Upon this, they made an assault from
every direction; their shouts arose on high; num-
bers increased against the Absians, whose difficulties
augmented; patience and perseverance were ex-
hausted, for they did not consist of more than one
hundred men, and their enemies were five thousand
warriors, all armed with spears.

But King Zoheir, when he was aware that there
was no reprieve from death, and evidently beheld
his destruction, resolutely encountered the barbs of
the spears that goaded him on all sides; and he
made assaults such as after ages never witnessed.
Khalid marked his exploits, and threw himself upon
him, anxious for a personal contest; at the same
time thinking that though he might kill him, he
should also be slain himself. . They shouted and


- BATTLE OF KHALID AND ZOHEIR. 315


roared aloud till they distinguished death and an
eternal blindness; the earth and sky vanished from
them.

Heaven protect us from the unenlightened per-
sons of that period of Arabian ignorance, particu-
larly from such as these two warriors renowned in
battle, namely, King Zoheir, and Khalid, son of
Giafer !

They continued now to close, now to start asun-
der; and a combat and contest arose between them
that would have turned infants gray. ‘They per-
sisted in driving at each other till their spears were
shivered : they flung them on the ground, and drew
their swords: they did not desist from smiting each
other with their sabres till their arms were quite
exhausted. Throwing these likewise away, they
grasped each other on their horses till their wrists
were quite numbed, and continued in this position
till they both fell at once on the sand; but Khalid
fell uppermost, upon King Zoheir, on account of
his arrogant speech at Mecca.

Khalid attempted to draw his sword, but he
could not guit the hold of his antagonist; upon
which King Zoheir cried out to the Absians, Come
to me, and assist me against Khalid; and if ye can-
not succeed against him, then slay him and slay mè
too. At that moment his son Warca stood near
him, and the instant he heard his father call out,
being beneath Khalid, O my father! he exclaimed,
and he threw himself towards him, and dispersing


$16 ZOHEIR RECEIVES THE FATAL BLOW.


the Aamirites, struck Khalid a blow on the shoulder.
But the sword turned round in his hand, and slipped
aside, and he could not relieve his father from the
power and oppression of the foe. Then came up
Jandah, son of Beka, and heaved up his arm with
his sword, and struck King Zoheir on the crown of
the head; and his brains dropped out from his
head, for the blow fell right against his temples: |
he heard his sword grate and rattle against Zoheir’s

skull. Convinced that the blow had made its way
into Zoheir, and had slain him, Arise now, my
cousin, he cried to Khalid, for it is all over with
him; and Khalid sprung up off his chest, and his
project was completed. He seated himself again
on his horse’s back, as he cried out to his cousins
and troops, saying, O my cousins, retire from these
dastards, for my purpose has succeeded, and God
has listened to my prayer.—What has this to do
with us? said Rebia, son of Ocail. I swore to Am-
roo, said Khalid, by him who hath spread out the
earth and the canopy of the skies, that I would not
take his sister Temadhur captive, and that I would
not slay one of her sons; and now that we have
accomplished our designs against Zoheir, I wish to
fulfil my promise and engagement with Amroo.
` Thus commanding his horsemen to withdraw their
hands from the blow and the thrust, he departed,
seeking his family and home, having first taken
possession of. King Zoheir’s sword, Zinoor, and his
charger, Caasa; and as they were traversing the
plain and the waste, Khalid turned towards Jandah,


CAÍS FINDS HIM ALMOST DEAD. 317


and said, Well then, the blow you struck Zoheir
was mortal? Eh! for I have sworn by the sacred
shrine, that if we met we should not part but in
death.—I struck him such a blow, said Jandah,
were even assistance to come ftom Hibel for him,
hever will he revive to snuff the air of heaven; for
my afm is powerful, and my sword sharp; it would
cleave even iron, And when I heard the rattle and
grating of my sword against Zoheir’s skull, some-
thing issued like the oil of jessamin. I tasted it with
my tongue, and I perceived it salt, so E was con-
vinced it was the juice of his brains, and that his
career was closed. Upon that Khalid smiled, and
thanked him for his deed.

But as to King Zoheir’s sons nd his people,
when they knew of his death, they feared for their
own destruction: they gave their horses their heads,
and fled away, till all pursuit being cut off, they
halted. And as they expressed their regrets for
King Zoheir, said Cais to his uncles and brothers,
Return with me to my father, that we may carry
him away with us; for if there is a breath of life,
we will cure him, and if he is dead, we will dig a
grave for him, and bury him; for the enemy has
given us up, and something has called away their
attention from us.

He accordingly returned with them to his father,
whom they found in agonies. He dismounted, and
spoke to him: he opened his eyes. What dost thou
want of me, my son? said he, in a faltering voice ;


318 _HE DIES. THEY BURY HIM.


depart, for thou art my successor, and only seek to
avenge me on Khalid, son of Giafer; there is no
occasion for me to recommend to thee thy cousin
Antar. With this last injunction he again fainted.
All present burst into tears and lamentations ; they
let loose their turbans about their necks. Their
clamorous grief recalled Zoheir to life. Shall we
not carry thee home with us? said Cais. No, said
he; do not move me, my son. Trouble not thy-
self, for the blow on my head has inflicted its death
on my heart, and I must inevitably die. A corpse
is but dust; only just let it be concealed from the
wild beasts and the wolves. Here his speech failed,
and he expired.

So they dug a grave for him, and having buried
his dust therein, they returned home, their tears
streaming copiously. But Warca was more grieved
and afflicted than any one, and his mind was in the
greatest agony on account of his blow at Khalid,
when the sword turned round in his hand, for he
knew the Arabs would shame him on account of
such a blow. He evidently wished for death in the
excess of his anguish and the calamity he endured,
and he thus mourned his father :

‘‘ I beheld my father under the breast of Khalid,
“ and all my happy prospect died in him. He cried
“ out to us—O by Abs, turn towards me, for my
“ eyes are overpowered by Khalid. I rushed upon
‘ him, and the horse shook their quivering spears,
“and death closed up every passage. But my


WARCA’S GRIEF AND DISAPPOINTMENT. $19


“ sword turned’ round in -my hand and betrayed
“me, and the God of heaven’s canopy palsied my
“ hand and my arm: O that before I had struck at
“ Khalid I had drunk the cup of the poison of
“venomous beasts! O that before I rushed on,
“the pangs of death had seized me in the contest !-
“ My mother Temadhur will not be congratulated,
as she was once congratulated by illustrious heroes
“at my birth. She indeed depended on me, and
“she prayed for my, success; but her hopes have
“ been disappointed in the hour of tribulation. I
“am become a common tale, after this blow at
“ Khalid; I shall be spurned by foes and enemies.
“O that I had been laid low in the dark desert,
“ and that the birds were devouring me! O sonof
“ Giafer, may the God of the canopy make thee
“drink of the cup of extinction, and of death, hot
“and cold! May the Omnipotent God, the uni-
“ versal Ruler, destroy thee, and mayest thou feel
“the direst evils of fortune, O Khalid! Soon ye
“ shall see horsemen brandishing death on their
“ spears and their arms. Alas! O tribe of Abs and
“ Adnan, rush to the fight, and come to me with
“ your illustrious heroes. O Absian Antar, Cham-
“pion of the tribe, thou sympathisest with them
« in the hour of battle and adversities. Come on,
“ O tribe, to revenge; haste—for the foe and our
“ rivals have triumphed over us. May the Lord
“ steep their land in blood; may it be a den of lions,
“ and may the birds never fly over it! 'The enemy


$20 TEMADHUR’S DESPAIR; KHALID'S JOY.


“ reposes on the couch of gratulation in the murder
“ of Zoheir, and Khalid’s heart is exulting. Alas !
“ O my cousins, rush on to the sea of death with
“ your spears and your arms. Let us shay every
_ “ ome of their chiefs; let us take their women eap-
“ tives in fetters and chains; let us destroy the Ke-
- © labians, with the tribes of Ghani and Aamir ; and
“ let us extirpate a thousand knights for one. Alas!
“ alas! how the foe laid him low; and the hand of
“the antagonist and the hater has stretched him on
“ the ground. My dependance was on him: I even
“ thought fortune feared his might, and would de-
“ mand pardon of him in adversities. Oh! I shall
“ weep for him as long as I live with ulcerated eyes,
“ whose lids no rest shall visit. Since it is my doom


“ to be cast down in misery, I will mourn in Howag


“ tears that shall never be stayed.”

Then, as they pursued their j journey homewards,
Temadhur dashed her fists against her cheeks, ever
casting her eyes behind her: she.anxiously wished
to destroy herself, yet her better reason checked her,
for she was one of the most sensible of women: still
she was reduced to misery and ignominy. But as
to the tribe of Aamir, when they reached their own
country, the Brandisher of Spears came forth with
his suite to meet Khalid, saluting him, and in-
quiring about all that had passed. Khalid informed
him of the victory and triumph, at which the Bran-
disher of Spears was happy and delighted, until he
heard of the safety of King Zoheir’s sons, at which


: PLAN TO WAYLAY ANTAR. $21


he was grieved and distressed. O Khalid, said he,
what thou hast done is wrong; had I been with
thee, by the faith of an Arab, | would not have left
a head or tail of them; for when a man undertakes
an affair, he should finish it, and should not leave
any thing to be done.

Cousin, said Khalid, I was afraid the same mis-
fortune would befal me as King Zoheir. But now,
he added, I wish you would execute an act that
‘will make you renowned indeed. Take with you
one thousand horsemen, and proceed to the defiles
between us and Yemen: conceal yourself there till
Antar returns, and do with him as I have already
done with Zoheir, for I have heard that Antar is in
the land of Yemen, and with him a party of horse
that despise the calamities of the times. If you can
slay them, we shall succeed in all our attempts, and
by killing them, we shall destroy the strong defence
of the Absians.

When Gheshm heard Khalid’s advice, his pride
and vanity were shocked,. and he was greatly an-
‘noyed, for he was a puissant horseman, and a stout
hardy warrior. Hast thou not found for me any
greater honour, said he to Khalid, than to detach
me against a baseborn slave? Let me protect our
property and families. I will assemble for them
the troops and the heroes; go thou thyself on this
expedition thou hast planned, and relieve me from
the life of Antar. He then despatched horsemen
in every direction, and ordered every one to a%

VOL. II. Y


322 ANTAR AIDS NAZIR AND ASYED.


semble who had blood or vengeance against the
Absians. In three days Khalid had equipped one
thousand brave horsemen, amongst whom were
Jandah and Rebia, son of Ocail, with whom he set
out towards the defiles, saying to his cousins, We
are engaged in an affair whose knot cannot be well
tied, till we have completed it, and have executed
the most difficult part of it. We have indeed cut
off the serpent’s head, but the tail remains.

The defiles where Khalid was going were on the
road by which every traveller must pass, and the
Arabs called them the defiles of Mesarih. Khalid
had taken to himself King Zoheir’s horse Caasa,
and made it his own charger, and also his sword
Zeenoor. ‘They continued their march till they
reached the defiles, where he halted with his party
in the meadows and ravines. Now, as to Abool-
- fawaris Antar, he set out with Asyed and his son
Nazih, as we before mentioned, and entered the
land of Yemen, in order to rescue Selma, Asyed’s -
wife, and to assist his son Nazih'with respect to
Dhymia, the daughter of Obad. -They continued
traversing the wastes till they came nigh unto the
land of the tribe of Cayan. But Nazih perceiving
on a sudden birds flying about and scimitars flash-
ing, shouts and battles, and armies and camps,
Alas! said ‘he to his comrades, we have fallen on
what we did not expect. Compose your heart and
brighten your eye, said Antar; proceed on forward
with your party, and ascertam what 1s the matter,


DISTRESES OF OBAD. 823-


that we may take measures accordingly. Nazih
slackened his bridle, and galloped up tọ the tents of
the tribe of Cayan, where were the women in the
greatest affliction, and the young damsels. in tears.
He beheld his chief Obad, and he was onc mass
of wounds. Dhymia was weeping among the wo-
men, and still exciting the horsemen to the combat,
and rallying the troops to face the contest. At the
sight of his mother Selma, he was quite distracted,
as she was erying out: O my son Nazih, from what
quarter can I eall thee? and in what land shall I
meet thee ? Congratulate yourself, exclaimed Nazih,
advancing towards Obad, victory and conquest are at
hand; but what's this misfortune? O my son, he
replied, are we involved in this calamity, and you
among the living still? Where have you been, and
what has happened to you and to your comrades?
O my lord, said Nazih, mine is too long a tale to
relate now; but inform me what has happened to
you, and congratulate yourself on the fulfilment of
every hope. For with me are horsemen, were they
to assault the ocean, they would disperse its waves ;
were they to strike the mountains, they would rend
open their sides. But who are these foes? O my
son, said Obad, after your departure from hence,
Nacmah, son of Ashter, King of the land of Sawdah
and the mountain of Ghemam, sent and demanded
my daughter Dhymia in marriage, but I refused her,
and rejected his suit, sending back his messenger
in despair. He repeated his offer, but I still denied


y2


$24 ANTAR’S PLAN TO RELIEVE HIM.


him, till his rage and indignation became excessive,
and he ordered against me his armies, with his son
Kelboon, and a contest took place between us.

Nazih listened, and the light became dark in his
eyes; he hastened back to Antar, and told him
what had happened. But Antar soothed his heart,
and dividing his troops into three bodies, ordered
them to make a general assault. Oorwah and his
men he stationed on the nght, and Nazih and a
hundred men to the left, and he himself stood with
a hundred horsemen in the centre. Asyed also
stopped on a rising ground with ten horsemen, re-
solved also to fight; but Antar would not permit him:
This is not right, said he, think not of exposing
yourself among this tribe of dogs; stand firm at
your post with this standard, that our foes may
know we have also a knight-chief. Antar shouted
out to the Absians, and leading the attack, thus
expressed himself: |

« When the dawn shines from the east, and the
“ birds sing and mourn on the entangled trees, my
“ sword flutters in my scabbard, and cries out that
“ it longs for the contest. My spear quivers when it
“ sees the experienced warriors brandish their lances.
“ My horse aids me on the day of the spear-thrust ;
“ when it moves, the winds even are dead. Behold
“ a true-hearted warrior, when the horsemen see him
“ they fling away their arms. O cup-bearer of death,
“ prepare the glass for us, for I am resolved ‘on de-
“ parture. Give us to drink nought but the drops


. BRUTALITY OF NACMAH. 325 |


“of blood, when the people drink of water and
“wine! Let the skulls be our apples, and spears
“in the battle our fragrant flowers! Sing to my
“ distracted heart of my love for the beauteous Ibla,
‘‘ adorned with jewels. Be patient under the dark
“ shadows of the battle and the harsh din of the
“ combat, if thou art enamoured of lovely woman.
“ IT am Antar, like the lion of the tomb, I destroy
‘‘ enemies with the blow of my scimitar !”

As soon as Antar had finished his verses, he re-
ceived the whole tribe of Arcat as the parched earth
receives the first of the rain, with blows that would
cleave a rock, and blind the vision, and stupefy the
senses. The tribe of Arcat was the most potent of
all the tribes of the land ‘of Yemen, so also was
their king pre-eminent above all the kings of those
regions, the most arrogant and most powerful of all
their ignorant and blasphemous race; addicted to .
debauchery among the maidens and the matrons
of Arabia, for whom beldams in his employment
searched amongst the tribes, and whenever they
happened to find a beautiful maiden or lovely
damsel, they came to him and informed him; then
would he send to her father to demand her in mar-
riage, and if her father assented, it was all well; but
if he refused, Nacmah would mount against him
with his armies and his bravoes, and would subdue
him with the sword-blow and the spear-thrusts, and
seizing her by force, he would keep her as his slave,
till he should hear of some other, when he would


326 SENDS HIS SON AGAINST OBAr.


make her over to his servants, and take another,
with whom he would act as with the first. About
this time he heard of the beauty of Dhymia, the
daughter of Obad, and he sent to make his pro-
posals, as we mentioned. But Obad sent his mes-
senger disappointed away, saying, I will not marry
mv daughter to an ignorant tyrant.

As soon as Nacmah heard this reply, he was in a
violent rage. He forgot it fot a short time, and re-
peated his message, but still Obad rejected him.
Now, said Nacmah, I must reduce him to disgrace,
and subdue him by force, and he instantly sent for
his son, whose name was Kelboon, a brave man,
and a sturdy warrior; him he ordered to mount,
and proceed against the tribe of Cayan, and bring
with him his beloved Dhymia. His son Kelboon
obeyed his orders and mounted, speeding to the
tribe of Cayan ; when he arrived, he attacked them
without any excuse, or previous notice, or explana.
tion: for the tribe of Arcat acknowledged no law
or compact; they worshipped the moon, and pro-
strated themselves before it when new, and when at
the full, at its renewal, and its completion; and on
the fourteenth night’ they demanded of it all their
wants and exigencies, renouncing him who spread
out the earth and raised up the shies. In every
month they had a festival, and they rejoiced at the
rise of the new moon. Kelboon plied among the
tribe of Cayan the blow of the deadly sword with-
oùt any cause assigned, or previous warning. The


HIS ARMIES ROUTED BY ANTAR. 327


carnage lasted three days; but on the fourth day
arrived Antar, and Nazih, and Asyed, and found
the tribe of Cayan reduced to great straits and
difficulties, all huddled together in their tents, and
disasters were falling heavy on them.

Antar divided his troops into three corps: hie
rushed upon the encampment, and trampled down —
the foe from every quarter; for Antar’s rage and
fury were at their height. He shouted at the horse-
men of Areat—he dispersed them—he drowned
them in their own blood—he mangled the foe as he
cut through them—he gored their breasts with his
spear—he crushed their ribs—he dragged forth
their hves—he spoiled them of their existence—he
dyed their carcasses in blood, and painted them
with gore—he dashed down their skulls, and tossed
them aboiit—he vociferated at the foe, and the. Ab-
sians answered to his shout. The enemy were only
anxious to escape by flight, for the tribe of Arcat
saw death was come upon them, and they fled.
Antar’s yell was heard again, and the whole country
was in convulsions. Then retreated the tribe of
Arcat from the tents, as they still saw horsemen
gathering upon them, and warriors assailing them :
back they turned, but death-was-ever before their
eyes. They dispersed like wild beasts, every one
felt the certainty of his fate; to every one this truth
was unquestionably manifested.

Their Chief Kelboon was stationed beyond the
field of battle and carnage, and with him a body of


828 THEIR FLIGN?; KELBOON’S RAGE.

warriors. He was expecting the prisoners to be
breught to him, for he had seen the party of Ab-
sians when they attacked and plunged into the fight,
but he despised them on account of their inferior
numbers. He knew not they were the horsemen of
fate, and of instant death. But when he perceived
his comrades scattered right and left, he shuddered,
crying out at them, What means this abandonment
of the contest? He himself then attacked the Ab-
sians, and he found in them warriors who regarded
not wealth, who wished not for life, who never
thought of flight, who feared not the storm of fire,
but whose assault was like the assault of hungry
lions, and whose spear-thrusts pierced the breasts
and the ribs. Then was the calamity frightful, and
awful the catastrophe. The arrows of destruction
were sped, and the warriors shrunk away terrified
at death, and at the circling cups of perdition, and
‘the furious steeds of annihilation. Some rushed
upon their fate, some sought safety in flight. They
demanded succour of Kelboon. We advise you,
cried they, to fly, before this knight comes down
upon you, and tears off your head from your shoul-
ders. He was highly indignant at such a sug-
gestion, and sparks of fire shot from his eyes. He
‘drew his sword, and smote his companions ; five of
them he slew. Eh! he cried, what is there more
intolerable than this? How? what? cana thousand
borsemen of Arcat fly from one hundred only, many
of whom are slain too? By thc truth of the rays of


ANTAR’S FURIOUS ASSAULT. | ‘$29


the new moon and the full, and by the night when
it is dark and obscure, I will show you what I will
do with this horseman; and he darted from beneath
the standards, and with him five hundred men,
brave warriors, in whom he‘could confide, and every
one almost his equal in skill at arms.

When Antar had eased his fury, and routed all
that came before him, he turned towards his heroic
Absians, and saw them fiercely engaged with two
thousand horsemen: he was alarmed for his com-
rades, on account of those fellows who rolled on like
the salt sea. He was also much afraid for Nazih,
and these circumstances creating great disquietude
in his mind, he sent them out of his hundred men
thirty horsemen, and then galloped forward with the
remaining seventy, to seek the King’s son’s stand-
ard, whom he observed hastening towards him, at-
tended by his five hundred; and as he approached
Antar, Advance, he cried to his people, towards
this demon, and ask him of what Arab tribe he is.
So they charged upon him; but one anticipated the
rest, and he was a spear-armed warrior. What Arab
art thou? cried he; whence comest thou, frantic as
thou seemest? But Antar, though he heard this
speech, condescended not to reply. He attacked `
him, and made at him; he pierced him through the
chest, and hurled him over. He also slew the one
who came up next, and again sent to join them a


third brother, goring the remainder with thrusts in


330 NAZIH AND OORWAH VICTORIOUS.


their sides, till they retired on their rear, and hur
ried towards Kelboon to demand his assistance.

When Kelboon saw this dreadful event, he rushed
upon Antar. He galloped, charged, and assaulted ;
soon laboured amongst them the blow, and the
thrust from the sword and the spear. At this mo-
ment the thousand opposed to Nazih were routed,
for Antar’s reinforcement reached him in good time,
and strengthened his eourage and resolution. We
have already mentioned all he felt in his heart for
his dear Dhymia. So he scattered heads like balls,
arid hands like leaves of trees, and by mid-day he
had dispersed them over the barren waste. Next
were repulsed the troops that were opposed to Oor-
wah; they too were dispersed over the land, death
and destruction came upon them.

Now then, cried Obad to his tribe, now ages
late yourselves on victory, in the arrival of your
Knight Nazih, accompanied by this Absian party.
Now turn again upon the foe with firm purpose, and
protect your women from every foreign invader.

All the horsemen gave an universal shout, and
the freeborn and the slaves attacked, and made
great havoc and slaughter. ‘The sword ceased not
to act, nor blood to flow, nor men to fight, nor the
flame of battle to rage, till the tribe of Arcat was
completely cut up, when Nazih and his comrades
sought the tents with Oorwah, where they were all
crowded together; and thus they continued ther


KELBOON SLAIN; ASYED's ‘JOY. 331


work of death. But Antar and Kelboon were oc-
cupied in the thrust, and the assault, and the skull-
cleaving blow.

Antar, being anxious speedily to conclude this
difficult affair, pretended -being exhausted. This
increased Kelboon’s fury, and he thrust at him with
his spear, in the hope of annihilating him. Antar
waited patiently till the spear came close. to his
chest, when he shivered it with his sword, and
rushing upon Kelboon, struck him on the side of —
the neck, and his sword issued quivering through
the joints. Upon this the tribe of Arcat assailed
Antar from all sides, shouting, Alas! alas! Kel-
boon! But Antar also cried out to his men, and
he encountered them, piercing their chests and their —
eyes, and making their blood stream down with his
spear. Asyed perceived him; the pride of glory
was roused in him ; his joy and delight were com-
plete, and seeing that the business was now rendered
easy, he attacked with the remaining horsemen, and
plunged among the foe with his sword and spear.
Now fled the tribe of Arcat, and Antar in pursuit
like an overwhelming destruction, the blood trickling
from his scimitar and lance.

Shiboob caught up the head of Kelboon, and
stuck it on a tall spear, and ran on till he came
near the tribe of Arcat. For whom would ye now
remain to fight? he exclaimed; Behold the head
of your Chief Kelboon! With that he mounted the
head on high towards them, and when they recog-


332 . OBAD’s GRATITUDE.


nised it they dispersed over the wastes and the wilds.
And God made security succeed to fears with the
tribe of Cayan. They all dismounted before Antar,
and walked towards him. Nazih also dismounted,
and pressed Obad to mount, but he refused, saying,
O my son, who are these noble people? My Lord,
said Nazih, these are of the tribe of Abs, whom the
Arabs call the Knights of death and instant destruc-
tion, and the cause of my acquaintance with them
is an extraordinary event; for their Prince is my
father, and their parentage is mine.

Thus he related to him all that had happened
to him on his expedition. Obad was exceedingly
surprised: By the faith of an Arab, said he, this is
indeed a story unequalled in the world; and truly I
hated the Absians on account of what my father
told me of them, but now, my son, it is incumbent
on us that our men become their slaves, and our
women their handmaidens; but which of them is
your father? Nazih pointed to Asyed—he who
has the standard over his head, he replied; the lord
of the embroidered robe. Obad ran eagerly up to
Asyed, and kissed his foot in the stirrup: Had I
known this youth, who is among us, I would have
made him'lord over theftribe of Cayan ;7but He who
is unseen is wonderful, and is the Author of all
things. You alone deserve well of me and my com-
panions, replied Asyed, kissing his head, and we
must partake in all your disgraces and your honours ;
and had we done for you two-fold of what we have


ASYED RESTORED TO HIS WIFE. - 883


effected, we could not have requited you for your
acts in educating my son among the Arabs; but we
request of you to marry him to your daughter
Dhymia, that we may be allied and connected, for
you are an eminent chieftain, and we are the princes
of the Arabs; and all of us are men of high renown
and degree. : One like me, returned Obad, express-
ing his obedience, must be honoured with such good
fortune. Asyed thanked him.

` Now when they came nigh to the dwellings, the
women and slaves met them. Nazih’s mother had
heard of her son’s return, and observed him engaged
with the enemy. She could scarcely believe he was
come back. She kissed him, ənd inquired how he
was. He acquainted her with his having discovered
his father. The Almighty God has restored him
to us; a tribe of Absians is come with me, and it is
by them that this affliction has been removed. Then
was her joy increased, and all sorrow and grief
were dead within her heart. She looked upon her
husband Asyed, and immediately recognising hin,
she walked up to him, and tendered her services ;
and when he saw her, he dismounted. and embraced
her. Every one of them was now united to his
friends; they wept and talked over tae horrors they
had endured, and wept again.

Before evening the tribe of Abs had pitched their
tents, and wine and meat. were served up to them.
‘The tribe of Cayan treated them very hospitably,
_ and in the morning some slaves came from Obad to


834 ORAD PROMISES DAYMIA TO NAIR.


Asyed with generous steeds, and horses, and spears,
end scimitars; he also sent to Nazsh’s mother fifty
party-coloured robes, and also fifty maidens, bearing
valuable jewels in their hands; and before the day
was passed and the night came on in obscurity, Na-
zih’s mother had absolute command over the tribe
of Cayan, after all the afflictions and ignominy she
had suffered among them. Soon after Asyed pre-
pared a magnificent entertainment, and assembled
all the tribe and families. The tribes of Abs and
Cayan made obeisance to Antar, and thanked him
for what he had done present or absent. The
feast lasted three days, and then Asyed requested
Obad to marry his daughter to his son; he assented.
My daughter will indeed execute her part, said he,
but my heart is under severe apprehensions on ac-
eount of this tyrant whose son you have slain; for
I am well aware the flame will not be quenched in
him, and he will not submit; and as soon as the
fugitives arrive, and notify his son’s death, he will
march against us with incalculable numbers, for his
armies are like the seas, and his country is the most
savage of countries; and if he comes he will leave
our habitations a desert wild. O Obad, said Antar,
we will not quit this country till we have bound this
tyrant by the neck for you, and I will make every
one.in the whole country subject to you. So enjoy
your, present happiness, and let it not be tainted
with sorrow, whilst I go with one hundred men and
annihilate Nacmah, son of Ashter, for not one will


ANTAR ENGAGES TO DESTROY NACMAH. $85


I leave alive of his tribe. O Aboolfawaris, ex-
claimed Obad, in amazement at Antar’s expressions,
these are not like the people you have hitherto en-
gaged; their country is most extensive, and they
are as numerous as the sands. I had better write
to my confederates. Let us all march together to
the mountain of the Volcano; there let us exert
our endeavours to extirpate this monster; for if he
demands the ransom of his son, he must prevail.
What say you, Obad ? said Antar: by the truth of
Him who created mankind, and infused life into our
bodies, I will not march but with two hundred.
horsemen of the tribe of Carad, and no one shall
accompany me but Oorwah and my father Shedad,
let them be as numerous as Themood and Aad.
Heaven protect us! ejaculated Asyed and Obad.
At such imprecations they were stupefied, and no
one could venture a reply. At last, said Asyed, O
knight of the age, verily thou hast sworn by an oath
that was not required ; and if indeed we are able to
accomplish this, we will not acquiesce in thy pro-
posal. But, O my cousin, if it must be so, let it |
be; do as thou wilt; march to-morrow, and we will
join thee in two or three days, for we cannot permit
thee to enter a country of which thou art ignorant
with this small body. It is for thee to command,
said Antar, but I had much rather execute this
business without them; and I trust you will not
join me till I have performed my engagement. This
passed in the evening, and the people retired to their


4 `


336 ANTAR MOURNS HIS ABSENT LOVE.


tents. As soon as the darkness had passed away,
Antar sent Shiboob for his father Shedad, and
Oorwah, and selecting from the Absians two hundred
horsemen, he bade adieu to Asyed and Nazih, tra-
versing the plains and the deserts ; and when Antar
was alone, he thought of Ibla. It was now a long
time that he had not seen her in his sleep, at which
he was nearly dead through grief; he was exceed-
ingly distressed, and in his passion he thus spoke :
« My virtues are enemies to the world, and my
‘“ actions are faults and disgraces. My let is eternal
“ separation from my love, but the lot of others is
“ to approach her. Every day the world renews its
‘¢ reproaches on account of my fondness, and I have
‘¢ no physician for my body. The world is enamoured .
“ of my mistress, as if I were its rival. If my ima-
‘‘ gination, O Ibla, has deceived me, let my heart
‘‘ die insulted, for death is sweeter to me than life,
« when it is my beloved that oppresses me. How
« can I go or pass the deserts, when the west and the
“ south winds contend to check me? O breeze of
« Hidjaz, if thou dost not quench the fire of my
“ heart, my frame must melt with the heat. Truly
“ the dove mourns on the bough, and’ its plaints
‘‘ and murmurs distress me; it remains wailing its
“ separation from its mate, and laments itself asa ,
‘‘ lonely stranger. But I pour forth sighs from my
“ burthened heart, that even the most wretched cries
“ at it, < Heaven protect me! O dove of the bough,
« if thou wert like me, thou wouldst not rest under


HIS SORROWS MOVE THE PITY OF HIS FRIENDS. 337


“the green branches. Leave their love and passion
« for the real lover, whosc heart is ever in torment,
“ whom fortune punishes every day, when any one
“ addresses him. O anguish interminable! O cala-
“ mity that will never cease! Ask the herald con-
“cerning me. O Ibla, ask the brave man, grown
“ gray in battle. He will tell thee, that on the edge
“ of my sword sits the king of death, ever present
“and never absent. My spear, on the day of thrusts,
“knows me. Ask it then, what will joy thy heart,
“how many warriors approached me, each’ crying
“out, O by my tribe, I am a noble hero! but he
“ never returned, but he bit the ground, and his
“ garments were rent from him. My sword laughs
“in my hand, but in another's grasp it would weep.
“ In the dark shadow of my spear is my parentage ;
“ and my black complexion, when it is questioned,
“ gives the reply. It protects me in the day of spear-
“ thrusts, as one noble-born defends hisfellow. ‘They
“ forbid me from drinking cups of wine, with damsels
`- “scented with musk and perfumes; they compel
“ me to hold up the skirt of glory, what even the
“ contemptible coward would renounce.”

As soon as Antar had finished his verses, his
father’s heart pitied him, and compassionated his
situation, and so also did Oorwah and his people.
They urged on their march, till they reached the
land of the tribe of Arcat. As to Nacmah, after he
had despatched his son, Kelboon, he remained ex-
, pecting news of him, and hoping that he would soon


VOL, WI. z


338 NACMAH BEHEADS THE FUGITIVES.


return with Dhymia, Obad’s daughter, but he was
not aware that fortune had belied her former habits
with him, and had, instead of her, sent Antar.
Thus it continued with him, till the fugitives arrived
and announced his son’s death. Accursed! ye
wretches! he roared out, ye went with seven thou-
sand horsemen, and has this calamity befallen you
at the hands of the tribe of Cayan? And have ye
left my son dead on the desert? My lord, one
named Masrook ventured to say, by your life, this
did not come upon us from the tribe of Cayan. We
had nearly effected their destruction, and had driven
them to their tents, but three hundred horsemen of
Hidjaz rushed upon us, on whose spears sat death,
and with them was a black knight like a thunder-
cloud ; he understood no address; he made no reply ;
but he thrust his spear through chests and ribs; he
wrenched out eyes, tore out entrails, and repelled
affliction from the tribe of Cayan, and he gored us
in our rear, till he drove us far away, and I should
say that he was even now at our heels. Nacmah
permitted him not to finish his tale, before he smote
him with his sword, and off flew his head. Bring
before me these fugitives, he cried to his attendants,
and they accordingly seized them, and dragged them
before him, and he struck off their heads till the
strength of both his arms was exhausted. Now he
had a brother whose name was Niamet, and when he
saw his brother's outrageous conduct, he advanced
towards him; he took the sword out of his hand,


HIS GOOD BROTHER NIAMET - 339:


and calmed his rage and fury. This Niamet was
the reverse of his brother, he was a kind-hearted
man, and one to whom people referred in their
troubles; hating oppression and violence. He was
ever checking his brother, and requesting him to
abstain from his hateful acts towards his people, and
to be just to his subjects, warning him of the conse-
quences. But Nacmah would never listen to his
discourse, and would not even deign an answer ; and
on this day, when he prevented him from slaying
his companion, and took the sword out of his hand,
saying, How oft have I checked you, and you still
indulge in this fury? And now fortune has struck
you with affliction, with respect to your son Kel-
boon”——Nacmah was confounded with horror, and
his eyeballs started into the crown of his head;
every one that saw him shuddered. Well, how oft
wilt thou reprove me for my actions, cried he to his
brother, and oppose the accomplishment of my de-
sires? I am the king of the universe, and [ will in-
dulge the lust of my heart ; if thou darest again to
come into my sight, I will despoil thee of thy life,
and I will strike off thy head. Upon this, Niamet
mounted his horse and went home, and his heart was
full of grief at what had happened with his brother.
In that quarter, he had with him three thousand
heroes, the best of the tribe, all obeying his orders,
and detesting his brother Nacmah, on account of his
insolent pride. As soon as Niamet returned to them,
he told them what his brother had done to him, and
Z2


340 RAISES AN ARMY AGAINST HIM.


how he had struck off the heads of the fugitives
Never return to him, cried they all, highly incensed;
raise not up your head to him again, consider him
no longer as a human being. I must, said Niamet,
destroy this monster. I will depart into the interior,
and will collect all the Arabs whose daughters he has
seized, and will excite the horsemen agamst him,
and I will not desist till I have destroyed him, and
I am relieved from this infamy and contempt. First
of all, I will try these Absians who slew his son
Kelboon ; for I have heard they have a knight as
good as a thousand, and that the warriors of the
earth cannot stand before him, and I will ask ther
aid against this demon. It is expedient that you
let us march this very night, said one, and let it not
be morning before we have traversed the wastes
and the wilds. He instantly ordered his slaves to
move off; he struck his tents, and so did his cousins,
and it was not night before they were all on horse-
back, and were traversing the deserts under the
shades of darkness.


NACMAH ASSEMOLES HIS SUBJECTS. 341


CHAPTER XXVII.


Bor as to Nacmah, son of Ashtar, I will posi- `
tively exterminate the wHole tribe of Cayan, cried
he to his people, I will sacrifice their women and
their children; then will I march into the land of
Hidjaz, and put to the sword the tribe of Abs, who
have slain my son. He reposed till day dawned,
when he sent to the tribes of Riyah, and Sabah,
Washah, and Atbool, and Barik, and Shamrack,
and ordered them to march with all expedition; for
these tribes were subject to him, and feared his
cruelty. Their residences were round the mountain
of volcano, and all had adopted the worship of the
Moon. This mountain was one of the phenomena
of the All-mereiful Lord, for there incessantly issued
from it something like a black cloud, and whenever
the new moon rose, from this mountain burst forth
groans, and sparks of fire flew forth. It was a black
mountain, and no one was able to ascend it, and
iron could not have any effect on its stony sides.
An historian has noticed it, saying, The Lord God
has been angry with this mountain, ever since he
created the world at first, and at the consum-


842 VOLCANO MOUNTAIN.


mation it will be the stone-work of hell. In one
of my excursions I ascended it, and I saw within
it terrific wonders; its summit is divided in two,
and in the centre is a sea of fire, that never subsides,
but day and night it rolls in waves of flame, and
on it are angels of wrath, and stern enormous
monsters, that are never weary, but are continually
stationed for its punishment by the will of the
omnipotent God. But let us return to our story,
and to Nacmah. As soon as the tribes came to
him, he tas also informed that his brother had
marched away with his property, in order to as-
semble the Arabs against him; And he will, they
said, conduct against you the tribes from the sur-
rounding regions, and will requite you for your
contemptuous conduct towards him. Ah! I am
foiled, cried Nacmah, for I should have cut off his
head, and thus I should have been at ease; but I
will pursue him, and put to the sword all his com-
panions. He instantly ordered his slaves to proclaim
the march, and early in the forenoon all the tribes
had mounted, as well his allies as his attendants, and
he ordered them to pursue his brother and his com-
panions, directing them to take a vast supply of
horses, and arms, and armour, and coats of mail,
and before mid-day they had quitted the land, and
they continued traversing the wastes and wilds in
their march, till next day at sunrise, when they
distinctly saw ahead of them a black dust. Behold


NACMAH OVERTAKES NIAMET. 343


how fortune favours us, cried they all. Niamet was

in company with his associates on the march, and

when they were distant from home, and nigh unto

the plains of Khidret, and the fountains of Hywan, .
he considered himself as secure. It was thus, when,

on a sudden, arose the shouts in his rear, and the

whole country was in agitation. He gazed atten-

tively, and perceived the camp, and the troops and

horsemen galloping over the desert, and various

corps that cut off all communication, and every road.

Niamet was certain his brother had overtaken him.

O my cousins, said he, here is my brother, who has

overtaken us, and our hostility has been discovered.

I request of you tomake some proper arrangement,

and let no one call me ‘ Chief? Comfort your heart,

and brighten your eyes, said they, for there is not

one of us that will shrink from the fight ; every one

of us will engage with the scimitar, and defend his
wife and family. Then shaking their spears, they

advanced to the battle and the contest, and at that
moment approached Antar, son of Shedad. He
beheld armies that filled the desert; he was ex-
ceedingly astonished. Gain some intelligence for
us about these bold armies, cried he to Shiboob, for
I perceive troops are preparing for battle.

Shiboob set his feet forward, and coming up
with the companions of Niamet, O Arabs, he ex-
claimed, tell me what is your kindred, and what is
your business ?—What want you of us, young man?


344 SHIBOOB GIVES GOOD NEWS TO NIAMET.


asked Niamet himself; we are a tribe flying from
a tyrant, and he is in our rear, seeking to destroy
us, and capture our women. He is Nacmah, son
of Ashtar; but you, who are ye? Explain to me,
perhaps by your means this trouble may be removed
from us.—Congratulate yourself, O Arab, replied
Shiboob, on the annihilation of Nacmah, and the
arrival of relief, for we are come purposely against
him. We are those who slew his son Kelboon, and
we are come to send him to bear his son company,
and pull down his dwellings over his head; but as
to your question about our parentage, we are a
tribe from the land of Hidjaz. |

On hearing this, joy infused itself into the heart
` of Niamet, and he felt assured all his troubles would
be satisfactorily settled. O my brother, said he to
Shiboob, were it not for these troops that have
overtaken us, I would go with you to pay my
respects to your companions; but the time presses
upon us. Return to your party, and relate what
you have heard, and assure them of wealth and
success in their enterprise; and when he is slain,
we will return home. Shiboob returned to Antar,
and informed him of the news; much delighted,
he said to his father Shedad, I am afraid there may
be some plot against us; and when we are among
the two parties, said he, it is possible they may
` turn upon us the troops on both sides.—We, said
Shedad, shall not meet them, but with the firm


ANTAR'S IRRESISTIBI.E AID. $45


resolution to fight. My opinion is, you should
attack their right, and we their left; probably
we may thus terminate our labours, and return
home. l o
- Antar alone assaulted their right, Shiboob going
ahead ; and the troops of Niamet closed upon them,
transfixing them with their spears. The armies were
thronged together, and the flame of war blazed.
Necks were cleft by the sword—armour was clotted
with gore—hope itself became despair; chests were
pierced with the spear, and souls fled from bodies ;
while skulls flew about on all sides, or were rolled
along the plain. As soon as the black lion at-
tacked, the renowned hero, the invincible warrior,
the knight of the battle and contest, the serpent of
the centre of the valley, the Chief Antar, son of
Shedad—he alone burst through the right, though
more than a thousand horsemen opposed him, and
with his cleaving falchion he struck horror into their
hearts. On that day Shiboob assisted him with his
arrows: the troops again attempted an attack; he
turned upon them, and dispersed them ; and he did
not desist from his assault till he scattered them
over the desert, and filled the whole country with
the dead. Thus also did Oorwah and his father
Shedad, and the Absians; they completely de-
stroyed the left by their terrible attacks. Niamet
and his men observed their battle and their actions,
and were astounded at their deeds, observing in


§


$46 THE FUGITIVES EXCULPATE THEMSELVES.


them what they could not comprehend. The battle
continued to rage in every quarter till the armies of
night came on, when the two hostile forces sepa-
rated and dismounted.

Nacmah’s troops retreated, for they were totally
routed, and there was not one but talked of the
tribe of Abs and their deeds. Eh! cried Nacmah,
assembling his companions about him, with such
hearts would ye wish to go with me into the land
of Hidjaz, and encounter its heroes in the combat ?
Here one knight with three hundred men has over-
thrown you, and these stern fellows have annihilated
you.—O Chief, said they, do not reproach us, for
this day we saw, with your brother, horsemen, whom
had we seen in a dream we should have been horror-
struck: we know not whence they come. Perhaps
you beheld the knight who attacked on the left,
how he crushed it; how he roared out to the nght,
and dispersed it. If you blame us for this, you are
no wise man. On hearing this, his rage became
dreadful. I had resolved to attack them in person,
he bellowed out, and with my single power to re-
move this evil from you; but I was afraid of shame
and reproaches, for truly men of high dignity may
scorn me on this account. But I must clear my
honour now that this catastrophe has befallen us,
and I will not endure the insults of living man.
To-morrow I will disguise myself, and I will
sally forth into the plain, and I will engage my-


‘NACMAH’S FURY AND THREATS, 347


self in fight, in the scene of the spear-thrusts ;
and for every one of that tribe I will slay an-
other of you also, so that not one of you must re-
treat or quit the battle unless he be covered with
wounds. :

When his comrades heard this, they were alarmed
for the fate that awaited them, and they remained
expecting the daylight. But as to the Absians
and Niamet’s troop, the women and young damsels
were in agonies of fear, alarmed for their husbands
and chiefs, as soon as the tribe of Arcat approached
them, and surrounded them on all sides. They
continued weeping and lamenting, in dread of cap-
tivity and separation, till the moment they saw the
Absians, and the deeds they performed, and how
they environed the troops right and left. At
this their hearts were composed, and they thanked
the omniscient Creator. Niamet ordered his slaves
to slaughter deer and sheep, and the women pre-
pared the repast; and before evening the horse-
men being returned to the tents, they took their
food.
~ Antar, having mangled the right and left, went

to his father Shedad, and Oorwah, and his men,
and found them all safe from peril, for they only
lost seven men: he congratulated the rest on their
safety. Niamet advanced towards him, and saluting
them all, received them with honour: he walked
. -before them till they came to the tents, where he


348 NIAMET’S GRATITUDE TO AKTAR.


made them dismount at their dwellings, among
their wives and daughters. But Antar declined,
and alighted with his party without their tents; so
they supplied them with victuals, and Niamet stood
amongst the slaves, to attend on them: but Antar
perceiving him arose, and taking him by the hand,
made him sit down by his side, saying, Do not so,
young man; eat with us, and feel assured of suc-
cess. Know that we entered this country for our
own concerns only, and we did not come without
reasonable grounds. And he gave him a full ac-
count of Nazih’s adventure, at which Niamet was
exceedingly surprised, remarking the wondrous
changes of fortune. The tribe of Abs roée still
higher in his estimation, and he said within him-
self, Doubtless these horsemen are the wonders of
the Genii, for they have marched against my brother
with these two hundred horsemen. Now, O Arab,
said he to Antar, if you slay my brother, and com,
plete my wishes, I will submit myself as a slave to
the tribe of Cayan, and I will for ever live their
servant.. I consent that the country be yours, and
all the wealth therein.—By the faith of an Arab,
said Antar, I never in all my life took a bribe for
an honourable action; and now we will only con-
sider you as independent, and our friend, for our
possessions are great, and our property abundant,
But, by him who ordered us to make a pilgrimage
to the sacred shrine, I must make thy brother drink .


'


ANTAR’S ADVICE A8 TO THE BATTLE. B49


of the cup of death. By to-morrow’s dawn I will
assail him, and I will strike off his head from be-
tween his shoulders: I will make thee lord over
all his property and possessions, and I ‘will put to
death his adherents and friends.
` When they had finished their dinner, they hasted
to repose; and as soon as the day arose in smiles,
they hurried to the battle and the combat. Do you
and your comrades, said Antar to Niamet, betake
yourselves to the left, and leave us the right;
and if you find yourselves unable to sustain the
combat, retire from before them for a few steps
only, so that the troops may pursue you, and
rush with avidity among you: but when I look
towards you, and you are engaged with them,
I will sally out against them, and will plunder
their. souls. Niamet highly approved the plan:
he separated towards the left, and quitted the Ab-
sians.
When the tribe of Arcat saw this manœuvre,
they were alarmed for Nacmah. O my cousins,
cried Antar to his friends, know that this affair is
a mere trifle; be assured of victory and conquest.
-Attack with me, that we may attempt the lord of
the great standard, on which is the form of the
moon, for King Nacmah is beneath it, and if we
do not slay him we shall not succeed in our ex-
pectations. |
- Antar had scarcely finished when the foe attacked.


350 THE CONTERT; MACMAH SLAIN.


Then too the Knight of the swarthy Abs went to
work, and fell among the enemy like inevitable
fate. The battle commenced ; the heroes stood firm
against the spear-thrust and the sword-blow—the
warriors turned upon each other—the men assaulted
—all headed by Antar, the ravenous lion. The
spear-barbs laboured on the backs of the tribe of
Arcat like sparks of fire. Certain of death and —
destruction, they dispersed over the wastes. Nac-
mah sought out his brother in the battle, but
the party met him like the waves of the ocean;
fear and horror seized him, and he attempted to
fly, when lo! Antar rushed against the standard-
bearer, and piercing him through the heart, hurled
him off his horse, and then made at Nacmah, to
overwhelm him also in death. He fled, for he felt
his death certain: still Antar drove at him, and
smote him on the head with his sword; he cleft it
even to the girdle of his garment. He poured
destruction upon the tribe of Arcat, and let loose
an overwhelming calamity upon them. In fine,
every one that knew of the death of Nacmah im-
mediately returned under allegiance to his brother
Niamet, and sought his protection; and those who
ran away at first fled home.

Before mid-day Niamet possessed a valiant army,
and over his head waved the standards and ensigns.
The whole camp came towards him, and marched
before him till they reached the tribe of Abs.


NIAMET’S PRESENTS TO ANTAR. $51


Niamet was about to dismount, but Antar checked
him, and kissed him between the eyes. Niamet
kissed Antar’s two hands, and extolling him, re-
quested his protection; and peace was concluded
between him and the Chief Obad, and terms were
arranged.

And when they were about to proceed each to
his country, Niamet turned towards Antar, şay-
ing, Aboolfawaris, I request you will do me a
favour.—Speak your wishes, said Antar, and say
what you want.—I swear, said Niamet, by the faith
of an Arab, not an article of my property, great or
small, that came with me, shall return with me:
but do not reprove your slave for its inadequacy.—
No, by the duty of an Arab, exclaimed Antar, not
even a halter shall follow me of yours. But if you
have any other enemy, tell me, that I may go
against him, and extinguish his life, and may ease
you of his iniquity.—Besides my brother, said
Niamet, I have not a foe; and if I.had, you ought
to return home. So take some of my camels, that
are unequalled in all lands; very patient they are
in traversing the deserts, and they are not to be
had in the land of Hidjaz. Upon this, two thousand
she camels were put aside, all with large overlapping
humps: they were given over to a hundred men
and as many women slaves, who were ordered to
drive them before Antar, son of Shedad, the Knight
of the dust and the fight.


S352 Ss NAZTH’S MARRIAGE; RETURN OF ANTAR.


This done, Niamet and his subjects returned
home, and Antar, with his comrades, set out for
the land of the tribe of Cayan. That day they
remained in the desert, and the next till mid-day ;
when lo! there arose a dust ahead of them, and
they discovered the tribe of Cayan, commanded by
the Chief Nazih, and his father Asyed, and the
Chief Obad. ‘They advanced, and the heroes sa-
. luted each other. Obad came forward; he kissed
Antar’s hand, and inquired what had passed. . Antar
recounted the whole; at which the Arab chieftains
were in amazement, and they returned to the dwell-
ings of the.tribe of Cayan.

About this time rose the moon of Redjib, which
the Arabs held sacred, hostilities were checked:
men and women were secure during that. season.
Arrived, they married Dhymia to Nazih, and they
passed that month in feasts and entertainments.
Asyed also took away his wife, and soon they set
out on their way to their own country. Obad
bade them. adieu, and returned home with his
. troops, whilst Antar continued his march over the
desert; and as his love and passion for Ibla seized
him, he thus expressed himself :

“ I march, and in my heart is a flame and a fire,
“ and I point towards home in my eager love—I
“ languish for thee ; so understand that I am weak,
‘© and thoughts only are alive. I march over the
‘‘ desert adoring her, and in my heart are. hell-


ARTAR LONGS FOR HIS HOME, 358


“flames and fiery tortures. O Ibla, I have en-
“countered warriors, from the thrust of whose
“í spears gushes out blood; but I have dispersed
“ them with the spear-thrust, till I have left them
“ to be dried up on the earth in the deserts. I have
“ killed Kelboon before Nacmah, and I have aban-
“& doned them as dried flesh on the ground. I die,
“‘ and revive every day and night; for captive lovers
“ there is no rescue. Fortune and time have fa-
“ voured Nazih, a youth skilled in the spear-thrust,
“and tried in war. O mountain of volcano, ever
“ be in hell-flames—ever be thy food the infernal
“ fire! and thou, O Mount Saadi, mayst thou ever
“be my home, and mayst thou ever be moistened
“ with rain; there is my home; in every hour I
“languish for it; there is my beloved, from whom
“ no captive can break loose. But I have endured
“in patience this lengthened absence. May God
‘‘ now unite us! He alone is omnipotent !”

At hearing Antar’s verses, there was not one but
thanked him and praised him, and they travelled
night and day till they came nigh unto the defiles
of the passage where Khalid was concealed, and of
which he had taken possession, in order to succeed
in his attempts upon Antar, having stationed scouts
and advanced posts. Antar arrived about night-
fail, and halted by a lake on the Yemen side; as
soon as the outposts saw his dust, they came to
Khalid, and informed him. He was overjoyed ;


VOL. III. AA


354 . KHALID WAYLAYS ANTAR.


but waiting till the night was quite darkened over,
he sent out a slave to obtain intelligence. He de-
parted, and returned about midnight, saying, It is
the Absians, and with them is Antar: so prepare
your companions for the battle and the combat. As
to Antar, as soon as the men had rested, and the
horses and camels had eaten their provender, he said
to Shiboob, Order the slaves to load the bagyage,
and let us move.

. Shiboob quitted him, and made the proclamation
in conformity with his brother's orders, and in an
hour the men were mounted, and the slaves had
loaded the camels, and they set out over the country
till they reached the defile. About an hour before
daylight they stopped at the head of the pass, when
the slaves were ordered to drive the cattle before
them: so the he and she camels, and the how-
dahs, and the. baggage, were driven forward, and
entered the defile. As soon as Khalid saw this,
and perceived the baggage-camels, and behind one
hundred horsemen with Shiboob to protect them,
letting them pass till Antar appeared with Shedad,
and Asyed, and Nazih, he shouted to his comrades,
and they assaulted in every direction, brandishing
their barbed spears and their scimitars, and rushing
upon them in the obscurity of darkness. The first
that engaged Antar was Rebia, son of Ocail: he
made a murderous thrust at Antar, but he grasped


his cleaving Dhami, and striking the spear, clipped


REBIA AND JANDAH MADE PRISONERS. 355


it off; then aiming at him with his sword, he cut
through his helm, and smote him on the crown of
his head, depriving him of his senses, and before he
could recover himself, Shiboob sprang upon him
and bound him fast by the shoulders, and pinioned
his arms and sides. |

Jandah attacked Nazih, followed by his horse-
men: they were all so crowded in the defile, and so
thick rose the dust; that it was impossible to distin-

friend from foe. Rebia being secured, Antar
vigilantly looked after himself, as he continued to
pierce the chests of the heroes. But Shiboob, when
he had bound fast Rebia, returned to seek for Jan-
dah: he had almost overpowered Nazih, when
Shiboob met him, and struck his horse with an
arrow : he threw him off, and Jandah being hurled
over from his height, Nazih was about to dismount,
but Shiboob anticipated him, saying, Do not trouble
yourself, O Chief; do not dismount, for the game
belongs to him who first struck it down, and be-
sides I understand such business much better than
you. So saying, he ran up to him and tied down
his arms.

The Absians then came on, issuing from the
defile. They extended their spears, and the battle
and the contest grew fiercer: their bodies were co-
vered with wounds, and blood streamed over the
sands. Antar slew of the tnbe of Aamir those
whose death was at hand, and whose departure
was ordained.


AA


856 KHALID, SBRING HIS DEFEAT,


Khalid observed the defeat, and repented of what
he had done; but they continued the engagement
till the day dawned, when the tribe of Aamir being
completely discomfited, took to flight; and Khalid,
feeling aware of his death and destruction, had no re-
source but deceit and stratagem. So he cast away
his spear out of his hand, and returning his sword
_ to its scabbard, urged the speed of his horse Caasa,
that had belonged to King Zoheir, till he came up
to Antar, exclaiming, Hold, in the name of God !
O Arab, I see my mistake, truly rapacity has ex-
cited our men, and the horrors of war have-visited .
them; they attacked your property in the dark,
but vengeance has overtaken them—they arose to
engage you before they made inquiries of you, but
their treachery has swiftly laid them low, and the
great and mean have been slain: but, O Arab, I
am their Chief, and on me ought to fall the blame
and the reproach; but, O hero, I demand of you
in the name of Him who raised the heavens, that
- you tell me to what Arabs you belong, and that
you order your companions to withhold the sword-
blow till the morning brightens, when perhaps
our dissension may terminate in peace. Know
too, that the daylight will demonstrate this fact,
and the Cahtanian will be distinguished from the
Adnanian.

Antar, on hearing this, acquiesced, and seeing
that he had thrown away his spear, instantly de-
spatched Shiboob, ordering him to withdraw the


HAS RECOURSE TO STRATAGEM. 357


Absians from the tribe of Aamir, and to tell the
tribe what Khalid, the chief of the fugitives, had
said, and to prohibit them from thrusting and
striking. O Arab, exclaimed Antar to Khalid, as
to your demand about our parentage, we are of the
noble tribe of Abs, and I am Antar, son of Shedad ;
our leader is the Chief Asyed, son of Jazeemah,
and wherefore have you exposed us to. this dis-
graceful transaction? I have been absent in the
land of Yemen on an affair that interested our chiefs.
I went and I slew their foes, and with my sword I
have overturned their power. I exerted myself;
that my promise might be fulfilled. Having finished
all my business, I am now on my way to my family
and tribe. But what is it you mean by your ques-
tions? Woe! woe, O Aboolfawaris, said Khalid,
how is it you have concealed all this from us, so
that evil at your hands is come upon us? How has
misfortune fallen on us from a tribe most dear to
us! Truly my love for you would have increased,
and in my heart would have been your glory and
honour, had not this cruel affair cut asunder the
connexion between us. What relationship is there
between us and you? said Antar in the greatest
astonishment, and what parentage? Hear, O cham-
pion of the tribe of Abs, said Khalid, for I wilt —
relate to you what has occurred during your ab-
sence, when you were in the lands of Yemen: but
be not too much distressed at what you have done
to my people, and that you have brought destruction


358 ' ‘ HIS FALSA TALE


upon them, for we commenced tlie insult, and we
were the origin of the violence, and truly I will for-
give you the blood of those who have been slain
out of regard to your Chief Zoheir, whom may Lat
and Uzza keep in holy remembrance! for his
liberality was universally aknowledged by us all,
and in him we have found a strong tower and a
defender. ‘The reason of this is, that I met him at
Mecca at the holy shrine, and between him and me
was formed mutual faith and engagement, and
when we returned from the pilgrimage, I bound
myself to him, and took him with me to the tribe
of Aamir (for I am thew Chief Khalid, son of
Giafer); I made him and his sons alight with me
in the middle of the tents, and I offered them
all that was in. my power, in the way of hospitality,
for the space of ten days, and they did not quit me
till between them and us relationship was confirmed :
for Zoheir, whom may Lat and Uzza ever guard in
holy remembrance | demanded my daughter Beder-
ool-Hoolel for his son Shas, and gave us things in-
calculable, such as no human being possesses: he
also did not depart till he had given me his charger
Caasa, and it is this I have under me; and he girt
me on this his sword, which is now slung over my
shoulders, and its name is Zeenoor: he left us
praising him and full of obligations, and when he
departed, I took with me a thousand horsemen of —
my tribe, and I am now on my way to the land of

Yemen, that I may procure jewels, and robes, and


SUCCEEDS, AND DUPES ANTAR. 859


articles no King of Yemen possesses. We halted
in this spot but yesterday evening, and in the
morning we resolved on marching, when you ar-
rived with your baggage-camels, and your slaves
were driving them. As soon as my party saw
them, they considered them as some plunder of the
inhabitants of Yemen. Their avidity excited them
to seize on them, and thus it all happened. |

When Antar heard Khalid’s narrative, and saw
King Zoheir’s charger under him, and his sword
over -his shoulder, he was confounded for a reply,
and hung his head to the ground in excess of
shame, and he knew not what to do.

Khalid, on seeing this, felt certain that by his
artifice and deceit, the stratagem and manceuvre
had had its effect, so he did not cease his villany
till he dismounted and did homage to Antar, say-
ing, May God be ever with thee; grieve not, O
champion of Abs; repent not, for unwittingly you
have acted thus; the fault was ours, and on us has
fallen the loss. And Khalid wished to kiss his feet ;
but Antar dismounted: My lord, said he, death
would be more tolerable to me than this act; buta
liberal man pardons a slave when he perceives the
apology is sincere.

The Absians came up and heard all Khalid said,
and they did as Antar had done; and Antar cried
out to the slaves to release the prisoners they had
m charge, amongst whom were Jandah, son of
Beca, and Rebia, son of Ocail, and others of the


$60 . ANTAR DESCRIBES HIS FEATS


Aamir horsemen. The whole came up to Antar
and made their excuses. Peace was concluded,
and Khalid rescued his friends by this deceit and
stratagem, and as they took leave of each other,
said Khalid, Make my compliments to my brother,
King Zoheir ; and he went off with the Aamirites,
hardly crediting their escape. As to the Absians,
they continued traversing the desert on their way
home. Antar went ahead, and when his love and
pensiveness overcame him, he began thus:

“ O tamarisk of the mountains, is there one to
t report of me—to tell the. state of a lover—one
‘¢ distracted and melancholy ? Mention then, in the
“ name of God, ye northern breezes, the honours
& and glories I have attained; tell Ibla that, for
'* her sake, I have encountered horrors of the most
“ eminent hazard; that I. have endured dreadful
& scenes, and have returned triumphant, and the
«c foe, in terror of me, dared not to appear before
me. O Ibla, by thy life, couldst thou but see
“ Antar amongst the armies and contending mul-
6 titudes, and the horse tearing down towards me
“ at the head of the defile, like the tempestuous
“ rain, in the battle, destroyer of joys. They come
‘6 on the backs of swift high-mettled steeds, some
«& black, like the winds when they rush forth, some
“ red, some white, and some piebald. I shout at
« them with an. Absian shout, like thunder, that
“ thrills through the whole army. I charge towards
« them, and I gallop at them, and Į storm them with


AS HE PASSES OVER THE DESERT. $61


* the chest of Abjer. I make them taste of sword-
‘ blows, and terrible spear-thrusts, with my cutlass
“ and the barb of my lance. I make them like the
“‘ harvest, as if they were the roots of date trees,
“& deeply interwoven in the rocks. - I have dyed the
‘6 face of the land with their blood, and it has be- `
s come like the crimson cornelian. The gore, like
4t a rolling sea of Judas flowers, resembles a bursting
“river. : O Ibla, couldst thou but behold my
“ achievements against the foe on the day of battle,
‘in my force and my impetuosity, and my arms,
‘ like the Judas tree, and my Abjer dyed with the
“ blood of every lion-hero. It is then I cry out from
“ beneath the forest of spears, whilst the dust and
‘© black volumes of sand encompass me. O, by Abs,
“ Tam the stubborn one among men, I will annihilate
“ horsemen with my cleaving scimitar. It is then
“ I dart from beneath the dust, and my coat of mail
“ is like the piony, and as if painted with saffron.
« I have slain Jabir, and. Hosein, and also the
“ voracious lion Ebeleshbal. I have left Masood
‘‘ and Amroo in the desert, on the ground, and
“ Nabih, son of Ashter ; also Kelboon and his father,
“ called Nacmah the tyrant, the oppressor; and
“ Soheib, him have I made to drink of the cup of
s death on the lofty towering mountains. Them —
“ all I have destroyed with the hewing blows of my

“ polished, my irresistible Dhami. Their property
“ I have seized, their plunder I have taken, and the
‘‘ deserts are filled with the incalculable booty. As
‘¢ to the troops of horsemen in the valley, there does


362 THEY FIND THE TRIBE IN AFFLICTION.


& not survive of them one to tell the tale. The
“ heroes can witness for me in the contest, that I
* am the lion—the devouring warrior: not a knight
«s like me has arrived at the highest glory, durable
“ for ages. My mother is Zebeeba, I disavow not.
« her name, and I am Antar ; but I am not vain-
« glorious: her dark complexion sparkles like a
“ sabre in the shades of night, and her shape is
4“ like the well-formed spear. I am the son of Shedad,
‘and my lineage is Absian, known above the bril-
« liant canopy of heaven. I have attained honour,
& glory, and fame, by my resolution, so that I am in
& the vicinity of Jupiter. Were death to see me,
& ay to see me, he would turn aside from me, in
& fear of my tempestuous might and power. I am
& sublime above all knights in the field of fight, by
& my intrepidity, by my modesty and forbearance.”

When Antar had finished his verses, they all
cried, May God never abandon thy mouth, may
there never be one to harm thee, O hero of the age,
thou champion of the tribe of Abs and Adnan!
They continued their march till they came near to
the land of Shoorebah and Mount Saadi, and when
they turned their eyes toward their homes, and saw
the desert in tumult with the glitter of armour, and
the concourse of people, and wailing lamentations,
Antar was startled, and so were his companions.
Doubtless some evil has befallen our families in our
absence, he cried, for the whole tribe is in the utmost
affliction. Now when Cais had returned home, after
the death of his father, the whole land was convulsed:


CAIS’S FUTURE. PLANS OF REVENGE. 363


with weeping and clamorous sorrow. Their grief
for Zoheir continued long. The tents and the
dwellings of the tribe of Abs. were thrown down,
and re-echoed to the groans and sobs of the mourners.
The people met them, and seated themselves, with
Cais, on the carpet of affliction. The tribes of Fa-
zarah, and Ghiftan, and Marah, and Dibyan, all
attended, with their friends and allies; they let
their turbans hang loose over their necks, and rent
all the garments they had on. But when they had
condoled with Cais for “his father, they congratu-
lated him on the kingdom that had fallen to him.
Congratulate me not on my kingdom, said he ; there
is no joy till you see that I have had my revenge.
Comfort your heart, and brighten your eye, said the
warriors, for we will not separate from you till we
have avenged you. And they despatched their
slaves to bring them their horses and their arms, and.
they remained preparing for the contest, whilst Cais
every day,rode out, gaining the hearts of the people,
and showing every kindness to the warriors, giving
them arms, and weapons, and corslets. His father,
in his lifetime, had banished many of the Absians.
Cais recalled them; he conciliated them, and made
them return to their native land. But as to Rebia,
son of Zeead, he had great influence with King Cais,
for Cais had married his daughter, and he placed
great confidence in him, in all his plans, and when
Cais was making his preparations for his expedition
to attack the tribe of Aamir, and had assembled his
forces, said Hadifah, son of Beder, to him, Wait for


864 HARITH, THE. IMPOSTOR,


me ten days, till I write to my allies, the tribe of
Marah; for their knight Harith, son of Zalim, is
my relation by birth, and he is now the knight of
the Arabs. My cousin, said King Cais, I have in
deed heard marvels of this knight, and they raise
him above Antar, son of Shedad. Who is Antar,
said Rebia, O Cais, when Harith is present? Now
then will be exhibit in his actions thinge that shall
be recorded of him to eternity. So Hadifah wrote
to Harith, requesting his assistance against the tribe
of Aamir, having first stated all about King Zoheir,
and the disgrace and infamy they had brought down
upon him, and he despatched the letter by'a horse
man of Fazarah. This Harith was a confirmed
impostor; he regarded no hospitality, neither did
he respect any engagement. He never kept his
word ; he was a great depredator, and iniquitous in
all his actions. If he associated with a friend, he
would betray him; and if he could overreach an
ally, he would put him to death. All the Arabs
were on their guard against him, and his villany
had been felt by every man alive, and moreover he
could not be quiet with Antar; he stationed spies
and scouts over him, and his very favours were
malice and perfidy.

Khalid had also written to Harith to require his
aid in his hostile preparations against the tribe of
Abs, saying, O Harith, I have slain King Zoheir
and his son Shas, and I am resolved not to leave
them a tent standing. You know what their slave
Antar did to your father Zalim, and how he cut his


H19 FIRST ACT OF PERFIDY. 365


hair off. If you are really what I have heard you
to be, that you are active and zealous, haste then,
that I may accomplish your every wish, and marry
you to my daughter Sitularab. Harith acquiesced
in the requisitions of Khalid’s letter, gnd having as-
sembled five hundred of the tribe of Marah, he
resolved on the expedition. About that time also
arrived Hadifah’s messenger, and gave him the
letter ; to whom he said in his malignity and deceit,
There was no occasion for your chief to write me a
letter; I am now marching to his assistance, and
shall probably have slain Khalid ere he arrives. He
sent the messenger back that very day, and he him-
self set out for the tribe of Aamir. When they had
proceeded some distance, O Harith, said his people,
_we wish you would tell us what is your real intention,
and whom you will assist? My cousins, said he,
march with me, and be sure of wealth, for these
tribes are populous, and they must engage each
other; and whichever we see will conquer, to that
we will turn. But we wish, said they, you would
inform us which you will join first? The tribe of
Khalid, said he. And thus he continued his march
with his comrades, and such was his resolution.

In the meantime Hadifah’s messenger returned,
and mformed him that Harith had preceded him
against the tribe of Aamir with five hundred horse-
men. Away went Hadifah to King Cais: O King,
said he, know that the man is wise and faithful ; he
is now-gone to execute what we requested of him,


366 ANTAR HEARS OF THE DEATH OF 20HEIR AND SHAS,


and he is already on his march to fight the Aamir-
ites before us: it is my opinion we should join him,
or he will sustain their attack alone. Do, my uncle,
what you please, said Cais, and tell the Arabs to
make ready their warlike weapons for the expedition
on this very day. The Absians accordingly came
forth with their arms; they slung on their spears,
and were preparing to march, and at that very mo-
ment arrived Antar and Asyed with the horsemen ;
they stopped near the tents. The Absian warriors
mounted to go and meet them; and amongst them
were Malik, King Zoheir’s son, Antar’s friend, and
his brother Harith by his side; and as soon as they
saw their uncle Asyed and Antar they scattered dust
over their heads, and det down the turbans over their
necks.

_ But Antar, marking the conduct of King Zoheir’s
sons, shuddered, and was-stupefied, for he thought
they were occupied on Shas’ happiness, as Khalid
had informed him. He dismounted, and in great
dismay, My lord, he said to Malik, what is the
matter? O Aboolfawaris, said he, a calamity never `
to be forgotten, a misfortune that overwhelms both
men and women. And he announced the death of
his father King Zoheir, and his brother Shas. The
colour of the swarthy Antar became wan and livid ;
he was nearly fainting. My lord, said he, dead? or
killed? Killed, my cousin, said Prince Malik, and
their enemies have triumphed over them ; and then
he told Antar how his father and brother were


. ANTAR’S MIGHTY GRIEF 367


slain, and what Khalid had done. Upon this, An- .
tar also related his victory over the tribe of: Aamir
in the defile, and that he had taken more than two
hundred prisoners, among whom were Rebia, son
of Ocail, and Jandah, son of Beka, and that all
‘were set free; and how Khalid had duped him by
his stratagem and deceit. On hearing this, all King
Zoheir’s sons set up an universal shout of grief. O
Aboolfawaris, said Prince Malik, it was that Jandah
who slew my father. At this Antar’s agony and
transports were most intense. Woe, woe unto thee,
O Khalid! he cried; by the faith of an Arab I will
not leave thee but as a proverb for every one that
stands and sits. His tears flowed in streams; his
sobs and lamentations augmented ; and thus he gave
vent to his sorrows: |

<< O my eyes, shed showers of tears for the an-
“ guish and calamities that have befallen me. Dry
“ not on my cheeks, but flow in gushing torrents
« like the rain-charged clouds. O my woes, quit
“ not my frame. O my agonies, leave not my body.
“<Q mourners of the tribe, weep and lament; mul-
“ tiply your afflictions with sobs of sorrow and
& distress, for he is lost on whom I most relied for
« aid. Fear not the rebukes of the railers: he was |
‘© my stay in every evil, and my sword when cala-
s mities flowed upon me. He was the refuge for
s the weak, and the asylum of the poor, who
« mourned in emaciating penury. He was a king
& to whom princes bowed down, and to whose


368 AND ANGUISH AT THE NEWS.


“ power the Arab chiefs submitted. © Zoheir,
“ verily my spirit is broken. It was thou that didst
* repulse the foe, and every enemy from me. Alas!
& O race of Abs, thou hast lost thy glory; thy
& noble, thy merciful, and bountiful prince! Past
“ away is thy benefactor! Thy days are darkened ;
“ now their light is gone, thy flame is extinguished
“in the obscurity of death. He was a full moon
« shining in its sublimity, and he was to me the
“ most eminent of virtues. How indeed has the
“‘ tribe of Aamir triumphed! Khalid exults and is
& proud of his conquest. Verily they have slain
“ Shas, and he was a knight who was my succour
“ in every adversity. Oh! I will weep for them as
“ long as the birds shall sing, or the drops of the
& pouring clouds shall fall. I will take vengeance
« on the tribe of Aamir, who have revolted, and
« have vanquished these warriors. Khalid! Oh!
‘© I will make him drink with my sword the draught
“ of the black gore in the midst of the heroes. I
“ will exterminate the tribes with penetrating spear-
s thrusts, and tear out their hearts with sharp-
“ edged scimitars. If I do not keep my word, may
‘¢ I never succeed in my wishes for.a friend! Soon
“ will I realize my project against them with my
“ sabre; soon will I pull down their glories and
“their honours. I will leave among their dwell-
“ ings nought but lamentations and shrieks of woe
“ for the loss of friends! I am Antar, well knowti
“in war and battle, when I make the heroes fly


THE ANGUISH OF HIS HEART. 369


“ terrified at death. But, alas! fortune has cast
“ me into, affliction, and for the loss of Zoheir my
“ heart is melted !”

When the horsemen heard these verses they
burst out into a loud expression of grief and afflic-
tion, and the creeping thrill of sorrow crawled over
their bodies. They entered the tents, their heads
exposed, and their clothes all torn. Rebia, old in
villany, met them, saying, Cousins, men should as-
suage their grief, and soon resign their sorrows.
Let not one of ye prolong his discourse, for this day
is fixed for departure. It was Rebia’s intention
thus to add new anguish to the heart of Antar. He
made him no reply, but he swelled with fury; his
eyeballs glared red, till they became like two liquid
globes of crimson blood; he roared and bellowed ;
his patience was spent; he struck Rebia on the
chest, and hurled him on his back, and his helmet
flew off from his head, and he was unable to utter
a word. Antar repaired unto King Cais. At the
entrance of the tent Antar stopped and wept; he
sobbed and shrieked in excess of grief, as also Asyed ;
but Antar thus exclaimed:

“ Set is the full moon, though once it was in its
“zenith; hidden is its light, and all is dark.
“ Eclipsed is the sun, and the morn no more re-
“ turns in smiles. Fallen are the constellations;
“ they have disappeared; the atmosphere is ob-
“ secured; the dust of darkness is over it; all the
* seas are hollow, and are sunk deep; we have lost

‘VOL. IIL. B B


370 HE MOURNS AND PAINTS.


“ its dews and its clouds. At the moment that Zo-
“ heir fell dead infamy shrouded us, and sat upon
“ us. Fortune has made him drink of the cup of
“s death, but likewise fortune will be quick in its
“ vengeance. He was my stay, my armour in ad-
“ versity; he was my breastplate, my spear, my
“ scimitar. O my eyes, when ye shed not tears,
“ may sleep be denied ye! I swear by Him who
‘‘ slays and brings to life, by Him who rules the
“light and the darkness, never will I raise my
“ sword in battle till I behold all my enemies in
‘* dismay and in shame. O tribe of Aamir, O clan
“ of Kelab, dread the light and shade of my sword ;
“ saon shall thy wives scream in terrors of captivity ;
« soon shall they weep for their orphaned little ones.
« I am Antar, son of Shedad, and my star is high
“ raised above the sublimity of the seven heavens !”
_ When Antar had finished his verses, his tears
gushed out in incessant streams, and he wept bit-
terly, till he could no more, and he fainted; but
when he recovered from his swoon, he cast his eyes
towards King Zoheir’s seat, and thus expressed
himself:
“ Weep abundantly, my eyes, in torrents of tears ;
“ aid me, relieve my woes with weeping! For oh!
“ I have lost a prince that was my support—that
“ was my full moon; but it is now set below the
“ earth! I have lost the sea and the rain by my
“ enemies, and him whose benevolence resembled
“ the deluging clouds. I have lost a lian, but in no


~ EXCITES THE ENVY OF HIS ENBMIES. 849


tures in Irak and with Nushirvan, and described
all the honours and dignities he had received.. But
when the slaves advanced to attend on Antar, he
ordered them to offer their services to his illustrious
Chiefs. Antar soon after rejoined Ibla, inquiring
after her health, and sympathising in her sufferings.
He kissed her between the eyes: she threw herself
into his arms, and kissed his face and cheeks. Re-
joice in these riches, said he tenderly to her; such
a sight, my cousin, regales the eye, and enlivens
the heart and soul. Mark, too, these female slaves,
that resemble moons, and this silver litter, studded
with costly jewels; and rule me as thou wilt, night
and day. Truly the great King has enriched me
with this crown of jewels, which no human being
has as yet touched. Verily, replied Ibla, your
safety is more acceptable to me than all you have `
described: no pleasure have I felt but in your
presence. Antar smiled, and his bosom expanded
with joy at the purity of her love. He quitted her,
having first stationed a guard over her, fearful of
any accident. And Antar’s enemies reposed that-
night under the protection of Antar, conversing
about his good fortune and exalted honours. Well!
said Amroo to his father, I can no longer remain
with the tribe of Abs; I shall set out for the land
of Yemen. I shall migrate; for I have not an eye
to look on this black slave, who even presumes to
take possession of Ibla—that full moon. What
can a man do, added Malik, when his projects are


350 IBLA’S SPLENDID EQUIPMENT.


thus thwarted? Could the God of heaven in his
wrath be more adverse to him, when I exposed him
to those oceans of perils? but he has escaped from
them all, and has, moreover, brought with him all
- this wealth, and these precious; ladings. Know,
my son, when we reach home, every one will love
Antar, and hate us; for you observed their be-
haviour to us when they heard he was dead. Am-
roo, said Oorwah, if Antar reaches the tribe of Abs
and Adnan, he will rule over it, and depose King
Zoheir: he will exalt himself to his station; the
clans, too, will obey and follow him. The greatest
Kings cannot produce such wealth. When Amarah
heard this, he wept in excess of envy and misery.
Disgraced, dishonoured, is the family of Zeead,
O my cousins, he cried ; verily my gall is bursting
at this vile black slave, whom fortune favours. By
the truth of our idols, should he enter unto Ibla,
I shall expire of anguish. Oh, that the Nocturnal
Evil of the Age had sacrificed me as a sheep, sv
that I had never beheld this vile wretch return in
safety. And he wept till morning, and there was
not one of the party that slept or felt at ease, so
intense were their jealousy and hatred. At day-
` light, Antar ordered the slaves to prepare for de-
parture and load the camels. Six hundred was the
number of his blacks, all headed by Aboolmout,
and he was a bold intrepid horseman. When the
mules and camels were loaded, and the female slaves
were mounted on them, Grecians, Persians, Cophts,


AMARAR’S AGONY AND DISAPPEARANCE. 351


Georgians, and Franks, Antar presented to Ibla
three variegated robes, studded with the precious
metals and jewels: he clothed her in them, and
placed on her head the diadem that the. King of
Persia had given him. He also ordered forth for
her the magnificent silver litter, the supports of
which were of burnished gold; and eight mules
were required to carry it. At the sight of this
mass of splendour, Ibla was stupefied and amazed.
Her father Malik, as he surveyed it, was in the
greatest consternation and surprise: but as to her
mother, her tongue was tied up in her mouth, so
vast was her astonishment. Amarah! he wept, and
sighed, and groaned, and moaned. Antar cared
not for any of them, so entirely was he devoted to
Ibla; producing articles after articles in succession,
till she was bewildered. He raised her into the
litter, with her mother, and he commanded the
slaves to march forward, and to attend to them on
the journey. When Ibla was seated in the litter,
her countenance became radiant and illumined“:
she smiled in the loveliest manner. Every charm
was heightened; and from her eyelashes she shot
arrows that penetrated the slayer of men and heroes.
Again Amarah cast his eyes upon her: he was
confounded. His rage became more intense: the
fiercest anguish and torture seized him. Alas, O
. Amarah! said he to himself, from this moment
thou art indeed a wretch—a lost man. Now Antar
~ delivered Ibla over to her father, saying, Receive


352 " ANTAR’S RETURN ANNOUNCED.


your daughter and her property. Malik was pro-
fuse in his praises and expressions of admiration,
exhibiting outwardly the reverse of what was in
his mind. Nephew, he replied, from this day Ibla
is your handmaid, and her father and her brother
are numbered among your slaves. Upon this,
Antar advanced, and kissed his uncle’s hand, and
paid him every possible respect. ‘Thus they con-
tinued, till between them and the tribe of Abs
there remained only one day’s journey; when, on
inquiring for Amarah, he was not to be found.
I imagine, said Malik, Amarah is gone on before
us, to announce our arrival. No, no, said Antar,
I am not in such favour with Amarah, that he
should do such an act; but if it be true, King
Zoheir will come out with all his family to meet
us. Well, said Malik, I will precede you, and
congratulate the tribe on your arrival; and I shall
thus conciliate your father and your uncles. It is
your own affair, added Antar; do as you please.
Malik accordingly changed his horse, and set off,
mounted on one of Antar’s noble steeds, with his
son Amroo, and Oorwah, and Ibla’s mother; and
all those whose envy was consuming their bodies
and souls. Travelling with great speed, they arrived
early the next day in the land of the tribe of Abs.
Malik immediately repaired to the habitations of
Shedad, crying out, Good news, good luck to ye,
O family of Carad! Antar, son of Shedad, is re-
turned. Shedad looked up: Do you indeed speak


ANTAR’S ADDRESS TO IBLA. 375


on the excursion, and the horrors he had endured,
thus expressing himself:

“ O Ibla, I have a heart steady in its love for
“thee; and ever anxious in its passion. O Ibla,
pity me for my love. I am thy captive-victim,
“ and my tears are like the stormy ocean. O Ibla,
_ “ thou hast vanquished my heart with a form, whose
“beauties even flash before the brilliant sun. O
“ Ibla, thy face resembles in its lustre the dawn,
“and thy tresses the darkness of night, the com-
“ plexion of thy adorer. O Ibla, not in all the
“ songstresses together are thy charms: no, by
“God, thy beauty is far superior. O Ibla, I am
“ indeed overwhelmed with love; all the world must
“ pity—compassionate me. O Ibla, thy cheek re-
“ sembles the crimson rose, and the pionies of the
“ gardens are like it. O Ibla, in thy bosom are the
“ pomegranates I desire, were even the swords armed
“ with lightning to flash from it. O Ibla, among
“the Houris there is not a face like thine; and
“ amongst mankind there is no lover like me. O
“ Ibla, grant but a meeting to me, whose whole
“ soul pants for thee. O Ibla, were even death to
“visit me, nought shall daunt me, for I am true
“and firm; for all I demand of God is a sight of
“thee at the dawn and mid-day, and whenever
“ shines the sun !”


END OF VOL. III.


LONDON:
PRINTED BY THOMAS DAVISON, WHITEFRIARS.


ANTAR,


A BEDOUEEN ROMANCE.


TRANSLATED FROM THE ARABIC,
BY


TERRICK HAMILTON, ESQ.


ORIENTAL SECRETARY TO THE BRITISH EMBASSY AT
CONSTANTINOPLE.


PART THE FIRST.


- VOL. IV.


LONDON:
JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE-STREET.
1820.


LIFE AND ADVENTURES
OF


ANTAR.


CHAPTER XXVIII.


Bur King Cais and the tribes of Abs and Fazarah
and their party, amounting to twenty-five thousand
men, armed, and well accoutred, continued their
march, eager for battle, against the tribe of Aamir.
At their head was Hadifah with a thousand horse-
men, as the advance of the tribe of Fazarah.

They had marched about half-way, when a dust
arose, beneath which were discovered a hundred
horsemen, at whose head was the Brandisher of
Spears, and at his side Harith son of Zalim. The
cause of this was as follows: when Harith sent
back Hadifah’s messenger, engaging to assist him
against the tribe of Aamir, he immediately marched
to join Khalid, who joyfully received him, and
conferred rich honorary robes on him and his
party; healso presented him his steed Caasa, which.. _
had belonged to King Zoheir, and bestowed on


VOL. iV. B


2 HARITH MEETS HADIFAH.


him his scimitar Zeenoor; it being his intent to
pay every possible attention to Harith. And as he
inspected the Arabs that were assembled at the
general call to arms, he observed the Brandisher
of Spears had mounted at their head with one
hundred horsemen; he himself also followed with
Hanth. This party formed the advance of the
army, and continued their march till they met
Hadifah.

As soon as they met, their shouts arose: Come
on, my cousins, exclaimed Hadifah, this is but
an insignificant band, they do not exceed a hundred
men; so plunder them with the sharp-edged scimi-
tar, At Hadifah’s call Harith came forth into the
plain. Eh, son of an accursed mother, cried Ha-
difah, 1s this thy conduct towards us? Dost deny
thy connection with us, and has thy soul thus acqui-
esced in perfidy in the plain and the desert? Ay,
replied Harith laughing, for I am celebrated for
my treachery, it is one of my natural habits; wise
indeed were you to suppose I should assist you and
a tribe that had admitted their slave among their
chiefs, and made their herdsmen their champions:
never will I condescend to sit with the tribe of
Abs till I have slain their slave Antar, and have
put numbers of them to death. But if you wish
to secure yourself, away home; no more of your
Impertinence; engage not this army, or you and
the tribe of Fazarah will be cut off, root and
branch. Hadifah was confounded ; perceiving that


THE ARSIANS ARE DISCOMFITED. B


he had fallen into a predicament out of which he
could not escape but by fighting, he called out
to his thousand; and men engaged men and heroes
heroes. Blood flowed and streamed, whilst Ha-
rith and the Brandisher of Spears pierced through
the horsemen of Fazarah, and made their advan-
tages turn to their loss; for the hundred Aamirites
withstood the thousand of Fazarah, and the spear
thrust continued to clash on either side, and the
dust to conglomerate, and the blood to gush from
the wounds, till the armies came up and joined
them. At that moment shouts were raised on all
quarters; alt were blinded to their dangers; every
one that arrived, and saw the engagement, laboured
and exerted his powers, and fought till the scene
exceeded all calculation, and the carnage and terror
were dreadful. King Cais and the Absian heroes
arrived, and the battle raged among them with foot
and leg. The sea of death waved and rolled
its stormy surge. ‘The complexions and constitu-
tions of all were convulsed. Shame fell upon the
coward, and the brave were painted with crimson
gore. Lords became slaves, and the desert and
rocks were agitated. Harith performed on that
day exploits that confounded the sight; his chief
object being to assault the tribe of Abs. Be-
fore evening, the Absians and the tnbe of Fazarah
being evidertly worsted, the two armies separated
on the advance of darkness. King Cais halted ; and
he now repented of having listened to the advice of
B 2


4 DISSKNSIONS ABOUT ANTAB.


the wretch Rebia, and that he had followed his.
opinions, all of which were perfidious, and had re-
jected Antar, son of Shedad. Cousins, said Cais,
in a general consultation, we have indeed taken
rash counsel, and we have mangled our reputation
amongst the high and low; never could I have
imagined that this dog would have ventured against
us in arms: I was mistaken in this tyrant. O King,
said Rebia, I was indeed aware of his iniquity, and
his malice, and his perfidy, and his treachery, but
now it is all over; we are come hither to seek re-
taliation, and we have no other resource but to
draw out the troops into the field of battle, and
expose ourselves to the barbs of the spears, other-
wise the Arabs of Hijaz will despise us. Moreover
send to your relation, King Numan, that he may
aid us with an army, or if you please, send for our
cousin, the reliever of our sorrows and our griefs,
Antar, son of Shedad; he will come and remove
this difficulty from us, and will slay Harith in the
battle and the contest. Who, my brother, said
Amarah, is that black wittol, Antar? what achieve-
ment is there this army cannot effect, amongst
which the first acknowledge, and the last assert,
there is none like the terrible Amarah in the time
of difficulty. Silence, O Amarah! said Asyed, no
more of your nonsense, this is all your plan and
your brother’s plan; but by the faith of an Arab,
had we known that our champion Antar was not of
our party, not one of us would have followed you.


CAIS BEGS ANTAR’S ASSISTANCE. an)


My advice is, that you send after him, and apolo-
gize to him, and make your whole dependence on
him, or the Aamirites will invade your lands:
should Antar acquiesce, it will be out of pure
generosity and benevolence, and if he refuses to
attend, he will be excusable. But as to your pro-
posal of requesting assistance of Numan, before a
messenger could reach him, or his armies come to `
your aid, your flesh will be in the mawa of the
eagles: for the proverb says, whilst the medicine is
coming from Irak, the viper-bitten dies. By the
faith of an Arab, there is no one but Antar. Na-
zih seconded Asyed in this proposition, as did all
Antar’s friends. —

As soon as the King heard his uncles opinion
thus declared, he was convinced of its propriety, and
at the instant he wrote a letter to Antar, in which
he said: To him, whom we acknowledge as our
cousin and the remover of our sorrows—the inex-
tinguishable hot-coal of the tribe of Abs, and its
ever-burning flame: know, O my cousin, that ene-
mies have calumniated you to me (they are those
to whom iniquity is natural), and you also know,
my cousin, all the kind love I bear towards you;
entertain not, therefore, any malice against us. O
generous knight! what I request of you is, that
you hasten your journey hither, in order to take
retaliation for King Zoheir: let there be no other
answer, O Aboolfawaris, but the applying of your
foot to the stirrup; delay not, for death and de-


6 HARITR’S BOLD DEFENCE:


struction are descending upon us. He folded the
letter, and gave it to a. messenger, ordering him to
be very expeditious.

King Cais laid himself down, and meditated on
these deeds of fate. The two armies also reposed,
keeping the watch till morning dawned. Hanth,
son of Zalim, started forth into the scene of battles
and galloping and charging to and fro, he cried out,
cpme forth, ye Absians, knight to knight, or a hun-
dred to one—or a thousand against one ; and if you
think it scanty justice, assail me all of ye at once,
that I may tear out your lives by the sword-blow
and the spear-thrust. Art thou not ashamed, cried
Hadifah, at what thou hast said, and at drawing
thy sword in the face of thy tribe? Eh, O Hadifah,
said Harith, I acknowledge no such calculation—
no parentage; but if thou wouldst escape death,
hie thee away, take the tribe with thee, and go
home to thy family: thwart me not, or thou diest,
otherwise come on to the contest of swords. Do not
imagine that I will respect thee on account of the
connexion that exists between us. How is it that
thou art fighting with those who have clothed thee
in shame, and hast rejected the aid of those who
came to seek retaliation for thee? Eh, O Harith,
replied Hadifah, and where is that black slave? It
was on your account we repulsed him :. but he will
soon join us here; for when we suw you allied to
~ our foes, King Cais sent a messenger for- Antar :
he will assuredly come and disperse these armies.


HE UNHORSES HADIFAH. 7


Harith, on hearing this, rushed at him, and they
began the contest. Fatigue soon fell on the arms
of Hadifah; he was exhausted, and disgrace quickly
succeeded his glory.. Harith, being aware of his
situation, assailed him, and pierced him with his
spear through the thigh into the horse’s side. Ha-
difah fell to the ground, and Harith standing over
him on horseback, exclaimed, Rise, thou son of a
coward! were there not a kindred between us, I
would strike off thy neck with this sword. Haml,
observing his brother’s condition, urged on his
horse till he came up to Harith. O son of Zalim,
said he, have we deserved this of thee? Not so
prolix, replied Harith. I forbad him the combat,
but he would not desist: dismount, and take him |
with thee—depart to thy tribe ; but if thou hast
any wish for another contest, come on to the fight.
Ham! dismounted, and carried away his brother on
his horse’s back, seeking the tribe of the generous
Absians; whilst Harith continued to. gallop and
charge, exclaiming, O tribe of Abs, I will not per-
mit any but myself to punish you, that I may
appease my whole heart among you; for you are |
my relations, and I have aright to seize your horses.
and your armour. Upon this, the Absians went
out against him, horseman after horseman; buthe
robbed them of their lives, and carried off their
horses and their arms; till night coming on and’ day
disappearing, the armies retired to ‘their tents, and
the heroes laid themselves down to sleep, after they `


8 HARITN’S ATTACK AND HARANGUE.


had stationed the patroles. But as soon as it was
light, the armies being mounted and the troops
drawn up, Harith appeared between the two ranks,
galloping, and charging, and prancing over the four
corners of the plain, and admiring himself in the
field of battle, he thus burst forth: ‘‘ Let me hear.
“the fall of the sharp-edged scimitars, and the
s whizzing of the spears through the body. Let
* me drink of the blood of horsemen in the course,
‘‘ between the flash of the sword and the dark shadow
“of the spear. Talk no more of the dwellings of
« Mey, or the land of Hind, or the tents of Seaad ;
“ for there is no glory for youth in cups of wine,.
“ circling under the shade of the vine, and in the
& valley. Glory is only in the battle—dust in the
“day of contest, or the blow through the heart.
‘* Consider no one as a friend among men—look on
“man as thine enemy. Smite every one with the
“ sword, and requite faith with outrage and injury.
« As to the action thou deemest virtuous, rush
t eagerly to its reverse by iniquity. O tribe of Abs,
& how can ye escape by flight this day on your
~ generous steeds? My scimitar is firmly
sin my hand, and death dwells upon the double
“edge of my spear. Come forth or retreat, you
<< will find me a ı knight that will never flinch in the
‘¢ day of action.”

On hearing this, pride and indignation raged in
the heads of the Absians, for they were men bound
on retaliation. Instantly stood forth Nazih on his.


THE APPEARANCE OF A STRANGE KNIGHT, 9


high-bred steed, famed in the day of battle: he-
attacked Harith, and rushing upon him without
saying a word, he startled him by his impetuosity.
They commenced the assault, and the combat, and
the contest ; their rage and passion increased—they
laboured in the blow and the thrust, in advancing
and retreating, till, being exhausted by repeated
charges, they both stood still, gazing each at his
antagonist. But as soon as they were rested, they
vaulted again on their horses with renovated spirits,
and recommenced the wrestle and the struggle. At
last Harith charged down upon Nazih, and wearied
and exhausted him. Asyed was alarmed for his
son; when, lo! a knight, black as a mass of rock,
came ‘orth from the hostile ranks of the tribe of
Aamir: he was strong-limbed, broad-shouldered,
soiled with dust, scantily armed, and ill supplied
with weapons: he had an instrument of war that.
could repel no blow, that could ward off no disaster:
his spear was spliced together with reeds; his sad-
dle was of wood, and his stirrup of palmyra rope :
under him was a meagre, foundered horse ; but he
himself was like a devouring lion. When. the
horsemen beheld him they thought he was Khalid’s
slave; but as soon as that knight came close to
Harith, Resign thy foe, he cried, thou son of a
coward; and, he added, dost thou not know that
these tribes that are assembled against the tribe of
Abs, are come to seek property and plunder? and I
among the rest have passed the valleys and the


10 WHO RESCUES NAZIH FROM HARIH,


mountains, and am come in quest of some booty,
that I may return to my home and my family: but
thou alone hast occupied the field of battle, and
hast left every one besides thyself in starvation and
penury. Now retire, and leave the fight, otherwise,
by him who rooted firm the towering sides of the
mountains, and has -power over life and death, I
will pierce thee with this broken spear: content
thyself on the tribe of Abs with an easier prey, and
_ begone !

Harith, on hearing these contemptuous expres-
sions from this Bedoween, assailed him and thrust
at him; but this Bedoween stooped ‘and avoided the
blow, and struck him with his spear on his back:
it startled him, but the Bedoween’s spear dropped
down, shivered in four. Harith escaped the Bedo-
ween, who dismounted, and began splicing it with
some pieces of cord, and picked up the fragments
from the plain. The Arabs were in great astonish-
ment at the conduct of this rustic, and thought him
mad. But the danger was removed from Nazih,
for Harith had nearly killed him. Now when
Nazih observed the Bedoween, and that he was
tying up his spear, his generous spirit was roused ;
he galloped up to him, and said, Think no more, .
young man, of mending your spear, but take this,
and return again to your antagonist; overthrow
him, or he will turn against you.in his malice.
Take also this horse, for he will assist you in the
charge; for had you a steed that was accustomed


WHOM HE TAKES PRISONER. ; ll


to the plain of battle, you would soon destroy this
demon; and you may then accomplish every wish
with respect to the tribe of Abs and Adnan. Upon
this, the Bedoween received the spear from Nazth;
he mounted the offered horse, and quite pleased, O
my lord, he cried, take charge of this my horse, for
it is of a high breed, till this difficulty is removed
from me. ‘Thus saying, he returned to Harith,
and rushed upon him, and flinging up the spear
into the air with his hand, he caught it as it fell
rolling round, and pierced Harith with the butt end
of it on the chest: it hurled him to the ground, and
his bones were bruised. Well, my lord, said he
again to Nazih, take this horse on which he rode,
aod, I will carry off his armour and spoils. Nazih
took it, and charged upon it over the plain. When
King Cais marked that horse beneath Harith, he was
melted like lead; but now, seeing him mounted by
his cousin, his concern and grief subsided. Let
one of ye go to this Bedoween, said he to his at-
tendants, and promise him wealth on my part; in-
duce him to drive Harith towards us, before his
comrades attack and rescue him out of our hands,
or he will purehase his life from this poor fellow ;
and while King Cais was thus conversing, the
Bedoween pointed to the tribe of Aamir, and cried
out, O Mooferridj ! O Mooferridj ! and there issued
forth a horseman in the same plight as himself.
Dismount for this vile wretch, he cried, and bind
fast his shoulders, for I cannot trouble such a fine


12 AND ALSO OVERCOMES JANDAR.


Chief as this, who gave me his arms, to whom I am
also obliged for this horse. I have no doubt in my
mind that he must be a king’s son, and I wish this
day to equal him in my gains, and to divide between
him and me the horse and arms. I know he does
not want it; but the chase is always an object, and
the heart and soul are ever interested in it. Thus
saying, he turned towards the tribe of Aamir, and
defied them to the combat. When Khalid saw what
this vagrant Arab had done to Harith, and heard
_ him cry out to his comrade, who quitted the Aamir
ranks,—By the faith of an Arab, he exclaimed, no
doubt amongst these tribes that we have assembled
there must be one who is our foe, or else some Ab-
sians have mingled with us. So he prohibited the
troops from attacking, and sent for some one to
bring him this Bedoween in disgrace and infamy,
_ Jandah issued forth, roaring like an enraged lion,
as he shouted, What art thou, foul Arab? and he
rushed at him; but the Bedoween charged upon
him, and they engaged till the scene of action ap-
peared too confined; they clung to each other on
their horses’ backs; they grappled and struggled
till their steeds were exhausted ; they wrestled and
grasped till all power and strength were extinct.
But the vagrant Arab was the most forceful and the
stoutest ; he gave his adversary the grasp of a lion,
and threw him on his feet by his superior might;
he tore off his sword from round his neck, and
endeavoured to drive him away with him; but as


HE 18 RECOGNISED AS ANTAR. 13


Jandah resisted, he smote him with his sword, and
made a gash on his shoulder, crying out with a loud
voice, Hither, O Mosayid! O Mosayid ! and there
started forth a horseman from the same spot as the
former. The Bedoween delivered Jandah over to
him, and ordered him to take charge of him, saying,
Let us see by the end of the day how many more of
these filthy fellows will fall into our hands, and then
we will consult about our further pleasures and
wants. When the two tribes saw these deeds, they
began to form various conjectures. ` As to King
Cais, By the faith of an Arab, he cried, assistance is
come to us, whence we know not: for Jandah is the
very fellow that smote my father’s head, and we are
revenged for the iniquity of Harith, son of Zalim ;
we have only now to gain over to us the heart of this
vagrant,. and promise him whatever he wants: this
Bedoween cannot be Antar; but like him there is
no one human being, for he came forth into the plain
naked, and has laid low knights such as these. O
king, said Shedad, how oft you degrade the merit
of my son, and raise the value of others! Know,
O king, if this Bedoween were my son, I should
have recognised him from any other horseman;
from me he could not have been disguised. But I
am certain of it, O Shedad, said Oorwah; I did
recognise him from every other horseman, and
. marked him as he attempted to outstrip the horse.
This is madness, said King Cais; as to Antar, we
only sent to him last night, so how could a messen-


14 ANTAR JOINS THE AAMIRITES IN DISGUISE.


ger reach him? and between us there are eight
days; we must suppose he followed us the very
day of our departure. O king, said Shedad, had
he followed us, it would not have been surprising ;
but as to his uniting with the tribe of Aamir, he
must have heard that you boasted of Harith as
being superior to him, and that you had bespoken
his aid: he must have fought with your foes think-
ing Harith was on your side, with the wish to de-
stroy him, and do with him just as he has done,
and to show you his power: for my son is patient
and forbearing—resentment has no place in him,
and never will he allow an Arab to triumph at your
expense. Just then advanced Nazih and Antar,
and Harith’and Jandah, with Shiboob and Jareer,
dragging them along. The cause of Antar’s arrival
was this: as soon as he went to the tents, and, his
meeting with Ibla being accomplished, he felt de-
lighted at seeing her; but when the women had
quitted him, he said to Shiboob, O my brother, I
wish to follow the Absians, and see what Harith is
domg: I will issue out against him and take him
prisoner; and I will show Hadifah and Rebia the
evil effects of such a plan. And in what form, said
Shiboob, do you wish to go? Im the disguise of a
miserable slave, said he: I, you, and Jareer; and
we will just sling spears over us. Upon this they
mounted some broken-down horses, and rode on
till they came within two days of the armies, and
mixed among the tribe of Aamir, thinking Harith


HIS CONVERSATION WITH NAZIH. 15


was with the Absians; but when he‘saw what he had
done, and observed how he fought, he knew him,
and went forth against him and did as he did; but
as soon as he had taken Jandah prisoner, he raised
up his vizor, and Nazih recognised him: he kissed
him in excess of joy, saying, O Aboolfawaris, verily
thou hast done the deed of the most generous of
men, and thou hast well kindled the flame of war
and battle. By the faith of an Arab, had I or my
father known that thou wert to have staid at home,
we would not have followed Cais into this difficulty,
but we would have left him, confiding in the opinions
of Hadifah and Rebia. My lord, said Antar, it
does not become a slave to reproach his master :
this Jandah is he who murdered my lord, king
Zoheir: he is the accomplice of Khalid, son of
Giafer, and here his villany is rewarded. But, by
the faith of an Arab, the deliverance of King Zoheir’s
horse and sword is dearer to me than my conquest
over these horsemen, for by them Khalid deceived
us, as you know, in the defile. I must requite that
Khalid, and must abandon his land as a desert. But
now return with me to our party : and as they went
on, Antar thus recited :—‘* God has ennobled the
“ son of Shedad, and what his sword and the thrust
“with his spear have effected against the enemy :
“ our property was plundered from us in fear, and
“ our friends could not repose in their alarms. But
“ I grasped the chiefsof the Aamirites by mid-day,
“ and I shall pass an evening in joy, like a quaffer.


16 CAIS BEHEADS HIS FATHER’S MURDERER.


“of wine. I am a warrior that glories in his She-
“ dadian birth, whilst the fire of battle blazes on
“ the plain.”

Cais heard Antar’s verses, and recognising bin he
hastened to meet him. I am now indeed convinced.
Q Aboolfawaris, he said, and making his apologies,
he added, Think not that after the death of my father
and my brother I have had sufficient presence of
mind for the guidance of my conduct; indeed who-
ever volunteered his advice, I accepted it, and com-
muned with his heart. Antar accepted this apology,
and delivered over to him the murderer of his father.
Eh, said Cais to Jandah, with this sword thou didst
murder my father? Ay! said he. And with it,
pursued Cais, will I strike off thy head: and as he
spoke, he drew it forth from its scabbard, and as he
waved it in his hand, flashes of light shot from its
blade, and with it he smote Jandah, and severed his
head from his body. This being done, they re-
turned to the tents, and darkness soon coming on,-
the hostile tribe passed a night of despair; whilst
Khalid, meditating on what had passed, out of pre-
caution for his own person, directed his own country-
men to watch the tribe of Marah; Do not take any
notice till day dawns, and then we shall see what
the Absians will do with their chief, Harith.

- But as to the illustrious Absians, their spirits
revived at the arrival of their champion, Antar,
and at the amelioration of their affairs after such
agitation. King Cais assembled his chiefs and con-


DEBATE ABOUT KILLING HARITH. 17


sulted with them about Harith; the first who spoke
about releasing him was Rebia, for he wished to
reserve this calamity against Antar. My opinion
is, O King, that you set him at liberty. And
mine, said Shedad, that you strike off his head, and
yours too, Rebia, on account of what we have
suffered from his atrocities, you dotard! Every one
that spoke was of this opinion. At last said Asyed,
O my cousins, send for the man, and let us hear
what he has to say, and if there is in him any room
for favour, let him be pardoned; but if we find him
resolute in his perverseness, put him to death.
Every one approving of this advice, they produced
Harith in chains.

Well! thou son of an accursed mother, cried
Antar rising up, sword in hand, what induced thee
to hostilities against thy tribe and to aid their foes?
Nought induced me to such a deed but thou, re-
plied Harith. By the faith of an Arab, truth is
now the best course, O hero; my reason for this is,
that I have long stationed spies and scouts over
thee, till I heard of the death of King Zoheir, and
. that thy tribe was proceeding to avenge itself: so
I imagined thou must be of the party, and accord-
ingly I have done this deed: I said, I would also
have retaliation, but thou-hast vanquished me, and
shame is heaped on shame. But hast thou not
heard of. my exploits? said Antar. Yes, said he;
but my ambition glossed over my ignorance, and
I could not ever suppose that fortune would be.

VOL. IV. c


18 THEY PARDON HIM.


tray me, and that there was any one on the earth
to oppose me. But now I am become more modest.
I have learned that fortune can produce every
miracle. I have fallen into your power. I acknow-
ledge my crime. Annihilation is what I deserve.
Thou hast now only to put me to death, or pardon
me that I may-be thy slave for ever. By the faith
of an Arab, said Antar, if I thought that in thee
there was room for grace, thou shouldst be par-
doned: but I have heard of thee, that thou art a
man of perfidy; an impostor, neither regarding
protections, nor heeding hospitality, but one that
breaks his faith and his oaths. ‘Thou art right, O
Aboolfawaris, said Harith, this was my disposition,
but this day I have not the heart to harm either
one on horseback, or one on foot. Well, said Antar
to Cais, it will be as well to release him, and let him
return home, for I am in a merry mood after my
conquest. O Champion of the Absians, said Harith,
do not delay, that I may on thy account put to the
rout the armies of the tribe of Aamir, and white-
wash my face among these tribes; then will I return
home, and be thankful to thee. May God curse
him who will not extirpate them with the sword,
and that will not cut them off old and young! said
` Antar. I truly believe, my cousin, said Rebia, that
you are able to do so; but if you are not satisfied
with the oath of Harith, I will be his surety. So
Rebia took Harith away with him to the division
of the race of Zeead; and when he was alone with


HARITH JOINS THE ABSIANS. 19


him, he asked him what he really felt in his heart
with respect to Antar. O Rebia, said he, J must
positively contrive his death, and his destruction.
Yes, said Rebia, but at another time; for now we
are in want of both him and you: it is now advisa-
ble that you remain firm to your promise—there
will be time enough. ‘Thus they staid together,
till, the day dawning, the men started up, and the
warriors prepared: and lo! shouts burst forth from
the tribe of Aamir; and their hordes waved like
the sea over the desert, brandishing their swords :
the dust arose on high and spread far and wide. The
reason of this was, that Khalid had a spy among
the tribe of Abs, whom he had sent over night to
observe what was done to Harith. Early in the
morning he returned, and told him it was Antar
who had taken the horsemen prisoners, and that
Harith had amicably settled his affairs with his
tribe; and he has promised, added the spy, to de-
stroy our armies. This is just his nature, said
Khalid, for he cannot adhere long to his friends,
or ever be sincere with his allies. But it would be
expedient for us to begin with them, before they
begin with us. Thus saying, he ordered his people
to surround the tribe of Marah, and ply the sword
among them: and they did so. As soon as Harith
heard the shouts of his companions, he cried out,
O, by the Arabs, the tribe of Marah is destroyed.
Alas! we have not succeeded: and he made the
attack,—he, and Rebia, and his brother, followed
c2


20 KHALID I8 BEATEN AND RETREATS.


by a thousand Fazarah horsemen, and some others
from the tribe of Abs, headed by King Cais. The
Absians assaulted the left of the Aamirites, and
Antar led them on. Heroes were strewed on the
plain: the multitudes were hustled together : coate
of mail sparkled: swords cut in twain: the thou-
sands rushed to the fight: Indian scimitars were
shivered ; and the Semhirian spears were shattered
and spht: calamities fell heavy on the tribe of
Aamir. Noble pride and spirit animated the Ab-
sians. Antar performed deeds no Knight of Igno-
rance ever executed ; for his thrusts anticipated the
breath, and his assaults were incomprehensible—
his shout was, Retaliation for King Zoheir and Shas!
and he slew every hero he trampled down. Thus
they continued till evening came on, when they
separated. Harith had encountered the Brandisher
of Spears, and passed the rest of the day in fighting
and dealing spear-thrusts that would have turned
children grey; and at the close of the day both
were wounded and nearly dead. But when the two
armies separated, Khalid, perceiving that his troops
were discomfited, and that their numbers were
greatly diminished, assembled the chieftains, and
set out on his march home; whilst the Absians re-
tired exulting at the victory and conquest they had
' gained ; and there was not one but extolled Antar;
and when they heard of Khalid’s departure, Antar
wished to follow them, but Cais refused, on account
of the great fatigue and distresses they had already


THE PARTIES SEPARATE. ` 21


endured. They laid down to rest in the tents, tll
God dawned with the day. Well, said Antar to
King Cais, it will be but proper to give this booty
to the tribes of Fazarah and Ghiftan, and that we
reward them well and abundantly, and send them’
contented back to their homes and country. But
let. us surprise the land of Aamir; let none but ,
ourselves assail them; let us do our own business
ourselves. Cais approved of this plan, and he dis-
tributed the arms and the armour, saying to Hadifah,
O my cousin, we have now no occasion to trouble:
you, for you have been wounded in our service, and:
he that wounded you is your nearest relation. Rebia
has arranged Harith’s affair with us, and the man
will march home in company with you. It would
be as well. that you should not reproach him, for
many of his men have been slain in this attack.
Thus he sent them away, and there only remained
with the Absians a thousand of the tribe of Ghiftan,
with their chief, Jamrah, son of Sabic; for he was
nearly allied to King Zoheir, and he swore he would
not return home till he had taken retaliation for
King Zoherr.

The next day, King Cais marched with his
troops, amounting, exclusive of the Ghiftanians, to
five thousand horsemen. The chief Antar headed:
the army.; and with him was Asyed, and Oorwabh,
and Nazih; and thus he elegized King Zoheir :—

“ Behold! we have opposed the edges of the
 scimitars and the barbs of the spears on the swift-


22 ANTAR’S EXULTATION AND GRIEF.


footed coursers. To engage the foe we have
“ sufficient force, were they even like the tem-
“ pestuousocean. There is no gloryin numbers; but
“ the glory of warriots was the dispersion of these
“armies. Ask the Absians of me, O Ibla, when
“ the hordes of Kelab came against me with the
“ tribes of Ghani and Aamir, rolling like the waves
“of the sea under the cloud-shadowed sky, con-
“‘ vulsed by the furious tread of the horses’ hoofs.
s How they fled and the spears on their backs
“ pierced their kidnies between their entrails and
‘‘ their hypocondres; had they stood firm, I would
« have left behind, on the desert, their bones and
‘‘ flesh for the rapacious eagles; how well my tribe
« exerted itself without the aid of Zalim’s son!
« foul was his act, his word perfidious. He said
‘‘ there was none on earth like him; but when he
<‘ encountered me, then shone forth the glory of
<¢ glories; he was to our foes an ally and assistant ;
“ but he retreated from my sword, frustrated and
“ of no avail. I love the tribe of Abs, and when
“ blood flows, the friendship of a slave is sincere,
‘and his word is true and faithful. They ap-
“proached, when they had sent me away, and
« encountered the spears flashing with light: they
« felled Zoheir, and the lacerating spears, and
s lances, and scimitars clashed over him. He in
« his power was the death of men; but he who was
« the cause of death, has now visited the inhabitant
« of the tombs. O woe, woe! that his foes have


HE AGAIN BEATS THE AAMIRITES. 93


“ triumphed over him, the crown of the Absians
“ and all the tribes! But I will not allow Khalid,
“ now Zoheir is gone and murdered, a resting-place
& but in the bowels of the graves. How can I
“ sleep by night, and not seek revenge? for he was
“ my resource in every difficulty.”

When Antar had finished his verses, his party
thanked him for the excellence of his achievements ;
and they continued traversing the deserts, and in
their hearts was a burning flame against Khalid.
In the meantime, Khalid reached his own country,
and there remained with him out of all his assembled
host, only. ten thousand horsemen (for every clan
sought its home and departed). His own tribe
advised him to send the women and families to the
mountain-tops: thus having secured their wives
and property, they prepared to meet their foes.

The next day arrived the Absians, and their
armour glittered, as they surrounded the tribe of
Aamir on all sides. But Khalid, seeing their scanty
numbers, was delighted. O my cousins, he cried,
rejoice, for they are only come with a small party.
He attacked, and his warriors followed him, but he
saw in the Absians blows that turned infants grey. |
The spears pierced through every mortal part of
their bodies; the dust and clouds of sand increased
till darkness came on and the two armies separated ;
but the Absians had greatly the advantage over
the Aamirites; for Antar, knowing how they re-
lied on him, did more than he had promised, and


'
24 KHALID’S DISMAY AND RESOLUTION.


performed deeds no one could surpass. Before
evening, twelve hundred Aamirites were slain, but
only seventy of the Absians. Antar retired, clothed
m a scarlet robe of the blood of horsemen; eleven
horses had been killed under him, for none but
Abjer could serve him (now Abjer was at home;
and Antar had come on a miserable hack). When
King Cais saw Antar’s resolution and intrepidity,
he gloried in him, and from that hour he felt con-
vinced that his kingdom would not last but by his
assistance; so he went to meet him and thanked
him, and he and his brothers treated him with
every kindness. But the tribe of Aamir retired in
the deepest consternation, and dispirited at the loss
of their chiefs, and as they stated in their complaints
to Khalid, what they had experienced from Antar’s
sword, O my cousins, said he, your excuses are
indeed well-founded this time, for it was this black
slave that routed us with his attacks; and if I do
not take a great part of the battle on myself, we
shall be completely cut up; and with this intention
he reposed till the day shone and the men sprung
up for the contest and battle.

The ranks were scarcely drawn up, or the swords
unsheathed, when lo! out started a knight from the
tribe of Aamir, and advancing towards the Absians,
‘O tribe of Adnan! O band of heroes! he ex-
claimed, I have come forth this day to the field to
protect the women and families, and I will try my-
self in the scene of slaughter, and by the. faith of


AAMIR, SON OF TOFEIL. _ 25


an Arab, I have not completed my twentieth year ;
never have I quitted the tents and dwellings of my
tribe: come forth against me, any one whose kin-
dred equals mine, for I am, by the faith of an Arab,
of an illustrious tribe—renowned for their patience
in the day of tumults. I am called Aamir, the son
of Tofeil, and the Brandisher of Spears is my ma-
ternal uncle, and were he not wounded he would
not acquiesce in this my wish. Then galloping
and charging, he thus spoke :—

“ Do not, O my mother, indulge in thy sorrows
‘“‘ for me: have patience on the day of my con-
& test and my absence. Let me singly act in the
‘¢ quest of glory with the edge of my. well-propor-
& tioned Indian scimitar. Let me be proclaimed
‘‘ through the exalted mansions of renown for the
‘¢ piercing barb of my supple spear. Who, when
‘¢ in quest of glory, feels conscious that this sport is
“c of bitter flavour ? Perhaps I may, with the edge
‘ of my sword, extinguish the flame of the fiercely-
“ burning battle.: I will show myself to the foe;
‘“‘ and I will rescue my tribe from the lions on their
“ high-mettled steeds; or I will meet my fate with
s the mangling spear, for whose sting there is no
“ balm. I will abandon my mother to pour out her
& sorrows in childless misery, and to shed her tears
“ of anguish.”

He had scarcely finished his verses, when an
Absian horseman galloped against him, and pre-
sented himself before him. This was a knight of |


26 COMBAT OF AAMIR AND CARWASH.


exceeding courage; firm and resolute in the com-
bat: over him was a strong corselet and a cleaving
sword; round his shoulder was slung a lacerating
spear; beneath him was a swift courser: but Aamir
permitted him neither to gallop nor to charge, before
he pierced him between the paps, and forced his
spear through his shoulders. He again repeated
his challenge, and a second came forth, but he slew
him instantly. O Absian tribe, by the faith of an
Arab, he cried in his boasts and his vaunts, ye are
the horsemen of the age, and the heroes of Adnan;
but I am of little experience in battle. Come out
against me, brave as ye are, ye heroes! despise not
my youth—let me try myself with some of your
knights, and your warriors. When the Absians
heard this harangue, and saw what deeds Aamir
had effected, they rushed upon him from all sides,
and issued forth against him like sea-monsters,
brandishing their spears and their swords. But a
knight, beautiful in form, and short in speech, anti-
cipated them all. He was perfect in every point,
and was called Carwash, son of Hani, and cousin
to King Cais. The horsemen, seeing him advance,
halted, and retired in awe of him. Carwash assailed
Aamir: they began the attack: they thrust with
their spears till they were shivered, and smote with
their swords till they were shattered; and their
horses died under them. ‘They continued in this
perilous contest till mid-day, when the dust clear-
ing away from them, lo! Aamir came forth with


AAMIR’S REPEATED BOASTS AND CHALLENGE. 27


Carwash, his prisoner, and driving him away like a
camel. The horsemen checked themselves from
rushing into the scene of action; but Antar was
greatly exasperated, and his eyes were red as blood
—he resolved on darting out against him, but
Nazih anticipated him, and engaged Aamir till the
evening, when each quitted his antagonist and de-
scribed what he had experienced that day. As
Aamir retired to his party, his cousins met him and
congratulated him on his safety. As to Khalid, he
was in ecstasies of joy—it was impossible to be more
so. But the tribe of Abs was impatient for the mor-
row ; and as soon as the obscunity of night departed
and the day shone bright, the warriors sprung for-
ward for the fight and the contest, and Aamir, son
of Tofeil, was foremost on the plain, and thus spoke:

‘¢ The mother of Aamir exerted her influence to
“ prevent my mounting at the voice of the herald.
“ She would keep me back, fearful of death on the
“ edge of the Indian blades. Do not be obstinate or
“& perverse, O mother, death is ordained by fate, and
“ it is near as well as at a distance. Let me plunge
« into the seas of deaths with the light and noble
‘“‘ chargers. O, tribe of Abs, there is no refuge from
‘“ my sword, or my spear, nor from death. There-
‘‘ fore either retreat or stand firm. You will ever
“ find in me a knight that never flinches from the
‘¢ scene of battle.”

Aamir, having concluded his verses, rushed to the
combat and repeated the challenge. Soon came forth


28 o HE IS TAKEN BY ANTAR.


Oorwah ; but Antar dismissed him, and descended
upon Aamir, saying, Come on, on to the field of
battle! Eh! thou base-born! cried Aamir, recog-
nizing him, I will not fight with one whose birth is so
mean.and vile among the Arabs. I say this not out
of fear of thee, nor of death. But my mother saw
me in a dream, and went to a soothsayer to whom
she imparted the secret ; and he said to her, Let not
your son contend with a black slave. Eh, thou
bastard ! cried Antar, and shall I, on account of thy:
mother’s visions, permit thee to destroy the horse-
men of the tribes of Abs and Adnan in the field
of battle? Thus saying, he shouted at Aamir and
rushed upon him, and Aamir was compelled to meet
him. A dreadful combat ensued between them—it
was a contest that would melt even the hardest rocks,
and stupefy the eyeballs and ternfy the bravest war-
riors. ` They continued in this state till the warriors
were astounded; but when Antar perceived his in-
trepidity he closed upon him, and hemming him in
so close that stirrup grated stirrup, he grasped the
rings of his coat of mail and breastplate and held him
up in his hand, like a sparrow in the talons of a fe-
rocious hawk, and threw him over to Shiboob, who
bound fast his shoulders and tied down his arms and
sides, and as he. was going to drive him away to-
wards the Absians, lo ! Aamir’s mother rushed forth,
crying out, and her slaves were leading along Car-
wash, son of Hani : O Aboolfawaris, she exclaimed,
force not my son to taste of the meat of captivity ;


KHALID CHALLENGES CAIS. 29


here is Carwash at your disposal, only release my son,
Aamir, as his ransom. Antar hailed Shiboob, and
ordered him tolet Aamir go; and having thus rescued
Carwash, he retired from the scene of multitudes.
Now came on the night of obscurity, and let down
its canopy over the two horizons. The two armies
reposed till the morning dawned, when mounted the
tribe of Abs and the tribe of Aamir ; and the troops
being drawn up in array, lo! Khalid issued forth be-
tween the hostile ranks on a white and black charger
indefatigable and unflinching; he was completely
enclosed in armour, and hecricd out in a loud voice,
Eh, O sons of King Zoheir, how long must last this _
contest, this destruction of warriors, this dishonour of
wives and women? This is a circumstance no high-
bosn hero can endure. I am he who slew your
father Zoheir and your brother Shas. I will not
suffer any one to aid me in this affair; here am I in
person, come forth against me one by one, but let
no one as the first come forth but your King Cais;
for he has taken the seat of his father, and I am the
King of the tribe of Aamir and the chief of the
Hordes and the Clans; whoever shall slay his an-
tagonist, let him succeed im his projects and complete
his hopes. King Cais heard this, and the affliction
fell heavy on him ; and thus too were his brothers,
and there was not one but welcomed death. Antar
marked their situation; he roared and bellowed :
What is the matter, O King? he cried; Cannot
one of ye command himself to go out against him ?


80 THEIR FURIOUS COMBAT.


Well, let me bring him to you a prisoner. I will
lay him down before you abject and debased. O
my cousin, said King Cais, by thy life, return to thy
post and let me appease my heart with Khalid, and
I will not let the Arabs look on me as one incapable
and inefficient ; so he moved forward on the back of
Caasa, and rushed against Khalid. Upon this, Antar
_ retired, but resolved in his own mind that if he should
see King Cais overpowered by Khalid, he would
make an attack and assist him. Cais encountered
Khalid, and between them was a contest and com-
bat that seared the eyeballs. They continued tll
the honour of chivalry was rent and mangled, and
they were charging and staggering till their spears
were split in their hands; they threw them on the
ground—they grasped their sparkling blades, as in- —
struments more ready for the plunder of lives, and
they continued this conflict till also their swords were
shivered; they returned their fragments to their
scabbards, and grasped each other on their horses’
backs with all their might and main, and both fell to
the ground, both firmly clinging to each other ; there
they wrestled and struggled till death and the worst
of evils was at hand. It was tlien the two armies
attacked, and the troops rushed forward. It was
then horsemen shouted from every quarter. It was
then they waved their spears and their scimtars. It
was then rage and indignation violently seized An-
tar, and he advanced to see how it was with Cais;
but Rebia, son of Ocail, met him, and the heart of


REBIA SLAIN; KHALID A PRISONER. $I


each was full of the day in the defile and the circum-
stances that befel them. The horsemen of the two
tribes moved towards their respective kings, like frag-
ments of clouds, and the combat and the battle raged
fiercely among them. Arab necks were hewn off, and
the dust rose up like clouds, and all around them was
like the darkness of night. The brothers of King
Cais made a furious assault and fought in the most
desperate manner. Antar and Rebia, son of Ocail,
were also engaged in a combat that transformed
youth to age. . Antar, indeed, alarmed lest death and
extinction should fall upon Cais, burst on Rebia
with the rush of a lion, and with a shout as if it were
thunder when it crashes. Rebia was petrified with
horror and aghast with affright, and in this state of
consternation, Antar pierced him with his spear
through the chest, and drove it out sparkling through
his back, and instantly renewed his attack against
the Aamirites like a savage lion ; he felled down the
horsemen; he cut through their comrades till he
came up with the sons of King Zoheir and Khalid,
who only considered them all as one individual. But
Antar halted, and, extending wide his arm with his
sword, he was about to slay Khalid, when lo! Rebia,
son of Zeead, shouted out, Hold! O Aboolfawaris,
for Malik, son of Zoheir, and my brother Amarah
are fallen his prisoners, and if you put Khalid to
death they will both be slaughtered, and ruin must
be our doom. Thus was Antar most grievously
distressed ; he ordered Shiboob to bind him fast, and


$2 PRINCE MALIK AND AMARATI TAKEN.


Khalid felt assured of death. But when Cais saw
this he sprung on his feet, and Antar waited for him ;
alarmed at his situation, he encouraged him, and sent
Shiboob for a horse and mounted him. Conduct
my Lord from the terrors of the fight, said Antar to
Shiboob, that I may disperse these horsemen, and
he assaulted the army and forced them to a disgrace-
ful retreat, overthrowing warriors and destroying the
brave, till the evening closed ir. ‘The Aamirites
were completely routed. The Absians returned
from the pursuit without any loss, not even to the
value of a halter; and when they alighted to rest,
they hastened to King Cais and congratulated him
on his safety. Rebia informed him of the captivity
of Malik and his brother Amarah. O Rebia, said .
Cais, much afflicted, my brother and thy brother cen
never be liberated, but by the deliverance of this
cuckold. Were it not so, I would strike off his head
and would drink of his blood. Guard him till we to-
morrow ransom our prisoners by him, and we must
wait some future event for him. My lord, said Antar,
distress not yourself about the deliverance of our
prisoners; if he escapes from me this day, he will not
escape to-morrow ; and had I not been occupied with
the death of that Rebia, son of Ocail, I would soon
have made him drink of the cup of annihilation be-
fore this accident had happened. This night let the
tribe of Aamir repose with their wives and families
on the summits of the mountains, but to-morrow we


will proceed on foot against them with sword and


MALIK AND AMARAH SET FREE. 33


buckler, and we will scatter them about like leavès.
Cais was much pleased, and his sorrows were re-
lieved. ‘They slept till dawn, when they sent for
Khalid, and informed him of their intentions, and
Aesianded of him his ransom, to which he assented
with oaths, in which the Arabs have the firmest
reliance. Cais accordingly set him at liberty, and
he departed for his tribe. But when he was about
to deliver Malik and Amarah, the tribe of Aamir
would not obey him, saying, We must hang these.
two, and revenge ourselves on them. The Absians
indeed have slain our chiefs, and they will not quit
us till they have entirely destroyed us.—Cousins,
replied Khalid, in dismay, I have sworn, to Cais
by the severest oaths and the pillars, so what means
this? Were we to be slaughtered like so many
sheep, I cannot possibly perjure myself, and become
a liar and a traitor; particularly whilst we are thus
reduced and disgraced. We must exert all our
strength in meeting the foe. I will assemble all
who have blood and retaliation against them, and I
` will not desist till I have rooted out every trace of
the tribe of Abs. Upon this, the hearts of.the
Aamirites being reconciled, he sent for Prince Malik
and Amarah, and made them swear that their tribe
should return home for the remainder of the year.
Having given the required oath, they were sent
“down the mountain, mounted on noble horses, and
very grateful for their security. But as soon as
they reached their tribe, and ee what had


VOL. IV. D


24 THR ABSIANS RETINE HOME


passed, May God curse the tribe of Aamir! sud
: Cais, this is treachery and villany.—Khalid will
decidedly, said Rebia, assemble against us his clans,
and will write to every one that rides or walks;
however, in a second rencontre we will root out
every trace of them. King Cais thought this plan
the most expedient; so he departed for his family
and home. But Antar’s heart was not at rest in
retreating from the tribe of Aamir; and as-he de-
scribed what had occurred to him and his tribe, he
thus recited :

‘ Ah, O Ibla! my youth is wasted, and the
“ period of thy absence inflicts repeated tortures.
« My love for thee is oppressive; it increases daily,
“ as age grows on youth. For thee I have passed
“ the revolutions of my fate, till my life fleets away,
‘‘ and my patience is become my chastisement. I
‘< have encountered the foe; I have protected the
“tribe; but they despise me, and have no regard
“ for my existence. Ask of me, O Ibla! in the
“ day of adversity, the tribes of Aamir and Kelab.
“« How many knights I have left stretched out,
‘‘ ther hands deep died with gore! They moved
“ hither m my absence, and they brandished their
“< spears, glittering like the shooting stars. How
“ many lions have rushed at me, and in disgrace
‘¢ have cast away their spears on the ground! They
“ ery out at me, and I answer them with the spear-
& thrust, deciding before a reply. I have slain
* two hundred free-born of them, and a thousand


ANTAR DISAPPEARS. 35


“im the defiles and the sandhills. Ha! let Khalid
“ rejoice in the calamities of my tribe; but the day
“ of his extinction shall be the most tremendous of
“ all the periods of misfortune.” -

They continued traversing the deserts night and
day, and Antar guarding them from the enemy,
all they came near home; and when there only
remained one night’s march, on a sudden Antar
was not to be heard of, and they could not trace
him any where. King Cais was aghast and bewil-
dered, as were also his brothers, and all Antar’s
friends; but his inveterate haters rejoiced in his

absence, particularly Rebia and his despicable bro-
` ther, and Malik, Ibla’s father; and though Cais
‘stopped the march of his people, and sent horsemen
right and left till the evening, they returned dis-
appointed and unsuccessful. By the faith of an
Arab, said King Cais, I will not stir from hence till
I know what has happened to our cousin.—This,
said Amarah, would show but little wisdom and
sagacity in you, that the Chiefs of Abs and Adnan
should be kept waiting for a black slave, a worth-
less, mean fellow.—O Amarah! exclaimed King
Cais, highly exasperated at such language, art thou
not ashamed even to mention thy cousin. in his ab-
sence ? it was but the other day he rescued thee from
captivity. By the faith of an Arab, were Antar
here present, I would not screen thee from him.—
O disgrace, disgrace at thy words; my cousin f
cried Amarah.—Ay, he is thy cousin, said King

D2


36 MALIK’S RAGE AGAINST HIS WIFE.


Cais, whether thou wilt: or not; and were he not,
not a head would be ‘raised towards the tribe of
‘Abs; of no esteem would they be among men.—It
will be as well, said Rebia, that we wait for our
cousin, till he comes. However, King Cais marched
in the morning, yet greatly afflicted and distressed
at the loss of Antar, the lion warrior; and when
they reached the dwellings, they inquired about
him, but no one could give any information of him.
Every one entered his own abode, and joined his
children and family. Malik, Ibla’s father, having
now heard from some of the women all that had
passed between his daughter and Antar, when the
tribe marched against the Aamirites, ran at her
with his drawn sword, and roared to his wife, Thou
foul wretch ! wert thou not ashamed for thy child,
that she should appear openly in the presence of
Antar, and converse with him? Thou hast taught
her to demand presents and goods of him, and it is
thy wish to load me with infamy among men and
women.—I had not done this, replied she, but that
I saw you inclined towards him, and that you had
bestowed her on him in marriage. But now, if
your heart is estranged from him, I will never let
him see her again.


ANTAR REAPPEARS. 37


CHAPTER XXIX.


Hapira# and his brothers hearing of King Cais’s
return, took with them a party of the Fazarah tribe,
and came to compliment him on his safety, and con-
gratulate him on his victory and triumph. Cais
made a splendid feast for them, to which he invited
the chiefs of the Absians and his brothers, and in-
formed them of the loss of Antar. Hadifah ap-
peared greatly affected, and exhibited the reverse
of what he felt. ‘They ate meat and drank wine
till mid-day, when the: King, hearing some loud ac-
clamations in the tents, asked what was the matter.
Shiboob and his brother Antar are returned, was
the general cry; when lo! Antar arrived. He
saluted the Absians, and he was on horseback.
King Cais inquired the cause of his absence. O
King, he replied, I was on the service of one who
deserved no duty at my hands; for he is of a vil-
lanous disposition, and of a foul origin——To what
dost thou allude by that? said Cais. Hear my
tale, O King, said he, and you will acknowledge I
am right. On the night that you missed me, I had
launched out into the desert, fearful of the night-
wanderers and the robbers on your account; and
whilst I was thus employed, a figure appeared
before me. I went forward, and lo! it was & va-


38 THE CAUSE OF HIS ABSENCE.


grant Arab on his journey. I hailed him; and to
my inquiries, Warrior, said he, I am a poor, ill-
used fellow. I am going to the tribe of Abs, to
make a demand of Rebia.—I am, said I, O Arab,
one of the slaves of Rebia, so tell me what he owes
you.— Warrior, he replied, I am called Basharah,
son of Mabid, and I have a daughter, who was
demanded in marriage of me. I consented; and
taking with me one hundred she-camels, I set out
for the valley of Deecar, that I might purchase
with their produce some clothes, with which to set
off my daughter; but some plundering horse met
me and waylaid me; they carried away my camels,
but I escaped on this steed. Being certain the
party were of the tribe of Kenanah, I took the
nearest road, saying to myself, I will go to the
tribe of Abs, to my friend Rebia. On this, I said
to him, Rejoice, O Arab, for I am his deputy:
lead on, and conduct me to your enemies, that I
may.realise your wishes. He proceeded, whilst I
followed till the day dawned, when lo! we came
upon a troop near the water of Career, and the
land of Nefeer: there were forty horsemen; five
and twenty of whom I slew, and the rest ran away.
I restored to the man the horses, and the she-camels
and he-camels, with which being well satisfied and
grateful, he repaired to the family of Zeead. I
returned, and have now erected for them a strong
columned building; but I find them talking in-
famously of me, and abusing my mother for adul-
tery: this is all my reward, and thus you may


QUARREL OF ANTAR AND ANARAN. . 939


distinguish the legitimate-born from bastards. How
long, thou son of Zeead, added he, turning sharply
on Amarah, must this insolence last? for by him
who has clothed the night in darkness, if thou dost
not cease talking foully of me, and mend thy
manners, I will hack thy limbs with this sword.
What! thou bastard, cried Amarah, jumping up
and unsheathing his sword, such language to me!
Darest thou thus impertinently insult me among
the chiefs? At my pastures I have a thousand
slaves such as thee; and he made at Antar sword
in hand. But the others rose up and checked him ;
and Rebia called out, reproaching and abusing
him : he ordered him to be silent, and taking the
sword out of his hand, said, Is this a recompense
for our cousin, who has exposed his life for us?
But Antar moved silently away, and went home
greatly ashamed on account of Cais, for he had
vexed him, and disturbed the entertainment. When
Antar reached his mother’s tent, she hung upon
him and wept from excess of joy and love.

Now King Cais had been greatly distressed at
this interruption; but Rebia soothed his heart,
saying, It is quite impossible that my brother and
Antar can ever meet in the same place again; but
I have in my heart something I should wish to do.
Thus they continued over their cups of wine and
conversing, and made Hadifah and Ham! drmk,
and loaded them with all manner of favours. Thus
it continued whilst the day withdrew its light, and


40 THE FAMILY OF ZEEAD LEAVE THE TENTS.


the night shaded them in its darkness till morning,
when Hadrfah and his brother returned home.

But Rebia and his brothers quitted the ‘tents,
and, together with their dependants, descended into
the valley of Yamooriyah, also accompanicd by
their horsemen and warriors, and those who hated
Antar, that they might seek the means of annoying
him. As soon as this circumstance was made known —
to King Cais, he disregarded it, and cursing them,
Wherever they go, cried he, may death overtake
them! And thus he cast them from his heart,
saying to the Arab chiefs that'surrounded him, Ye
know, my cousins, that King Zoheir admitted Antar
to our birth and parentage, and called him cousin,
and accepting him as such, he raised him to honour
and legitimacy. Now, whenever Amarah and Antar
meet, they quarrel and disturb the union of the
tribe; and should they remain separate, it will be
better than their living together. , Antar every day
associated with King Cais, and attached himself to
him, and thus they continued many days and nights.
But Antar, on his arrival, having heard what had
passed between his uncle Malik and his wife, and
how he had attempted to kill her, remained en-
tirely with his mother. In the mean time, King
Cais became very anxious for the termination of
the year, on account of Khalid, son of Giafer, who
he understood had thrown himself on Direed, son
of Samah, chief of the tribes of Howazin, and
Jeshm and Hamadan, and had induced him to pro-


. CAIS GOES IN QUEST OF ARMS. 41


mise his assistance with ten thousand horsemen
against the tribe of Abs.

This Direed was four hundred and fifty years
old, and by the Arabs he was called the Mill-stone
of War. He was referred to on every difficult
point, on account of his great age, and his orders
were obeyed among the Arabs like King Numan’s,
So when King Cais heard this, he was in dismay:
This, he cried, is indeed complete ruin! He then
assembled the Absian chiefs, and consulted about
what he should do. Comfort your mind and
brighten your eye, exclaimed they all, for were
Khalid to come against us with the armies of
Chosroe, we will fight till we die in your presence.
O King, said Antar, easy let it lie on thee, and on
the sepulchre of King Zoheir! I will disperse the
armies of our foes, and will not leave one of them
alive. The words of Antar revived him, and feel-
ing re-assured: O Aboolfawaris, said he, you in-
deed can speak and act!

From that day they made preparations for war,
and searched for arms; but only finding a small
quantity, Cais consigned the country to the care of
Antar, and leaving his uncle in his place, he took a
_ noble string of he and she camels, and resolved on
selling them, in order to purchase with their pro-
duce some arms and weapons. He set out for
Medina Yathreb, for that was the nearest place,
and its chief was called Ajijah, son of Jellah,
the Yathrabee; and he was the brother of Abdool-
motallab on the mother’s side; and between him


492 DAVIDEAN COAT OF MAIL


and King Cais there existed a friendship of long
standing, from the time of his father King Zoheir;
and when King Cais reached Medina Yathreb,
Ajijah was much pleased, and received him very
kindly. Cais related his adventures, and that he
was come to purchase arms. Now Cais having
heard that Ajijah had a coat of mail of the work-
manship of David, and exquisitely riveted, whose
like no one possessed; he addressed him, saying,
O Chief, I have heard that you have a coat of mail
made by David, which I am anxious to purchase,
that in it I may go against my enemies, and I will
give you its value instead. O Cais, said Ajijah, I
would have given it you, but Khalid has already
asked me for it, and praised me in his verses. What
are the verses, said Cais, in which he praised you ?
Let me know them; and Ajijah thus repeated :

« When I demanded a favour from the race of
“ Yathreb, Ebe Amroo cried out, and Ajijah con-
“ sented. Remain under the protection of a Yath-
“ rabee, for if thou stayest there, a shadow will
“ even dread thy power. I saw a man, over the
“ brilliancy of whose countenance was a vizor, by
« which the sun was hid or shone. I have a
¢ station in glory, in honour, and on high, but his
« mansion is above the two Pisces. If he brandishes
“ his sword on the day of horrors, thou mayest see
< the rays of his sabre flashing with death ; and were
s his hand and the cloud impregnated with rain, to
“ exhibit their bounties, his beneficence would en-
« dure, and the cloud desist. In his house every


WHICH HE RECEIVES FROM AJIJAH. 43


“ fugitive is safe, and with his donations he even
‘< satisfies the unsatiable. Virtues were of old in
« Jellah, and since him Ajijah has imitated him.”
On hearing these verses, Cais was astonished at
their import and allusion: By the faith of an Arab,
said he, I cannot blame or reproach you. Cais re-
mained with Ajijah till morning, and having pur-
chased all the arms he wanted, Ajijah questioned
him, saying, O Cais, have you purchased the arms?
` Yes, said he. Well then, said Ajijah, bid now for
the coat of mail. Cais was pleased; but said, By
the faith of an Arab, of all my trifling articles, I
have now only remaining one hundred camels: so
take them, whether it be much or little, and excuse
me for the deficiency. On this, he sent for the
coat of mail, and it was of great length in the skirts.
Take it, O Cais, said he, let it be considered as a
purchase made for a hundred she-camels, though,
in fact, it is a present from me to you. So he took
one of the she-camels out of the hundred, and re-
stored the remainder to Cais, who was very grateful,
and in three days, having procured every thing he
wanted, he took leave of Ajijah, and setting out for
his own country, he reached the valley of Yamou-
riyeh, whence he sent home his arms with his slaves,
and proceeded unattended to Rebia, who, being
told of his arrival, met him, and complimented him,
receiving him hospitably, and making him welcome.
In the course of conversation, Cais asked his advice
about his attacking Khalid and the Aamirites. My
cousin, said Rebia, we are all yours, and at your


4A REBIA PURLOINS IT FRON HIM,


disposal, But whither have you been travelling?
I have been to Medina Yathreb to purchase some
arms. And where, said Rebia, are your purchases ?
I have sent them home, said Cais, with the slaves.
Rebia stared about, and at last espied his port-
manteau, which was full. O my cousin, said he,
what is in your portmanteau? Cais laughed. O -
my cousin, said he, there is init what would surprise
you indeed, were you to see it. - Let me see it then,
said Rebia. Cais alighted and took out the coat of
mail of Ajijah, and opened it before Rebia, who
was astonished. O Cais, said he, whence came you
by this? This is, said he, the coat of mail of
Ajijah, son of Jellah, the Yathrabee, and he has
made me a present of it. O Cais, said he, if that
man made you a present of any thing, it must be
invaluable; and Rebia stood up and put on the
coat of mail, and though he was very tall, it came
down to his heels. He walked away with it and
entered the tents; then rushing out with a drawn
sword in his hand, he cried out to Cais, This is my
coat of mail! it was stolen from me, and there are
my marks on it, this very flaw in the sleeves; and
if you do not tell me all about it, I will sue you for
it, and he recited these verses: |
= © O Cais, my coat of mail I never sold, neither
s did I give it away ; it was stolen from me by some
“ of the Arab hordes: I am not one that speaks
s falsehoods—no ; by the truth of Him who is con-
“cealed from sight! It happened by chance there
‘¢ was a flaw on it, and it will serve as a proof on


AND LAUGHS HIM TO SCORN. 45


“all points. By God, were you not nearly related
“ to me, I would bring down death upon you, even
“in the month of Rejib.”

Cais was stupefied for a time: Son of Zeead, he
said, what outrage is this? Dost wish to purloin
my coat of mail by such a frivolous pretence? And
thus he expressed himself:

“ Wretch! thou wouldst purloin my coat of mail
“ by fraud, by foul accusations and falsehoods : the
“ coat of mail belonged to Ajijah, son of Jellah, the
“ Yathrabee. Talk not such nonsense; thou art
“ nomore a child. By the truth of Him who spread
“ the wings of nocturnal obscurity, I will not give
“ it up, were even my father alive.”

* Upon this, they disputed soley in words, and
a serious quarrel ensued, and they abused each other
most virulently. The Arabs assembled round them,
but Cais was unable to contend with Rebia and his
Arabs, for he was alone. So he calmed them with
his words, whilst the family of Zeead laughed at
him. Away, O Cais, said Amarah, to your family;
we will restore ìt to you, but should it happen that
we do not return it, send to us your champion An-
tar, son of Shedad; let him come here and rescue
it from these horsemen.

Cais, being now aware they only sought to quarrel
and provoke him, mounted his camel and returned
home. He hastened to his wife, Rebia’s daughter,
and said to her, If I abandon my coat of mail to
your father, all the Arabs will accuse me of imbe-
cility over the deserts and the wastes, and will re-


© This quarrel is an historical fact.


46 JEMANAH ATTEMPTS TO RECOVER IT.


duce me to infamy and disgrace. O my father, cried
his daughter Jemanah (and she was the most beau-
tiful of the daughters of Arabia; she could even
compose poetry, so that she was quite a proverb), I
will restore to you your coat of mail, for my grand-
father Rebia is very fond of me. Do so, O Je-
manah, said her father, do what you please.

Upon this she mounted her camel, and taking a
slave with her, she went to the valley of Yamoor,
where, as she entered the tent of her grandfather,
he stood up to receive her, and saluting her, treated
her with the greatest kindness, saying, What has
brought thee hither,O Jemanah? Iam come, re-
plied she, on account of my father’s coat of mail.
Here I am; send me not back disappointed, for I
am thy favourite. Yes, said Rebia, in his wily man-
ner, when I have fought Khalid with it, I will return
it to him. Jemanah, perceiving that he would per-
sist in his obstinacy, thus addressed him :

« My father will not permit that his coat of mail
“ should be purloimed from him, and my grand-
ss father consents to purloin the coat of mail from
“6 my father. My father’s judgment is the judgment
“ of a prudent and cautious man; but the conduct
& of my grandfather is the conduct of an oppressor
“ and a tyrant. Theson of Zoheir will not give up
‘< his coat of mail, neither will the som of Zeead yield
“ to salutary counsel. O Cais, this coat of mail was
“ left with thee, as an act of generosity, for the bet-
4 tle that turns infants prey: so I fear that Antar,
“ who plunges into the horse-dust, will not yield it.”


AXTAR’S FURY AT THIS FRAUD. 47


As soon as Jemanah had finished she departed,
and repaired to her father. May God be with thee,
O my father ! said she: if it be possible for thee to
resign the coat of mail, give it up; for now that he
has denied me, he will resign it to no one. And if
thou dost dispute with him, he will dispute with
thee; and if thou wilt fight with him, he will fight
with thee: thus will the tranquillity of the tribe be
dissolved. Very well, said Cais. But the news soon
spread about the dwellings of the Absians, and it
came at last to Antar, who was exceedingly indig-
nant, and went to King Cais, to whom he said, How!
hast thou been cajoled by thy enemies? and thou
the king of the age! and canst thou submit to such
disgrace and infamy? If thou art willing to have
thy coat of mail rescued, I will soon redeem it for
thee, ay, before to-morrow’s dawn, were it even on
the back of the driving clouds. I will slay that Re-
bia, and Amarah, and the whole race of Zeead. It
was on this very account, said King Cais, I would
not inform you of it. And he told him all that had
passed with the family of Zeead, and how Amarah
had said, Hie thee hence, and send us thy champion
Antar, son of Shedad. |

Without word or comment Antar retired home,
and called out for Shiboob, who instantly appeared.
O son of my mother! he cried, I wish thee to tell
me how I must manage, for King Cais has been
cajoled by Rebia, and my heart is in an agony at
the words of Amarah, for he even said to Cais, Hie
thee away; send us thy champion Antar, to rescue


48 AMARAH’S SLAVE CAUGHT ASLEEP.


thy coat of mail from hence. My advice is, said
Shiboob, that we proceed to the valley of Yamoor,
and that we hide ourselves near the tents of the
' Zeead family. No doubt some one of them will fall
into our hands: we will take him prisoner, and
we will not desist tormenting him, till we ransom
him for the coat of mail of Ajijah.

That’s just the thing, said Antar ; and they waited
till evening, when they set out for the valley of
Yamoor, where, lo! they saw in front of them a
fellow lying asleep, and before him stood a horse.
Shiboob went up to him, and struck him with a
stick over the back of his head. He instantly awoke,
and much alarmed he was. Eh! said Shiboob, who
art thou? My lord, said the fellow, whilst he shook
as if in an ague—my lord, said he, I am no horse-
man. I am no great man; but I am the slave of
the magnanimous Chief Amarah. And where is
Amarah? said Shiboob. My lord, said he, he is
just passed over to the tents of the Carad family,
just to havea look at his beloved Ibla, the daughter
of Malik ; and this has been his practice for a long
time every night, and when he reaches this spot, he
puts on my clothes, and disguises himself in them,
and enters their tents. Ay! said Shiboob, I did
not know a word of all this. Accursed be ye both;
come, arise, strip off thy clothes, before I cut off thy
head. :

The slave had just stripped off his clothes, when
Antar came up, and smote the slave with Dhami on
the neck, and severed his head from his body. In-


AMARAR’S DISGRACE AFTER SEEING IBLA. 49


stantly Shiboob put on the slave's clothes, and laid
himself down in his place, whilst Antar hid himself
near at hand for an hour, when lo! advanced Ama-
tah. As soon as the horse saw him, he neighed: I
am come to thee, thou neigher ! said Amarah, now
that I have beheld my beloved. And he came up
to Shiboob, thinking it was his slave, and struck him
with his stick on the back of the head, saying, Get
up, son of an accursed mother, ‘come, strip off the
clothes before morning overtakes us.

So Shiboob turned about, and began rubbing his
eyes, like one roused out of his sleep, and appeared
as if about to take off his clothes, whilst Amarah,
having stripped off his clothes, stood naked. At the
instant, Antar sprung upon him, and grasped him
by the small of his belly, and raising him in his
arm, he dashed him against the ground, and then
turned to upon him with a whip, till he made the
blood start from every part of his body. In short,
the agony of this chastisement was so acute, that
Amarah fainted. Shiboob came up to him and
bound his shoulders, and tied down his arms and
sides, and hoisting him on the back of his horse,
carried him away. O Arabs, cried Amarah, cover
my shame, and if ye are from a distant land, and in
quest of property and gain, congratulate yourselves
on your success: for I am no paltry fellows I am
the Chief Amarah, son of Zeead, and my party is
near at hand; and if you do. not sell my life for
‘cattle, you will heartily repent; for my friends will


VOL. IV. E


50 HIS MISERY AND PUNISHMENT.


rescue me without ransom or goods at all. But
Antar stood before him, and turned to again with
his whip on his body, till his very liver was on fire.
Ay, said he, I will redeem the coat of mail with thee,
which thy brother took away. Yes! thou saidst
to King Cais, Hie thee away! send us thy cham-
pion Antar, son of Shedad; let him come and re-
deem the coat of mail from us here. Then indeed
Amarah recognised the dreadful Antar, and he cred -
out, Pardon, my cousin, pardon! for that is true
virtue; don’t, now don’t punish me, O my cousin,
for the flippancies of the tongue; and be sure of
every favour you can desire. No more talk! cried
Antar, till we reach the tents, where I will contrive
every variety of torture for thee ; and they drove him
on before them to the tents, whilst Amarah endured
such a night, as he never experienced before, and
when they arrived, every one being asleep, Antar
confined Amarah at his mother’s: and he appeared
in the morning as if nothing had happened.

In the course of the day, Rebia learnt that his
brother was missing. He wept, and so did his
brothers, and also-his mother, and his relations, and
there was not one but said Antar had killed him. I
rather think, said Rebia, that Cais has set spies and
scouts over us on account of the coat of mail of Aji-
jah, and has seized an Arab in order to redeem it
with him. But, by the faith of an Arab, that's
what [ll never do. I will, however, plant spies
over them, and every one that falls into my power


PLANS FOR MUTUAL REVENGF. 51


I will slay: I will carry on for ever a rooted enmity
against Cais, and I will aid the Aamirites against
him, that he may feel my power; and if Antar has
slain Amarah, no one will I put: to death as an
equivalent but Cais himself, that he may know that
one like me will not sacrifice his retaliation for him.

Soon the account of the disappearance of Ama-
rah became public; it was also reported to King
Cais, that Rebia accused him of the deed, and that
he had stationed spies and scouts over them, that
should he be able to seize any one, be might kill
him. By the faith of an Arab, said Cais, Rebia lies
in what he says; and as to Amarah, he has no
enemy but Antar; and Antar has never been absent
from the tents. Moreover, I cannot believe he would
put him to death, for his mercy is ever superior to
his wrath. He has overcome him a thousand times,
and has never attempted to murder him; there need
be no alarm on that score, he will certainly re-ap-
pear: never let it be said, that my cousins are be-
come my enemies, though I am of opinion, we should
be on our guard against them.

Thus he recommended the business to his brothers.
Go out by turns, said he to them, and protect the
pastures, otherwise Rebia may suddenly surprise us.
So Malik every day went out on horseback with the
cattle, taking with him a body of men, and when
Antar understood this, said he to Shiboob, Eh! son
of my mother, it appears King Cais then is afraid of
Rebia, and he thinks he will join the tribe of Aamir

F 2


52 REBIA SURPRISES PRINCE MALIK.


against him. But as he will not permit me to act
against him, what I wish of you is, to go out every
day to the pastures, and if you see Rebia, or any
one of his family, advance, hasten to me with the
news, that I may show you what I will do. Shi-
boob acquiesced, and went every day to the pastures,
concealing himself where no one could see him.

After this, Antar visited Prince Malik, and im-
parted to him all about Amarah; that he was suf-
fering torments with him, and was almost dead, and
he wants to ransom himself for the coat of mail, but
don’t believe him; and I have not yet punished him
enough. O Aboolfawaris, said Prince Malik, over-
joyed, kill him whilst the business is a secret. O
my lord, said Antar, I have never killed one of the
tribe, and should the circumstance reach your bro-
ther Cais, that I have exercised my power against
his cousin, as long as he lives, he will never be re-
conciled to me.

Thus passed three or four days, when lo! shouts
arose from the pastures. Antar was sitting in his
tent, when behold Shiboob entered; Arise, my
brother, he cried; come to your friend Prince Ma-
lik, or Rebia will slay him; he has surprised him
in the pastures, with seventy horsemen of his family.
-Tbe moment Antar heard this, the light became
darkness in his eyes; he roared and bellowed, and
‘sprung off the ground on the back of Abjer, and
set out for the pastures, Shiboob. going on before.
He stared about for his friend Malik, and seeing


HE IS OVERTAKEN BY ANTAR. 53


him hemmed in with the horse of the family of
Zeead, and almost overpowered, he shouted—the
earth and the barren waste trembled, and the horse-
men shrunk back from the contest. How came this
dszemon here? cried Rebia, and he precipitated him-
self from the sand-mound, and penetrating the dust,
wished to attack the dreadful Antar, when lo! his
brother Anis appeared, bent double over his saddle,
whimpering out, This shepherd-slave has broken my
ribs, (for Antar had, indeed, with the butt end of his
spear, broken his ribs, and had yelled at him, so he
wheeled off in flight, fearful of death).

Rebia slackened his bridle and shouted out to his
friends; when lo! some rushed, disordered in flight,
from beneath the dust: alarmed at death and destruc-
tion, they fell back on their rear, and the fugitives
were followed by their comrades. Rebia also re-
treated. But Antar cast his eyes at him, and beheld
the coat of mail of Ajijah. Whither wouldst thou,
O Rebia? cried he, and immediately he was up
with him, and shouted at him; every limb of him
quaked; he pierced his horse through a tender
part, and the animal stumbled and threw him off ;
he endeavoured to rise up, but he tottered and fell
with the weight of the Ajijah coat of mail. Antar
drew forth Dhami from the scabbard, and was in the
act of extending his arm. Hold! O my cousin, cried
Rebia, pardon! for that is the true generosity of
nature; you are our cousin, and the reliever of our
sorrows. May God, said Antar, make thee die and


54 HE RECEIVES THE COAT OF MAIL.


let thee not live, for never dost thou name me cousin,
but when thou art under the scimitar’s edge. In
the feasts and entertainments I am still the slave,
the carrion born! Strip off that coat of mail, or I'll
strike off thy head with this sword, by the life of
the eyes of Ibla, to me the most binding of oaths.
Rebia instantly obeyed ; he pulled off the coat of
mail, and delivered it to him, and then fled in haste
away, scarcely crediting his escape from death. Thus
Antar accomplished his hopes and wishes, and taking
the coat of mail with him, he returned to Prince
Malik ; and, as they were retiring, King Cais came
forward with a numerous body of Absians ; for,
having heard the circumstance from some shepherds,
he instantly mounted, alarmed for Malik. Seeing
him safe and well, he inquired what had happened ;
he told him what Antar had done to the family of
Zeead ; how he had redeemed the coat of mail and
the cattle. After which, Antar presented him the
coat of mail, for which Cais thanked him, and they
_ returned to the tents, rejoicing in their success. As
to Rebia, he retreated; routed and discomfited on
all sides, and sought his tents and habitations ; and
when he considered himself secure, he collected his
companions and rebuked them, saying, My cousins,
you indeed failed to aid me at the very moment I
needed you most. O Rebia, said they, what dost
thou desire of us? Dost wish us to fight against
our cousins, and raise hostilities against our king?
Many of them are the husbands of our daughters


REBIA LEAGUES WITH HADIFAN. 55


and our sisters. Has it not satisfied thee, that we
have followed thee to this place, but thou must urge
us to contend in battle against those who are the
dearest of human beings to us? In this pomt never
will we obey thee. If such is your resolution, said
Rebia, return to your families, for I can do very
` well without you ; and he called out to his brothers,
and ordered them to depart for the tribe of Fazarah.
As soon as Hadifah heard of his arrival, he went
forth to meet him, and received him honourably,
saluting him, and congratulating him, and accom-
modating him with a portion of ground, wide and
extensive, and inquired his reason for quitting the
tribe of Abs. Rebia told him what had passed, and
what he had suffered at the loss of Amarah. Your
settlement, said Hadifah, in the valley of Yaamoor,
' was not judicious; had you come to us, we would
have exerted our utmost in league with you. But
as to your brother Amarah, it must be all owing to —
Antar, son of Shedad. O chief, said Rebia, our
misfortunes always proceed from that despicable
slave, and we have no other enemy but him. I must
indeed contrive his death, were my life to be annihi-
lated, and all my brothers to be slam. That night
came back Amarah, and he was in a most deplorable
wretched plight, tiled over with filth and ordure.
And when he told his brothers all the horrors he had
endured, they were in utter dismay, and greatly
augmented was their rage and indignation against
Antar, the lion warrior. O my son, said his mother,


56 ASSEMBLAGE OF THE HOSTILE ARMIES.


will you never relinquish your stubborn violence on |
account of Ibla and Antar? Are you not satisfied
with the calamities and misfortunes that have already
befallen you ? O my mother, by your dear life, said
he, death itself would be more tolerable to me, than
what I have endured these days. I have expe-
rienced tortures from Antar, in my life, I never
felt such from all the Arabs. Wait patiently for
us, my fine fellow, said Rebia, that we may open a
door for the destruction of Antar. ‘Thus Rebia
remained, consulting some plan, till the news of
Khalid’s departure on his expedition reached him,
and that he had thrown himself on Direed, son of
Samah, who had sent with him his.brother Abdallah,
with twenty thousand horsemen, and that the whole
of the army of the Aamirites, when complete, would
amount to forty thousand men, twenty thousand of
which would march against the tribe of Abs, and
twenty thousand, under the command of Abdallah,
would march to attack the tribe of Fazarah. Hadi-
fah was confounded and bewildered, and sent for
Rebia, to consult with him; but they told him he
was absent, and that, a short time ago, he had taken
away his brothers, with forty slaves, and had pro-
ceeded to destroy Antar. Oh! what will become of
us? he exclaimed; What will become of Rebia and his
brothers? And he sent to request assistance of Harith,

son of Zalim, and the horsemen of the tribe of
Marah. The news also reached King Cais and the

Absians. He was astounded and stupefied, and


CAIS ASKS THE AID OF HADIFAH. 57


assembling the chiefs, told them of Khalid, and the ©
Aamirites, and Abdallah, Direed’s brother, and
asking for Antar, they told him he was absent.
King Cais sent to procure intelligence of his mother,
who said to the messenger, a crier cried out to him
in the night, and with him he departed. On hearing
this, King Cais was unable to distinguish light from
darkness. Truly, Antar, he cried, has disappeared
at the moment he was most required; and he con-
sulted with the Absians abeut what he should do.
Comfort your heart and brighten your eye, O king,
said they, for by the faith of an Arab, we must fight
for you, till by our acts we have settled your affairs
to your satisfaction, and we will not die but in the
presence of our families and our wives. My wish,
cousins, said King Cais, is to send to the tribe of
Fazarah, and to ask them to come to us, that we
may bea united force against our foes. My opinion,
said his brother Malik, is, that you be not cajoled
by them any more; ask no aid of them, for Rebia
is with them. So, my brother, stand staunch for
your dignity, and let not your honour and reputation
be sacrificed. However, they agreed to send a
messenger to Hadifah ; he departed for the tribe of
Fazarah, where Hadifah was anxiously expecting
the return of Rebia, much terrified at the treacheries
of fortune. In a short time came Rebia, and his
brother Amarah, and some more of his brothers ;
but as to his slaves, not one of them, black or white,
accompanied them. He had entered the tents by


58 REBIA REPORTS ANTAR’S DEATH.


might, and the next day he went to Hadifah and
saluted him.. Hadifah inquired about his absence.
O chief, said he, I have slain Antar, but with him
were forty of my slaves killed. O Rebia, cried
Hadifah, much rejoiced at Antar’s death, a man,
when he is engaged in the destruction of his foe,
must expend his property, great as it may be. The
reason of this was, that when Rebia repaired to
Hadifah, and was jomed by Amarah, who told him
what he had suffered, he consoled his brother's
heart, and remained quiet till the next day, when
he took away his brothers, and forty slaves, and
repaired with them to the land of the Absians, where
he halted in a valley, and concealing himself, he sent
a horseman to Antar to supplicate his assistance, and
to conduct him to the valley. The horseman pro-
ceeded till he came nigh to the tents of Antar, when
he cried out, O Chief Antar, I am a suppliant for
thy assistance. Antar instantly ordered Shiboob to
prepare Abjer; he brought him out bitted and
bridled. Antar sprung from the ground, on his back,
and took Shiboob before him, and followed the
horseman, who had begged his protection; and he
_ did not discontinue following him, till he was far
from the tents. As tothe noble Arabs in those days,
when any one demanded their protection, no one
ever inquired what was the matter; for if he asked
any questions, it would be said of him that he was
afraid. The poets of those days have thus described


them in verse:


ANTAR LISTENS TO A FALSE SUPPLIANT.. 59


& They rise, when any one in fear calls out to
“ them, and they haste before asking any questions ;
‘© they aid him against his enemies that seek his life,
“ and they return honoured to their families.”

Poets have also thus mentioned those who glo
make inquiries of him who asks their protection :

“< They dispute about the protection on frivolous
& pretences, and they lengthen out the conversation
“« in questions, and when a suppliant calls out to
& them in the desert, they snore, or else make them-
“ selves acquainted with the business.”

‘When Antar was at some distance from the tents,
O young Arab, he cried, console thy heart, and
brighten thine eye, but tell me now whaf is the
matter, for were thine enemy Chosroe, I would-make
his balcony totter; if it be the Roman Emperor, I
will slay his warriors. O Aboolfawaris, replied the
man, stopping, I am of the tribe of Shiban, and with
me were my wife and mydaughter ; I was on a visit to
one of my brothers, and when my visit was concluded,
I was on my way home; and on reaching your
waters, twenty horsemen rushed out upon me; they
wounded me, aud took captives my wife and daugh-
ter. I fled, as you see; and when I heard of your
name, and that you were noble and generous, I
came to you, and I begged your protection. March
on forwards, said Antar, pitying him from his heart ;
console thy mind, dispel thy fear and alarm. ‘The
horseman continued to gallop on ahead of Antar,
till he conducted him to the valley, where Rebia had


60 ANTAR CAUGHT IN REBIA’S SNARE.


drawn ropes among the trees for Antar’s horse; and
when Antar was in the middle of the valley, Rebia’s
slaves rushed upon him, crying out, Where art thou
now ? Vile slave, how wilt thou escape hence? The
light became dark in Antar’s eyes, but he galloped
towards the fellow who had begged his protection,
and pierced him through the chest with his spear,
and drove it quivering out through his back; he
shouted at his foe; he attacked, and bounded away
‘on his horse. But his horse being entangled among
the cords that Rebia had fastened, Antar dismount-
ing from Abjer, and grasping Dhami in his right,
and his shield in his left hand, fought on foot. As
soon as Shiboob saw this dreadful disaster, and his
~ brother’s awkward situation, he felt assured some
stratagem had been contrived against him, so he
drew forth his dagger and killed four of the slaves,
and Antar slew ten. But they multiplied upon him,
shouting and throwing stones at him, and bellowing
at him, till they nearly destroyed him ; his limbs
were unnerved, and he felt his calamity, when lo!
another stone fell between his shoulders, and threw
him at his full length on the ground. Rebia’s slaves
pounced upon him, and bound him with cords, and
tied down his arms and sides; they seized hold
of Shiboob, and bound his arms also with ropes.
Bring him to us at the division of the road, cried
_ Rebia, that we may play with our swords through
their bodies. Antar recognized Rebia, and the
despicable Amarah. Verily, O Rebia, said Antar,


ANTAR SEIZED BY ANOTHER PARTY. 61


thou hast contrived well; this is a masterly plot
indeed. But whilst they were in this state, lo! a
dust arose, and there appeared five hundred horse-
men in armour. Go thou to Antar, cried Rebia, to
Amarah, as the dust approached, whilst I kill Shi-
boob ; then let us be off, or death will come upon us.
Amarah assented, and galloping up to Antar, drew
his sword with his left hand. Antar was tied on the
back of Abjer ; Amarah lifted up his hand to strike
him ; but just as he heaved up his arm with his
sword, Abjer started under Antar, and sprung forth
hke a flash of lightning, and made towards the horses
that were advancing towards them, for he had been
trained by his master, “whenever he saw a troop of
horse, to seek it, before they could seek him. Fly,
-O noble fellow, fly, roared out Rebia, or death and
perdition will overtake us. Shiboob was dragged
along by a slave, but as soon as he saw his brother,
and ,how Abjer had started away beneath him, he
disengaged himself from the hands of the slave who
led him, and followed his brother Antar, that he
might know all the evil he had suffered. As to
Rebia, he fled, followed by his brothers. The troop
of horse assaulted the remainder of the slaves, and
tossing them upon their spears, stretched them dead
‘upon the ground. They afterwards surrounded
Antar in the barren desert. Now these horsemen
were Arabs of the tribe of Khoolan, and their chief
‘was a warrior, named Moshajaa, son of Hosan, and


62 REBIA EXULTS IN HIS SKEMING SUCCESS.


he was one of the famed haughty tyrants, and cele-
brated knights of the age. As soon as he saw
Antar, he recognized him, and cried out to his
comrade warriors, O my cousins, slay not this de-
vouring hero; for this hero is called Antar, son of
Shedad. I know that our King Safwan has a re-
- taliation against him, for he killed two of his sons;
and it is my opinion that we should take him away,
and go with him to our dwellings: there casting
him into fetters and chains, let us proceed to our
King Safwan, and receive from him an immense
reward in cattle, in exchange for this lion Antar.
As they assented to his advice, they took Antar
and Shiboob, and set out on their way home..

Now Rebia and Amarah, as they fled, turned
behind to look at the tribe of Khoolan; and per-
ceiving that they had surrounded Antar and Shi-
boob, and had drawn their swords upon then,
they imagined they had slain them ; so they eagerly
pursued their way till they reached the land of
Fazarah and joined Hadifah, to whose inquiries
about their absence they related what we have
already stated. Hadifah was in ecstasies of joy,
and thought Antar must be slain, and his limbs cut
in pieces. ,

In the mean time, the tribe of Khoolan travelled
with speed till they reached their own country,
where they cast Antar and Shiboob into chains,
and stationed a guard of slaves over them. But


HADIFAH REFUSES TO AID THE ARSIANS. 68


Moshajaa, with a party of his tribe, repaired to
King Safwan, to give him the good tidings of the
fall of Antar, the conquering warrior.

The very day that Rebia arrived, and felicitated
Hadifah on the death of Antar, came also King
Cais’s messenger to order Hadifah to march to the
land of Shoorebah and Mount Saadi, that they
might all form an united force. But when he con-
sulted with Rebia upon this subject, No, Chief
Hadifah, said he, let Cais and the tribe of Abs
settle with their foes as they like; for this once we
are stronger than they. Cais has now lost Antar:
let the enemy kill him, and make him drink of the
cup of death and misery. Hadifah accordingly
sent back the messenger disappointed, saying, Tell
Cais to arrange his own matters as he can, he and
the champion of his country, Antar, son of Shedad ;
for never shall there be any hostile dispute between
us and the tribe of Aamir. The messenger returned
to Cais, and told him what Hadifah bad said; on
which Cais, feeling the truth of his brother Malik’s
advice, assembled the tribe of Abs, and. ordered
them to prepare for battle, for he had heard that
Khalid was in the neighbourhood. ‘They obeyed,
and prepared that very day. King Cais then sent
for the tribe of Ghitfan, who came the next day,
with Hatal, son of Antar’s sister, and four thousand
horsemen, all spear-armed heroes.

In three days the Absians and Ghiftanians were
equipped, to the number of eight thousand horse-


64 THE FIRST CONTEST WITH KHALID.


men, all in coats of mail and in armour. My
cousins, said King Cais, I am of opinion we should
march and meet the Aamirites in the road, before
they reach our lands. They assented, and set out
to meet the tribe of Aamir; and when their whole
army was complete, it amounted to seven thousand
men, as one thousand were left to protect the cattle
and families. Thus they continued their journey
till evening, when King Cais alighted: Now, said
he to his cousins, I think we ought not to separate
beyond this distance from our wives; otherwise we
may have cause to fear for them on account of the
enemy. ‘There they remained till morning, when
behold ! the horses’ fronts burst upon them. This
was a troop of the tribe of Aamir; the bickering
scimitars and Semherian spears glittered. Shouts
-arose, and the horsemen were eager for the fight
and contest. The Absians called out in their pa-
tronymics; the spears were interwoven one within
the other; the crowds pressed on violently; the
rush of the combatants was terrific, and the behests
of fate and destiny descended upon them. Rise to
arms! to arms! cried Khalid. The Brandisher of
Swords exhibited his activity beneath the dust; the
cleaving sabres were at work; and the cleft skulls
were hewn off. It was a day of dreadful portent,
and the Absians felt not secure till the light fled,
and the night came on in darkness, when they
retired from the army that had thus ‘surprised
them; and they saw tribes, the like of which they


GRIEF OF THE WOMEN FOR THE LOSS or ANTAR. 65


had never seen in all their lives. Now, said King
Cais to his people, let us return to our wives; it
will be the most expedient measure, for I fear some
_ of these tribes may invade our homes, and de-
vastate our dwellings. We have nothing to do but
to march before the darkness passes away ; for this
is indeed an event of fate, and our affairs are me a
dreadful condition.

They arose accordingly by night, and set out for
their own tents. The enemy was soon aware of it.
Khalid gave a shout, and they were all in move-
ment by dawn. The Absians reached their dwell-
ings, and the women shrieked in excess of fear and
terror; and when they saw the Absian army return,
their screams of woe and distress increased, and
became still louder, alarmed as they were at dis-
honour and infamy. In an hour the action com- -
menced; heads were scattered about; the party
was panic-struck, and their rapacious designs were
_ frustrated. The.women screamed out to the lion-
warriors, and Ibla beat her sides and wept. All
the maidens of the tribe assembled like full moons ;
they uncovered their faces, and let their hair flow
dishevelled ; they cried out, and exciting them to
the contest, they exclaimed, O cousins, where is the
valiant warrior ? where is he who would protect the
women on such a day as this? Then Gheshm, son
of Malik, attacked and performed dreadful deeds.
They continued in this state till evening came on,
and the two armies were separated from each other.

VOL. IV. F


66 ABS AND FAZARAH IN DISTRESS.


The Absians were discomfited that day, for two
hundred of their. most renowned warriors were
slain. On that night the wailings of the children,
and the screams of the women and men, increased ;
and shrill above the rest rose the shrieks of Ibla,
for the loss of Antar, the undaunted hero. Cais
himself remained in the greatest affliction. As to
the tribe of Fazarah, their condition was similar to
that of the Absians; for Abdallah, the brother of
Direed, assaulted them with twenty thousand horse-
men, and rushed upon them from all sides. The
Fazareans engaged them till they were near death
and extinction; and had not Harith, the son of
Zalim, been with them, they would have been cut
up and destroyed; for one noble Knight, when he
was with a weak party, could defend it, and steadied
it against the enemy. -Rebia, too, fought with his
brothers firmly and resolutely, though he was also
anxious that Cais’s inability should be proved; for
he knew well Antar was not present in the en-
gagement.

But the tribe of Abs continued to fight with the
Aamirites for three days; on the fourth day the foe
routed them in the tents, and possessed themselves
of their fountains and waters, having completely
overpowered them with superior numbers. Good
fortune and fear prevailed alternately ; heroes ex-
posed their lives to death, for they saw no rescue
from destruction; the armies of Aamir thronged
upon them like the foaming billows of the ocean,


SHEDAD’S SORROW FOR HIS SON. 67


driving them out of their dwellings. The Absians
fortified themselves on the sandhills and Mount
Saadi. O my cousins, said King Cais, let us
lengthen out the battle with the foe; perhaps one
of the heroes of Hijaz may still come to our aid:

so they acted in conformity with his commands.
But the one who that day was the chief victor over
the Absians was the Brandisher of Spears; he had
taken fifty brave horsemen prisoners, besides those
he had wounded and slain. The army was pro-
tected by his intrepidity, and Khalid gloried in his
exploits. The last that challenged the Brandisher
of Spears was the Chief Shedad ; and as he was on


- the mountain side he remembered his son Antar,


and thus he mourned his death:

“« Was it seen what arrow of all the arrows
& of calamity pierced thee, thou son of the noble
“ and generous? Who was the warrior whose arm
s could strike thee, and thy arm so irresistible in
<<‘ its blows among the horsemen? Art thou to be
_ & geen dead, laid low on the ground? Shall the
<¢ wild beasts of the desert prowl about thee on all
« sides? In truth, the tribe has lost in thee a
<¢ Knight equal to a host of foot or of horse. Thou
<¢ couldst repulse the troopers, and, eager as they
< were, they were deprived of their warriors on
s the day of trial: O my son, since thy absence
« from us, the hostile troops have invaded us, like
< giant sea-monsters. Oceans have encompassed
‘© us, rolling in furious waves of the bitterness of

F2


68 COMBAT OF SHEDAD AND GHESHM.


“ spears and two-edged scimitars. Our heroes have
“ fallen into the power of the enemy, and our wo-
“ men mourn in fear of death. We are enthralled
“ by horrors, and our maidens are in despair, fearful
“ of captivity. O son of the noble and generous!
« Ibla calls on thee from her ulcered heart, and
& weeps in torments of tears. Here I am come
*< forth this ‘day ; I will expose my life, and, aware
' © of the catastrophe, I encounter the heroes; for
. perhaps thou mayst still join us, and we still sur-
“vive by thy pe eeverence, thou protector of the
« wives of thy friends !”

When Shedad had finished, the Absian women
shouted to encourage him to the fight and combat.
Shedad descended, and his back was bent double
with his great age, for he was like an ancient eagle.
Who art thou, O Sheikh, cried the Brandisher of
Spears, thus eagerly moving towards death, and
drawing along the bridle of annihilation ? O Gheshm,
replied he, dost thou not know me, that I am one of
the illustrious warriors? I am Shedad, son of Carad.
I am a knight, the soul of the day of battle and com-
bat ! I am the father of Antar, the destroyer of the
stoutest tyrants! ‘Thou art a pusillanimous wretch,
continued the other; and immediately assailed him.
Shedad encountered him, and there ensued so fierce
a contest and combat that-the noblest warriors were
astonished at its fury. Their long spears were shat-
tered in their hands; they both disappeared from
the sight, and were veiled from the eyes of the spec-


SHEDAD TAKEN; OORWAH ATTACKS. 69


‘tators ; again they exhibited in the contest the most ©
skilful manceuvres, and the bravest were aghast at
their deeds. They continued in this state till fatigue
fell on the fingers of Shedad, for he was no match
for Gheshm in feats of arms; and when the Bran-
disher of Spears saw this he assaulted him like a
lion, and clung to the rings of his coat of mail and
corslet, and dragged him off his horse’s back, dash-
ing him on the ground: his cousins tied down his
shoulders, and bound him by the arms and sides.
Now rose their shouts still louder at the captivity of
Shedad, and their exertions failed, feeling certain of
death and perdition. The Brandisher of Spears
again returned to the skirts of Mount Saadi; Hola!
tribe of Abs, he exclaimed, come forth, if there be
any more of ye remaining; if not, surrender; for a
surrender is your only resource. At hearing this,
the Absians were more furiously enraged. O my
cousins, cried Cais, there is no means of escaping
death in the presence of these Arabs; and he re-
solved on the attack, but Nazih prevented him, and
wished himself to challenge the Brandisher of Spears.
Oorwah anticipated him, and as he recollected his
friend Antar, his tears flowed; he hasted on, ex-
claiming, O champion of Abs, may God not divide
from us thy stirrup! and may thy friends be never
abandoned by thee! And he thus mourned the death
of his friend Antar in these verses:

«¢ The foul wretches have prevailed, O Aboolfa-
‘¢ waris, now thou art absent from the land of the


7T OORWAH’S LAMENTATIONS.


“tame fawn. The Arabs have surrounded our
“ country, and they charge our heroes like fiends.
“ The tribe has lost in thee a knight, who used to
& encounter our foes, smiling and unruffled. Thou
& wert our guardian, O champion of Abs! when
& every defender and protector failed us. Now thou
“ art gone, we are ruined and lost; our supports
“ have given way, and every one that sat down has
& risen up to oppose us. How many women bewail
“& thee with eyeballs swimming in tears; and from
“ eyelids that never slumber! How many of our
& warriors have been captured! and how many lie
& dead among the devastated habitations! There is
“ no champion for the daughter of Malik, now
‘‘ thou art gone, thou disgracer of horsemen ! Who
& now can encounter calamities, now thou art gone,
_“ or wear off the rust in the day of terrors? May
“God moisten the tomb where thou liest with
“the dew of the clouds, charged with never-failing
& showers !”

When Oorwah had finished, he rushed upon the
Brandisher of Spears, and galloped beneath the
thickening dust: there ensued a combat between
them that made heroes shudder, and confounded
the most resolute warriors. ‘They continued in that
state till their spears were shivered in their hands,
and their souls were near expiring. Oorwah was a
brave knight, and an undaunted man of arms, but
in prowess he was no match for the Brandisher of
Spears; so fatigue fell on the hands of Oorwah,


OCORWAB TAKEN; DESPAIR OF THE ABSIANS. 71


which his antagonist perceiving, rushed at him, and
hemmed him in, and grasping him by the rings of
his coat of mail, he elung to him, and took him pri-
soner, and dragging him along, miserable and ab- |
ject, he delivered him over to his people, who
pinioned and secured him. Oorwah being taken,
the Absians gave up all for lost. King. Cais threw’
his casque off his head, and cried out to his tribe
and his comrades, O my cousins, after this there is
no hope, no resource! their word against us is
blood. They have vanquished us, and I well know
they will not suffer one of us to live, not a black or
a white. Let those who feel as I do, do as I do;
and those that fear death retire to the rear; for our
women are dishonoured, and the blood of our men
is shed. Our horsemen are overcome, and our
champion is lost: there is nothing left to protect us,
or defend our wives, but the blades of our swords
and the barbs of-our spears. Thus saying, he gal-
loped down from the sand-hills and Mount Saadi,
surrounded by his brothers and warriors, and those
who stood by him on all important occasions; and
when they came to the spot they bent their heads
over their saddle-bows, and in one universal shout
exclaimed, O by Abs! O by Adnan! and they
poured down on the Aamurites like a torrent of rain.
Now, my cousins, come on! exclaimed Khalid, as
he marked them. See these fellows! they scorn
life. ‘Tear out their souls; rejoice in the capture


12 ABSIANS ALMOST ANNIHILATED ;


of their women, and beautiful maidens, and the
plunder of their abundant cattle. Then the armies
and the troops assaulted, and made at the Absians
in all directions, and assailed them with swords, and
spears, and pointed lances. The plain was choked
up; the associated heroes rushed on; horsemen
were exhausted ; the two forces were mixed promis-
cuously ; the steeds danced to the sound of the
lutes; blood streamed from the bodies; they per-
sisted in these dangers and perils till midday, when
the Absians were nearly destroyed, and extinguished,
and extirpated; the women cried out to the Lord
of Heaven; blood flowed; protectors and de-
fenders were diminished ; existence was annihilated ;
the Absians were lost amongst those armies and
troops, and dust-clouds like an extended canopy.
There was not one but exposed himself to every
disaster, and courted death in the midst of the
tumults; the plains: appeared before them like
mountains; the black dust ascended over them in
columns, and they were clothed in. garments of
blood. Such was their perilous situation, they were
nearly destroyed, and had resolved on flight, when
lo! a dust arose, and closed up every passage of the
country. It was not long ere the dust opened:
there was seen the glitter of corslets, and the waving
- brilliancy of helms, and innumerable horsemen,
headed by a black knight, on a black steed, who
bellowed out, Ignoble dastards! I am Antar, son


~


BUT SUDDENLY RELIEVED. | | 18


of Shedad ; quit these women and children: and he
instantly attacked the Aamirites, like a devouring
lion, accompanied by his warrior-friends. In an in-
stant the enemy was repulsed, and the twenty thou-
sand were routed right and left. The cause of the
release of Antar from captivity, and his arrival with
the horsemen, was as follows.


74 ANTAR MEETS A FRIEND IN PRISON.


CHAPTER XXX.


Wue Antar fell a prisoner into the hands of the
tribe of Khoolan, they took him to their own
country, where Moshajaa confined him between four
iron stakes, and stationed over him a party of slaves,
saying to his companions, My cousins, this will we
continue to do until we receive from our master the
reward of our pains, and then we will deliver him
up to him, that he may do what he pleases with
him. And he instantly set out to King Safwan to
congratulate him on the fall of Antar. But the
' women of the tribe of Khoolan having heard An-
tar’s story, and learnt his punishment, and having
marked the immensity of his bulk, and the horror
of his form, went to look at him; but the last that
entered was a very old woman, a stranger in that
land, and as soon as she saw Antar she recognised
him. She threw herself at his feet and kissed them,
saying, May this accident be the cause of joy to me,
O Aboolfawaris! How is it that the nocturnal wan-
derers of evil have surprised you, and cast you into
prison and infamy? The women, on hearing these
words, and seeing her kiss Antar’s feet, were much
astonished. Old woman, said Moshajaa’s wife, who
is this black slave, that you kiss his feet? May


' AN INSTARCE OF ANTAR’S GENEROSITY. 75


God be with you, noble ladies, said she, call him
not a black slave. By the faith of noble Arabs, '
men of truth, and honour, there is not on the face
of the earth a braver man than this great warrior ;
nor among the Arab chiefs, or the most illustrious
princes, is there one whose munificence is more un-
bounded, or whose benevolence is more exalted. As
to his courage, said the women, we have heard of
it; it was clear and evident: but what hast thou
seen of his generosity, that thou shouldst thus praise
him? I will tell you, said she, and I will relate an
instance of his liberality. You all know my son;
well! once on a time he surprised some she camels
belonging to this young man, and took away about
a thousand of them; but as he was returning home
to be married to one of his cousins (it was his in-
tention to make these camels her marriage dower),
this man, black in skin, but fair in deeds and qua-
lities, overtook him, and rescued his camels, and
took my son prisoner, and went away with him to
the tribe of Abs; and just as he was going to put.
him to death, he asked my son about his situation
in hfe, and his Arab descent, and on what account
he had plundered his camels. So my son told him
he was in love with his cousin, and that it was only
on lier account he had seized the cattle. Upon this,
he ran towards him, and released him, and gave him
the thousand camels which he had plundered, and
presented him, over and above, three hundred more,
saying, When the property you have now in hand


16 MOBADIR’S ATTEMPT TO SEIZE MAVIA.


fails come hither tome. My son returned delighted
and happy ; and soon after married his cousin, and
all his sorrows were removed. And now we are
living under the aid of God and this youth, and
there is not a tribe in the desert but is sensible of
his liberality. ‘The women being much astonished
at the narrative of the old woman concerning An-
tar’s generosity and benevolence, greatly extolled
and honoured him, and then quitted him. They
reposed in peace that night, but the next morning
the tribe was invaded by a predatory party of horse,
consisting of five hundred horsemen, all in coats of
mail, and clothed in armour, with a warrior of the
haughty tyrants of Arabia, called Mobadir. These
warriors and horsemen rushed upon the tribe of
Khoolan, whilst Mobadir cried out in a loud voice,
O Mavia, for such a day as this have I been
anxiously waiting on thy account ; and he rushed for-
ward at the head of his heroes, pouncing down like
the rush of a torrent. He attacked the tents, and
.brought down captivity among the dwellings. ‘The
cause of his arrival was this: he had long demanded
in marriage the daughter of the chief of the tribe,
who would not consent to marry her to him; so he
watched her father, till having heard that he was
gone to King Safwan, he collected these heroes and
horsemen, and came to seize her as his captive from
beneath the glittering sabres. When the women
were aware of this event, they trembled at captivity
and infamy; screams and shrieks arose; but the


SHE APPLIES TO ANTAR FOR AID. TT


most dreadful calamity was in the dwellings of Mo-
shajaa, for they had invaded it by force, and sur-
rounded it with misery. There stood Mavia ex-
claiming, Alas! alas! captivity! Alas! alas!
separation from home! This day the foe has van-
quished us, and we are for ever clothed in shame.
O noble ladies, said the old woman who had de-
scribed Antar, in this catastrophe there is nothing
to be done but to go to Antar and ask his aid, and
demand his protection: he is able to destroy your
enemies were they as numerous as the sands of the
desert. To this they assented, and screaming aloud,
went to the place where was Antar, the lord of
battles. Among the first’ was Mavia, and as they
threw themselves at his feet, O Aboolfawaris, they
exclaimed, we are under thy protection, and the
protection of Ibla, daughter of Malik: we have in-
deed heard that thou art noble-hearted towards `
women and maidens.

O Aboolfawaris, cried Mavia, kissing his hands,
a calamity has overtaken us, and we implore thy
assistance. And she related to Antar all that
Mobadir had done to them, from first to last; and
when, added she, he understood my father was ab-
sent, he came in order to seize me by the force of
the cleaving scimitar; and now, O Aboolfawaris,
we are between two perilous circumstances, and two
deadly calamities; for we fear if we release you,
you will avail yourself of the opportunity, and
plunder our property, as well as that of the foe, and


78 ANTAR PROMISES TO REPEL TRE FOE.


then you will seek yaur own home, and no doubt
you will be excused in doing so; for indeed you
~ are near your death and every evil; but if we now
quit you, this tyrant will destroy us, both us and
you too. O Mavia, said Antar, console thy heart
and brighten thine eye, I will rout these cowardly
foes for thee, and I will disperse them among the
wastes and the wilds, and I will then return to my
fetters and my chains; and I will not depart hence
but by the mutual consent of all your men and
women; for generous men are not ungrateful, and
they do not abuse fortune for exciting troubles
against them. Know. too that my captivity was
only the effect of fate and destiny, from which no
creature can escape or fly.

As soon as Mavia and the women heard this,
they were convinced of victory and conquest. They
ran towards him, and released him from his chains
and fetters, and brought him his weapons for battle
and carnage; As to your horse, said they, not one
of us can venture to approach him. Release my
brother Shiboob, said Antar, he is accustomed to
him: (Shiboob had been bound close to him), so
they set him at liberty. He went up to Abjer and
saddled him and brought him to his brother Antar,
who sprung from the ground on his back, after he
had clothed himself in iron, and a magnificent coat of
mail, in which he appeared like a strong battlement.
And he assailed the foe with a heart undaunted at
death and extinction: he shouted with his well


EXGAGES MOBADIR. 19


known shout in his wrath, Ignoble dastards, I am
Antar, son of Shedad; quit the women and the
children ! and he attacked and transfixed the horse-
men, and drove them round the skirts of the dwell-
ings: at his second attack he repulsed them from
the walls, and slew twenty of them, overwhelming
them with shame and disgrace; he charged them
like a trampling lion, fearless of multitudes, and
thus expressed himself’: 7

“ Whenever I go as a guest to a tribe, and they
“ be alarmed by their enemies, may I never grasp
“ a spear-staff in my hand, may sleep never seal up
“& my eyes! My captivity by the Shrine of God is
“ no fault; for I have been proved in the day of
‘‘ battles. I was made prisoner by stratagem and
“ the destiny of God, whose power is infinite over
“ his slaves, whom he drives, in despite of every oppo-
«¢ sition, into bondage, either for their advantage or
“ destruction.”

As soon as Antar had finished, he assaulted the
party, and dispersed their united bands, and routed
the horsemen, and destroyed their warriors. When '
the chief saw Antar’s exploits: Eh, bastard! said
he, what Arab slave art thou? tell me before I cut
off thy head, and extinguish thy life for thy op-
position to the depredations of the warriors of the
age. Mobadir had almost gained possession of the
whole clan, and was pillaging the property. Base-
born, cried Antar, knowest thou me not? and what
noble hero I am? I am Antar, son of Shedad, the


80 MOBADIR CLEFT IN TWO.


conqueror of hardy warriors! Away to thy home!
for as to the booty, I have rescued it from thy
power; and if thou doubtest my word, come on—
on to the plain—that I may make thee drink of the
cup of infamy. Mobadir only laughed, and smiling,
said, They say too, that thou art a man that deals
fairly, but this day I see thou movest on the road
of oppression. I am, said Antar, just what they say
of me; but what is it thou requirest that I should
do thee justice? Know then, said Mobadir, that
I had nearly gained possession of the clan, and
seized my beloved; but thou hast interrupted the
accomplishment of my desires. Thou bastard, said
Antar, thou hast demanded a man’s daughter m
marriage, but he will not accept thee for a husband ;
thou hast staid quiet till he was absent on some
business, and now hast come in his absence to take
her captive from beneath the glittering scimitars ;
and this is.the justice with which thou hast acted
towards him. Mobadir rushed at him, and wanted
to charge in front of him, and gallop about; but
Antar would not permit him even to wheel round,
before he attacked him and stopped him in his
charge, and checked him in his martial display, and
aimed at him with Dhami between his eyes. Mo-
badir received the blow on his shield, but it cleft it
in twain, and his casque it hewed in two, and the
sabre still continued its course down to his thighs,
= even to the back of his horse, seven spans into the
ground: thus he hurled him and his horse to the


ANTAR RETURNS TO PRISON. 81


ground in four equal divisions. Alas! alas! cried
Mobadir’s companions at the sight of this blow, this
furious warrior must be one of the genii; so saying,
they fled, throwing away all the property they had
acquired, and calling out to Antar, May God curse
thy flat-nosed father and thy harlot mother! how
hard are thy blows! how penetrating is thy thrust,
and how fierce is thy assault! Antar pursued them
till he drove them out of that country, and after-
wards returned to collect the scattered horses and
dispersed arms. Shiboob attended him like one of
the rebellious fiends till they reached the tribe of
Khoolan. |
Antar no sooner dismounted from Abjer than the
women surrounded him, and kissed his hands and
feet. Noble ladies, said Antar, return me now to
my chains and fetters. But they said, By the
faith of an Arab, nothing shall touch thy feet, in-
stead of fetters, but the blessings of cheeks. By
the faith of an Arab, said Antar, that must never
be, were I even to drink of the cup of death and
perdition. Eh! son of my mother, cried he toShiboob,
return me to my chains and fetters; let it not be
said that I have falsified my word. What! said .
Shiboob, thou art surely mad. What! now thou
art at liberty, and hast vanquished thy captors,
wilt thou again cast thyself into chains and fetters,
and wait till some one comes to slay thee? Yes!
said Antar, let me not sin against my oath; let not
a falsehood approach me. Shibvob, on hearing


VOL. IV. G


GÈ MOSHAJAA HUMBLES HIMSELF BEFORE ANTAR.


this, was more and more enraged, and in a great
passion came up to Antar, and fastened the weighty
fetters on his feet. Well then, said he to him, lie
there in base imprisonment, that thou mayest
not sin against thine oath! But Antar did not
remain in captivity longer than that night; for
on the next day the Chief Moshajaa returned
with his warriors, and as they came near to
the tents, they saw the dead piled up among the
dwellings and habitations. Moshajaa also beheld
Mobadir's head fixed on the point of one of the
tallest spears by the side of his tent. On inquiring
about this, they told him what Antar had done.
Moshajaa and his warriors were fixed in astonish-
ment. By the faith of noble Arabs, said he, we
shall never be able to requite this man by all we
can do for him; for whilst we went to demand his
death, he has done this deed for us; he has pro-
tected our wives and families, and has even returned
himself to chains and fetters. ‘Thus saying, they
ran towards Antar, the lion warrior, and set him at
liberty, Moshajaa fell down and kissed his feet,
and bringing him into the middle of the tent, they
clothed him in robes of honour, and presented him
with riches, and begged his pardon for what they
had done. O Chief, said one to Moshajaa, what
answer will you make to King Safwan, to whom
you have pledged your word? , Cousin, said Mos-
hajaa, where can there be a more complete excuse
than this? Here is one who protected our wives


HE AND HIS TRIBE ACCOMPANY ANTAR. 83.


in our absence, and has done a deed no human
being ever did before. After this they made pre-
Pparations to accompany Antar, and to depart to the
land of Abs. Moshajaa mounted with five hundred
horsemen of the chiefs of his tribe.

Antar also set out on his way to the land of
Shooreba and Mount Saadi, greatly pleased at the
unton with the tribe of Khoolan ; and as he marched
at their head in great spirits, he thus recited: =‘

s Where is my love? my sport? my song? Be-
€< gone, my failings of my early youth! What was
€< expanded is now folded up. The matrons and the
“< large-eyed damsels shall keep me in remembrance ;
€ torture has not relaxed my powers in the battle,
“ and the hon stands in awe of me on the plain and
“<< the mountain. It has not enervated me, and I
<< will not mourn in tears at home and my native
€s lands. In horses and black coursers is my de-
<< light; love and wine are no more my occupations.
<* How can ambition raise any one to glorious emi-.
“nence, whose post is in talking of sports and
€ songs? My failing is in horses; my boast isin their
€c hoofs; when the lion hero moves on them, de-
“‘ spair moves with him. My Abjer blusters with
& me on the day he bears me: is there a hero that
& escapes me? or can a warrior touch me? How
& many warriors have I put to flight in confusion,
“ meeting every form of death like a roaring tor~
“ rent! As to the dust, I have plunged into it,
“high and low, with sword blows, and spear:

G2


84 ANTAR ARRIVES TO AID THE ABSIANS.


“thrusts, among scimitars and lances. I do not
‘¢ intend that the tribe shall getdrunk with my blood:
“am I not their superior both in word and deed?
“ Let no one drink blood but who has a forfeit due ;
“ and let him not repose, whose neighbour is in
“trouble. The enemy cannot repel him with their
“ thrusts; he is replete with virtue, joyous with
“ wine. Were not Cais my King, and did I not
“ obey him, I would have drank of blood sweeter
“ than honey from Rebia and the wretch who re-
& sists me on account of Ibla; still I am in anxious
« fears about her; I am of the noble and illustrious
€ ones, ever renowned over the plains and the hills.
“I wish to exterminate them, but my tenderness
“c prevents me, and I’ check my impatience. He
« who wishes to be honoured as I am honoured,
“ let him pierce the warriors, or challenge the
“ heroes.”

The chieftains were astonished at his eloquence,
and expressed the gratification they felt. May God
never abandon thee! may no one ever harm thee! O
knight of the age, and the result of the time and
the period! cried Moshajaa, for thou hast not left
for any one either a word to speak or a deed to do.
Thus they continued their march till they came
near to the tribe of Abs. Antar led them on likea
furious lion; he uncovered his head, and received
the horsemen of Aamir as the parched up land re-
ceives the first of the rain, with resistless and never-


failing blows, as also the warriors of Khoolan, for


SHIBOOB RELEASES THE PRISONERS, 85


‘they were undaunted heroes, they penetrated through

the ranks of the foe, and made them drink of the —
cups of death and perdition, scattering them over
the plain and the waste.

But when the Absians heard Antar’s shout, their
souls revived, and they seemed to live again. Ay!
my cousins, exclaimed Cais, now take retaliation on
the foe, and cast off this dishonour, for this is our
champion Antar that is arrived; now destroy your
enemies over the plain and the mountain; and he
who will not exert himself in the battle, may he
never have a legitimate child! The Absians roused
all their energy and spirit for the contest. But
when Khalid saw Antar approach, he felt aware
that he was able to annihilate his whole force, were
they even double their numbers, and that he would
disperse them over the desert and the sand-hills.
So he called out to the Aamirites, and drew them
off; they hesitated not, but dispersed themselves
over the wilds and the wastes. Now I have nothing
to do, said Khalid, but to go to the tents and kill
all my Absian prisoners. When lo! they appeared
before him, mounted on high-blooded steeds, with
Shiboob hardly touching the earth with his feet.
For Shiboob, on the arrival of his brother Antar,
seeing how eager the enemy was in the contest, felt
assured that there must be some Absian prisoners
among them; so he set out for the tents of Aamir,
where meeting Shedad and Oorwah, and the other
prisoners, he hasted towards them, and released


86 é FLIGHT OF THE AAMIRITES.


‘them, and brought them horses, and weapons, and
corslets, and armour, and they became warriors
again. As soon as Khalid saw them thus rescued
from imprisonment and danger, he had no other
‘resource but to wheel round his horse, and. fly to
the land of the tribe of Fazarah. After him also
fled the Brandisher of Spears; the standards and
ensigns were upset, and the whole army was scat-
‘tered over the plain and the waste, pursued by
Antar and the tribes of Abs and Khoolan, till they
expelled them out of the country, when they re-
turned to their dispersed horses and scattered arins ;
and having collected their property and

they set out for the tents, Antar at the head of
‘them, like a noble lion. King Cais kissed him
between the eyes, and congratulated him on his
escape, and inquired what had happened. Antar
related how Rebia and his brother Amarah had
meditated his death, and every circumstance relative
to his imprisonment and liberation.

On hearing this, King Cais execrated Rebia and
his brother, and all the race of Zeead, saying, O
Aboolfawaris, be not distressed, for by the faith
of an Arab, I must punish the race of Zeead for
their conduct; but some one says:

s We acted kindly, and we were rewarded by
& the reverse, and such is the conduct of worthless
& traitors: those who act kindly to persons of a
** different nature, are requited as one who assisted
“ a hyena was requited.”


ABGIANS GO TO RELIEVE THE FAZAREANS. 87


O Aboolfawaris, added Cais, it is, however, in-
cumbent on me to repay the tribe of Khoolan, by alt
the favours and benefits in our power, and that wë
consider them among our friends and allies. But
we had better go first to the tribe of Fazarah, for
I fear their chief must be reduced to extremities,
and that we shall have some difficulty in delivering
him. Do, O king, as you please, said Antar, for I
will not oppose you ; but here let us repose. Having
halted at the tents, the slaves brought them their
dinner, and they treated the tribe of Khoolan with
every distinction. They slept that night till dawn
of day, when they set out for the land of the tribe
of Fazarah, Antar marching ahead, and thus re-
citing :

s I am going to assist Rebia and his tribe ; never
‘can I sit quiet when the dust of war is roused ;
‘‘ were it not for thee, O Cais, I would not go to
“them; but thou art my glory and my protector.
“< Fazarah every day opposes me, but they are, in
“ the contest, ever under alarms. All the kings of
& the earth fear my blows, and I have an impetuous
“ action in the battle, no other knight possesses my
“¢ ambition ! Its seat is above the Pisces, and, in the
“ combat, my strength is like that of a trampling
& ion. Although my complexion is black, my deeds
“ are the dawn of day, and fear of me is in the hearts
“ of the most valiant; for I thicken my spear-thrust
s in every region, and I cry out in the heat of the
& carnage, where is my opponent? I am the bold


88 HARITIUS PERFIDY TO THE FAZAREANS


“ lion and hero, as they call on me in the day of the
“‘ crash of multitudes. ‘The kings of the earth are
*< sensible of the terror of my power. In theslaughter
“ I encounter the vagabond warriors, and my sword,
& when the dust mounts on high, cries to me, steep
“ me in wine, the blood of horsemen ; and when my
“ spear quivers on the deadly day, its barb is like a
“ kindling flash of fire. For love of thee, O daughter
“ of Malik, I am a lion hero. O thou ornament of
“ women in the assemblies ! O Ibla, wert thou to see
“ my deeds and exploits, when the black columns
“ rise up on the desert, like the darkness of night,
- thou wouldst see me rush into it with a violence
“ and vehemence, no one, either naked or clothed,
** can surpass.”

The warnors and chiefs, in astonishment at such
eloquence, pursued their journey till, as they ap-
proached. the tribe of Fazarah, they saw that the
enemy had surrounded them on all sides; their
voices were enfeebled—they were fighting among the
tents, and the power of utterance had almost expired.
For Harith, son of Zalim, who was with them, as
we before stated, seeing the party discomfited, said
to himself, Why should I thus presumingly interfere,
till I die slaughtered? Accordingly, about evening,
he took his men away, and seeking the pastures of
the tribe of Fazarah, he carried off five thousand he
and she camels; and saying, This is the reward of
my trouble, he set out for his own country. But,
in his absence, the sword played among the tribe of


DISGRACE OF ABDALLAN’S ARMY. 89


Fazarah, and Abdallah, Direed’s brother, fell upon
them unawares, with his troops. Khalid too, in his
fears, repaired to them, and told them the loss he
had sustained. Abdallah’s alarms were awakened
at hearing this account of Antar and the Abgjans,
being certain they would. not leave him quiet.
Anxious, therefore, to avail himself of the oppor-
tunity, and pillage the property of Fazarah, and
wishing to retire before the arrival of Antar, he
called out to his warriors, and as he encouraged them
to the contest, they exposed their lives to death and
perdition; and making an assault on the tribe of
Fazarah, like voracious lions, they devastated the
country, and overwhelmed them with their trium-
phant superiority. Just as they were resolved on
flight, all but Rebia, and the chieftains of Fazarah,
and Zeead, and as the wretch Amarah was trembling
in despair, with the women, arrived the tribes of Abs
and Ghiftan, and the warriorsof Khoolan, and Antar,
the destroyer of horsemen. With one universal
shout of, O by Abs! O by Adnan! they rushed
down on the foe with hearts to which death was
sweet and easy, and in less than an hour they drove
them far from the tents, Antar exhibiting all his
horrors, and performing deeds that would turn
infants grey; and so astonished was the tribe of
Khoolan, at Antar’s exploits, that they wished him
to return with them, that they might make him the
champion of their lands and territory. Before mid-
day, the army fled in disgrace, and Abdallah, giving


90 RXULTATION OF THE FRIENDLY TRIBES.


the reins to his horse, escaped. After this, the Arab
horses were dispersed, and Khalid also fled, and
sought the barren waste, alarmed at the chief Antar.
The horsemen were scattered over the plains and
sand-hills, and before evening, there not being one
left, Antar conducted bis people, and the tribe of
Khoolan, back, and departed for the land of Abs
and Adnan. But King Cais halted with the tribe
of Fazarah, on account of Rebia, and congratulated
him on his safety. Ah, O Cais, where, indeed, is
our safety ? said Hadifah; but that is of no con-
sequence to thee, that does not interest thee. King
Cais concealed these expressions in his heart ; he
remained that night with them, and departed the
next day. But Antar, whilst he was marching with
the tribe of Khoolan, meditated on the circumstances
that had occurred to him among the tyrants of Arabia,
and he thus recited :

- * Question my scimitar about my deeds on the
“ day of battle, and my blows amongst the kidnies
“and the joints. Ask my whizzing spear, in the
“ sand-cloud, how many throats of noblest heroes
“ I have pierced. How many columns of dust I
& have rushed through on my steed, crying out,
& with a loud shout, Where is my antagonist? When-
“ ever Death sees me, he flies away in terror, fright-
“ ened at my Indian blade and spear. How many
& warriors have I laid low with my sabre? whilst
“ the black blood rolled in waves from the breasts
& of the combatants. I have routed, in the fiery


ANTAR GLORIES IN HIS DEEDS. i 91


“ field, the sons of Aamir, on the backs of their
“ snorting chargers. They roam in flight, distracted.
** over the desert, horror-struck at my strength, and
“ the magnitude of my achievements. Learn, O
“ Ibla, how many warriors I have destroyed, how
“many knights, on the day of carnage, I have
“ captured, and have then set at liberty, after lace-
“ rating their joints. How many heroes have sought
“to slay me, but have not succeeded in their
“ attempts, and their every machination has been
s“ frustrated. I have left Khalid, son of Moharib,
“ mangled, stretched out on the stones, and the
“ rocks; and as to his ill-starred tribe, I have made
“ them drink of death with the wine of absinth,
“ Also, in the valley of Torrents, I annihilated their
“ crowds, and made Wirdishan drink of the cups of
“ the grave. I seized all the wealth of Irak, and
& Chosroe himself arose, bewildered and aghast.
« Verily, I slew Badhramoot in my strength, against
“ whom the lions of armies could not prevail. I
** carried off the Asafeer camels for thee, and the
“ diadem of Chosroe, unequalled in the world. I
“ am the Antar of horsemen—the knight of the tribe
¢ „merciful and clement—black in complexion—
‘intrepid. I am the dauntless hero in every fight ;
s I am the knight of the fiery contest of illustrious
& chieftains. Though, my cousin, my complexion
“is black, yet my deeds are fair offsprings of muni-
66 ficence. I have that ambition, whose seat is above
<< Pisces, and my success and prosperity are the con-


92 MOSHAJAA RETURNS HOME.


summation of all good fortune. Mine is perfect
“ liberality and purest love, and my mansion is the
t resort of every guest. All the kings of the earth
“ dread my power, and my renown is spread through-
“ out every tribe. My spear-thrust appears in death
‘ and perdition, wherever life pervades the muscles
“Sof man. Death is terrified at me, and even when
‘¢ he wishes to escape me, I goad him on to speedier
“ flight with my iron fingers.”

The warriors and chiefs having thanked him, they
continued their march till they reached home, when .
Antar alighted and conducted the tribe of Khoolan
to the tents. The next day came King Cais, and
the Absian chiefs. Antar rode out to meet them
and saluted them; and, to his inquiries concerning
the race of Zeead, By the faith of an Arab, my
cousin, said Cais, had you yourself even fallen upon
Rebia, and his brother, you would not have given
them bitterer wounds. ‘They now made feasts and
entertainments for the tribe of Khoolan, and treated
them with every honour and distinction. King Cais
presented them with the most beautiful of his horses,
the finest of his spears, and the most brilliant of his
swords. Antar did the same as King Cais, and gave
their chief a string of Asafeer camels, and presented
him with five hundred of the she camels of the Vol-
cano Mountain. ‘Thus, the tribe of Khoolan, much
gratified at the friendship of Antar, and the tnbe of
Abs and Adnan, sought their own country and lands.
The Absians remained quiet at home ; and the state


KHALID AND HARITH GO TO NUMAN. 98


affairs of King Cais were well arranged under the
terror of Antar, son of Shedad ; yet he always kept
himself informed of Khalid’s movements, that he
might still have his revenge on him. But Khalid,
when he fled, sought the land of Aamir, and though
his party had preceded him, and had given the in-
telligence of their defeat, on his arrival the crisis
appeared more disastrous. He assembled the chiefs
that very day, and he debated about an expedition
to the land of Irak, in order to complain of their
situation to Prince Aswad, his near relation. They
acquiesced in his wishes, and after they had secured
their property and families on the mountain tops,
they left the Brandisher of Spears to protect them,
together with a small body of men, and departed
for the land of Irak. Now Harith, when he quitted
the land of Fazarah, immediately conducted his
people to their own country, and then hastened with
all expedition to the land of Irak, wishing to avert
the calamities of the time, and to see how the bust-
ness would terminate, for he had a sister in Hirah,
married to a man called Sinan, son of Ebe Harithah ;
she was usually employed im suckling King Numan’s
children, and-at that time she was nursing one of
his infants, called Shirjibeel. Harith alighted at
his sister Selma’s, with the view of relating to King
Numan what the tribe of Abs and Adnan had
suffered from the brave Aamirites, as perhaps he
would send some aid to the Absians, and appoint


94 KHALID'’S TRARS BEFORE ASWAD. ©


him to command it. The next day, he presented
himself to King Numan, and stated the case of the
Absians, and what the tribe of Fazarah had also
suffered from Abdallah, son of Samah. King
Numan was much mortified, as was also Prince
Aswad, on account of the tribe of Fazarah. Numan
even wished to despatch that very day a messenger
to the Arab hordes, and assemble an army to the
assistance of the tribe of Abs and Adnan; but, in
the course of the day, arrived Khalid and some of
the Aamirite chiefs, who repaired to Aswad with
their turbans hanging loose round ther neck, and
howling in tears, and lamentations, and complaming
of the disasters they had endured at the hands of
the Absians. What! said Aswad, O Khalid, Harith
has just told us, that you had assembled an army
against the Absians, and had left them, like many
others, the prey of your sword, and my brother
Numan has resolved on writing to the Arabs, and
to send them to the tribe of Adnan, but now "tis you
yourself that complain of them. Harith was right in
what he said, returned Khalid, but he knew not
what happened to us afterwards:’ But we, O prince,
were the first aggrieved by the Absians; for King
Zoheir falsely accused us of the blood of his son
Shas, and outraged us—he slew our warriors; but
when I overcame him, and put him to death, I
pardoned his wife and progeny. When Cais con-
quered us, we secured ourselves in the mountains,


NUMAN AND ASWAD PITY HIM. 95


but they killed twelve hundred of our heroes in one
day, as Antar has described in his verses, where he
says:

“ We slew of them two hundred and one thou-
“ sand freeborn in the defiles and deserts.”

When we heard of Nacmah’s death we threw
ourselves upon Direed, and set out to engage them,
and when we had reduced them to the last ex-
. tremity, their slave Antar came up, and with him a
party of Arab warriors: he defeated our armies,
and dispersed us. We are therefore come hither
that you may make peace between us and them,
and for every price of blood we will give ten; only
let them set at liberty our women. On hearing
Khalid’s discourse, Aswad pitied him in his heart;
and engaging to accommodate matters, he went to
his brother Numan, and related all the transactions
between the Absians and Aamirites, and also Kha-
lid’s arrival, and that he was anxious to make peace
with the Absians. As King Numan thought no-
thing was more desirable than harmony among the
Arabs, he told his brother to introduce Khalid and
his chiefs. Aswad introduced them, and King Nu-
man arranged an impartial peace, neither prejudicial
nor too advantageous. He also gave them a splendid
entertainment; and thus that day passed till even-
ing, when they mutually communicated the various
events and circumstances that had happened to
them. Soon after, the horsemen having dispersed
and quitted King Numan’s assembly, Harith, whose


96 KHALID MURDERED BY HARITA.


envy of Antar was greatly increased by what he had
heard from Khalid, resolved to put Khalid to death,
even under the sacred hospitality of Nuan. Fixed
in his determination, and only waiting till every one
was asleep, he sprung up, and cautiously moved
towards the tent where Khalid slept. He entered,
and finding him asleep, he smote him with Zoolhy-
yat, and severed his head from his body. He was
departing, but it still occurred to his mind that
perhaps his blow had not had its effect, and recol-
Jecting Warca’s blow at Khalid on a former occa-
sion, he returned and placed the edge of his sword
against Khalid’s chest, and leaned with all his
weight upon it, till he plunged it deep through his
body two spans into the earth *. Now being con-
vinced he had finished him, he hastened away for
his horse; he mounted, and quitted Hirah by night,
distraction in his countenance; sometinies turning
to the right, sometimes to the left, till the day dawned.
At that time Akhwedh arose to seek his brother,
but he saw him dead. He shrieked in his horror:
he ran to Aswad, and communicated the fate of his
brother. Aswad ordered Harith’s men to be seized,
and they were instantly cast into chains and fetters.
Thence he went to his brother Numan, and related


e It is an historical fact that Zoheir, son of Jazeemah, was slain by
Khalid, who was murdered by Harith in the private tents of King Nu-
man; and this was the cause of many wars. It is also stated that he
in vain sought the protection of other tribes to screen him against
Numan’s vengeance.


HARITH ESCAPES, RUT RETURNS, 97


what Harith had done. At this the light became.
dark in the eyes of Numan, and he swore he would
put Harith to death.

As to Harith, after he had slain Khalid, he re-
pented of the deed, and feeling assured he must die,
he resolved to repair to the mountains and defend
himself there till overtaken by death.’ But how
can I be at ease? he said to himself; my cousins
will be all murdered. He therefore set out on his
return to Hirah, concealing himself among the
mountains and the sand-hills till evening, when he
reached Hirah, having first secreted his horse in
some by-place. He then sought the spot where his
companions were confined ; perceiving their guards
drowned in the sea of sleep, he grasped Zoolhyyat,
and slaughtered them to the number of fifty. Hie
to the tribe of Abs, he cried to his friends, and de-
mand protection of King Cais, son of Zoheir, and
of Antar, son of Shedad; but as for me, it is im-
possible for any one of the subjects of King Numan
to protect me, for ‘he is the king of the Arabs, but
I am resolved on taking retaliation before I am slain:
thus saying, he quitted them, and death became easy
to him, till he entered his sister Selma’s dwelling: and
as soon as she saw him she saluted him. O my bro-
. ther, said she, what has brought you back, safe as
you were? I want thee, said Harith, to give me
Numan’s young son Shirjibeel, that I may meet his
father with him to-morrow. I will request him to

VOL. Iv. H’


98 HE MURDERS SHIRJIBREL,


forgive me this blood and this crime; and as I wasin-
toxicated when I murdered Khalid, perhaps he may
pardon me on account of his child, and then I care
not if the whole tribe of Aamir assemble against me.

His sister saw the propriety of this observation;
but she knew not the fraud and odious designs he
harboured ) so she made over Numan’s child to him
in her fears for her brother. Harith carried him
off, and hastened to the passage out of the city,
where he remained near his horse till the city gates
_ being opened, and the inhabitants coming forth, he
cried out in a loud voice. The people stopped when
they saw Harith, and hearing his shout, they stood
staring at him as he tossed Numan’s child up in the
air, and as he fell he caught him on the point of his
sword; and the child fell, cut in two, on the spot;
and it was a lovely infant! On beholding this, the
people ran back to the city, and informed King
Numan of the death of his child by the hand of
Harith. On hearing the murder of his infant, a
flame was kindled in his heart. He ordered his
armies to march ; and there went forth about twelve
hundred men in the pursuit of Harith. But he, as
soon as he had slaughtered Shirjibeel, mounted his
horse, and made towards the boundless desert; and
whilst he was travelling with all expedition, behold !
armies, like the rolling segs, appeared. He turned
upon them as a lion would do, and shouted; they
were dismayed. He shouted again in the faces of


HE ESCAPES INTO THE DESERT. 99


their horses; he forced them back on their haunches,
and they cast their riders off their backs. We have -
already mentioned Harith’s superior prowess and
intrepidity. He was one of the thousand tyrants:
and he did not desist fighting from the forenoon
even till the sun turned pale, by which time he had
slain about seven hundred horsemen. But by the
evening he was almost dead ; yet he did not so much
grieve for himself as he grieved for his sword, and
that the foe should possess it when he was no more ;
so he went up to an immense rock that grew hard
by, and heaving up his arm with Zoolhyyat, he ex-
tended his elbow, and smote the rock, wishing to
shiver the weapon by the blow, that it might not
fall into the enemy’s possession, but it split the rock
in two, and he continued his flight. When King
Numan’s troops came to the side of the rock and
beheld Harith’s blow, their senses were startled ;
they stopped short, and not one of them dared to
pursue him a spars length, saying to one another,
By the faith of an Arab, no one will pursue him but
he who bids adieu to life, and hails his death! for
when he saw no one before him to smite, he smote
this rock; but had this blow fallen on one of us,
what would have become of him? The twelve hun-
dred being thus routed, returned to Hirah, and told .
Numan that Harith had escaped in safety. Numan
instantly sent for Sinan. ‘Thou vile old man, said
he, thou perfidious dog! No one but thou has mur-
dered my son; it was through thee I knew that
HR


100 THE ABSIANS JOY IN KHALID’S DEATH.


Harith, son of Zalim. No one shall ever rescue
thee from hanging, unless he give security for thee
as responsible for Harith. Sinan gave security for
himself that he would produce Harith, were it pos-
sible, and if not, he would be his substitute in cap-
tivity and disgrace; and this the whole body of
King Numan’s satraps guaranteed. But what hap-
pened to Harith? When he had delivered ‘himself
from the army of King Numan, he turned his face
towards the wastes and the wilds, and worked hard
to: make himself a resting-place on the mountain
top, eating the herbs of the earth, and drinking of
the rain-puddles. As to his companions, whom he
had released from Numan’s dungeons, and ordered
to repair to the tribe of Abs and Adnan, they
speeded away till they came to King Cais, and told
him how Harith had murdered Khalid. At hearing
this from the horsemen of Marah, King Cais was in
a transport of delight, and he invested them with
honorary robes. The Chief Antar also heard the
news, and was overjoyed, though he wished Kha-
lid’s death had been the work of his own hand.
By the faith of an Arab, said he, if Harith comes
to me I will protect him from King Numan, from
Chosroe Nushirvan, and from every one that dwells
in the wilds and the deserts. King Cais too or-
dered splendid feasts and entertainments; but as he
looked at Antar, he perceived that he eat and drank
but little, and did not partake in the pleasures and
amusements: so his brothers said to Cais, Outrage


MALIK’S CONTINUED DUPLICITY. 101


not Antar’s heart, but order his uncle Malik to
marry Ibla to him, that our joy may be complete.
King Cais accordingly sent for Malik, and taking
him aside, said, Why do you not wed Ibla to
her cousin Antar? is she not his affianced wife?
and have you not taken her marriage portion? Yes,
O king, said Malik; Ibla, and her mother, and her
father, and her brother, are his slaves at his service ;
and if you wish it, to-night before to-morrow’s dawn
I will marry her to him. In three days I desire,
said King Cais, that our joys may be complete and
our enemies be vexed. Malik acquiesced, and stood
up to go away after having kissed his’ hand; and
when they separated, Malik went home, and being
alone with his wife, he sent Ibla to her uncle’s, and
as he wept before her mother, What’s the matter ?
said she tohim. One has-used me ill, said he, out
of whose influence I cannot withdraw myself; for
his heart is now relieved from the affliction of his
enemies, and Antar is even in greater favour with
him than with his father. He has obliged me to
marry Ibla to him; but by the faith of an Arab,
were the head of this vile slave to mount to heaven
‘itself, my heart could never, submit to yield him my
daughter. Now Ibla’s mother felt convinced that her
daughter could be matched to no one but Antar,
because he had ever protected her. As to Antar,
he returned home quite rejoiced at the order for his
marriage, and he wanted to mount his horse, and go
to his uncle’s; when lo! -his brother Shiboob came


102 MERWAR'S DREAM. `


up to him, distressed and melancholy. What's the
. news? said Antar; what has happened? Know, son
of my mother, said Shiboob, that your sister Mer-
wah is come from the dwellings of the tribe of Ghif-
tan, and she is in a violent passion, and probably
angry with her husband ; but she wishes to see you.
Antar immediately went to see what was the matter.
This Merwah was the daughter of Shedad, and
married in the tribe of Ghiftan to a man called Jah-
jah; and she had a son, whose name was Hatal,
who used to mount the horses, practise horseman-
ship, and was habituated to nocturnal expeditions.
His uncle Antar was very fond of him; but when
he heard of the arrival of his sister, he hastened to
her: she sprung up towards him, and kissing his
hand, O my brother, said she, my son Hatal! the
heroes of Ghiftan have bewildered his mind: they
ordered him to join them, and took him away with
them to gain some cattle and plunder. But some
nights ago I saw a dream, and there were my son
and his companions in a forest all entangled with
trees, and over their legs chains and fetters of fire;
and at the mouth of the forest there was a ferocious
lion that threatened to devour them night and day.
I awoke; but I was terribly frightened. I rushed
out of the tents, and lo! I beheld a black slave at
the door in the garb of a beggar. I went in again,
and I brought him out some bean husks, which I
gave him, saying, Take these, O stranger! and
pray for the return of my absent son. Is not thy


ANTAR DEPARTS TO RESCUE HATAL 106


son Hatal? saidhe. Yes, I replied; and I perceive
you know him. Know then, said he, your son has
fallen a prisoner into the power of Locait, son of
Zararah, and with him twelve warriors of his tribe,
and I am come as a messenger from him to you,
and he begs you will hasten to his uncle Antar.
And now, my brother, I am come to you, atid my
object is to obtain my son’s deliverance through
you. Antar was confounded at this interruption of
his happiness. Return home, my sister, said he,
and calm your mind, for I will go and release your
son. I will soon come to you with him and all his
property. Thus having appeased her mind, and
relieved her of her sorrows, he sent for Oorwah,
and told him what had happened; he ordered him
and his noble comrades to march, and recommended
his father Shedad to keep the affair secret, that
King Cais’s heart might not be harassed. He took
away his brothers Shiboob and Jareer, and his —
father Shedad, and the Carad horsemen, and his
uncle Zakhmetuljewad.

As to Ibla’s father, he was rejoiced when he heard
this, for he had resolved either to inform Rebia, or
to escape by flight into the desert. So the business
turned out just as he wished, and his situation was
improved after all his discomposure; but when he
saw Antar mounted, he said in his perfidy and ini-
quity, O my nephew, truly Hatal’s mother has
spoiled all our pleasures by this untoward interrup-
tion. Uncle, said Antar, there is a prescribed time


104 FROM THE TRIBE OF DAREM.


for every thing, and all that is predestined must
take place. And he quitted him; and finding his
people waiting anxiously for him, he departed with
one hundred of Oorwah’s men, and two hundred of
the race of Carad, whilst Shiboob started ahead of
the horse on the road to the land of the tribe of
Darem.


LOCAIT, 80N OF ZARARAH. 105


CHAPTER XXXI.


Now Locait, son of Zararah, was an uncontrollable
knight; he was the bold one of the age and period,
and the Arabs called him the Eagle of War, and the
Knight of Woe. Locait had nineteen brothers by
the same father and mother, and he was the eldest ;
and their father was conspicuous among men tor his
birth and parentage.

One day, their father being seated in his tent, his
sons came to him, and complained of their brother
Locait’s excessive pride and haughtiness, and stated
their resolution to emigrate. He sent for Locait,
who in fact was a great coxcomb in his gait, and
most ostentatious in his general deportment. . My
son, said he (for he was exceedingly angry and in-
dignant at such conduct), you are indeed a most
self-sufficient fellow, and behave in a most over-
bearing manner towards your brothers and your
comrades. Had you even in your pastures a thou-
sand of the Asafeer camels, or were you possessed of
Bedret-ul-Yemen, the daughter of Moazzem, the lord
of the Pavilion and the Palace, or could you even
overcome in battle the Chief Antar, the Knight of
Hidjaz, you would not even then strut about as at
present, neither would you swagger your limbs in


106 KING MOAZSEM.


this bragging, blustering style. What! father, said Lo-
cait, then these are the three accomplishments which
should a man attain, he would acquire the highest
glory among the brave and the heroic? What can
be superior to these three acquisitions? added his
father. At the instant, up started Locait and went
to his uncle, and asked his assistance. This uncle
was also a brave and valiant hero, and he promised
to aid him.

They mounted their steeds, and taking with them
two she camels to carry water and provisions, and
two sturdy slaves, they quitted their tents under the
cover of the night; and when they were at some
distance, after consulting which they should attempt
first, they were unanimous in the opinion, that they
should first of all proceed to the King Moazzem.

Now this king was a mighty monarch, and a stout
horseman. He was the lord of armies, and troops, and
lands, and cities; his country lay on the borders of
the cities of Nibas, and it was called the land of As,
where he possessed a strong impregnable fortress,
in which was an idol named Jebbar, which this
king and his people worshipped. He had also a
daughter called Bedret-ul-Yemen, of whom he was
very fond; and out of his great affection, he con-
signed her over to the idol, and rejected every suitor
and every wooer. f

Locait and his uncle travelled on till they reached
the. country of King Moazzem, where they beheld
populous cities, abundant cultivation, and tents and


HIS DREAMS. LOCAIT WEDS HIS DavcHTER. | 107


dwellings, and spears and swords, at which sight
Locait was much disordered ; he turned towards the
fountains and the waters, and having bathed, and
clothed himself in magnificent robes, he with his
uncle proceeded to King Moazzem. Near his palace
they met the officers and satraps, to whom Locait
addressed himself: My wish, said he, is to visit your
King. The satraps entered: the King deliberated,
but at last exclaimed, Go out, and ask him his name;
for if it be Locait, son of Zararah, invite him in; if
any one else, turn him away: for thus has the idol
ordered. Moreover, I saw a dream, in which I was
standing in front of the idol, and I demanded of it a
husband for my daughter. In these days, it replied,
there will be sent for thy daughter a valiant hus-
band, and a brave hero, called Locait, son of Za-
rarah. Marry him to thy daughter, and let him
share in thy favours (but this dream was the result
of his fears about his daughter)..

So the attendants went out, and asked Locait his
name. He said, Locait! ‘The King Moazzem ad-
mits thee, said they : and he entered in the presence
of the King, who directed him to be seated; and
having also imparted tohim the dream he had seen,
he prepared feasts for three days, after which he
pitched the marriage canopy, and introduced Lo-
cait to his daughter, without marriage, any dower,
or donations. Locait went to her, and saw she was
a full moon no description can attain; but he was
ashamed to approach her without a wedding present,


108 LOCAIT MEETS AND FIGHTS HARITH.


lest he should become a scandal in every land. So
he turned his back towards her, and slept till the
damsel also fell asleep; when he started up, and
awoke his uncle. Arise, my uncle, said he, let us
repair to King Numan to procure a marriage dower:

and they sallied forth by night.

They rapidly continued their journey till they

reached the city of Numan, and by. great good for-
tune they met Harith, roaming like one distracted
among the deserts, for ie’) had heard of his ad-
ventures.
_ Locait no sooner saw Harith, than he pounced
down upon him like an eagle, crying out, Eh! son
of Zalim, whither wouldst thou seek refuge from
the great King and the lion warrior? Harith, on
hearing this address, and seeing him alone, felt his
courage rise against him, and shouted out, Hola!
O Arab, What man art thou? tell me quick. Sur-
render, said Locait, ere thou diest !

Upon that, Harith poised his spear, and let out
his horse on its speed, and charged at him. Each
rushed upon his antagonist, and commenced the
combat, that lasted till the day was darkened, when
Harith being exhausted by the contest, Be generous,
thou Arab, he cried, and outrage not a man, whom
the sufferings of this widely-extended desert have
debilitated. Take me prisoner, and perhaps it may
be productive of good. And he threw away his
spear, and stood still. Locait thinking he had sur-
rendered himself, Dismount, said he, that I may


HARITH TAKEN PRISONER.. | 109


pinion thee. Promise me, said Harith, that thou
wilt not concert with King Numan for my blood.
And he continued his insidious importunities (his
intention being only to protract the contest a little),
till he drew forth his sabre Zoolhyyat, like a flash
of lightning, and fell upon Locait, like the descent
of an overwhelming calamity, and smote him. He
cleft his casque, and the chains, and wounded him;
and had not Harith been previously exhausted, he
would have slain him. |
Locait repented of what he had done: the world
seemed darkened in his eyes, and the blood streamed
down his face: but when Locait’s uncle saw him in
this condition, he rushed upon Harith, and occupied
‘him in the contest till Locait had recovered, and re-
gained his senses; and his return was like the return
of a lion. He shouted at Harith, and drove at him
with the heel of his spear, and hurled him on the
ground : his uncle dismounted and pinioned him.
Early next day, Locait resumed his journey till
he reached the land of Irak. In the excess of Lo-
cait’s good fortune, he arrived during Numan’s days
of festivity *, when he clothed every one in splendid


* It had happened that Numan, in a fit of intoxication, had ordered
two of his companions to be killed. When he recovered, he was so
struck with remorse, that he raised a tomb to their memory, and set
aside two days in every year, one of which he called his day of sorrow ;
the other, his day of joy. On the first, whomsoeyer he met, he slew
on the tomb; on the other, whoever came to him he would load with


gifts, and grant every request.


110 LOCAIT DELIVERS HIM TO NUMAN.


robes; and as soon as the slaves beheld him, they
crowded towards him from every direction, and con-
tinued to load him with robes of honour till his
horse could move no further.

King Numan being informed of the circumstance
immediately mounted, his heart bounding with joy,
as he exclaimed, This i is indeed a joyous day, and
a real triumph over foes and enemies. He received
Harith from him, and cast him into a subterraneous
cave, and there left him. But Locait presented
himself to Numan, who complimented him, and
asked his rank, and parentage, and his tribe, and
his Arab connexion. My lord, said he, I am of the
tribe of Darem, lords of honours, and distinctions,
and spears, and swords; and I am Locait, son of
Zararah. Be so obliging, said Numan, as to de-
mand what you want, and be sure of attaining it in
these days of joy. Upon this Locait took courage,
and informed Numan of his marriage, and the cause
of his expedition; and I ask of you a marriage
dower for my wife Bedret-ul-Yemen. By the pro-
tection of an Arab, said Numan, had you demanded
my kingdom, I would have made it over to you.
And he ordered him a thousand Asafeer she camels,
to which he added an infinity of other things, as he
said to his attendants, Do ye also give this youth all
the cattle and flocks that you drove to the pastures
this day. After this, he ordered them to pitch tents
for him without the city, and convey him wine and
meat.


LOCAIT RETURNS TO HIS BRIDE. | 111


Three days Locait passed very merrily, but on
the fourth he departed, habited like a powerful
monarch, with horses, and mules, he and she camels,
and slaves, and cattle; and with his uncle he con-
tinued his journey over the deserts; and the world
was too compressed for the excess of his joy and
exultation. As to the father of his bride, his mis-
fortune was severe; for his countrymen irritated his
heart with reproaches; yet he expressed outwardly
his resignation, and concealed his affliction and vex-
ation till Locait’s return with the cattle and the
camels, The whole country was in confusion with
delight: the King himself went out to meet him,
with the grandees of the tribe, and saluting him, in-
quired whither he had been? O my lord, answered
Locait, you acted towards me on my arrival here ©
as no one ever acted before, and heaped upon me
obligations beyond my powers to bear; you even
married me to your daughter Bedret-ul-Yemen ;
but I could not submit to the idea of possessing the
daughter of a king without a marriage-donation, and
I be called too the Knight of the Universe: so E.
went away to seek some gain, and the God of old
has bestowed on me these favours.

‘Thus saying, he gave orders to his slaves, and
they led away the noble steeds, decorated with —
housings of gold, and the Asafeer camels, which are
the wonders of wonders, and exhibited all he had of
garments, and cattle, and high-priced jewels. The
King was astonished at the extraordinary things he


112 THE MARRIAGE*FRAST. HE GOES HOME.


beheld, and he gloried in such an illustrious hus-
band for his daughter. He made splendid feasts,
and sent for musicians, and made his daughter a se-
cond marriage-banquet. He married her to Locait,
and all his griefs and troubles were at an end.
- Thus they caroused and feasted till the day dawned.

After a stay of seven days, Locait prepared for
his departure. The King granted his permission,
and made him immense presents In cattle. Bedret-
ul-Yemen having taken leave of her father and
mother, they raised her on the back of the camel;
but the King accompanied her one whole day, as a
last farewell of her. On the second day Locait re-
quested him to return; and he continued his course,
having succeeded in all he had coveted, and as he
travelled on, passing over the wilds and the wastes,
he thus recited :

“ I have succeeded in my object and demands of
“ fortune, for I have possessed myself of Bedret-ul-
“& Yemen by my sword. She is indeed the full moon
“ when it rises over her tent; the rosy-coloured
- “ moon, that lights up the desert for my distracted
“ Jove. It is as if the sword of her father flashed
“ from her eyes, that vanquish hearts without laws,
“ human or divine. Her beauty is so perfect, the
“sun might envy it, when it rises in all its splen-
“ dour over the dwellings and the lands. It is, as
“ if beauty’s self fraternised and associated with her,
“ as the soul of life associates with the body. Were
“ she to call a ghost from the tomb it would an-


t


ë


LOCAIT MEETS AND SUBDUES HATAL. 113


“ swer, and from its shroud would say, Here am I.
“ T have possessed myself of her by my sword, having
“ broken the hearts of all her suitors by my ven-
“ turous trials. ‘To-morrow will the spectators be
“amazed at my ambition, when I draw along the
“train of my glory in my native land. When I -
“ draw my sword in the battle, I make knights bow
“ to it from Senaa to Aden.”

When Locait had finished, he continued over the
deserts, when lo! Antar’s nephew, Hatal, and his
companions, drew nigh. Seeing Locait, and the cat-
tle he had with him, his avidity was excited, and he
ordered his men and warriors to desire him to aban-
don his property. But Locait, in the pride of his
character, paid no attention, but rushed upon him
with all his impetuosity ; and they fiercely engaged,
till eight warriors being slain, and twelve more being
prisoners, he assailed Hatal, and exhibited against
him all his wonderful powers and terrors; but they
were not long engaged, before he took him captive,
and united him to his comrades. Being much sur-
prised at his prowess, Of. what tribe art thou, said
he, for I never yet beheld thy equal? O Chief, re-
plied Hatal, I am called Hatal, and my maternal
uncle is Antar, son of Shedad, the knight of battle
and war: it was he who instructed me in this horse-
manship and dexterity in the spear-thrust and sword-
blow. O my uncle, said Locait, turning towards
him, there never. was so fortunate an expedition as
this; for thou knowest the cause of my P a

VOL. IV.


114 HE RETURNS HOME IN TRIUMPH.


from home was the scandal of my father, who, when
my brothers complained of me, said to me, Were
even a thousand Asafeer camels in thy pastures,
and wert thou to marry Bedret-ul-Yemen, the
daughter of the lord of the palace and great pa-
vilion, and wert thou to overcome in battle Antar,
the Knight of Hijaz, thy deportment would not be
such as this, nor wouldest thou swagger thy limbs
in all this presumption. I am now arrived at twoof
these distinctions, and I am now reaching the third,
as I have taken this hon-youth prisoner; for he is
the son of Antar’s sister, and his uncle will unques-
tionably come to release him as soon as he hears
what has happened to him; and then will I fight
him in the presence of my father.

After this he set out, traversing the mountains
and valleys in ecstasies of delight, till he reached his
native land. The good tidings had preceded them;
his father had been very anxious on his account, till
being informed of his son’s approach, he went out to
meet him with his brothers, and the aged Sheiks of
the tribe. As soon as he saw him and the quantity
of cattle he had with him, he was overjoyed, and
inquired what had happened. Locait related his
adventures; he established himself in the dwellings,
and the horsemen of the horde stood in awe of
him. He made entertainments for them all, and in
the excess of his self-admiration, and his anxiety to
meet Antar, he despatched a slave to Hatal’s mother,
as if from her son.


ANTAR’S JOURNEY TO THE TRIBE OF DAREM. 115


But now let us return to our former narrative.
Antar and his father Shedad continued their journey
with two hundred horsemen of the family of Carad
and Oorwah, and his men, seeking the land of the
tribe of Darem ; and’ as they hastened over the sand-
hills, Antar was vety melancholy at this interrup-
tion of his joys, and thus he spoke :

“ My transports are silent; but my grief, how
“can I conceal it? In my heart is the flame of
“ love, that consumes it. How can I disguise my
“situation? it is evident. How can I deny it?
“ My tears disclose it. I say, my heart is at rest
“ about my love of thee ; but it is a prey to anxiety,
“and it cannot change. Oft, as I say, my fortune
“is bright and pure, the nights of absence return
“ to renew its sorrows. O Ibla, how can I endure
“* with patience my distraction? My fate resists
“ me with every open outrage. I am seeking Hatal,
“ to rescue him from captivity, and I will disgrace
“whoever puts him in fear. I will make Locait
“& see the exploits of the lion Antar: he shall shrink
‘from me, and I will expose him to peril.”

” They travelled on till they came nigh unto the
land of the tribe of Darem, where they repaired to a
lake, and halted to consult on what they should do.
My opinion, said Shiboob, is that you ride on for
the rest of this day, till you know that you have
passed beyond the abodes of the tribe; and when-
you are in their rear, conceal yourselves whilst I
depart for the tents, and on my return I will explain

12


116 SHIBOOB VISITS LOCAIT IN DISGUISE,


to you how to surprise them, and seize their property,
and rescue Hatal and his companions; thus you
may succeed in all your wishes, and we return home.
You are perfectly right, Shiboob, said Antar.
Shiboob accompanied them till he was certain
that he had conducted them beyond the dwellings
of Darem. Now, pursue your way, said he, to the
valley of Ramla, which is ahead of ye; there con-
ceal yourselves, and move not till I return. He took
with him his brother Jareer, and clothed himself in
a jacket of coarse cloth, with wide sleeves, and put
on an immense turban, that closed over his face.
Thus they went on till they reached the tents,
when the slaves sprung towards them in all direc-
tions, inquiring who they were. We are messen-
gers from the tribe of Aamir, said Shiboob to Lo-
cait, son of Zararah; where shall we find him?
Repeir to that great pavilion, said the slaves. Upon
that Shiboob advanced, and Jareer followed him;
and they found Locait seated at the door of his tent,
and his brothers round him, and all his cattle scat-
tered about. Shiboob penetrated through the crowd,
but before Locait could question him, May God
grant long life to the noble Chief, he exclaimed ; the
honoured Prince, the Lord of great emprise, the
Chief Locait, Chieftain of the tribe of Darem. Hail
to thee, too, said Locait (to whom this discourse was
very gratifying, and who was greatly surprised at the
fluency of his speech), O Arab born, speak thy pur-
pose, make known thy demands. What manner of


AND DUPES HIM WITH HI8 TALE, 117


man art thou? I am, my lord, of the tribe of Aamir,
your friends and allies, said Shiboob; and I am come
to you with intelligence that is exactly to your wish.
My master Ahkwedh, son of Giafer, has sent me to
you out of his great regard for you, saying to me,
Go to my brother Locait, and tell him that Antar is
proceeding with a.party of warriors in order to re-
scue his nephew Hatal, and his companions; and I
am alarmed on account of his violence; but if there
should be any good opportunity, make him drink
of horrors to suffocation, and should he know any
thing of Harith, who slew my brother Khalid, in the
sacred hospitality of King Numan, let him secure
him for me; and if Hatal is still with him, let him
despatch him hither, and I will send in his stead as
much cattle as he desires.
By the faith of an Arab, said Locait, in admira-
tion at the sweetness of his language, this slave is
an eloquent fellow. ` May God bless the tribe that
makes its slaves resemble princes and chiefs: as to
Harith, said he to Shiboob, I took him prisoner,
and I presented him to King Numan, and I have.
received in his stead camels and horses. As to
Hatal, he is with me in bondage and confinement,
and when his uncle Antar comes to release him, I
will accelerate his death, and thus will I accomplish
the three distinctions, on account of which my
father shamed me; and I will not leave one of the
Absians to tell the tale. Moreover, I am determined
to depart to-morrow morning to meet this black slave.


118 LOCAIT DEPARTS TO MEET ANTAR.


O my lord, continued Shiboob, expressing his thanks,
if you would but be so obliging as to make over to
me those foul wretches, I should be so glad to have
the chastisement of them whilst they are in confine-
ment, till you return from this expedition, bringing
with you the tribe of Abs and Adnan in chains and
captivity, and at their head their slave Antar : then
will I return to my master Ahkwedh, son of Giafer,
and tell him all about it. Youth, said Locait to
Shiboob, did your spies say with how many horse-
men Antar was coming against us? Yes, my lord,
said Shiboob, he is coming against you with a thou-
sand horsemen of Ghitfan, and the tribes of Abs
and Adnan. Locait laughed and smiled at this;
May God disgrace the mustachios of that bastard
slave, cried he. And he ordered his slaves (accord-
ing to the decrees of fate) to deliver Hatal and his
- companions over to Shiboob. å

As soon as the sun had risen-over the mountains,
he took away with him three thousand of his choice
warriors, leaving five hundred horsemen to protect
the cattle and families. He departed, roaring in his
rage against Antar; and he knew not that he whom
he sought was concealed in his rear. No sooner
were the dwellings deprived of their protectors, than
Shiboob sent his brother Jareer to inform Antar of
all we have mentioned.

Jareer traversed the deserts in quest of his bro-
ther, and told him of Shiboob’s contrivances, and that
Locait had set out with his warriors and horsemen.


ANTAR ATTACKS THE TRIBE, 119


Greatly delighted, Antar ordered his comrades
to equip themselves with their arms, and to prepare
for the contest. He instantly departed, and by
morning reached the lands of the tribe of Darem,
where he saw the cattle grazing, which his men at-
tacked, and drove away all they could ofhe and she
camels, whilst the slaves ran home exclaiming, Woe
and death! The horsemen mounted, and the troops
hastened from every direction, intending to redeem
the plunder, all clad in armour and corslets, well
accoutred, and determimed to resist. But Antar
having already sent the cattle away with fifty lion
horsemen, stopped with the remainder; and when
the enemy came up, heroes shouted out at heroes,
and they stretched out their spears, and commenced
a furious battle, driving with their lances, that
wrenched out lives. They smote each other with
scimitars till blood gushed forth, and streamed, and
filled the whole dcsert.

Antar overpowered them with his impetuosity and
intrepidity, forcing them back till the fight was con-
tinued close to the tents, and the women were nearly
reduced to slavery and infamy. Screams arose ; the
slaves rushed out; maidens sought their protectors
and defenders; and existence seemed annihilated.
Shiboob had made himself known to Hatal and the
rest, and told him the real state of the case, and the
plans he had adopted ; at which they were much de-
lighted, rejoicing at the prospect of release from
captivity and ignominy.


120 HE LEAVES THE WOMEN AND RETIRES.


Now Shiboob seeing the tents vacated by the
horsemen, and every one employed in the contest,
released his friends from their fetters, and brought
them horses, and a sufficient supply of arms, saying
to them, Now, away to your cousins, and aid them.
Accordingly, Hata] rushed on, followed by the
others. They shouted, they assaulted, they bel-
lowed, they fought, till the people of the dwellings
resolved on flight, having resisted till evening; but
Antar goaded them so fiercely, that they were all
huddled together with the women. Upon that he
retired, and night coming on with darkness, My
cousins, said he, our companions are released from
captivity; and it would ill become us to enslave
women in the absence of the warnors. It will be
better for us to return hence, and renounce all out-
rage and violence. And I, said Shiboob, will conduct
you over the extent of the desert, and by cutting
across the mountains and the plains, by morning I
will bring you out in a distant land. Do, O Shi-
boob, as you please, said Antar; perhaps we may
soon reach our own country.

Shiboob set off with them early in the night,
whilst he himself kept in their rear till sun-rise,
when he conducted them down to the waters of
Caiwan; here they halted, and rested their horses.

Shiboob still directed them across the deserts and
wastes by unfrequented paths, till he approached
the land of the tribe of Aamir, where he made them
travel along by-roads, and halt till night, when he


THEY TRAVEL HOMEWARDS. 12]


desired them to drive on the camels and horses, and
pursue their way in haste, and before morning he
had left the enemy behind him, but he said not a
word about it to his brother. Well, Shiboob, said
Antar, what are the dangers we have left behind?
Son of my mother, replied Shiboob, you know well,
that between you and the tribe of Aamir there is an
enmity of long standing, and particularly that Bran-
disher of Spears, and Ahkwedh, son.of Giafer. At
hearing this Antar was much disordered. Thou
son of a dog, said he, and so thou art afraid of a
numerous body of men! By the faith of an Arah,
had I known what thou wert about, I would not
have left the tribe of Aamir in peace and quietness.
They halted, till the day was spent, and then de-
parted, seeking their native land : now Shiboob cast
round his eyes, and behold a dust arose, and closed
up every vent in the country. It will be as well
to prepare for battle, said he to Antar, and not move
hence till we exactly know what all this means.
Having stationed the he and she camels in their
_rear, they advanced towards the dust, and waved
their spears. Soon the cloud cleared away from
an army like the drifting sand, and horsemen like
fragments of a mountain. All were in coats of mail,
and breastplates of great weight, and with them were —
camels, and horses, and cattle, and women, and
children, and the shrieks of woe convulsed the moun-
tains. Now then it is all evident,—The truth is ap-
parent, cried Shiboob to Antar, our property and


128 THEY MEET THEIR OWN FRIENDS CAPTIVES.


our families, my brother, have been a prey to cala-
mities; our abodes and our lands have been pillaged;
and if my apprehensions are nght, this army is of
the tribes of Aamir, of Ghani, and Kelab. They
have vanquished our country, and have rooted out
every vestige of us. Thou art right, brother, said
Antar, and now I hear the voice of Ibla, and the
women of the Carad family. On this day shall be
made known the virtue of the brave. This calcu-
lation was correct, and the cause of it was Ahkwedh,
son of Giafer, in whose heart was a sparkling flame
against the tribe of Abs. In his fury against them,
and his alarms of their invasion, he stationed spies
and scouts over them to bring him news. Thus
matters continued, till he was informed that Antar
was gone to the tribe of Darem, and with him some
of the noblest warriors. He also learnt that Rebia
and his brothers were still with the tribe of Fazarah.
Well, said he to the Brandisher of Spears, what say
you, O Gheshm, to an expedition against our foes,
thus insuring retaliation during the absence of their
slave? Very right, said Gheshm, and accordingly |
they assembled the Aaminte horsemen, and those of
Ghani and Kelab, and there came six thousand well
equipped, all brave fellows. Leaving one thousand
to protect the dwellings and the country, he marched
till he reached the land of the tribe of Abs’; where,
dividing his army into three corps, he surprised the
Absians under the veil of the night, when, most of
the people being asleep, he put them to the sword,


ANTAR’S BAGERNESS TO ASSAIL THE FOE. 123


and before the morning rose in smiles, he had pos-
sessed himself of the tents and dwellings. King
Cais had fled with his brothers, and those who were
able, to escape. The horsemen were scattered
about, and sought the land of the tribe of Ghitfan ;
some betook themselves to Fazarah, and the tribe
of Abs was completely disorganized, and ruined.
In the morning the Aamirites returned home, after
having taken prisoners the women, and plundered
their property. They travelled in haste, triumphing
in the success of their wishes, for the greatest part
of the Absians had been driven away in despair ;
many of their horsemen were wounded, and no people
were ever reduced to such a miserable state. The
Brandisher of Spears being under some alarm, lest
King Cais might turn upon them, and bring troops
and armies against him, hastened their march, till
they met Antar and the Absian horsemen. Now
the whole tribe appeared through the dust, and
Antar heard the screams of the women, and the
lamentations of Ibla. He rushed towards the quarter
of the women, and pounced down upon them like an
eagle. His noble horsemen followed him, for he
was chiefly anxious to release the prisoners from
torments. When the tribe of Aamir recognised
hin, they shouted, and the Brandisher of Spears
exclaimed, How lucky is this rencounter, than which
none more beautiful was ever traced on the leaves
of history! Attack this slave-demon, my cousins,
he continued, that we may erase out for ever every


124 HE ASSAILS THE AAMIRITES.


vestige of the tribe of Abs. Come on! come on!
Antar made at him with his whole might; then
rushed on the whole army. Antar met them with
the horsemen of his tribe, for they were horsemen
that would mount even lions; they received the
spears on their chests, harder than stones and rocks.
Antar was at their head, with spear-thrusts that
made their very skins shrivel with horror, and in
an hour, their ensigns and standards were upset,
and his horsemen were like one man on that cele-
brated day. Spears were extended; the stern-
faced heroes assailed, and‘ the most tenacious of
existence were prodigal of their lives; whilst they
all tasted of sorrow and wounds. Antar roared at
their head and shouted ; horsemen drank cups from
death ; the women instantly heard his shouts, and
they exclaimed, Oh glorious morning! Antar, the
grasper of lives, is come! ‘and they prayed for his
victory and triumph to the Source of the Clouds and
the Conqueror of the Winds, who opens for his ser-
vants the gates of life without a key. Praise be to
him! may he grant sinners repentance and grace !
They continued in this dreadful state, till the bril-
liancy of the day being converted into the darkness
of night, the two armies separated from the blow and
the thrust, after they had been engaged in a contest
that would have turned youth to age. There were
laid low of the tribes of Aamir, and Ghani, and
Kelab, about seven hundred horsemen, over the face
of the land, and five-and-twenty of the Absians


ANTAR’S FIRMNESS; GRIEFS OF THE AAMIRITES, 125


were slain, and as many wounded. Yet they re-
tired from the combat, like wild beasts when they
start from their dens, and behind them was the
lion Antar, and his nephew Hatal. And having
alighted, they began to consult and deliberate how
they should engage that numerous host. As for
me, said Antar, were the battle to last a whole year,
and around me were to assemble all the tribes and
hordes of the desert, I will not stir hence, till I
release the women from the hands of the foe, and I
disperse them over the wastes, and the wilds. As
for me, by the faith of an Arab, I will not leave of
all these five thousand, no not an old or a young
one; as for me, I will offer myself alone as their
antagonist, and I will make them taste deep of
misery. After all their exultations, their warriors
and their chieftains will I slay. Thus he remained,
watching over them in the obscurity of the night.
As to the tribe of Aamir, when they quitted the
combat and halted at their post, bewildered at the
tribe of Abs, and at their assault, they complained
of their situation to Ahkwedh. If this demon con-
tinues to assail us, he will not leave one of us alive,
particularly since he knows Ibla is with us. O my
cousins, said Ahkwedh, if we do not make a general
attack upon them to-morrow, the Brandisher of
Spears being with us, we can never hope to succeed.
Speak not, O chief, said the elders, in this manner :
we never can succeed against Antar, we cannot over-


come him, whilst he has behind him men like wild


126 = AAMIRITES SEND AWAY THEIR PRISONERS.


beasts, all of whom protect his rear. Were I not
afraid, said the Brandisher of Spears, of Shedad, and
Oorwah, and Hatal, I would go out against him to-
morrow, and would engage him, and take off his
attention from you, till his companions might be all
destroyed. But I also fear King Cais may over-
take us with the Arabs of Hijaz, and powerful
armies, which we shall be unable to resist; we shall
be obliged to fly, and abandon all this booty. My
cousins, if the business is indeed, as it is represented,
said Ahkwedh, I will send away the prisoners with
one hundred valiant horsemen, and when morning
dawns, we will by some means contrive the destruc-
tion of Antar; and if there comes an irresistible force
against us, and we resolve on flight, we shall, at any
rate, have the advantage of the property and booty.
This will do, said the Brandisher of Spears ; for
Antar, if he knows this, will go after them, and then
we will attack his companions and destroy them :
but should he stop, after he receives this news, his
heart will be so pre-occupied with Ibla, that his
resolution will fail, and he will be in despair. We
will make a sudden attack, and complete our
wishes, for he never could engage this tempestuous
ocean but when Ibla 1s present. After this harangue,
they despatched the captives with one hundred
horsemen, and sent with them the guide, Kimhar,
who led them away under the veil of obscurity ;
and when daylight shone, the first that started forth
to the fight was Antar, and he knew nothing of what


ANTAR’S PROWESS: ARRIVAL OF LOCAIT. 127


had happened. The armies of the tribe of Aamir
arose, like the ocean when it roars. Ahkwedh
shouted out towards them, and assured them of the
entire ruin of the Absians, for they consisted of
. four thousand well known horsemen, and the Absians
only amounted to one hundred and fifty ; but their
hearts ever- anticipated victory and conquest, re-
lying on the intrepidity of Antar. With such
resolutions they engaged ; they pierced each other
with Redeinian spears, and they smote each other |
with their edged scimitars. Calamities and evils
were magnified, and men felt anguish as they ex-
pired. But God aided Antar and his deeds, that
day. How many warriors laid he low! How many
heroes and brave men did he reduce to despair!
They continued in this state till mid-day, when .
Antar seeing the Brandisher of Spears plying his
cleaving sword among his comrades, instantly fell
upon him, like the descent of a ravenous eagle—he
closed with him; and as he exhibited all his won-
derful prowess and courage, he shouted at him in a
voice that terrified him; he manceuvred with him
for an hour, till having exhausted him, he thrust out
` his hand towards the rings of his corslet, and was
about to throw him on the ground, when Jo! a dust
arose, and a black cloud of sand mounted on high,
and beneath was seen the glitter of armour, and the
gleam of spears, and men fearless of death, and
undaunted, exclaiming, O by Darem! and at their


head was Locait, son of Zararah, like a frantic eagle,


128 ' DISTRESS OF THE ABSIANS.


and round him were his brothers, like devouring
vultures ; and when they came nigh to the field of
battle, and saw the engines of war revolving, they
rushed upon the Absians, like greedy lions, for they
had heard the shouts and cries, and had distin-
guished friends from foes. When Antar marked
this occurrence, and saw all the troops directing their
lances towards him, he let go the Brandisher of
“Spears, and turned to defend himself. The horse-
men encompassed him on all sides, whirling their
sharp sabres about his body, and he felt assured of
death. But the Absians fought like men in despair ;
the thin blades laboured among them; death and
annihilation were let loose upon them; and had
not the God of heaven assisted them, not one of
them had survived to taste of water.

They continued in this dreadful contest till the
darkness separated them, after the Absians had lost
twenty valiant fellows. Shedad and Oorwah, and a
number of the Carad family, were wounded : they
were surrounded by the foe on every side, and
every way of access and egress was cut off. Locait
having rescued his property, and rejoicing in the
accomplishment of his object, hastened to Ahkwedh.
The Aaminite Chiefs thanked him for what he had
done, and, to their inquiries about the cause of
his arrival, he told them what had passed. When
Antar heard of the departure of Ibla and the
women for the land of the Aamirites, he laid down;
he was sorely afflicted for his companions and the


ANTAR ENCOURAGES THEIN HOPES. 129


captivity of their women: grief and melancholy,
such as no heart of man or fiend ever felt, fell upon
his soul, and his gall was bursting. Turning to-
wards the noble Absians that survived; Although
I feel, said he, as if my life could not last beyond
this night ; yet to-morrow morning I will challenge
these armies that surround us on all sides—I will
shame them with their numbers—I will call them
forth by hundreds and more. If they do this, I
shall succeed in my project, were they even as nu-
merous as the sands of the desert: if they assault,
I will destroy these armies in your presence, and I
will rescue you with spears and cleaving scimitars ;
I will protect you with my vehemence and perse-
verance till you reach the land of Shureba and
Mount Saadi; then will I return alone against
them, and‘I will overwhelm them with my strength
and my power, or my skin shall be flayed off with
the barbs of their spears. O my son, said Shedad,
there is not one of us that will abandon thee whilst
thou art alive, were our lives to be reduced to collar-
bones and shoulder-blades. Thus also said his
ncphew Hatal, and all the rest. The two armies
reposed, some feeling secure, and some apprehensive,
till, day dawning, the fierce Absians arose for the
contest, and their souls bade adieu to their carcasses.
The universe was convulsed with shouts; the foe
resolved to attack them with swords and spears,
when lo! Antar started forth into the field, and
rushed forward, determined in his mind to do some-
VOL. IV. K


bned


130 ARRIVAL OF CAIS RETURN OF THE CAPTIVES.


thing that might be recorded of him, and perhaps
remove his grief and distress; then he thus re-
cited :

“ We are a tribe that fear not annihilation; we
“ regard not the results of calamities. How should
“ we? Death ‚draws up his skirts, and we en-
“ counter him with our noble spirits. ‘There is not
“one of us that fears death; for death is pre-
“ destined to every one alive. Come forth, then!
“ behold the lion of the den, resolved on chasing
“ the wild beasts in the midst of the deserts.
“ He dreads not the warriors in the field of battle;
“ he fears not the most numerous hosts; he comes,
‘and this day ye shall feel his powerful thrusts,
“and his blows that cleave skulls. If I live, I
“ will succeed; if I die, I shall fall, slain by the
“ separation from my beloved. The peace of God
“ be with thee, daughter of Malik; and now this
“ day will I ply my sword-blows among them.”

Antar had not finished, when, from the quarter
of the tribe of Aamir, there arose a dust that dark-
ened the day; and lo! there arose another dust,
and it appeared from the quarter of the tribe of
Abs and Adnan, and it was more extensive than
the former, and the shouts more tumultuous and
more terrific; and the horsemen, who were beneath
it, were eagerly pursuing their march, headed by
King Cais. As to the first dust, it discovered the
captives of the tribe of Abs and Adnan, and all ther
property, and their leader was a knight, with shouts


LIBERATION OF HARITH. - 181.


and roars, vociferating, I am Harith, son of Zalim.
Victory and conquest are thine, O Aboolfawaris !
for the lion-warrior is at hand. The cause of this
event was, that when Harith had slain Khalid in
- the private apartments of Numan, and had also
murdered his son Shirjibeel, as we mentioned,
Locait took him captive, and delivered him over to
King Numan, who confined him till the days of
festivity should expire. Mootejeredah learnt. what
had happened, and was not grieved at it, for he had
killed the murderer of her father. So she sent to
him five slaves, who had been brought up with her
as her brothers, and ordered them to exert them-
selves in his liberation. ‘Tell him, said she, to go
to the tribe of Abs, and proceed to my brother
Cais, and Antar, and demand their protection.
The slaves went forth accordingly, and waiting till
they found an opportunity, they entered, and slay-
ing the guards placed over him, they gave him his
liberty, and mounted him on a horse.

Harith set out, travelling over the wastes, not
crediting his escape till he had passed the tribe of
Aamir, when lo! he met the Absian captives, and
their property under the conduct of the hundred
horsemen. Hanth was delighted. The Aamirites
did not recognise him, but they made at him, and
surrounded him. He stood firm, and cried out,
Well! .would ye exhibit your cowardly superiority
against me, a single person? Ye are ignorant of my
rank; for I am he who slew your Chief Khalid, son

K 2


`~


132 HE RESCUES THE ABSTAN WOMEN.


of Giafer, and clothed ye with the greatest shame.
Calamities were easy to him; he assaulted them,
and his vehemence became still more furious, till
mid-day, when he had slain seventy of their bravest
horsemen, and the remainder resolved on flight.
The Absian slaves released their chiefs, and the
women also assisted them. The nobles being libe-
rated from the chains and disgrace, started forth like
ravenous lions, and surrounded the remainder of the
Aamirites, whom they destroyed to the last, and
left not one alive. With expressions of gratitude
to Harith for this deed, they alighted in that place,
when Harith related to them the various accidents
that had happened to him, and what Mootcejeredah
had done for him; and I am now going, he con-
tinued, to your King, to demand his protection.
Alas! said Malik, Ibla’s father, such distresses as
have befallen our King and people were never felt
by the heart of man. And he mformed him of their
captivity, and that Antar was now fighting. Re-
turn with me, said Harith, this moment to Antar,
that we may join him in the contest, and aid him in
these adversities.

But as to the second dust, it was the dust of
King Cais, who arrived with three thousand of the
renowned Arabs of the tribe of Ghiftan, and they
were come to rescue their property and families;
but they were abandoned this time by the tribe of
Fazarah. As soon as King Cais approached the
troops and armies, he uncovered his head and at-


_ANTAR AND HARITH DISPERSE THE FOE. 133


tacked, his companions doing the same, and shout-
ing, O by Abs! O by Adnan! whilst Harith and
his followers shouted, O by Marah! O by Dibyan!
At this cry, Antar’s heart took courage, and was
calmed. He roared and bellowed in his well known
voice: Hail then the day, so inauspicious to the
foe! As Locait had already imparted to Ahkwedh
the occurrences between him and Harith, he was
greatly amazed at his release; shouting out to the
tribe of Darem, he rushed upon Antar and Harith.
King Cais assailed the foe with hig party, and con-
fronted the tribe of Aamir. In less than an hour
the two armies were promiscuously thronged—
the dust arose—the scimitars laboured—the barbs
pierced the sockets of eyes—blood gushed out from
the nostrils—the noble steeds were thrown down—
the swords hacked right and wrong—ribs were
broken, and waists cut through. Antar and Harith
performed deeds that confounded beholders. Ha-
rith’s heart was full of rage against Locait, so he
sought him over the plain, as he hewed off necks
and throats with his sabre, till the earth was cram-
med with carcasses.. Antar also wished to bear
himself the weight and evil of the battle; so the
flame of war blazed furiously, and the blows con-
tinued among them till the light departed; and on
that day the tribe became a proverb. At last the
two forces divided, and the tribes of Aamir and
Darem were defeated. Locait retreated in repent-
ance; for six hundred of his horsemen were slain,


Pd


134 HARITH OBTAINS THE ABSIAN PROTECTION.


and three times as many of the Aamirites, who were
annihilated; and when they halted, the battle was
calmed, furious as it had been. Antar met Hanth,
and to his inquiries about him, he related his ad-
ventures from beginning to end; and now, he
added, I am come to demand your protection, O
Aboolfawaris, and the protection of King Cais.
Antar having tranquillised his mind, and promised
him security, Harith was rejoiced, and thanked
him. Antar went to King Cais, accompanied by
Harith, and told him what he had narrated, and
how he had aided them with his exploits. Cais
thanked him for his friendly exertions, and promised
him assistance, and the extinction of his oppressors.
At hearing this, Harith thus addressed him :

‘¢ Hola! ‘hail to your lands and your tents; as
s“ long as ye live, hail! hail to the man who seeks
“ your asylum, whom troubles and adversities have
“& oppressed! I have endured things not to be ex-
& pressed in words, not to be described by all my
“ powers of speech. I have plunged into horrors,
“and I am come in haste to a King who extin-
& puishes foes and heroes. O Cais, thou art an
“ active hero, and a knight whose accomplished
‘© wisdom defies all imitation. I must tell thee,
« that I slew Khalid, and made him drink to the
“ dregs the cup of death. Truly thy sister released
“me by force from prison, when I was watching,
‘ and all around were asleep. I retaliated for thee
“ with my scimitar—I have redeemed thy due from


HIS SPEECH TO CAIS AND ANTAR. 185


“ him who was thy foe—I have travelled over the
“ deserts till I reached a party of Aamirites, with
“ whom were thy captives: they were in ignominy ;
“ they were mourning in anguish the cruel vehe-
“« mence of the dusty fight. Ibla too was shrieking
“ in captivity, and her tears were streaming down
‘her cheeks. She was exclaiming in her disgrace,
< Where is Antar, that he might see my dishonour,
“ and what I suffer in my debasement? I released
‘“‘ the captives from them with my furious assault,
“ and in my heart I loved and pitied them. I am
' now come from the land of Irak, bent towards
“thee to seek thy protection, thou noble-born !
“« Art thou not the brave in war, Antar, to whom
‘¢ the stalking lions bow in submission? O knight
“ of Abs, to thee I make my complaint, my sorrow,
‘‘ and griefs; to thee, who feelest no affliction. Be
“ my support then, O Absian youth, and aid me;
‘‘ for he who seeks thee, is soon free from pain.
_ Protect me against Numan; there is none but
« thou to defend me from myself and from dreadful
“ events; for when thou appearest, thou art feared
“ and dreaded; and thy perseverance resists every
“ attack. How many are the horses thou hast left
s plundered of life, and their riders sleeping on the
“ earth! When they hear thy name on the day of
‘¢ battle, fear may be seen fluttering in their hearts.
‘6 Every tribe knows, that where thou art the bat-
‘¢ tlement, there dwells no affliction. All the kings
“ of the earth fear thee in battle, for thou standest


136 THE BATTLE RENEWED.


“ alone brave among men. Asylum and refuge
“ can never fail mankind: thou art the protection
‘¢ against the adversities of fate—thou art raised up
“ to the brilliant shooting stars by courage—thou
& hast raised thy station above Pisces. Mayst thou
“ never decline in glory, in eminence, and honour,
& whilst the sun shines, and darkness disappears !
“ O Cais! O crown of Kings! one whose exaltation
& no one can attain, protect me, for this day I am
& come to thee to try thy protection, thy faith, and
“ thy engagement.”

King Cais was much pleased at Harith’s verses.
By the faith of an Arab, said he, were Chosroe or
the Emperor of Rome to demand thee, they shall
never set eyes on thee; and thus also Antar swore,
saying, Extinguish all thy fears and apprehensions,
and be afraid of no mortal man. They then re-
posed in joy and happiness, and their enemies in
sorrow and affliction, till the day dawned, when
they renewed the fight, and bodies and souls were
spoiled by swords and spears. It was a dreadful
calamity, and a scene that would have turned in-
fants grey, till about mid-day, the tribes of Aamir
and Daren being defeated. Antar mangled their
horsemen with his irresistible thrusts,and made skulls
fly off with his sword: he chopped off hands and
wrists, and hewed off wrists and joints. The Bran-
disher of Spears encountered Harith—they en-
_ gaged—the combat raged between them till their

blood flowed—they saw woe and misery, and the


FINAL DEFEAT OF THE AAMIRITES. 137


earth and sky disappeared from them—they con-
tinued till the day closed; still they persisted in
their deadly spear-thrusts ; but at last the tribes of
Aamir and Darem took to flight. The Absians,
seeing their confusion, pursued them, destroying
them with the cleaving scimitar, till the whole
country was obscured. Then the Absians retiring
with the spoils of the warriors, and their arms and
corslets, and dispersed horses, reposed in that spot,
after they had expressed their thanks and gratitude ;
every one congratulating his neighbour on his
safety. |
In the morning they departed with the women
and families, and plunder, and cattle, and set out
for their own homes. Antar delivered the booty he
‘had taken from the tribe of Darem to his “uncle
Malik, saying, O uncle, when I possessed myself of
this plunder, I laid it aside for the celebration of
the wedding-feast. My nephew, said his uncle, we
will soon accomplish your wishes, and on reaching
home, we will occupy ourselves only in our pleasures. -
Antar’s heart was comforted at these words, and
soothed at this promise; but the words of his uncle
were all fraud and guile, and his heart was full of
and resentment. When we arrive, said King
Cais, who also heard this, we will only wait three
days, and then we will marry Ibla to Antar, before
any other impediment comes upon us; for our foes
are many, and we have traitors amongst us: more-
over, the calamities of fortune are not to be trusted,


138 ANTAR RECOUNTS HIS GLORIOUS DEEDS.


for we are not secure from King Numan, should he
demand the aid of Chosroe, King of the Persians, .
against us, or should he invade us on account of
Harith, son of Zalim. Then they hastened over
the wastes and wilds; as Antar, by the side of
Harith, thus recited :

“ I have opposed the revolutions of incontro-
“ vertible destiny. I have endured absence and
‘ separation. I show the sentiments of love for a
* tribe that would’ renounce me, and truly their
€“ hearts evince no sincerity. I ease with hope my
“ sickened mind, and with exemplary patience that
“ never ends. My foes abuse me for my swarthy `
“ complexion; but some of my deeds should wipe
“ off that blackness. Ask the tribe of my acts, O
“ Ibla, and those who witnessed my exploits and
“ warlike deeds. I repulsed the horse and the war-
“ riors round me as they brandished their long
“‘ spears in theif hands. I plunged impetuously
“into a sea of death, whilst the flame of war was
“furiously blazing: I returned tinged with the
“ blood of foes, and the foam of war, that drenched
“ my steed. How many did I rescue from the
‘¢ dreadful scene in the glorious path of firm-
“ ness, reviving hearts with my sword two-edged
“ and luminous, whose point would cleave the
“ hardest rock, and a spear, whoever was pierced
‘‘ with it, the perfect light never revisited his eyes!
“ Were it not for my sword, and the barb of my
“ spear, I could never have raised a firm support


MALIK RECURS TO Tis ARTIFICES. 139


“for the Absians. I am Antar; well known is my
“ reputation, that -I am the knight of the noble
“ steeds.”

At hearing Antar’s verses, Harith’s heart was
gladdened, and he extolled him (for Harith was the
vilest of men, and full of guile, and it was only his —
fear of Numan that made him humiliate himself: he
also knew that all the united Arabs could not pro-
tect him, so he humbled himself to the tribe of Abs,
and confided in Antar). They continued their
journey till they reached their country. As to Malik,
Ibla’s father, all his projects had failed; he was
melancholy and distressed, and he felt assured his
daughter must escape out of his hands, and that
Antar would be married to her, whether he liked it
or not. So he took his son apart, and told him
his secrets. My opinion, said his son to him, is,
that you send to the tribe of Fazarah, aad acquaint
Rebia and Hadifah that Harith is’with us; that he
has demanded our King’s assistance, and has con-
fided himself to Antar: perhaps they will inform
King Numan of this intelligence. On hearing this,
' Malik was aware that numerous advantages would
accrue from it; and he immediately sent to Rebia
to complain of his situation, and to inform him of
what he did know, and what he did not know.

When they reached home, they pitched their
tents, and being well established and settled, all the
country and dwellings seemed secure in their in-
habitants, and smiling in the return of its occupiers ;


140 ABSIANS SETTLED AT HOME.


and it was all in confusion with feasts and entertain-
ments, and convulsed with jollity and merriment.
Antar conducted Harith to his habitations, and
passed most of his time with him, anxiously expect-
ing his uncle would fulfil his engagements, and on
King Cais he depended for assistance and favour.


ANTAR LEARNS THE PLOT AGAINST HIM. 141


CHAPTER XXXII.


Five days after, came Khemisah, Ibla’s hand-
maiden, to Antar (he was at his mother’s). O my
lord, said she, be on your guard against your uncle
Malik and his son Amroo; be not deceived by
their words and promises, for he has broken his
engagements. Now just about that time a mes-
senger came to him from Hadifah and Rebia, de-
siring him to entice Antar out to the lake of Zat-
ul-irsad, by professing great love and affection for
him. There we will suddenly surprise him, and
put him to death, and thus be relieved from his
persecutions. We will just give you some slight
wounds; so that when you return home, and King
Cais questions you about the circumstance, you
may say, some predatory horse surprised us; and
as we were intoxicated, they treated us as you see;
and thus you will remove this dishonour from your
daughter! I have learnt this, continued Khemisah,
from one of Rebia’s slaves, called Maktoom, who
loves me with the most faithful attachment. He
communicated to me this plot. The maiden quit-
ted Antar, whilst he formed his conjectures about
what she had told him.


142 A FEAST AT ZATOOLIRSAD.


Now Rebia wrote to King Numan to inform him
-about Harith, and that he was with the tribe of
Abs and Adnan, who had resolved to defend him
against the world, and that Antar had also given
him his protection. He also imparted to Malik,
Ibla’s father, what he had done. Antar continued
in his doubts and his fears, till one day his cousin
Amroo came to him, saying, O Aboolfawaris, my
father invites yoy to a feast at the lake of Zatool-
irsad. On hearing this, Antar entered his tent,
-~ and putor his most magnificent robes, under which
he still kept on his coat of mail and breastplate;
and as an additional precaution, in consequence of
Khemisah’s warning, he also girded on his famed
Dhami; and Shiboob brought him Abjer. Antar
mounted, and, together with his brother, proceeded
to the lake of Zatoolirsad, where he found Malik
expecting him, and his slaves were standing in frout
of him. He advanced, and received him kindly.
Antar thanked him; but they had not been seated
long, when they brought dinner, and afterwards
the wine; and in the course of conversation, said
Malik to Antar, I wish you would send to your
friends, and invite all your associates, as many as
you please, that we may decide on the marriage-
feasts, and complete all your wishes: it is my in-
tention not to leave out any one, high or low, but
to have them all at the banquet, there to clothe
the widows and orphans, that your name may be


ANTAR SURPRISED BY HIS FOES. 143


celebrated: so do just what you please. Antar’s
heart was comforted at these words, and his mind
felt quite at case.

After this conversation they pushed about the
wine-goblets ; the damsels sung, and the time passed
agreeably away, whilst Malik kept turning about to
the right and left; and, as he cast his eyes. towards


the plains and the sand-hills, he continued coaxing ` `


Antar, and making him drink, till Antar perceived
the slaves winking at each other: at this he was
roused, and on his guard ; and Khemisah’s words
were verified. Shiboob stood by him with Abjer’s
bridle in his hand, sometimes keeping close to them,
sometimes walking round them, when lo! he saw
the slaves encircling Antar, and Amroo clapping
his hand on his sword, waiting the signal from his
father. Shiboob set up the roar of'a lion ; Rise! rise,
son of my mother! he exclaimed; quit these foul
villains, for in their hearts are nought but intrigue
and guile. Antar started up; he drew his sword,
and was about to ply it among the slaves, when lo!
the horsemen of Fazarah appeared, headed by Ha-
difah and Rebia, exclaiming, Rush on him on all
sides; make at him with spears and scimitars!
Antar on hearing this prepared to mount Abjer,
when cried out Malik to his son, Smite him with
the polished sword, and prevent him from mounting,
thou poltroon! Accordingly, Amroo struck Antar
about the waist, and cut through his clothes, and
reached the coat of mail, which we before mentioned ;


”


144 ANTAR 18 ON HIS GUARD, AND DEFRATS THEM.


so his attempt was foiled, and his expectations were
frustrated. Already was Antar on the back of Ab-
jer; he grasped his destructive spear, and made
towards the troopers, before they could attack him,
cursing his uncle, and upbraiding him. He met
the warriors, and Shiboob flew before him, like a
fawn; his bow was in his hand, and his quiver full
of arrows. Antar pierced their chests with his spear,
and Shiboob hurled them over with his shafts
through their eyeballs and their throats. As to
Jareer, he was quite frantic. Your projects, ye
sons of adultresses and whoremongers, have fatled
in the chase of the devouring eagle, he exclaimed.
The day was nearly spent ; but the obscurity did
not come on before Antar had overthrown the horse-
men, and had dispersed them; and the plain and
the desert seemed too confined for them; they felt
the blows and thrusts that hewed their armour: had
a lion heard them, he would have fallen or fled. The
warriors were scattered over the wastes, and they
felt assured of destruction and calamities. But An-
tar overtook Hadifah, and as he was about to pierce
him with his spear, Shiboob anticipated him, and
smote Hadifah’s horse with an arrow ; he stumbled,
and Hadifah fell. Antar dashed at him, and struck
him the blow of high indignation, and cut through
the two coats of mail, which enveloped him with its
closely knitted rings, and the sword penetrated to
his joints. Quitting him, he rushed at Rebia, and
‘shouted at him; but he wheeled round in flight,


2 os | ; |
ANTAR PUTS THEM TO THE ROUT. 145


and endeavoured to avoid him, for, seeing his attacks
that terrified him, and his blows that made him
shudder, he cried out, What mean these assaults of
drunkards? these blows of intoxication? this slave
can never fight but death is at hand; and every
achievement becomes easy to him. And he sought
the tribe of Fazarah; and those who wished to
escape followed him ; but those who remained Antar
left stretched upon the ground. Haml returned for
his brother, who was lying on the earth; he dis-
mounted, and fastening him on the back of his own
horse, carried him off, following Rebia, whilst An-
tar’s sword still played amongst those that lagged
behind. At last retiring, he thus exclaimed :

<& See what the foe has done; but I am the con-
“¢ queror over every rebellious unlamented enemy.
“ I have a sword whose brilliancy flashes like light-
“ ning, and when my hand wields it, it sparkles
« like the shooting stars. I have a spear whose barb
« exterminates the foe, and leaves him dead on the .
« dusty earth. Whoever wishes to meet me, to him
“© I exhibit death how easy, and life how difficult.
“ They wished to destroy me; but my firmly-
‘‘ grasped sword is in my hand, and the genii of the
“ earth dread my blows. I am the Antar of horse-
s men in the field of battle. I pounce down upon
& the heroes, and they are satiated with my thrusts.”

He then returned in quest of his uncle Malik
and his son at the lake; but he could find nothing
of them (the fact is, he determined first to bind up

VOL. IV. L


146 MALIK AGAIN EMIGRATES.


his wounds, and then to confine Ibla, and absent
himself from the tribe). They must have returned
to the tents, said Shiboob, and to-morrow there will
be a deal of talking and disturbance. They set
out for the dwellings, and reposed till morning,
when Antar, being recovered from his intoxication,
sent for Shiboob, of whom he inquired what had
actually occurred. He accordingly detailed every
circumstance ; in confirmation of which he also pro-
duced his corslet, and lo! it was dyed in blood.
Just then came in Khemisa in haste; O Abool
fawaris, said she, my mistress Ibla sends her com-
pliments, and informs you that her father and
brother have fled, vowing that they will never dwell
with the tribe whilst you are in the country.

The cause of this, and the disgrace of Ibla’s father
was, that, having failed in his plan to destroy Antar,
he was ashamed to return to the tents and habita-
tions. Here we can no longer remain, said he to his
son; I am resolved to repair to King Numan, and de-
mand his assistance to soothe the sufferings I endure
from this slave-demon. I will also inform him, that
Harith is with the tribe of Abs, and that they have
protected him; and this deed will be the cause of
their total extirpation: and if Antar should be slain,
~ against whom we have laid so many snares, then
indeed all will end well; we will marry your sister
to some one, under whose benignity we may live,
` and under whose awful influence we may be secure.
Away ! continued he to his slaves, seek the pastures;


ANTAR'S FRIENDS TRY TO CONSOLE HIM. 147


tell Ibla, that I am become a wretched wanderer in
the desert through fear of her infamy, and if she
wishes to preserve her honour inviolate from the
talk of the slanderers, let her seek refuge with my
brother Shedad, for there Antar will never presume
to wound her modesty. Upon this, he set out with
his son early in the night, and travelled with all
speed, on horseback; but the slaves returned, and
informed Ibla and her mother of what had passed.
I will not go, said Ibla, to the dwelling of my uncle:
I will not stir from my mother’s side. I have no
suspicion of my cousin ; for he will protect me from
both strangers and relations; and never shall I be
a captive whilst he resides among the tents. Having
reposed till morning, she desired Khemisa to go to
her cousin Antar’s, as we have already observed.
Antar’s heart burst; he felt as if his soul had
quitted his body; and whilst he was in a state of
profound melancholy, Oorwah and Harith visited
him, and as they bantered him for his being so re-
tired, he related what had occurred with the tribe
of Fazarah, and that Rebia had sent to inform
Numan of all that had passed; and, added he, be-
tween him and us enmity and war must unavoid-
ably arise. As to King Numan, said Harith, trouble
not yourself about him; for if I hear that he is
marching against us, I will only take ten horsemen,
with whom I will set out, and destroy his armies
and camps. As to your uncle, O Aboolfawaris, it
would be better to seek him: take with you one of
L2


148 HADIFAR’S FALSE ACCUSATION.


King Cais’s brothers; follow him, conciliate him,
and bring him back to the tribe on account of his
daughter; for some one thus says, “ the sorrow is
“ relieved, and the pain diminished that inflames a
“ love-sick youth, particularly when he complains of
“ his misfortunes to a compassionate heart.”

As Antar listened to Harith the tears gushed
from his eyes, and his phrenzy became more violent.
Just then entered a messenger from King Cais,
saying, O Aboolfawaris, my lord King Cais sum-
mons you to his presence, for a messenger from
Hadifah is arrived, stating, that he has a grievous
complaint against you. Upon this Antar mounted,
and repaired to King Cais, before whom he dis-
mounted, and saluted him. O Aboolfawaris, said
Cais, what is the meaning of this affair > how could
you drink to such excess as to commit so outrageous
an act? O King, said Antar, what have I done to
deserve such a reproof? Hadifah’s messenger has
just arrived, said Cais, and he states that in conse-
quence of your blows he has been nearly reduced to
an untimely death; and he has couched his message
thus—O Cais, I rode out one day with a hundred
of my noble horsemen, and my cousin Rebia was
also of the party. We passed your way, that we
might congratulate you on your safety, and make
our apologies for not joining your expedition, or
assisting you against the enemies that had rebelled
against you (the truth 1s, we had then a large body
of horse in Yemen, which is but just now returned


_ ANTAR’S JUSTIFICATION. 149


in safety). We went to make our compliments,
but Antar started up against us, when he was at
the lake of Zatoolirsad; he was intoxicated; he
slew my men, and overthrew my heroes, neither did
he desist till he met me. But I imagine that when
he saw me he was ashamed, for he instantly lifted
up his arm with his sword and struck me, intending
to murder me; and had not his uncle kept him off
from me he would have followed us even into our
country.—Great King, said Antar, by the truth
of him who rooted firm the lofty mountains, and has
the power of life and death, and makes the rain to
fall in his bounty and munificence, verily all this is
false; they only came to assist my uncle to destroy
me, and to shed my blood. And Antar related
every circumstance to the King, from beginning to
end, adding, My uncle has quitted the country, and
fled; there is no occasion for me to appeal against
them, for their enmity towards me has been evinced
a thousand times, and whenever my uncle appears
a little inclined towards me, Rebia communicates
with him, and estranges his heart from me: but as
to what they say about the party of horse in the
cities of Yemen, they tell the truth; for Hadifah
and Rebia, when they knew that I was gone to re-
lease my nephew Hatal, sent after me one hundred
horsemen, promising them cattle in recompense for
my death. But Locait fell upon them, and slew
most of them. All this has befallen me, and I con-
cealed it from you, for fear they should say, Antar


150 ` REPLY OF CAIS TO HADIFAH.


commits violences and outrages; but I will soon
show them the consequences of tyranny and oppres-
gion when the enemy returns and disgraces them.

King Cais easily distinguished the truth from the
falsehood; for he was now put into the direct,
straight-forward road. Return tô Hadifah, said
Cais to the messenger, and tell him, Cais says, by
the faith of an Arab, there is no truth in thy words ;
Antar is right, and his evidence unquestiònable.
Moreover, every one that advises me to’banish Antar
from the tribe only wishes my destruction, and annihi-
lation, for I am a man with many foes, and few allies.
How often has Antar rescued your wives and families
from infamy and disgrace; and moreover, I will
not interfere between Antar and the tribe of Faza-
rah, for they have provoked him a thousand times.
Thus he sent back Hadifah’s messenger, and_.took
Antar to the tents, where he learnt all his sorrows
and the outrages he had endured.

Antar had remained in this way five days, with-
out relishing his meals, or sleep, when Ibla and her
mother sent for him. Know, my cousin, said Ibla,
that your uncle and his son have turned their faces
to the desert and the wilds; it would be advisable
for you to go after them, and pursue their track,
for this has happened to them by the advice of
Rebia; so be kind to my father on my account.
Antar’s heart was instantly calmed. Returning
home, he sent for Oorwah, and his father Shedad,
and summoned Harith, and his uncle Zakhmet-al-


ANTAR GOES IN QUEST OF HIS UNCLE. 151


jewad, to whom he related the conversation that had
passed with Ibla and her mother. I am resolved,
added he, to follow my uncle, when it is dark. I
will punish him for his conduct towards me in
thus listening to the advice of those accursed ene-
mies. I have only sent for you to ask your advice
on this point, and to recommend Ibla to your kind-
ness, for I fear my expedition will be long. As to
Ibla, said Shedad, she shall not stir from my dwell-
ings, and she shall be kept for you till your return.
See how it has turned out, just as I before men-
tioned, said Harith ; let us two go together. By the
faith of an Arab, said Oorwah, I will not remain
apart from you. I must be of your party, for when
you are away from the tribe, all the country is black
as night, in my eyes. Antar expressed his thanks,
they made every preparation, till the gloom of night
coming on, they mounted, having first drowned
themselves in armour, and mailed themselves in
corslets, and girded themselves with scimitars, and
slung their spears over their shoulders. Shiboob
went ahead, like a male ostrich, and when they
were at some distance, said Antar to Shiboob, Con-
duct us by a road where we may meet neither friend
nor foe. Come then with me, said Shiboob, and
see the miracles I will perform; and when I have
brought you out of this land, I will arrange every
thing to your satisfaction. Thus they, hastened over
the wilds and the sandhills, under the night, till they
came nigh to the land of the tribe of Aamir, where


152. SHIBOOB LEARXS WHERE HE I$.


Shiboob having concealed them, said to Antar, It
will be well for me to go forward, and bring you
some news. Away then, said Antar. Shiboob put
on the clothes of a pauper of Yemen, and set out
traversing the countries and plains, whilst they re-
mained in anxious expectation of his return all that
day and night, till the morning, when Shiboob ap-
peared like an ostrich, and with him a slave, as black
as a thunder-cloud, whom he was dragging along
with a rope round his neck, and when he stopped,
he shouted at him, and pulled him with all his force.
Antar was amazed; Who 1s this slave, Ebereah?
said he. This is the slave of Ramih, son of Sabah,
said Shiboob, and from him I have had some news
of your uncle and his son ; he has informed me, that
they are with his master in torments, and disgrace,
and his master is the chief Ramih, the lord of the
tribe of Jibhan, and he is threatening them with
death, morning and evening; for when I quitted
you yesterday evening, I penetrated into the land of
the Aamirites, and there this slave met me, advancing
from the quarter of the valley of Zorood. Who
art thou, wandering in the obscurity of the dark
night? said he tome. Of the tribe of Aamir, said
I, and what dost thou want? Son of my aunt, I am
of the tribe of Jibhan, replied he, and my master
has sent me to Akhwedh, son of Giafer, and the
Brandisher of Spears, to congratulate them on the
fall of Malik, son of Carad, and his son, into troubles
and difficulties with my master Ramih; so that


THEY WERE TAKEN BY RAMIH. 153


they may come to him, and witness their death, for
they are their enemies. At hearing this my reason
fled, and my distress increased. Come along with
me, said I to him, that I may conduct you to the
tents of Akhwedh, son of Giafer, for he is my master.
So he went along with me, my hand locked in his,
whilst I continued to question him about the circum-
stances of Malik and his son’s accident, and kept
occupying his attention, till the wings of darkness
were spread out, when I gave him a cut over the
shoulder with my dagger, and having mastered him,
I bound him fast, and here he is. At this, Antar’s
wrath was kindled into a burning flame. He went
up to the slave, Whence art thou coming? said he.
From the land of Aniziteen, my lord, replied he. And
how was it your master obtained possession of that
Absian and his son? asked Antar. Know, my lord,
added the slave, that my master, Ramih, was return-
‘ing from a feast, to which he had been invited, and
with him was his wifé, Daad-ool-aaminiya, and also
a horseman called Abd Minah, who is the champion
of our country, and the knight of our tribe, and as
they came nigh home, they met this Absian and his
son, travelling over the sands; so he took them
prisoners, and returned to his own country, whcre
he chastised them in the severest manner, chaining
them up with the dogs. On this, Harith ran up
to the slave, and, raising his sword in his hand,
smote him, and severed his head from his body,
saying, O Aboolfawaris, it is my opinion, we should


154 ANTAR’S PATIENCE UNDER NEGLECT.


traverse the land, and perhaps we may overtake your
uncle, and rescue him from torture; and I am con-
vinced that, after this affair, he will be like a slave
to thee. O Harith, said Antar, were I to perform
every act the tenderest friendship could imagine, it
would only increase his hatred and obstinacy ; but
with me he has a powerful intercessor, and that is
his daughter Ibla, for whom my heart is cauterized,
and “ she is the life that animates me, and for one
“ eye let a thousand eyes be protected.”
_ They continued on the road towards the land of
Aniziteen, and Shiboob conducted them across the
wastes, followed by Antar and his comrades. As
Antar thought of what his enemies had made him
' suffer, and how he had submitted to be subdued,
he thus recited:

“ The revolutions of the world are easy to me;
“ its inhabitants are of no account to me, and they
“ are of little value. In every scene of war there
“is a report of me; whenever they hear that
= “ warriors were disgraced in it, I raise the dusty

- storm, and the steeds charge, weighed down with
“ the indefatigable horsemen. I do deeds no one
“ else can do; were other horsemen to do so, they
“ would be exhausted. I consent to be degraded
“among men. . I respect them, but my death they
‘ esteem lawful. I am patient, on account of my
“ beloved, though they outrage me. I cannot re-
“ linquish my passion, but no pity do I find. Per-
‘ haps fortune will favour me with possession; for


HIG SUBMISSION TO THE WILL OF HIS UNCLE. 155


“ after the bitterness of absence, how sweet will be
“ enjoyment! I am the Antar of the Absians, and
‘‘ my name fills the atmosphere, hill, and dale. I
“ thirst for the blows of the flaming sword, and the
‘¢ brave are rendered infamous through me. I send
“ them back, and they fly light and swift, and com-
“ plain of the spear-thrusts of which they are
& wearied.” l
Harith was much pleased at his expressions, and
his eloquence, and being much surprised at his
generosity, O Aboolfawaris, said he, had any part
of what has happened to you happened to me, I
should have slain my uncle, and every one that de-
pended on him. I should have plundered his pro-
perty, and have taken away his daughter, and made
his wife a captive. That, O Harith, is what I will
never do, said Antar, were I to drink of the cup of:
death, for could they even make me quaff of per-
dition, I can never do but what they please. I well
know that what is fated must come to pass. Thus
_ they travelled on over the wilds, till they reached
the haunt of lions, near which was the abode of the
tribe of Jibhan. Here they arrived about evening,
and, halting in a by-place, they began to con-
sult. Say not a word, said Shiboob, till I enter
among the tents, and see how many horsemen are
gone away from the tribe. O Shiboob, said Antar,
we are four of us, and we disregard numbers, great
or small, for victory is from God, and by the faith
of an Arab, no one shall enter the tents, but you and


156 | ANTAR AND SHIBOOB IN DISGUISE.


I, for I am very desirous this time to see my uncle,
whilst he is suffering these tortures; perhaps it
may appease the fury in my heart. How can that
be? said Shiboob, you have such a particular way
with you, and I fear they may discover us, and
then we shall be killed, and we shall spoil all our
good luck. What say you, you base-born fellow?
said Antar; were the tribe as numerous as the sands
of the desert, I will not permit any one to touch you,
not an old one or a young one; and if the alarm
should be given, I will show you what you may
remember in your heart for ever. If it must be so,
said Shiboob, and you are resolved upon it, off then
with these arms ; and Shiboob put hum on a disguise,
and took him away to the haunt of lions, where they
cut two bundles of wood, which might be of use to
them in the adventure. Each took up a bundle and
proceeded. It was almost dark when they entered
the tents, through which they continued to pass,
attentively observing every thing, till they came to
the tents of Ramih, where they saw Malik, and his
son in extreme misery, tied up with the dogs. Be-
hold your uncle, said Shiboob, let your grief’ be now
assuaged. Antar threw his bundle of wood off his
head, and Shiboob did the same; but they did
not stop till Ramih, who was the chief of the
Jibhanians, came out, attended by a troop of slaves,
who laid out a sofa for him to sit on. He then
began to talk to his shepherds, who were parading
before him his horses and his cattle: and he in-


OVERHEAR A CONVERSATION. 157


+


quired of them about the pastures and the grain.
O my lord, said one of the slaves, I beheld a most
extraordinary sight this day; for whilst I was in
the valley of meadows, tending the flocks, I came
upon the high road, where, behold! was a knight
hunting the fawns. He was mounted on a black
steed, and in front of the knight was a man on foot
girded with an Arabian bow, and round his waist
was a quiver, full of arrows, and both were in pur-
suit of a fawn, endeavouring to catch it. I stopped
to look at them, when lo! the man on foot out-
stripped the knight. He seized the fawn by the left
horn, and the knight, catching it by its nght horn,
and gazing in its face, thus in poetry exclaimed :

“ Depart, and, ever in the protection of God,
<¢ may no evil eer overtake thee! for thou resemblest
& my love in her eyes, and her beauty, so depart in
“ security. Although thy form resembles the dam-
<< sel, no imagination can comprehend the virtues
“ of her mind.”

As soon as the knight had finished his verses, my
lord, he let the fawn go out of his hand, and it went
off skipping over the barren waste, when soon two.
more knights joined them. And what is there so
wonderful in all this? said Ramih; I suppose they
are of the tribe of Cahtan, and that the evening has
surprised them, and consequently they must repose
in my land, and will quit it in the morning. Antar
was much astonished at the fellow’s having remem-


bered his verses (for it was he and Shiboob who


168 MALIK SEVERELY PUNISHED.


had chased the fawn). But Ibla’s father, Malik,
having also overheard this account, was convinced
the man on foot must be the dusky Shiboob, and
the knight Antar, so he said to his son, Should this
be my nephew, on his way to release us from these
dreadful tortures, never will I again harbour evil
against him, never will I again listem to his foes.
It is long, that I am without news of my slave, that
I sent to Locait, said Ramih, addressing his slaves
and troops, that surrounded him, and I am very —
anxious to put these two Absians to death; I am
quite tired of keeping them night and day. It will
be as well to wait, said one of his cousins, till they
come to enjoy the spectacle, so that they may not
blame you. Now Malik and his son heard this
discourse, and they felt sure of death and perdition;
but Antar and Shiboob were standing without,
each leaning against his bundle of wood, the night
covering them with its obscurity. Ramih having
terminated his discourse, arose to go to the tents,
and as he went by Malik and his son, he stood
over their heads, and beat them over their noses
with a whip, saying, May God curse the family
to which you belong, for you are full of per-
verseness and iniquity, fellows of little generosity
and: justice, ever celebrated for perfidy amongst
men, and falsehood 1s your clothing. Then address-
ing Malik, he said, So thou art one of the Absian
sheiks, and a black slave has a thousand times done '
thee kindness, and has rescued thy daughter from


CONFUSION IN THE TENTS OF RAMIH. 189


_ captivity and disgrace, and he is Antar, son of
Shedad ; thou hast also taken from him a splendid
dower in cattle, and hast affianced to him thy daugh-
ter; but thou hast ever lied: may God curse that
hideous face of thine, and all thy infamous trans-
actions ! I will indeed cast thy flesh to the dogs, for
thou art a lying sheikh: and Ramih went off to bed.
Antar raised up the bundle of wood, and flung it-
on the fire; he drew his sharp scimitar, making
towards the dwelling where was his uncle, Malik.
Shiboob followed his example. The slaves, who had
charge of Malik and his son, were three; they were
stretched out in sleep. Antar put them to the
sword, and not one of them stirred. Shiboob
entered the habitation ; he was like a great camel ;
he broke off the fetters from Malik and his son,
saying, Take each of ye one of the swords of these
slaves, and trot on before me, that my brother may
defend ye with his sword, Dhami; be grateful for
his deed, and don’t be niggardly of his bride, Ibla.
Accordingly, they did as he. desired them, and
hastened away. But Antar, the illustrious warrior ;
he stood near Ramih’s tent, when lo! Ramih issued
forth, alarmed by the noise. Antar smote him, and
made his head fly from off his shoulders; then
followed his brother, terrified on his account. ‘The
wood blazed, and the flames were furious, and the
fire was extending among the tents. The dogs
barked, and the warriors started forth, and they
were all horror-struck; every one drew his sword,


160 ‘THEY ESCAPE. MALIK’S CONTRITION.


eager to discover what was the matter. The night
became bright as day, from the blaze of the fire,
whilst Shiboob continued to urge on Malik and his
son, and quickly passed through the tents. Antar
followed them, wielding his sward. They proceeded
into the desert, till terror fell on the inhabitants;
when Antar, his uncle Malik, and Amroo, having
mounted some of the scattered horses, Shiboob wished
them to seek the haunt of lions, and escape from this
terrible scene. But Oorwah and Harith joined them;
for having heard the alarm, they determined to as-
sist Antar, and accordingly brought his horse and
his arms. He puton his breastplate and his girdle,
he mounted his steed, and grasped his spear. Let
us begone, said he, whilst they are occupied about
the death of their chief.

And as they urged on their journey, Harith turned
towards Malik to abuse him, saying, Who is like
~ this noble lion, to whom every lion humbles himself
or flies? How then could you hate and avoid him by
flight? O Harith, cried Malik, I am a man whose
eyes have been in a swoon, and those ever err whose
errors are predestined by the God of old.

Malik dismounted, and, advancing towards Antar,
humbled himself before him, saying, By the faith
-of a noble Arab, if I betray thee again, let me not
be a man, and let me not be akin to the tribe of Abs
and Adnan; for thou hast in this instance done a
deed we never can forget, and thou hast resuscitated
our lives after their extinction: comfort thy heart,


OVERTAKEN BY THE FOE. 161


and let thy mind be at rest, for Ibla can suit no one
but thee.

At hearing this, Antar’s sorrows were relieved,
and his afflictions were removed; he dismounted,
and having embraced his uncle, they traversed the
desert and the hills, till the obscurity was illumined,
when lo! some Jibhanian horsemen overtook them.
The cause of their arrival was, that when they heard
the alarm, every one rushed out of his tent, inquiring
what was the matter. The women told them what
had happened to Ramih; so they re-entered their
tents, and put on their arms, and galloped over the
wilds; and amongst them was the knight of Jibhan,
Abd Minah. He mounted with the other heroes,
and sought the lands of Abs and Adnan, hastening
over the wilds till they overtook Antar. O Ebe
’ool Ebyez, said Antar, perceiving that the horse
had overtaken them, take my uncle, and his son, and
Harith with you, and march over the desert whilst
I keep off the foe. No, by thy life, Aboolfawaris,
said Oorwah; we will not return but altogether ;
so also said Harith: but his uncle Malik, when he
saw the troops making towards them with spears,
and swords, was dreadfully alarmed; O Aboolfa-
waris, cried he, thou art our stay; ‘tis thou must
ward off from us peril after peril; on such a day as
this I must remember thee.

Whilst they were thus talking, lo! another dust
arose from the quarter of the tribe of Darem, and
there appeared beneath it a troop of one hundred


VOL. IV. A M


162 A GENERAL ASSAULT ON BOTH SIDES.


horsemen, spear-armed, and headed by Locait, who
was coming to assuage his heart in the murder of
Malik and his son; and when they saw the Jib-
hanians, they raised their shouts till they came up
with them, who acquainted Locait with what had
happened to their Chief Ramih, and told them how
Malik and his son had been released. This, said
Locait, must be the act of that cunning Shiboob;
for in the same manner he rescued Hatal, and then
they plundered my property, and slew our slaves;
but now they shall not escape me: attack them
boldly, but do not despise them on account of their
small number. Assault them with spears and swords,
and particularly if Harith be with them. Thus he
attacked with his men, and the desert was in com-
motion with the glitter of spear-barbs : they slack-
ened their horses’ bridles, whilst shouts and clamours
arose. It was a frightful scene for Malik. and his
son; they both cried out in the name of Antar, and
. they were in a dreadful plight.
. Antar was quite overjoyed, for he felt assured his
uncle’s perfidy was converted into sincerity; Which
wouldst thou prefer, said he to Oorwah, their right
or their left? or wouldst thou attack Locait? But
Harith urged on his steed, and made against Locait,
without noticing Antar, or speaking to him. Antar
marked his actions, and followed him much delighted
at his uncle’s promises; and as he attacked, he thus
burst out—
“ Rancour has quitted my uncle’s heart; it has


-


ANTAR’S JOY AT HIS: UNCLE’S PROMISES. 163


& vanished. When he saw what was just, he re-
& nounced his malice: my heart rejoices in his words ;
“ how should it not, when I see his actions? But
< if he falsifies his promise, I will deliver him over
“6 to Him who sees us, and who: firmly rooted the
& mountains. Away with the man, who, whenever
& I humiliated myself to him, failed me, and grieved
“me. On the day of the thrust of the spear, I am
‘< to him the noblest of knights by my maternal and
& paternal uncle; but when he is safe with his fa-
« mily, I am the son of Zebeebah, the tender of
& camels. O sword, be thou the judge between us;
“ when we are present in the battle, and when they
“ fly, and when the spear-thrust exhausts the fue,
“ tell them the messengers of death are here to mul-
“ tiply the afflictions. What is passed, fate has de-
& termined; and he who fights obtains glory. I am
& the Antar of War in the day of contests; these are
<6 my acts in pure truth.” _

As Oorwah assaulted and heard his verses, he was
amazed at his eloquence, as also were Malik, and
his son, who thought it necessary to engage in com-
pany with him., Thus they attacked as the horse-
men came upon them in every direction. The shouts
mounted on high, and were loud; the brave became
proverbial; the spear-barb drank of the blood of
kidnies. Harith and Locait fought as no former
tyrants ever fought; whilst Antar dispersed thé
horsemen over hill and dale, filling all hearts with
fear and dismay.

M2


164 LOCAIT WOUNDED: HIS PEOPLE FLY:


`- At the close of the day Antar had diminished
their numbers; and having left the Jibhanians
stretched out on the rocks and stones, he turned to
Harith, and saw him still with Locait, and the tribe

- of Darem, engaged in a furious contest of fierce
spear-thrusts. They had slain his horse; he had
fallen to the ground. Locait shouted, and rushed
at him; but Antar, who saw this calamity, roared
and assailed like a shower of rain, when it deluges;
he sought Locait and Harith in the most determined
manner, dispersing the horsemen with his well-tem-
pered blade. Oorwah also rushed towards Locait,
and pierced him with his spear, penetrating his
thigh even to the horse’s back, and halted near
Harith, till he had mounted him on one of the
scattered horses, and then attacked the remaining
Daremites. Remove this disgrace from me, my
cousins, and fly not, cried Locait; soon will I bind
up my wound, and return to the contest, and I will
not have it said we fled from only four men.

Upon that his horsemen resisted, and extended their
long spears: it was an hour to them that would turn
warriors grey. They continued in this state till the
day fled, and the night came on with its veil of ob-
scurity; then fled. the horsemen of Darem, Antar
setting them on fire with unremitted thrusts. None

e escaped but those whose deaths were postponed, or
whose bodies bore marks of Antar’s spear.

Locait wished to persist in the combat, but he was
incapacitated by the anguish of his wounds: he was


ANTAR MEETS AN ABSIAN SLAVE. 165


safe personally, but in his heart was a raging flame
at having suffered this disgrace from five horsemen..
Antar retired, the blood trickling from his sleeves;
and his uncle could not cease praising him whilst he
traversed the desert. But Antar was not tranquil
or at ease till they came near to the land of Shoore-
bah and Mount Saadi, bearing with them immense
property; for they had plundered every horde
through which they had passed; and just as they
were going to send on Shiboob before them to in-
form the tribe of their approach, lo! one of King
Cais’s slaves met them; O by the Arabs, he cried,
how lucky to meet you on the road! Antar was.
startled : What more, have you to say? he exclaimed.
What has brought you here? O Aboolfawaris, said
the. slave, I am now in pursuit of you, for my lord.
Cais has been much agitated since. your departure ;
-the loss of you has distressed him. Your father told
him you were gone to seek your uncle, but did not.
know whither. you.had directed your course. The
King was greatly afflicted, and despatched slaves
one after another, who returned all disappointed ;
but I set out last night—No-more of this talk, ‘said
Antar ; what news have you of my father Shedad,
and of the family of Carad? O Aboolfawaris, re-
plied the slave, the tribe of Abs is inthe greatest.
trouble and tribulation, on account of the rise of.
dissensions, and the devastation of the country; for.
you, my lord, know that Hadifah is a most perfidious
fellow; his head is full of absurdities, and he can-


166 THE HORSE OCAB AND MARE HELWEE.


not bear to see any one possessed of a he or a she
camel, particularly whilst that Rebia is with hin,
instigating him with all his art and deceit: and now
too there is between Hadifah and my Lord Cais a
controversy and a wager about the speed of their
horses, and the people are alarmed at death and
misery.

' Now it happened that when King Cais sent his
slaves after Antar, one of them returned and sad,
My lord, as to Antar, I can hear nothing of him;
but on my way home, I passed by the land of the
tribe of Temeem, and I slept in the dwellings of a
clan called the tribe of Riyah, where I saw a colt
amongst the colts most remarkable for their beauty.
It belonged to a man called Jabir, son of Awef: my
eye never beheld the like of this colt, and never did
I mark one of equal velocity in the race-course.
Cais’s heart was captivated at the account of this
colt, and his anxiety was very great. Now this eolt
was one of the miracles of the age, and the most
beautiful animal the noble Arabs had ever brought
up. It was the most illustrious of all the Arab steeds
in birth and pedigree, for its sire was called Ocab
by the Arabs, and its dam Helwee, whose rapidity
the lightning even envied. Nations were enra

at her form, and the tribe of Riyah had long exulted
among the Arabs on account of this mare and stal-
lion. Now the sire of this colt was returning home
with Jabir’s daughter by the side of a lake (it was
just then the time of meridian heat) : it was there he


A CURIOUS CUSTOM AMONG THS ARABS. 167


beheld the mare Helwee standing by her master’s
tent: he neighed, and burst his halter. The dam-
sel was abashed, and let him go, and hastily took,
refuge in one of the tents out of her extreme mo-
desty and bashfulness. There the stallion remained
till the damsel again came forth, and caught him by
the halter, and led him to the stable; but her father
seeing her disorder, that could not be concealed,,
questioned her: so she told him what had passed..
At this, the sparks flashed from his eyes, for he was,
an ill-conditioned fellow; and he immediately ran to,
the middle of the dwellings, and raising up his tur-
ban, cried out, O by Riyah, O by Riyah! and in-,
stantly the Arabs collected round him, to whom he
related the whole affair, saying, My cousins, [ will.
not leave the seed of my horse in the womb of
Helwee, neither will I sell it for cattle or camels;
and if they will not let me extract the fetus out of:
her, I will commission some one to kill her. Come,
on, do what you please, they all cried; for we will
not oppose you (now it was the custom of the Arabs.
to act after this manner in those days). So they:
brought him the mare, and tied her down before
him; he sprung up, and turning up his sleeves to.
his shoulders, he brought a bowl of water, and
wetting his hand in the water, he mixed up some.
clay, and thrust it up the mare’s belly, with a view tọ
destroy what was originally ordained by God to exist.
But the mare became with foal without any harm, and `
the fellow returned, his passion being now:cooled.


168 DISPUTE ABOUT THE COLT DANIS,


And there was only wanting a few days of the year
when the mare brought forth a perfect colt ; and as
the owner of the mare beheld it, he was greatly
pleased, and ‘all his apprehensions were at an end.

He called it Dahis (thruster), in allusion to what
Jabir had done. `

The colt turned out more beautiful than its sire,
Ocab; broad-chested, long-necked, hard -hoofed,
open-nostriled, its tail sweeping the ground, sweet-
tempered, and, in short, the most extraordinary
animal that ever was. ‘They brought ìt up, and it
increased in size for a long space of time, and it be-
came like an arch of a palace, till one day its dam
going out to the lake, followed by its colt, Jabir,
the owner of Ocab, chanced to see it; he rushed
towards it, and carried it off, leaving its dam to be-
wail its loss; and saying, at the same time, This is
my colt, and I have a greater right to it than any
one else.

The news soon reached its master, who imme-
diately assembled the chiefs of his tribe, and after
he had told them what had happened, they repaired
to Jabir, and reproached him, saying, O Jabir, you
~ had your will of your cousin’s mare at first, and had
your due, and we decided that point for you. But
now you wish to seize his property and outrage him.
No more talk, said Jabir, none of your abuse; for,
by the faith of an Arab, I will not surrender it to
him till you put me to death, or take it from me by
force; and I will stir up a war against you. Now


WHO TURNS OUT A WONDERFUL HORSE. 169


the tribe was unwilling to excite dissensions. We
like you too much for that, said they, on account of
the kindred between us. We will not fight you for
it, were it even an idol of gold. Now the owner of
the mare and colt was called Kereem, son of Wahab,
a man peculiarly famed for his liberality and ge-
nerosity among the Arabs; and when he perceived
Jabir’s obstinacy, O my cousin, said he, as to the
colt it is yours, and it belongs to you; and as to the
mare, here she is before you, and let her be a present
from me to you, in order that the colt and its dam
may not be separated ; and let me not appear a per- _
son capable of defrauding his cousin of his property.
He then turned away, and made over the colt and
its dam to Jabir. The tribe highly applauded his
action; but Jabir was so abashed at his kindness to
himself, that he returned the dam and colt back to -
him, and with them a handsome string of he and she
camels. Dahis turned out a most perfect animal in
every respect; and when his master wished to.race
him against another he rode him himself, and would
say to his antagonist, Precede me an arrow’s shot,
that I may overtake you and pass you; and he not
only came up with him, but outstripped him far;
and to any one that saw him he appeared like an
arrow in its most rapid flight, or a star sped with
calamities, When Cais heard of this he was quite
beside himself, and he could not sleep. He sent to
its master, Kereem, saying, Sell me this colt for
whatever you choose of gold and silver, that I may


170 © l
i CAIS RESOLVES TO- 6EIZE HIM.


send it. you without delay, and there be no room for
reproach. Kereem was highly incensed and in-
dignant at this message. Cais must be a dolt or an
ill-bred fellow, said he. What ! does he suppose that
I am a merchant to sell my horses, or that I am .
unable to ride this horse myself? By the faith of
an Arab, had he sent to request Dahis, as a present,
I would have sent it to him immediately, and with
him a string of he and she camels; but in the way
of traffic this can never be, were T even ta be made
to drink of death.

- The messenger returned to Cais, and told him
Kereem’s answer, at which Cais was exceedingly
enraged. Am I the King of the tribes of Abs and
Adnan and Fazarah and Dibyan, said he, and shall
a foul Arab presume to contradict me?- And he
called out to his men and warriors; instantly armour
and coats of mail sparkled, swords and helmets glit-
tered, the bold heroes mounted their hard-hoofed
steeds, they slung on their spears, and set out for
the land of the tribe of Riyah; and as soon as they
came nigh they rushed upon the pastures in the
morning, and carried off an immense quantity of
cattle, which Cais surrendered to his noble cousins.
After this he invaded the tents and dwellings, for
the inhabitants were perfectly unprepared for any
such catastrophe. Kereem also being absent on
some military excursion with his men and chiefs,
the Absians attacked the habitations, and captured
the wives and daughters. Now Dahis was tied


CAIS BARGAINS FOR HIN. 171


amongst the tent ropes, for Kereem never rode him |
in battle, fearful of death, or some accident; and
one of the slaves, who was in the dwellings, happen-
ing to perceive the invading host, went up to Dahis,.
intending to burst the heel-ropes by which he was
tied; but he was totally unequal to that difficult task.
However he mounted him, tied ashe was, and struck
his sides with his heels, and he flew away with the slave
in the excess of his high spirit, and continued spring-
me and skipping like a fawn till he reached the de-
sert ; and though the Absian horsemen galloped after
him, they could not even overtake his dust. As
soon as Cais saw Dahis, he recognized him, and his
anxiety to possess him increased; he advanced to-
wards his rider, whilst his regret was exceedingly
violent, because he was aware that if he pursued
him he should never succeed in his hopes, however
eagerly he might follow him. The slave, being now
at some distance from the Absians, dismounted from
the horse, and having untied the heel-ropes from his
feet, again mounted, King Cais still pursuing him ;
and when he came nigh, Stop, O Arab, he cried,
you have my. protection and security, by the faith
of anoble Arab! At this the slave halted. Have
you a mind to sell that horse? asked King Cais, for
you have fallen on a purchaser the most wistful of
_ all the Arab warriors. I will not sell him, my lord,
said the Arab, but for the restitution of all this
plunder ; and it will reflect some honour on me that
I shall have made him of so much value and con-


172 CAIS OVERJOVED IN HIS PURCHASE.


sequence. I will buy him, Arab, of you, added
Cais, and here is my hand in confirmation of my
engagement and bargain. ‘The slave instantly
agreed, and dismounting from the colt, delivered
it over to King Cais, who mounted in the fulfilment
of his hopes, ordering the Absians to restore the
cattle they had taken; and they did so, not de-
taining even the value of a halter. Thus King Cais
possessed himself of the horse, and being overjoyed
at his success, returned home. As soon as they were
established, Cais, out of his great fondness for Dahis,
used to feed and rub him down with his own hands.
And soon the account of Dahis reached the tribe of
Fazarah ; and in the heart of Rebia the flame of
envy was kindled. Hadifah also was in a similar
state, and they wished to contrive his death. My
opinion, said Rebia, is that you have patience for
some time, till Cais cool in his passion for him, for
he is now completely devoted to the horse *.


* The race between Dahis, King Cais’s horse, and Ghabra, Hadi-
fah’s mare, is historically true; in consequence of which a war was
kindled between the two tribes, that lasted forty years: and it became.
a proverb amongst them ; so that whenever a dispute was with difficulty
allayed, they would say, the battle of Dahis and Ghabra is arisen.

It is also stated that Cais was the owner of both Dahis and Ghabra,
and that Hadifah was possessed of two mares, which he ran against the
former two. That Hadifah injured Dahis is also mentioned, and that
Ghabra won the race; but that Hadifah, being unsatisfied, raised
troubles and dissensions, which lasted for forty years,


A DISPUTE ABOUT SUPERIORITY. IN HORSES, 173


CHAPTER XXXIII.


Asour that time Hadifah gave a grand feast, at
which Carwash, King Cais’s cousin, was present ;
and when they had eaten their dinner, and the cups
of wine were circling round, the conversation turned
upon the most famed chieftains of that period, till
having exhausted that topic, they began talking of
their celebrated steeds, and their races in the desert.
O my cousin, said Carwash, there never has ap-
peared.such a horse as my cousin Cais’s, Dahis : there
-can be no competitor for superiority, for he startles
every one that looks at him; he is the antidote of
‘grief to every one that beholds him, and he is a
strong tower to any one that mounts him. Thus
he continued to describe him in such glowing terns,
that the hearts of the tribe of Fazarah, and the
minds of the family of Zeead, were in agonies.
Hear him, my brother, said Haml to. Hadifah : this
is quite enough, continued he, turning to Carwash,
all that you have said about Dahis is stuff, all non-
sense, for at this day there are not finer horses than
mine or my brother’s. Upon: this, he ordered the
slaves to parade’ the horses before Carwash, and
they accordingly exhibited before him the horses
. of the family of Beder. Here, Carwash, said Haml,


174 CARWASH MAKES A MATCH FOR Cals,
e@


look at this horse. It is not worth his dried fodder,
said Carwash. They then paraded Hadifah’s horses,
amongst which was a mare called Ghabra, and a
` stallion called Marik. Look, Carwash, at these
horses then, said Hadifah. ‘They are not worth his
dricd fodder, repeated Carwash.’ Hadifah, very in-
dignant at these expressions, exclaimed, What ! not
even Ghabra? Carwash. No, said Carwash, not
Ghabra, nor all the horses on the face of the earth.
Will you make a match for King Cais? said Hadifah.
Yes, said Carwash, that Dahis will beat all the horses
of the tribe of Fazarah, had he even on his back
whole kintals of stones. ‘They disputed, asserting,
and contradicting cach other, till said Hadifah,
Well then, let the winner take as many he and she
camels as he pleases. You will play me false,
Hadifah, said Carwash, and I do not wish to take
you in. I will not bet you more than twenty she
camels, to be paid by the owner of the beaten horse;
and thus the business was settled. Having finished
the day in eating, they reposed that night; but early
next day Carwash rode off, and sought the tribe of
Abs, till coming to King Cais, he told him all about
the bet. You have done wrong, O Carwash, said
Cais. You might have betted with all the world,
but Hadifah, for he is a very obstinate fellow, and
full of shifts and pretexts. But if you have settled
the bet, I must cancel it. Cais only waited till his
company had quitted him, when he mounted his
horse and repaired to the tribe of Fazarah, whom


WHO CANCELS IT; BUT LAYS ANOTHER. 175


he found seated in the midst of the dwellings, with
their dinner before them. Cais dismounted; he
bared his arms, and seated himself amongst them,
and began eating their dinner, like a generous Arab.
Cousin, said Hadifah, wishing to quiz him, what
large mouthfuls you take ; Heaven defend us from
your voraciousness! I am indeed hungry, cousin,
said Cais, but by Him of hereafter and heretofore, I
am not here merely to eat your dinner, but I am
come to dissolve the wager, which was made be-
tween you and my cousin Carwash. I request you
will break the bargain, for every thing that happens
over the bottle should be annulled and forgotten.
Know then, Cais, said Hadifah,‘I will not be off the
bet, except that I receive the he and she camels,
and when you have produced them, it will be per
fectly indifferent to me. However, if you wish, I
will seize them by force, or if you like, I will re-
nounce them by way of grace. Whatever Cais could
say, over and over again, Hadifah still kept to one
side of the question; and as Hadifah’s brother only
laughed at him, Cais was in a violent passion, as he
said to Hadifah, (his face all flushed with rage) How
much was the bet between you and my cousin ? For
twenty she camels, said Hadifah. As to the first
bet, Hadifah, said Cais, I dissolve it, and I will lay
you another, and let the wager be thirty. Forty,
said Hadifah. Fifty, said Cais. Sixty, said Ha-
difah; and they continued rising till they made the
bet a hundred she camels, and consigned the contract


176 TRE AMOUNT AND DISTANCE SETTLED.


into the hands of a man called Sabic, son of Wahab,
whilst a crowd of old and young collected about them.
What distance shall we run? said Hadifah to Cais.
Forty arrow shots, said Cais, and we have an archer
called Ayas, son of Mansoor, (for there was no Arab
at that day could shoot like him, and the Arabs had
made him quite a proverb). King Cais was anxious
indeed for a longer race, on account of the strength
of his horse’s muscles, for the greater distance he
went, the more his spirit and animation increased
in his moyements. Determine then, said Cais to
Hadifah, when the match shall take place. Forty
days, I think, said Hadifah, will be required to train
the horses. Very well, said Cais; and the affair was
mutually settled, that the horses should be trained
forty days, and the race-ground should be near the
lake of Zatulirsad; and the horse that should
arrive first should be the winner. Cais having given
his consent, he returned to the tents. Cousins, said
one of the Fazarah horsemen to his neighbours, be
assured dissensions will arise between the tribes of
Abs and Fazarah, in consequence of this race be-
tween Dahis and Ghabra: the two tribes will be
disunited, for King Cais 1s come in person, and
he is a prince and the son of a prince. He has
endeavoured to annul the bet with Hadifah, who
would not consent, and this will be a business that
will-occasion a contention that will last nearly fifty
years, and many will be destroyed in wars and
battles. As to that, said Hadifah, I care not about


E HADIFAH'S OBSTINACYs 177


it, neither will I follow such advice. I will soon
describe to you, O Hadifah, the end of this, your
obstinacy with King Cais, said Ayas, and thus he
addressed him :

“ In thee, O Hadifah, there is no beauty, but in
“ the purity of Cais there is no stain; how pure is
“ his advice, and how becoming ; but propriety is im-
“ planted in him. Bet then with some one who has
“ not in his possession even an ass, and whose father
“ owns not a horse. Give up Cais, for Cais has
“ wealth, and possessions, and horses, and a fiery
“ spirit, and moreover, that Dahis, who in the day
“ of the race is pre-eminent, when he moves or stands
“ still. He is a horse, when a night of dust sheds
“ its obscurity, you may see his hoofs like a fire-
“ brand.” !

O Ayas, said Hadifah, thinkst thou I will shrink
from my word? I will have the camels from Cais,
and I will not permit my name to be banded about
as one incapable and beaten; let things have their
course. !

When King Cais reached the tents, he first ardered
his slaves totrain his horses, but to be most particular
in their attention to Dahis; and then he related to —
his brother and his uncle Asyed what had passed
between him and Hadifah. It was on that day
Shiboob arrived, and gave the news of Antar’s return,
to the great joy of King Cais. All the tribe of Abs
went out to meet him, and saluted him. King Cais
took him by his side, and received him most honour-

VOL. Iv. N


1%8 ANTAR EXCOURAGES CATS TO THE RACE-


ably, and conversing with him; asked him what had
occurred during his excursion. Antar related every
circumstance eoncerning his uncle Malik; how he
had rescued him from punishment, and released him
from the dogs; and, in reply to Antar’s inquiry
about the horse-race, Cais repeated what had oc-
curred between him and Hadifah. O king, said
Antar, calm your heart and brighten your eye, run
the race and fear not; for, by the faith of an Arab,
if Hadifah moves or excites any disturbance, I will
kill him, and I will kill the whole tribe of Fazarah.
Thus they continued, till they reached the tents,
but before Antar would enter the tent of his cousin,
Ibla, he went to look at Dahis, and walked all round
him, and saw that he was the wonder of the world
in qualities that astonished every one; and Antar
having comforted Cais’s heart, went home. By the
faith of an Arab, said Harith, it would be better to
renounce this business than to persist in it, (Harith
was related to the tribe of Fazarah, and he was afraid
that Antar would bring down upon them a violent
death.) Antar reposed that night in his tents, but
the next day came Sinan, son of Ebe Hanthah,
- to King Cais, from King Numan, and the cause
of Sinan’s coming was Hadifah’s messenger, who
reached Numan, and told him that Harith was with
King Cais and Antar, Who are resolved, said he,
to protect him against you and Chosroe Nushirvan,
and all the inhabitants of the wilds and wastes. I
cannot imagine, said Numan, that my brother-in-law


~


"CAIS REFUSES TO SURRENDER HARITH. ` 179


of the tribe of Abs will protect the murderer of my
_ son; and he immediately ordered Sinan to repair to
King Cais and Antar, and to demand Harith of
them. Sinan accordingly departed for the land of
Abs and Adnan, and arriving on that day he pro-
ceeded to King Cais, and told him he was come to
demand Harith ; For it is reported, said he, that you
have given him an asylum. King Numan has sent
me to you, saying to me, If Harith is with King
Cais, tell him to surrender him to you, and do you
bring him to me. Now I am his surety, and you
know the consequences. Cais was much troubled.
I know, O Sinan, said he, you are an old sheikh, and
many persons submit to your opinions. You have
learnt that Harith has slain my father’s murderer, _
Khalid, son of Giafer, and for our sakes he has
exposed his life, and when he fell into King Numan’s
power, my sister rescued him from death. She sent
him to us, knowing well that we should protect him.
‘We will not surrender him to any Arab of the wil-
derness: had he come to us, when we were suf-
ficiently secure in our tents, perhaps we had driven
him away from our tribe ; but as a consummation of
good fortune, he met our prisoners with the tribe of
Aamir, and rescued them with his sharp sword, and
he bas behaved generously towards us, first and last ;
we cannot therefore dismiss him from our protection,
were even our heads to fly off before him. The
man is under our protection, and neither King
Numan, nor Chosroe Nushirvan, shall have any
N2


180 — aANTAR's SPEECH TO NUMAN’S MKSSEKGER.


authority over him ; not a hair of his head will we
deliver up, till after the blows of the thin-edged
scimitar, or the thrust of the well-proportioned spear;
let Numan be pleased or angry, just as he likes.
‘They were thus conversing, when lo! Antar came
in, brandishing his sword Dhami, for he had heard
of Sinan’s arrival. As he entered, he did not salute
or speak, but turning upon Sinan, Thou despicable
sheikh ! he cried, thou artful dog! art thou he that
is come from King Numan? Were I not in the pre-
sence of this king, I would make thee drink of thy
death. Avaunt! begone! away to him who sent
thee ! tell him from me that I have protected Harith,
neither will I deliver him to an Arab or a Persian;

and if Numan sends us another messenger, he shall
-= not return from me bat degraded and repentant.
Sinan arose, and was struck with horror; he was
confounded and bewildered; he immediately de
parted, and in his heart was an unquenchable flame,
and an unappeasable fire against Antar. In the
meantime, Hadifah had heard of Antar’s return,
and that he had encouraged Cais to the race. O
my brother, said Haml, I fear, should Antar fallon
me, or one of the family of Beder, he will kill him,
and we shall be dishonoured. Annul the race, or
we shall be annihilated. Let me go to King Cais,
and I will not quit him, till I persuade him to come
to you to request the bargain may be broken, and his
perverseness be satistied. Do as you please, said Ha
difah. Accordingly, Haml mounted bis horse, and


HAML TRIES TO ANNUL THE RACE. 181


immediately went to King Cais, without asking any
permission, and there he found his uncle Asyed, who
was a wise and sensible man. Haml saluted him and
kissed his hand, and exhibiting great interest about
Cais, O my cousin, said he, know that my brother
Hadifah is but arr ill-conditioned fellow, and full of
intrigue. I have been these three days abusing him,
in order to induce him to abandon the wager. Well,
said he, at last, if Cais again returns to me, and
wishes to be off the bargain, I will annul it; but let
not the Arabs hear that I abandoned the bet in fear
of Antar. Now you know, my cousin, that to for-
bear with cousins is the greatest of kindnesses, so I .
am come to request that you will go with me to
my brother Hadifah and ask him to give up the
race, before any disturbances arise, and the tribe
be driven away from its native land. At hearing
Ham's discourse, Cais was abashed; for he was
easily persuaded, and was of a noble birth and origin;
he immediately started up, and leaving his uncle
Asyed in his place, he accompanied Haml to the
country of Fazarah, and when they were half-way
between the two hordes, Haml went ahead of Cais,
whom he thus praised; at the same time blaming
his brother Hadifah, in these lines :

“ O Cais, be not incensed against Hadifah, for
<< he is a vile obstinate fellow, and iniquitous in his
“<< deeds. O Cais, if you pertinaciously persist in
sc this wager, destruction will be its result, and its
«<< consequences will be fatal. I fear that my brother,


182 CAIS REPAIRS TO HADLFABe


« for his foul deeds, will suffer what the youth
“ Kelthoom suffered, who raised his brother to high
“honours; but he swerved from propriety, and
“ became a rebel, and his power was

“ O Cais, both you and Hadifah are high-spirited,
“and on that account I am im great affliction for
“ you. Renounce all private interest, be kind and
‘¢ generous, before the oppressor becomes the op-
s pressed.”

_ Haml continued abusing his brother, and admiring
Cais, till they reached the tribe of Fazarah by even-

ing, where they saw Hadifah and the chieftains as-
sembled together. Cais saluted them, and throwing
his eyes round, saw Sinan seated by Hadifah’s side.
He disguised his feelings, and exclaimed, O Sinan,
return, if thou wouldst exert thyself in the cause of
peace and friendship, and the preservation of the
blood of noble horsemen. O King, said Sinan, I am
paralysed on that point; by the faith of an Arab, I
cannot possibly redeem my life from death, for you
know that I am Hanith’s surety with Numan, and
as I cannot return, I have sent my comrades to ac-
quaint him with my situation, and in the mean time
I am conie hither to seek an asylum till you and
your brother-in-law Numan decide on your future
Movements.

Now this speech of Sinan’s was all dissimulation
and deceit; and he only came to the tribe of Faza-
rah to embroil the two tribes, and to work their mu-
tual destruction; for when the scene between him


QINAN’S PLAN TO. EMBROIL THE TRIBES. 183


arid Antar was over, Kiran rushed out quite stupe-
fied. Away, said he to his companions, away to
King Numan, and tell him all you haye heard from
the black Antar, that contemptible fellow; and de-
sire him to send intrepid armies against the Absians,
to root out every vestige of them. Asto me, I will
- repair to the tribe of Fazarah, to plot the death of
Antar, and the Absians, that I may extirpate them,
and knock down their boundary marks.

His companions hastened to King. Numan,- but
Sinan reached the tribe of Fazarah, and Hadifah
received him with great distinction, asking the cause
of his arrival. I am come, said he, to carry away
Harith from King Cais; but Antar has said to me
so and so: I have therefore sent to Numan to tell
him what Antar has said, and what Cais has done.
In the mean time I am come te you, and I cannot
possibly think of returning home till I have con-
trived the destruction of Antar and Cais, and not
left a man of them alive. Hadifah told Sinan all
about the horse-race; and I have just sent Haml,
he added, to King Cais, and it was my intention to
make peace; but now that you have imparted this
to me, I will never give my consent to any accom-
modation: and just at that moment arrived Cais and
Haml.

Hadifah, as soon as he saw Cais, resolved over
whelm him with shame, as Sinan had recommended.
_As to thee, said he to his brother, pray whé ordered
thee to go to this man? By the faith of a noble


184 CAIS REFLIES TO HADIFAR'S OUTRAGE.


Arab, were every human being on the face of the
earth to importune me, and should say to me—O
Hadifah, do but relinquish one hair of these camels,
I would not relinquish it till after the sword-blow
that cleaves, and the spear-thrust that penetrates.
Cais blushed, and remounted his horse, reproaching
Haml for his conduct. The night was now ad-
vancing, when Cais, convinced that this affair was
entirely owing to Sinan, thus spoke his rebuke:

“ In truth I abhorred the horse-race, fearful of
‘outrage; but my adversary is stanch te his bar-
“ gain: I said gently, Hadifah, abandon it, and
“ hear what I in my clemency say. But he was
« violent; and as he saw me become milder, he be-
“came still more outrageous. Such intemperate
“ acts are iniquitous: they insulted me when they
“ saw me gentle, and I am called a great coward.
« As tome, by Him to whom belong the pillar, and
‘6 the shrine, and Zemzem, and the wall, I have
‘ that resolution in me, that will put to flight the
* calamities of fortune, when they are even destined
“ by fate; and I have heroes that will meet the rush
“ of death with hearts incorporated in their whole
«“ frames. O family of Bedr, although power com
«& sists in command and prohibition, by my life, it
« cannot last long: but he who has advised you this
« day has erred, and over him will hover the birds
“ of death.”

King Cais applied the latter lines to Sinan ; he
then procecdcd till he reached home, where he found


PREPARATIONS POR THE HORSE-RACE. 185


his uncles and brothers sitting in anxious expectation
of him, and in a state of the greatest inquietude. O
my son, said his uncle Asyed as soon as he saw him,

thou hast done a foolish deed, for thou hast degraded

thyself. Had it not been for Sinan, said Cais, I

should have accommodated the business; but now

there is nothing for it but the race and the wager.

He then communicated to them that Sinan had

taken refuge with the tribe of Fazarah, and had en-

gaged to aid them with his advice and contrivances. -
They were amazed, and repented of having let him

escape out of their hands.

King Cais reposed that night, and as he was fixed
in the determination about the race, he trained his
horse for forty entire days, The Arabs of that
country had engaged to each other to come to the
pastures to see the race; and when the forty days
had expired, the horsemen of the two tribes as-
sembled, and flocked to the lake of Zat-ul-irsad ;
and also Ayas the archer was there, who, turning
his back upon the lake, to which the horses were to
run, and moving himself towards the north, shot his
hundred shots with his arrows, till he finished at a
well-known spot. Soon arrived the horsemen of
Ghiftan and Dibyan, for they were of one country,
and between them were kindred and relationship,
and all were called the tribe of Adnan. Cais had
recommended Antar not to be present, he was so
afraid of the occurrence of dissensions. Antar
listened, but he could not stay quiet; and being


308 _ ANTAR'S SPEECH TO THE ARABS


glatmed for King Cais on account of those dastardly
Fazareans, who might betray him, he mounted Ab-
jer. He girded on his sword Dhami, and taking
Shiboob by his side, he joined the multitude in his
fears for King Zoheir’s sons; and when they ap~
proached, they saw him like a mailed lion ; his sword
was drawn in his hand, and his eyes were throwing
out red burning coals.

- As they all halted, they continued to look at him,
till he being in the midst of them, cried out in a
tremendous voice, Eh! noble Arab Chiefs, and ìl-
lustrious men here present—ye know, that I am the
favoured man of King Zoheir, father of King Cais,
and that I am the slave of his munificence ; it was
he who admitted me to rank and kindred, and caused
me to be numbered amongst the Arab chiefs; but
though he did not survive, that I might repay him
for his kindnesses, and make the kings of the earth
subservient to him, he has left his Absian son as his
heir, whom his other brothers have acknowledged,
and have placed in the seat of his father, on account
af his good sense and uprightness, correct judgment,
and high rank; I am his slave, his property, the
succour of him who loves him, the enemy of him who
opposes him: never shall it be said whilst I am
alive, that I ever saw him debased by a foe. As
to this match, to which he has graciously given
his consent, it is incumbent on us to aid him
in all his wishes; so there is nothing more to
be done but to let the horses go. Victory is frem


ADVICE TO THE JOCKIRS. 187


the Creator of day and night; and I swear by the
sacred Shrine, by Zemzem, and the temple, and the
eternal God, who never neglects his servants, and
who never sleeps, that if Hadifah commits any act
of violence or oppression, I will make him drink of
death and vengeance; I will make the whole tribe
of Fazarah a fable amongst mankind: and, O Arab
Chiefs, if you really desire the racé, be impartial ;
otherwise, by the eyes of Ibla, I will make the
horses plunge through blood. Antar is right, cried
out the horsemen in every direction. |
Upon this, Hadifah selected for his mare Ghabra
a jockey from the tribe of Dibyan, one who had
spent all his life in bringing up horses, and had even
passed the obscurity of night in that occupation.
But Cais chose for his horse, Dahis, from the tribe
of Abs, a jockey more expert and scientific than the
Dibyanian ; ; and when each was mounted on his re-
spective horse, Cais gave this recommendation to
the Absian jockey:
s Give him not the rein entirely; if the sweat
“* and moisture burst out on him, wipe him with
‘* your legs, and gently press against his loins ; but
s< if you push him too hard you will distress him.”
Hadifah heard what Cais had said, and he also
wished to imitate him, so he gave his recommenda-
tion to his jockey, as follows:
“ Give her not the rein entirely ; if the sweat
“ and moisture burst out on her, wipe her with


188 THE RACE DEFERRED.


« your legs, and gently press against her loins; but
« if you push her too hard you will distress her.”

Antar laughed. By the faith of an Arab, said
he, you are beaten. O Ebe Hidjar, expressions in
poetry are not so deficient, and the application of
verses is not so obliterated, that you should speak
just as Cais spoke. Cais, however, is a king, and
the son of a king, and he must always be imitated ;
and your following him in your speech is a proof
that your horse will follow his over the desert.

On hearing this, Hadifah’s wrath and indignation
were roused, and he swore an oath that he would
not run his horse that day; and would not race till
the morrow by sunrise. Hadifah only desired that
delay, in order that he might in his perfidy contrive
some vile scheme; for when he saw Dahis, he was
amazed at his form, and the beauty of his points.

The judges dismounted, and the Arab horsemen
were about to return home, when lo! Shiboob cned
out in a loud voice, O tribes of Abs, and Adnan,
and Fazarah, and Dibyan, and ye all that are here
present, wait for me a little, and hear words that
shall be recorded from generation to generation.
All the warriors halted: Speak, O Ebe Reah, said
they, what is it? Perhaps there may be some good
in thy words. O illustrious Arabs, said Shiboob,
ye have heard what has passed about the match
between Dahis and Ghabra; and I will stake my
existence.that I will beat both the horses, were each


SHIBOOB’S WAGER. 189


of them to fly with wings, but upon this condition,

if I beat I will take the hundred camels that are

agreed upon; but if I am beaten I will give fifty

camels. On this, one of the Sheikhs of Fazarah ex«
claimed, What’s this, thou vile slave, that thou

sayest? Why, if thou winnest, shouldst thou take
a hundred camels, and if thou art beaten, shouldst_
thou only give fifty? Eh! you he-goat of a fellow,

you dung-born, said Shiboob, I only run on two
legs, and a horse runs on four, and he has a tail to
boot. So all the Arabs laughed, much amazed at
the conditions he made, and as they wished very
much to see him run, they assented to the perilous
undertaking.

_ But when they had returned to their tents, said
Antar to Shiboob, Eh! thou son of an accursed
mother, how canst thou beat these two horses, for
whom the horsemen of the tribes have assembled,
and say that in this age there are not their equals in
the race, not a bird that can overtake them? By
the truth of Him who produced springs from the
rock, and who knows what is to be before it is, re-
plied Shiboob, I will outstrip the two horses were
each of them to fly with wings. Ay, thou black
born, and much benefit will come of it, for when the
Arabs hear of this circumstance, they will never
again attempt to follow me when I run away over

the deserts. Antar smiled, for he knew what was

in his mind. Shiboob then returned to King Cais,

and his brothers, and all the spectators, and engaged


¥90 HADIFAH’S FOUL PLAY.2N THE RACE.


on his existence that lie would outstrip the two
horses. All present were witnesses to his sayings ;
and they then separated in the greatest astonishment
at his determination.

But as to the treacherous, perfidious Hadifah,
when evening came on he sent for one of his slaves,
called Damis, who was a great bully. O Damis, said
Hadifah, you are ever talking of your dexterity,
but hitherto I have never had occasion for you. My
lord, said Damis, say what you want, that I may
exert myself in the execution of your business.
What I want of you is to go to the great defile, said
 Hadifah: remain there, and conceal yourself till
morning. Mark well the horses, and see if Dahis
comes by first; if so, bolt at him, strike him over
the face, and make him start back. Let Ghabra
‘run ahead of him that we may not incur the dis.
grace of being beaten; for when I saw Dahis, his
appearance created doubts, and I fear he will beat
my mare Ghabra, and outstrip her in the desert,
and I become a derision among the Arabs. But
how, my lord, shall I distinguish Dahis from Gha-
bra, when they both advance beneath the dust? I
will assist you in some measure on their respective
standards, he replied. Hadifah collected a number
of stones, as many as were necessary to make him
womprehend the standards. Take these pebbles,
said he, and as soon as the sun shines begin to
count them, and throw them on the ground in fours;
when you have cast away two-thirds or three


THE RACE, DAMES AHEAD OF GHABRA. 1g


‘feurths of them it will be Ghabra, for this is her
standard to that spot. If you see her advaneing,
let her pass, and do not oppose her; but if you
have only thrown away one-fourth, or one-third, ar
less than that, then Dahis will be the first—rush
out, strike him with a stone across the face, and
drive. him back on the desert, and let my mare
Ghabra run ahead of him. The slave assented,
and taking the pebbles went to the defile, where he
concealed himself, and Hadifah felt assured of being
the winner.

When the day dawned, the Arabs being collected
from every quarter, were huddled together in one
mass; the judges let go the horses, and their jockeys
gave a loud shout; they started forth like lightning,
when it blasts the sight with its flash, or a gust of
wind, when it becomes a hurricane in ite course.
Ghabra shot ahead of Dahis, and left him behind
her over the desert. Thou art thrown out, my
brother of the tribe of Abs, cried the Fazarean, to
the Absian,.so comfort thyself in thy grief.and dis-
tress, ‘Thou liest, retorted the Absian; in a short
time thou wilt see on whom the disappointment. will
fall: wait till we have passed these shingles; mares
work better in such troublesome places than on
plains and level grounds. When they came to the
mead, Dahis launched forward like a gignt when he
stretches himself out, and he left his dust behind.
‘He appeared as if without legs or feet, and ina
twinkling of an eye he was ahead of Ghabra. Then,


192 SHIBOOB COMES- IN FIRST.


cried the Absian to the Fazarean, send a messenger
by me to the family of Bedr, and do you taste of
the bitterness of patience in my rear. Shiboob
all the while kept ahead of Dahis, like the northern
blast, and he skipped along like a fawn, and rushed
with the violence of a male ostrich, till he came nigh
to the defile, where Damis was concealed. Damis
had cast away of the pebbles less than a quarter.
He stretched out his eyes, and saw Dahis advancing.
Damis waited till the horse came,up to him, when
he shouted at him, and springing at him, struck
him a severe blow with a stone over the eyes. The
horse started back, and staggered ; the rider nearly
fell off; but as soon as Shiboob saw this, and spied
out the subtle slave, he knew that he belonged to
the base-born Hadifah. In the excess of his fury
he rushed at him, and in haste drew hisdagger, and
striking the slave Damis, ripped out his entrails, and
exterminated his existence. He then wanted to
return to Dahis and coax him, when lo! up came
Ghabra, like a gust of wind, tearing over the wide
desert. Shiboob was afraid of being beaten, and
that the camels would be taken from him, so he
returned, and playing away with his feet made to-
wards the lake, where he arrived first by two arrow-
shot. Ghabra came dn his heels, and Dahis came
in last, bearing the marks of the blow between his
eyes, and the tears were streaming down his cheeks.
The spectators were amazed at Shiboob’s acti-
vity, and the power of his muscles; but as soon as


DISSENSIONS ABOUT THE WAGER, 198


Ghabra advanced, arose the shouts of the Fazareans,
and when Dahis came up in that state, the -jockey
informed the tribe of Abs what the slave had done.
Cais saw the effects of the blow on the face of Dahis,
and heard all the circumstances. Antar bellowed ;
he dashed his hand on his resistless Dhami; he
roared out in a tremendous voice ; he longed to put
the tribe of Fazarah to death ; but the Sheikhs pre-
vented him—so he had patience—they went to Ha-
difah, abusing him and reviling him, for his infamous
_ transaction. He denied it, and perjured himself
with false oaths, swearing, he knew nothing about
the blow Dahis received, and said, I demand my
due; I will not relinquish my bet; I will not admit
of this paltry excuse. This blow cannot but be of
bad omen to the tribe of Fazarah, said Cais; God
will truly grant us victory and triumph, and we
must positively root out every vestige of them ; ‘for
Hadifah only desired the race in order to produce
troubles and dissensions, and that war and commo-
tion might fall upon the tribes, that men might be
killed, and children be orphaned. The conversation

grew more violent, shouts arose in all directions, —
and the polished swords were drawn; the cries of
the warriors were loud, and there only remained the
rush to arms. Upon this, the Sheikhs and the wise
men dismounted, and uncovering their heads, they
penetrated the crowds, and humiliating themselves,
they settled the business in the best possible manner,
‘That Shiboob should take the hundred camels from


VOL. IV. Oo


194 SHIBOOB RECEIVES THE CAMELS.


the tribe of Fazarah, the amount of the wager, and
that Hadifah should abandon all further controversy
and dispute; thus endeavouring to extinguish ani-
mosity, and to stop the rising tumults, and to calm
the differences among the tribes. Then the families
retired home, and in their hearts was as much of
rancour as filled their bosoms; but it was Hadifah
whose resentment was the most vehement, and whose
hatred and pertidy were the most virulent, part-
cularly when he heard of the death of his slave
Damis. As to King Cais, also, his heart was replete
with passion, and rooted grudge, whilst Antar com-
forted him, saying, O king, distress not your heart,
for, by the tomb of King Zoheir, I will bring down
infamy and disgrace on Hadifah; it has been on
your account I have hitherto respected him. And
thus they dispersed to their tents. In the meantime,
Shiboob, as soon as day dawned, slaughtered twenty
of the camels he had taken, and distributed them to
the widows and the maimed. Another twenty also
he slew, and made with them a magnificent feast,
and entertained the slaves and handmaidens of the
tribe of Abs. The next day he slaughtered. the
remainder, and made a grand dinner at the lake of
Zat-ul-irsad, to which he invited the sons of King
Zoheir, and the noble chieftains. When they finished
eating, the cups of wine went round, and they all ©
approved Shiboob’s conduct. Now what Shiboob
had done soon reached the tribe of Fazarah ; how
he had slaughtered the camels, and feasted the


HADIFAH DEMANDS THEM OF CAIS 195


illustrious Absians. So the fools of the tribe assern-

bled round Hadifah. O Ebe Hijar, said they, we
came in first, and the slave of those impostors has
eaten our camels; send toCais and demand your due,
and if he sends the camels to you, "tis well ; if not, let
~ us raise a roaring war against the Absians. Hadifah
raised his head to his son Ebe Firacah : O my son,
said he, instantly ride to Cais, and say to him, My
father says, you must instantly pay him his bet, and
then you will be generous, otherwise he will take it
from you by force, and then you will be overwhelmed
with affliction. At that time, one of the chief Sheikhs
was present, and when he saw Hadifah resolved on
sending his son to Cais, Eh! O Ebe Hijar, said he,
art thou not ashamed to send such a message to the
tribe of Abs? They are thy cousins: is this in
conformity to reason, or the extinction of dissensions?
Never mention such people, but to pardon and to
do good. My opinion is, thou shouldst abstain from
this obstinacy, for it will be repaid by extirpation,
and the dust of war. Cais has been impartial, and
has done no outrage; and as to the horsemen of
Abs, make peace with them; it is more consistent
with thy dignity. Mark thy slave Damis; he struck
Dahis, the horse of King Cais, but how speedily God
punished him, and left him dyed in his biack blood.
I have advised thee to listen to wholesome counsel ;
act worthily, and renounce such foul proceedings.
After this, thou art aware of thy situation, and now
look after thine own affairs. Hadifah was furious

o8


196 HIS SON RETURNS WITHOUT THEM.


at these words: Thou despicable Sheikh, thou false
dog, he cried, shall I be afraid of Cais, and all the
whole tribe of Abs? By the faith of an Arab, men
of trust and honour, if Cais send not the camels, I
will not leave him a tent standing. The Sheikh
was greatly vexed, and to alarm him, thus said :

“ Outrage is base, O Ebe Hijar, for it springs
“ unawares, like the watchful night wanderers ; be-
‘¢ ware of its blows when swords are drawn : be just,
“and clothe thyself not in infamy. Ask the well-
“ informed of Themood, and his tribe, when they
“ rebelled and committed acts of tyranny, he would
“ tell thee, how an order from the God on high
“‘ destroyed them in one night; he destroyed them
“in one night, and in the morning they were laid
“ low, with their eyes fixed upwards.”

Hadifah, totally disregarding the Sheikh, and his
verses, not only cursed him, but ordering his son,
Away to Cais, said he; and thus departed Ebe
Firacah for the land of Abs; and when he arrived, .
he entered the dwellings of King Cais, where, not
finding him at home, he asked his wife Modelilah,
Rebia’s daughter, about him. What dost thou
want of him ? said she. I demand of him our due
and our wager, replied he. Alas! for thee and thy
due! son of Bedr, replied she, dost thou not fear
such perfidy? Were Cais at home, he would de-
spatch thee to the tombs. Ebe Firacah returned, and
told his father what his wife had said. Hey! thou
foul coward, said Hadifah, hast thou returned, thy


HE REPEATS THE DEMAND: Cals KILLS Aim. 197


business unfinished, and frightened by the daughter
of Rebia? Go back. It is now evening, said his
son, let this be to-morrow’s deed ; and he slept that
night in his tents, to take leave of his father and
uncles. As to King Cais, when he came home, his
wife informed him of the arrival of Ebe Firacah to
demand the'camels. By the faith of an Arab, said
Cais, had I been present, I would have killed him ;
but it isover—let it pass. That night Cais passed
in grief and sorrow, till the day dawned, when
being seated in his pavilion, Antar came to him:
he sprang up, and placing him by his side, told him
all about Hadifah. And he has had the impudence to
demand of us the he and she camels! continued Cais;
but had I been at home, I would have slain him. Cais
had not finished his speech, when Ebe Firacah stood
before him. He neither made any salutation nor pre-
viousaddress; but said, O Cais, my father desires you
to send him his due, and then you are generous;
otherwise, he will mount against you, and take them
by force from you, and then you will be overwhelmed
with affliction. On hearing such words, the light
became darkness in the eyes of King Cais: he
snatched up a winged javelin; Thou son of a base
cuckold, said he, how js it thou art not more civil
in thy speech, when in the presence of one like me?
and he smote him with the javelin through the chest,
and it issued through his back, and as he was falling
off the horse, Antar caught him, and lashing him
on, he turned the horse’s head towards the quarter


198 BOTH PARTIES PREPARE FOR WAR.


of Fazarah, and struck him with his whip over the
flanks. The horse returned to his pastures till he
reached his stable; and he was floating in blood.
The shepherds varried him away to the tents, crying
out, O misery! O woe!

A flame was kindled in the heart of Hadifah ; he
smote his bosom, and was in the greatest consterna-
tion, exclaiming, O tribe of Fazarah, to arms! to
arms! So the foolish ones assembled round Hadi-
fah, and said, Arise with us against the tribe of
Abs; let us retaliate on them. O my cousins, said
he, lay not down this night but under arms. It was
Sinan who urged on the absurd party of the Faza-
rah tribe; for it was his purpose to excite dis-
sensions among the tribes; he also smote his bosom,
and cut himself over the chin, as he cried out to the
tribe of Fazarah, Vengeance! Vengeance on the
tribe of Abs! leave then: not a tent to live in.

The tribe of Fazarah reposed that night, having
prepared all their implements of war and battle. By
break of day Hadifah was mounted; the warriors
were ready, and they left no one in the tents but
the children, and those who had not the force to
fight. Rebia was amongst those left behind, he and
his brothers, saying, I will not war against my
family. I will not be for them or against them. As
to King Cais, after he had put Ebe Firacah to
death, he was aware the Fazarah tribe would seek
him with their warriors; so he also made prepara-
tions for battle: and as it was Antar who arranged


COMBAT OF CAIS AND HADIFAH. 199


all King Cais’s affairs, and put every thing in pro-
per train; he mounted with the Carad heroes, and
the Absians were immersed in armour and brilliant
coats of mail. ‘They made ready for the contest,
leaving no one in the tents but the women, and those
who were unable to stand. And amongst those left
behind was Harith, who said, I will not engage the
_ tribe of Fazarah, for they are my relations. This
was a dreadful event for the two parties. They
marched out against each other, and the sun had
not risen when the dust flew on high, and the light-
ning of the scimitars flashed, and the whole region
was convulsed ; the light of day was obscured.
Antar was resolved to start forth and appease his
heart, when lo! Hadifah came forward arrayed in
sable robes, his heart and soul ulcerated with grief
on account of his son. Son of Zoheir, he cried, it
was not well to slay an infant; but it is well to
issue forth into the scene of battle, that it may be
decided by the contest of spears who deserves do-
minion, you or I. At this King Cais was vexed ;
he rushed from beneath the standards, resentment
overpowering every feeling; he sprang at Hadifah.
Urged on by the rancour they entertained. against
each other, they charged on their noble steeds till
the day became black in their eyes. Cais was
mounted on Dahis, and Hadifah on Ghabra. In
the contest between them there past things unseen
before; each tribe despaired of its master, and they
resolved on the attack to assist them, that the vehe-


200 REMONSTRANCES OF THE ELDERS.


mence of the combat might be diminished. Just
then intense were the shouts; the cries arose on
high; scimitars were drawn; the spears were ex-
tended between the ears of the Arab chargers. An-
tar advanced towards Oorwah and his father Shedad;
Attack with me these dastards, said he, and make
to their right with the unsheathed swords, that we
may send it rolling against their left. At that mo-
ment the elders of the two tribes came forward, and
` stood in the centre of the plain, their heads un-
covered, their feet bare, and over their shoulders
hung the idols. They presented themselves before
the two armies (the horsemen were alarmed for the
results), and thus they addressed them; O my
cousins, by all the union of kindred between us,
make us not a proverb against the ordinances of
God’s slaves: let not our enemies and our enviers
have cause to reproach us; relinquish this contro-
versy and dissension; widow not the women; or-
phan not the children; be satisfied with the blood
that is against you among the Arabs; humble your-
selves to the Absians, your cousins. We ask of you,
how many nations before you has outrage anni-
hilated! how many tribes have plunged into evils
and calamities, but have soon repented of their im-
pious deeds! how many men have swerved from
propriety, and have stumbled into the pits of an-
guish and regret! Wait then for the destined hour
of death ; expect the day of dissolution; for it is at
hand. Ye will be lacerated by the hovering eagles


CAIS. PROMISES TRE PRICK OF BLOOD. 901


of destruction, and you will be consigned to the
gloomy recesses of the grave; then let there be no
‘record but of your virtues when your carcasses be-
come extinct. The Sheikhs did not desist from their
harangue till that burning flame was quenched, and
the passions of these resolute heroes were tranquil-
lized. Hadifah retired from the contest ; and it was
decided that Cais should pay Ebe Firacah’s price of
blood with a great quantity of cattle, and a string
of he and she camels. Neither did the Sheikhs quit —
the field of battle till Hadifah embraced Cais, and
acquiesced in this arrangement. Antar roared and
bellowed, O king, said he to Cais, what is this deed ?
What! shall the tribe of Fazarah take from us the
price of blood for one slain, and the sword of our
resolution thus brilliant? Shall our prisoners be
ransomed but by the barbs of the spears? Shall the
blood of our dead be shed unrevenged ? Hadifah’s
rage increased: Eh, thou bastard! said he; thou
son of a foul mother! What is it that honours thee
or disgraces us? Were I not ashamed of these noble
Sheikhs, I should have annihilated thy numbers by
this time: I should have left thy women widows
and thy children orphans. Hadifah’s resentment
then being inflamed, By the faith of an Arab, said
he to the Sheikhs, who had exerted themselves in
restoring harmony, I will hear no more of peace,
were the foe even to plunder me with the points of
their spears. Do not so, son of my mother, said
Haml to his brother; ride not over the road of


202 HAML’S ADVICE TO BADIFAR,


folly; abandon such loathsome ways; be at peace
with our cousins, for they are the firebrands of the
zealous Arabs; their brilliant stars, and their daz-
zling suns. It was but the other day you outraged
them, and ordered your slave to strike their horse,
that it might fail and swerve from the direct road.
As to your son, he was justly slain, for you sent to
demand what was not your due. After this there is
nothing so recommendable as peace; and he who
seeks war is a tyrant and an oppressor. Accept the
compensation and be tranquil, or else you will open
upon us a flame that will burn us in the fire of hell,
and thus he recited :

“ By the truth of Him who firmly rooted the
“ mountains without a foundation, if you do not
“ accept the compensation of the Absians you are
« deceived. They call Hadifah chief; be thou a
« chief, and be satisfied with cattle and wealth.
“‘ Quit the horse of outrage; ride it not; it will
« conduct you to a sea of sorrow and affliction.
‘© Hadifah, renounce violence like a ‘liberal man,
‘“‘ and particularly the battle against the horsemen
“ of Abs. Make them a strong tower for us when
“ the foe charges us, in the Absian superiority.
“© Make them to be of the number of our friends,
« for they are of the noblest resolution, and Absians.
s“ And if Cais has acted oppressively, it was you
« who taught him treachery a few days ago.”

When Haml had concluded, the chiefs of the
tribes thanked him, and Hadifah having agreed to


PEACE RESTORED. 208


take the compensation, they restrained him from
acts of violence and hostilities. The warnors re-
turned home, and every thing was calmed between
them. Cais sent to Hadifah two hundred she
camels, ten slaves, and ten female slaves, ten head
of horse; and after this all was restored to peace,
and the people remained quiet in their country.


204 PRINCE MALIK iN LOVE.


CHAPTER XXXIV.


Some days after, Antar rode out in company with
Harith and Prince Malik to the chase; and as they
wandered far over the desert in search of game,
they drove the wild beasts over the wastes, till the
heat overpowering them, they returned to the val-
ley of Ghadha, where was a party of Arabs esta-
blished, called the tribe of Ghorab. Antar and his
comrades drank at their wells, and whilst watering
their horses, they observed a Sheikh, who was very
infirm from the number of years he had lived ; with
him also was a young girl, like the thirsty fawn, m
shape resembling the branch of the tamarisk. As
soon as Prince Malik beheld her, he was bewildered, |
and a violent flame was roused in his bosom. He
instantly turned towards her father, and saluting
him, inquired after his health, saying, O Sheikh,
what is this damsel to thee? My daughter, he re-
plied, and of all my family and tribe she alone re-
mains to me. She assists me in milking in the
desert, and helps me as thou seest. Wilt thou con-
sent, said the prince, that I become her husband,
that I may make thee lord of all I possess in cattle
and sheep, and I will remove thy poverty and thy


THE SHEIKH GIVES HIM HW DAUGaATER. . 205


distresses from thee? The Sheikh smiled, and said,
` How can that be? My lord; I am but a poor man,
and thou art a great prince. Speak not so, added
Malik ; think not, O Sheikh, it is wealth that adorns
the man; lineage and birth are far better than pro-
perty and worldly acquisitions. Whilst they were
thus conversing, up came Antar and Harith, and
asked Malik what was the matter? So he related
his adventure, and complained to Antar of the
agonies of love, saying, O Aboolfawaris, I used to
accuse thee of folly when thou didst complain of thy
passion, and I used to say love was only a phrensy
till I tasted it myself, and beheld those eyes; but
as soon as I felt it, I knew that in forbearance you
must be the most patient of men, and the firmest
against grief and affliction. Antar laughed, and —
perceiving that love had worked a change in his
mind, O my lord, said he, if in less than an hour all
this has been effected in you, in what a state must
he be who for years has been seeking consolation,
and has found none? Rejoice, said Antar, to the
old man, at the departure of sorrow and poverty,
and in thy future happiness. Marry thy daughter
to this prince, that thou mayest become lord of the
tribe of Ghorab, and ruler over its elders and
youths. It all appears to me like a dream, said the
man; there is nothing to be done but to accept her
as a gift from me, without any fixed settlement, or
calculated dower—that indeed is quite beyond my
powers. When I am married to thy daughter, said


206 CAIS CONSENTS TO THE NUPTIALS


Malik, the Arabs shall see how I will requite thee.
So he took his hand for the nuptials, and he suc-
ceeded in all his wishes.

Malik returned quite bird-hearted, and Antar
congratulated him, and wished him joy. But when
he came home he told his brother what had passed :
By thy life, O my brother, what is this? said Cais:
couldst thou not consent to connect thyself with the
daughters of our uncles, the swoln-bosomed damsels
of the earth? but must thou have recourse to the
daughters of the tribe of Ghorab? Reproach me
not, O brother, said Malik, for what could not be
resisted; it is the only God that has power over
love. Hearts communicate and meet of themselves,
and the only messenger is the glance of the eyes.
They were thus talking when Antar approached,
who overhearing Cais reproaching his brother, God
forbid, O king, said he, that you should rail at
lovers, and increase the flames of passion. Your
brother has not acted violently or oppressively, and
has done nothing but what all the world has done
before: you ought to partake in his sorrows, and
not blame him or reproach him. Let him have his
way in his passion, for he has not distressed you in
any point for which you should rebuke him. On -
this the countenance of Cais brightened ; he wished
him joy: As the business is as you describe it, said
he, and you yourself encourage it, let us also com-
plete your nuptials and his on the same day. That
affair, said Antar, entirely depends on my uncle


PRINCE MALIK MARRIED TO THE DAMSEL. 207


Malik; permit me to expect my so from the
king of all slaves.

On the next day Prince Malik sent to the Sheikh
he and she camels, and variegated robes, and cattle,
and precious jewels, and howdahs, brilliant with
magnificent velvet, and servants and slaves, and with
them horses and sheep, ordering them to be expedi-
tious, on account of the passion that was in his heart :
and he appointed a certain hour on the seventh day.
When all these presents reached the tribe of Ghorab,
the old and young rejoiced ; they passed those days
in the greatest delight, and slaughtered the sheep
and the camels, and filled the goblets with wine,
and they were perfectly happy to the exclusion of
every sorrow. Soon after, Prince Malik clad him-
self in the robes of noble-born kings, and his beauty
was more dazzling than the new moon. On this
expedition Antar accompanied him, fearful lest some
enemy should waylay him; and he took ten horse-
men and five of his brothers. They wandered through.
the Arab dwellings till they reached the tribe of
Ghorab, and Prince Malik dismounted at the mar-
riage canopy, his brothers also alighting round the
tent. The feast immediately commenced ; the dam-
sels waved the cymbals, and the horsemen flourished
their swords; exclamations of joy arose, and the
cups went round; and thus they continued till the
laughing day was spent, when the nymph was mar-
ried to Malik. All the chiefs and lords of the tribe
soon fell asleep, on account of the watchings and


208 THE REPROACHES OF HADIFAH’S WIFE.


fatigue; but by morning their joys were converted
into sorrows, and shots were precipitated at them
from arrows, for which there is no surgeon; for
fortune never gives, but it pillages; is never sta-
tionary, but it revolves; is never merry, but it sor-
rows; never bestows, but it takes back ; never joys,
but it grieves; never sweetens, but it embitters.
Now the cause of the interruption of their happiness
was, that Hadifah, having accepted the composition
for the blood of his son from Cais, returned home.
What hast thou done, son of Beder? exclaimed his
wife; hast thou sold the blood of thy son for things
that have no value? hast thou received, as the price
of his blood, grazing flocks, and forgotten thy in-
famy and disgrace amongst every passing Arab?
By God, no more shalt thou be my husband or my
friend; I will never acknowledge a coward for my
husband. Upon this she forbade him her presence
for three days. On the fourth day he entered, and
found her in great grief, the tears rushing down in
torrents, whilst she thus expressed her sorrows:

“ Hadifah! thou wilt never be secure from the
« foe; thou wilt never be protected from the ma-
« lignity of misfortunes. What! has Cais slain my
« omy one, and hast thou accepted camels and
« grazing flocks? ‘Thou hast put on, O Hadifah,
‘¢ garments of shame and indelible disgrace, even to
“thy dying day. Dost thou not dread that thy
« foes will say, Hadifah’s heart is the heart of a
“ girl? Away with what Haml, son of Beder, said,


HER GRIEF FOR THE DEATH OF HER s0N.- 209


“ every fated event must take place. Retaliate with
“ the barbs of the spears, and with the blades of the
“thin scimitars; otherwise leave me, that I may
“ weep day and night in streaming tears. Haply
“ my death will speedily come, and the penetrating
“ arrows will overtake me. Shall Į ever take to my
“ love a coward husband, whose life is the baseness of
“life? Alas! alas! for my murdered boy—-cruelly
‘murdered. Alas! he was stretched dead on the
“ desert! Behold the birds of the Erak, how they
‘“ mourn, like me, on the tops of the waving
‘ branches! but does the turtle-dove feel an anguish
“ like my anguish, even when it is dashed down
‘¢ with the arrows of dispersion? O day of the race!
“ I shall mourn thee for one who excelled in every
“ mental virtue. O that thy dawn had never seen
“ the night, and the face of the full moon had never —
“ been shaded in obscurity! O horses of the race !
“ that ye had drank of poison, diluted in the purling
“ streams! that your backs had been weighed down
« with the burthens of the firmly-rooted mountains !
“ for your race has cast a sorrow at me that can
& never subside but in death.”

At hearing these verses the tears gushed from the
eyes of Hadifah ; his regrets increased. (The women
heard these verses, and the shepherds and the horse-
men used to repeat them, and they were called the
exciters of woe). Daughter of my uncle, said he,
I only accepted the compensation by Sinan’s advice ;
for when he saw the ancient Sheikhs issue forth

VOL. IV. P


210 HADIFAA SURPRISES TIE MARRIAGE PARTY.


against us, and endeavour to make peace between
us, Thy son cannot be recalled, said he to me, and it
will be as well to listen to my advice: thus it is;
take from Cais the compensation, renounce violence
and hostility; then station over Cais and his bro-
thers some spies and emissaries, till you catch one
of them; kill him, and thus accomplish your designs :
fight them at your pleasure, but just now you cannot
possibly succeed. This conversation took place be-
tween him and me, and ever since we made the
peace, I have had spies stationed over the Absians,
and I will afflict them in one who is the dearest of
the tribe. Thus he continued to soothe her, till
the account of Prince Malik’s marriage in the tribe
of Ghorab reached him; and immediately he as-
sembled his brothers Awef and Handhala, to whom
he communicated Malik’s situation ; but not a word
would he say to his brother Haml, because he was
aware he would not obey him in such a project.
His brothers assented, and they set out with seventy
horsemen of the tribe as soon as it was dark (but in
his great exultation Hadifah forgot to ask his in-
formant whether Antar had accompanied Malik).
They travelled over the wilds tll they reached the
tribe of Ghorab by morning, and they found them
all asleep. Hadifah observed the nuptial canopy
apart from the tents; he made towards it, and the
horsemen encompassed him, preceded by his bro-
thers. As the horses galloped forward the slaves
started up, and the earth far and wide was in com-


PRINCE MALIK MEETS HIM. 211


motion. Shouts arose among theshorsemen. Antar
sprang upon his stallion, and the tribe of Ghorab
‘mounted in all fifty horsemen, old and young.
Antar was the foremost in the contest; and when
he saw the men, he knew, beyond a doubt, they
were of the tribe of Fazarah: he soon recognized
Hadifah and his brothers; Hola! O Ebe Hijar, he
cried, this day will I bring down destruction upon
thee ; it was for such a day as this that I have waited.
I must indeed appease the anguish of my bosom on
ye all, ye wretches! He shouted at the horsemen
and assailed them, playing away his spear through
their sides; Abjer, under him, hastened down, like
a torrent, rushing against the horses. But Hadifah,
beholding his exploits, was afraid lest he should fail
in his attempt; he determined, however, to avail
himself of the opportunity ; he burst into the nuptial
canopy, there to slay Malik, and make his friends
mourn for him. Whilst he was forming this resolve,
lo! Malik rushed out upon him. He was scarcely
awaked from sleep, immersed as he had been in the
sweetest of enjoyments. He was also intoxicated,
and his garments were scented with musk and saf-
fron. As he beheld Hadifah, and the horsemen .
prepared to attack him, he was inflamed with ardour,
and a foolish pride worked through him. Moreover,
being anxious to exhibit to his bride a proof of his
courage, he mounted his horse, he snatched up his
spear, and he assaulted in his arrogance, making at
Hadifah and his brothers, and crying out, I am
P 2


‘912 ANTAR FINDS HIS FRIN DYING.


Malik, son of Zoheir! He shouted on his steed;
he was intoxicated, and his hand being unable to
direct the bridle, his horse precipitated him to the
‘ground. He attempted to arise in the excess of his
spirit, but Hadifah overtook him on his mare, and
smote him with his sword on his skull, and the in-
strument descended half way down his body. Con-
vinced that he had killed him, he returned to his
comrades, crying out, O retaliation of grief! But
being afraid of Antar, and well aware were he to
find him he would make him drink of a violent
death, he fled in haste home, and his fury subsided.

He left Antar occupied with the remainder of the
Fazareans, and no one followed him, but those who
were more immediately about him. The party op-
posed to Antar were soon diminished, and most of
them being slain, he returned to Malik, just to see him
in the agonies of death, where he was lying bathed
in blood in front of his horse. At this sight he
screamed and threw himself upon him: he smote
himself with his hands like a woman deprived of
her children. O full moon of perfection ! he exclaimed,
never, never did: I imagine such would be thy end.
And he let his head fall upon his knees; he kissed
his face till ha nearly swooned upon his body; and
his tears streamed over Malik’s cheeks, who at last
just opened his eyes. He attempted to speak and
move his lips, but he could not, so violent was the
fate that had fallen upon him; he could only point
with his fingers towards him ; he bade him farewell,


THE AGONIES OF THE BRIDE» 213


and his spirit groaned in the excess of agony. An-
tar’s afflictions became more vehement; and whilst
they were in this state, behold! Mahk’s bride
rushed forth, her face uncovered, her hair dishe-
velled, and surrounded by a number of women and
high-bosomed damsels beating their. breasts and
throwing dust upon their heads. Malik’s bride
‘smote her cheeks with her hands: and when she
reached the death-place of her husband, she thus
spoke : |

“ I will weep for thee, not in festivities or nup-
“* tials, but in spears, and swords, and shields. I
*¢ will weep for him who is gone, and has abandoned
& me after having become my. husband. I will
s weep for him who is gone and made me heir to
«c interminable grief, even to the end of time. I
“c will weep for the full moon, whose light is fled,
‘< whose glory is eclipsed and destroyed. Alas!
‘© my lord has vanished from me; he has left me a
‘* solitary being; he is concealed from: me in the
< darkness of the grave. Iam left forlorn in the
“6 morning to mourn my beloved, whom I knew but
& yesterday. I will weep for him: i will mourn
‘‘ for him as long as the moon of heaven and the
€ sun shall shine. No joy shall ever again please
<é me; never again shall my soul be at ease. ` I will
& weep for my lord; I will grieve for him who has
<< widowed me on my marriage morn. O that be- ©
s< fore his dissolution I had drank of the cup of
‘© death in my soul. I will make fortune and the


214 ANTAR MOURNS HIS DEATH.


“ world weep in concert with me for my beloved,
“ or my senses must be annihilated. Never will I
‘ cease to mourn him in sorrowing strains, as long
“as the bird of the Erak shall pour its piteous
“c notes.” |

‘Malik’s bride did not cease till Malik, with a
sigh, expired, and he was united to his God.
Antar wrapped him up in his clothes, and tying
him on the back of his horse, took him away; and
as he sought the land of Abs, he thus exclaimed :

« Alas! O raven hastening in thy flight, send me
“ thy wings, for I have lost my support. Is it true
‘‘ that I have seen the day of Malik’s death and
« murder, or has it befallen me ina dream? The
« light of day is darkened in grief for the youth,
“ the hero of Abs and of Ghiftan. O that Ghabra
“ had never been! that Dahis had never been !—
“ that the day had never been, when that wager
“ was made! O it was a day black in look, harsh
“ and stern, the night wanderers of evil might dread
‘its calamity. O by God! my eyes will ever be
& ulcered on his account in ever streaming tears,
‘‘ till the moment I see the bones of Hadifah dis-
« persed, and death close upon him. Alas! my
‘‘ force is weakened; I am weighed down by mis-
« fortune, and my heart is in continued palpitation
s for him who was my strength whenever the foes
“ unsheathed their swords against me to cut off my
“‘ fingers. Now he is gone, who will be our de-
« fence when the nocturnal invaders shall surprise


. ANTAR VOWS VENGEANCE. 215


‘us? O woe is me! how fell he from his horse,
“ and my sword and my spear were not near him?
“ The fated arrow of the all-bounteous Archer cast
“ him down. O that when it cast him down, it
‘‘ had cast me down too! O that my soul had bade
“ farewell, and that his hands had not beckoned to
“& me a double adieu! Alas! his kindnesses, were I
“< to comment on them, my tongue would fail ere I
“ could repeat them. I swear [I will not sleep from
& taking vengeance! I will not repose, but on the
“ back of my stallion. Never shall my sword cease
{< to cleave those Fazareans, till the desert be con-
‘“ verted into a sea of crimson blood. Sons of
“ Beder! your power will not be the strongest
“ when we join the plain in the day of spear-thrusts !
“ if I do not make blood flow on account of Malik,
“ and leave his foes in the mansions of disgrace,
“& may my heart never cease, night and day, to
“& repeat to me what has oppressed it, and cast me
“& down. Soon will I extirpate the sons of Beder
“ and all Fazarah ; for I shall never have succeeded
s in my hopes, unless I accomplish my project
“ in retaliating with the thrust of my spear and the
“ blow of my sword.”

Antar returned to the tents, and there were only
fifty of his horsemen and Malik’s two brothers that
had escaped, and they endured what no one ever
endured before, so that they were nearly dead with
grief. And as they approached the dwellings, Cais
met them with the whole tnbe in tears and mourn-


216 UNIVERSAL LAMENTATION.


ing; his mother Temadhur smote her bosom, till
she came close to her son, who was tied on the
horse’s back ; and the land of the tribe of Abs was
in universal convulsion. Cais wished to bury
Malik, but his mother would not permit him. I
will not bury my son till to-morrow, said she; I will
go to our foe, and I will demand the blood of my
son of the family of Beder, or never will the flame
of my heart be quenched. We will never allow
thee to do such an act, my mother, said Cais; we
will not let thee go-to our enemies, but we will go
with our sharp-edged swords, and our tall spears,
and our sturdy warriors. We will have vengeance
for our brother, perfidiously murdered, and all the
family of Beder will I put to death. Thus they
entered the dwellings, and continued their grief
and lamentation, insensible to all consolation for
Malik. -

As to Hadifah, when he returned to the tribe of
Fazarah, he had but few of his companions re-
maining. Sinan met him, for it was he who con-
trived these projects, till this eventful. disaster
befel the tribe of Abs. His brother Haml and
Rebia also met him. Well, said Sinan, hast thou
effected the deed that we planned? We have sought
the bird, and have chased it, said Hadifah, and
when we had chased it, we sacrificed it. Oh! Ha-
difah, said Rebia, tell me the meaning of these
words, for my anxiety is extreme, and I know you


have nothing concealed from me. O Rebia, said


REBIA’S GRIEF: HE REPENTS OF HIS CONDUCT. 217


he, we must inform you; thus it is, we have slain
Malik, son of King Zoheir. On hearing this, the
light became darkened in the eyes of Rebia. Ve-
rily, cried he, you have passed all bounds in your
perfidy. O spn of Beder; of evil omen will be this
murder ; frightful indeed will be the consummation
of this deed. Son of Zecad, said Hadifah, as his spirit
was roused against him, there is no evil but near
thee and the tribe of Abs. By the faith of a noble
Arab, were there not engagements and sacred
rights between us, I would make thy head fly off
with this sword; thou son of ordure, what means
this talk? Begone from us, whence thou camest
in an unlucky hour, and be again of the filth of thy
tribe; and turning his bridle, he sought his own
dwelling. As to Rebia, he went back to his bro-
thers, and his mind felt relieved. He told them
of the murder of Malik, and of Hadifah’s actions,
adding, This is the reward of him who abandons
his relations, and takes refuge with strangers. He
then made his preparations for departure, he and
his brothers, and all that belonged to his family,
and only waited till the sunset, when they set out
for the land of the Absians. Approaching the tents,
they perceived the whole population in confusion,
with cries, and the Absians wandering over the
desert. ‘They had deposited Malik in the tomb,
and the women were screaming in their tears. Rebia
dismounted, and threw away his turban off his head,
and tore all the garments he had on (his brothers


218 HIS EAGERNESS FOR VENGEANCE.


doing the same), and there was not one but whose
grief was excessive, and sobs incessant. Rebia
came up to the grave; he threw himself upon it,
and embraced it; and as his sorrow, and tears,
and sighs, and lamentations augmented, he thus
spoke :

& O unexpected misery! O mind-distracting ca-
“ lamity! O misfortune! when I think of it, the
“ light and darkness are one to me. O my eyelids!
“ perhaps ye will aid me in my grief, for to me all
“ joy would be sacrilege. Aid me then, for I have
s Jost a youth, the age could not boast of such an-
“ other. O, I marvel how Malik could be en-
‘* compussed in a tomb, and thus be hid, for he was
“ a full moon! the crown of Abs! its glory! its
“ defence! its honour! its spear! and its sword!
“ Aid me then with eagerness, O my friends, sleep
“ not in vengeance for Malik. I swear by the
“ sacred wall, and the shrine of truth, and also by
“ Zemzem, and the Lord of the Temple, that I
‘¢ will not permit the retaliation of Malik to pass
“ away, were I even, in its results, to drink of the
“ cup of death.”

* When Rebia had finished, torrents of tears
gushed from his eyes; he and his brothers hastened


© Abulfeda mentions that Rebia had sided with Hadifah on ac-
count of the quarrel that had arisen between him and Cais, when he
forced him to resign the celebrated armour; that Cais slew Ha-
difah’s son, and that Hadifah waylaid Malik, upon which Rebia re-
turned to his allegiance.


CAIS MISTRUSTS REBIA. 219


to King Cais and embraced him, excusing them-
selves to him, and complaining of what they had
experienced in their absence.. After condoling with
Cais, they repaired to Antar. Antar was seated by
Malik’s tomb, his head hanging over his knees. As
Rebia drew near, he met him, and stood up, kissing
his hand, and clearing their hearts of sorrow, and
they all vowed to take retaliation for Malik. Rebia -
gave orders to his slaves, and they brought him
twenty camels, which he ‘distributed amongst the
poor and the orphans, having first slaughtered them
on the tomb of Malik. But King Cais’s heart re-
volted at Rebia, for he was full of deceit and
cunning, and he wished to put his friendship to the
test. Waiting till night came on, he summoned
one of his maidens, called Bedrah, and said to her,
Hie thee to the dwellings of Rebia, and conceal thy-
self among the tents; quit him not till he is alone
with his wife and asleep; listen to their conversa-
tion, for I fear again we shall be annoyed by Rebia’s
stratagems, and all our tranquillity vanish and be
lost. „The maiden set out, and stopping among the
tents, she concealed herself among the baggage-
camels; and when it was bed-time, Rebia came and
laid himself down to repose. And as he was lying
on his bed, his wife came unto him, and was about
to take off her clothes and sleep by his side; but he
cried out to her, Begone from me! the sorrows and
anguish I endure, suffice me; after the murder of


220 REBIA’S TRUTH PROVED


Malik, what has a man to do with woman ? Then as
his regrets increased, he thus spoke :

“ Sleep is forbidden; for how bitter is the past
“ through fear of some evil tidings at hand. O, it is
“ an event to delight the hearts of our foes; it is the
“ road of mortals that turns the hair grey. Forhim in
“ the evening, women are in tears, and in agonies of
“ grief they remain with those that watch. What!
“& after the murder of Malik, son of our Zoherr, :
“ does woman desire the results of marriage? He
“who joys in the ‘assassination of Malik, let him
“< come to our tribe by the light of day; he will find
“ the women full of sorrow, grieving for him in the
“ morning, before the dawn isillumined. They would
“ conceal their faces, and cover themselves, but in
“ the day they return to be seen by spectators.
“ They scratch their faces for the youth—pure as
“the fountain stream—our intrepid Knight—the
“ emblem of joy—the high-minded hero—the pro-
“ tector of our women, and the remover of all
“ shame. When we adhered to him, we adhered
“ to a horseman, firm and resolute in the scene of
“ battles. I see nought for his murder among the
“ tribes, but the camels loaded with pack-saddles.
“ Knights, the rust of the sword is.on them, as if
“ the steel were smeared with pitch; let every horse
“ of our steeds be led out, tractable, well-trained,
“ undaunted ; that we may raise at Moreicab a dusty


“ war, and make them drink of cups of perdition.


BY THE CONSTANCY OF RIS GRIEF. 99T


‘© He who joys in the murder of Malik, let him drink.
“ of it at the edge of the deadly scimitar. Soon ye
“ shall know, if we once meet with the sword and
& the spear, fraught with peril, who can caper his
« high-blooded steed over the heads, and who will
“ gnaw his nails in shame. Do ye think we will
“ abandon Malik? No! by the God of the Shrine;
“ and secrecy! till we have exterminated your chiefs
‘© to revenge him. O Haml, and your knights! O
‘© Ebe Hidjar! O Absian Antar, charge over their
«< lands—God forbid thou shouldst forget retaliation
« for Malik. O Aboolfawaris! never let the inva-
‘“ sion cease with the sabre, till they haste away in
«c flight. Show them the spear-thrust and the sword-
“ blow: Oh, slay for Malik the whole tribe of those
- £6 wretches! O Aboolfawaris, let there not be one
<< in their land to stand forth, or establish himself in
“c atent! Sons of Bedr—ye shall not drink of the
“ cup of shame, but of the burning water of liquid
«c fire. O Cais, destroy them all for Malik, and re-
<< move the dishonour with the murder of Hadifah !
<< Kill Haml for him and Awef; let the flints of war
€c strike fire in retaliation, and I too will to-morrow
é< extirpate them, and will pierce them with the
<< mortal spear. I will abandon the carcasses as
€< carrion on the desert, as if they had drank of the
<‘ wine of calamity. If I do not execute my word,
€ then am I the offspring of illegitimacy, and a mine
« of infamy.”


The damsel instantly quitted the dwellings in, the


222 ANTAR BEGINS HIS RETALIATION.


obscurity, and joined King Cais, to inform him of
the beautiful rhymes she had heard; and he was
delighted at the purity of Rebia’s intentions.

When it was day, King Cais went out to the tomb
of his brother ; thither also came the chiefs of the
tribe, and Rebia, and his brothers, and all his de-
pendants. Cais welcomed him, and showed him
great honour. Here they remained three days, but
on the fourth day they assembled to consult, and
they resolved on marching; they sought for Antar,
but he was not to be found; no tidings of him what-
ever. This was a grievous blow, and his anguish
was renewed; for he thought, he was enraged at
the arrival of Rebia. He remained in deep melan-
choly till the forenoon, when behold, a dust from the
quarter of the tribe of Fazarah arose. The Absians
were confounded, till the dust clearing away, there
appeared from beneath it he and she camels march-
ing along, and howdahs, and an immense quantity
of cattle. Cais was amazed, and galloped towards
it to learn what it meant, followed by the horsemen ;
and as they came near to it, lo! it was Antar.

Cais advanced, and inquired what was the matter:
O my lord, said Antar, as he wept for Malik, and
sobbed, truly, I have pursued the track of the vil-
lains, and I have in some measure had retaliation
for thy brother. Soon will the tribe of Fazarah
come against thee; be prepared for the contest;
brace up thy resolution, and summon thy men.
This is thy brother’s property, which he had sent as


THE SHADE OF MALIK APPEARS IN A DREAM. 229


the dower of. his bride to the tribe of Ghorab; and
it is come into my possession by the will of God. I
have slain ten horsemen of Fazarah, and amongst
them Awef, Hadifah’s brother. -Last night, my lord,
I watched till midnight, when I fell asleep, and lo !
my lord, Malik stood before me; and, beckoning
with his fingers, said to me, O Aboolfawaris, dost
thou sleep, and I unrevenged ? Hast thou forgotten
our former friendship? Before thee many have
been faithful to their friends; be thou faithful also
to him, who was slain but yesterday: and then he
vanished, whilst the tears trickled down his cheeks.
I instantly awoke from my sleep, and I felt like one
misfortune-struck. I mounted, and took Shiboob
before me, and sought the land of Fazarah, in the
darkness of the night. I heard the noise of camels
ahead of me; I approached them, and saw a hun-
dred warriors, surrounding them night and left. F
resolved to engage them, but ten of them turned
upon me, the foremost of whom was Awef, Hadi-
fah’s brother, who cried out, I am Awef, son af
Bedr. Overjoyed, I met him with a spear-thrust
through the chest, and it passed through his back.
I pursued the horse to destroy their riders; and I
well know, I slew ten of their heroes, besides the
men I wounded.

The cause of this was, that Hadifah, after his
dispute with Rebia, consulted with his party, and
sent his brother Awef to the tribe of Gharab, with
one hundred horsemen, saying, Drive hither the


AK. AWEF SLAIN EY ANTAR.


property which Malik sent them, whilst the Absians
are engaged with their sorrows: endeavour to bring
me his bride, that I may rip open her belly, for I
am resolved to destroy them root and branch. Awef
did as he was directed, and effected his purpose.
As to the women, he did not succeed with them, for
they fled to the mountain-tops; but on his return
he encountered Antar, and every vestige of him wes
erased ; for speedily were ten of his heroes killed.
The fugitives repaired to Hadifah, and as they com-
municated his brother’s death, his life nearly quitted
his body. He determined instantly to march against
the Absians, but Sinan advised him to collect the
troops of the tribes and the lakes, till Numan’s ar-
mies should arrive. In this manner they continued
making preparations for war and battle; and such
was the treachery and stratagem they harboured in
their minds.

As to Antar, he passed his time in his tent, like
a spirit of the night, when lo! Khemisah, Ibla’s
handmaiden, came to him and said, O Aboolfawaris,
my mistress sends her compliments to you, and tells
you, that as this is the time of total abandonment to
grief and sorrow, she wishes this night to go with a
party of her cousins to the lake, and she desires you
will go there also, to protect her from the night-
wanderers of the time.

At hearing this, Antar was much delighted and
overjoyed at the fidelity of his mistress’s mind under
all circumstances. So he took up his weapons im-


AMARAH IN WOMEN'S CLOTHES. 995


mediately, whilst Khemisa returned to Ibla, and —
informed her of his acquiescence and obedience.
Now it is very remarkable, that Amarah at that
period had stationed his spies over Ibla till that very
night on which she went out to the lake, requesting
her cousin to protect her. Informed by some of the
women of this, Amarah could almost have flown with
joy ; but he waited till the darkness obscured the
land, when he quitted the tents, and put on women’s
clothes that the hearts of the girls might not revolt
at him. He continued till he came to the lake:
staring about he saw the damsels, and Ibla among
them, like a brilliant moon. At this sight his senses
were in agitation; phrensy and distraction scized
him, and he pounced down upon Ibla like a vora-
cious eagle. She thought him a 'woman, but when
she experienced the force of his muscles, she was
aware that he who held her wasa man. Fully sen-
sible of the dishonour and infamy, she cried out in
his face, Who art thou, thou black greasy pot ! thou
foulest of hogs? The damsels were aghast and
amazed. I am Amarah, said he, whom you have
repulsed and discarded. Ibla’s heart fluttered, in
hopes her cousin might be near her. She roared at
Amarah like a lioness; Thou son of the ordure of
cowards, dost thou not fear Antar ?

Antar was a witness of all that passed, for as soon
as Ibla had sent to him, he went out and concealed
himself behind the sand-hills, where he waited till
Ibla came with the girls; and they were amusing
themselves among the hillocks when Amarah started

VOL. IV. Q


226 HIS UNSEEMLY SITUATION.


- out. The universe turned black,in the eyes of
Antar: he burst forth like a furious leopard, tll he
closed on the cuckold Amarah. He roared and
bellowed at him, and seized him by the small of the
belly, and raising him, he dashed him on the ground,
and almest pounded his bones. In the excess of his
terror Amarah was in a most unseemly plight ; he
was dying in fear of Antar, who on seeing his ridi-
culous situation, laughed in the violence of his rage.
Arise, thou greasy black pot, he cried; mayest thou
never drink pf rain, or a drop of moisture, thou
bastard! Were it not out of respect for the women
and thy kindred, I would behead thee with this
sword.

But as to Ibla, when she saw Amarah in such a
filthy state, she spit at him, whilst the women sur-
rounded him, and laughed at him. Antar, indeed,
would have put him to death, had not this happened
to him, and Ibla also interceded for him. The girls
ran away, roaring with laughter, and he had no-
thing for it but to retreat to the lake and take off his
clothes, and wash his legs and his thighs: and thus
he returned home without his clothes, well aware,
too, that this event could not be kept secret from
the tribe, but that the girls would tell it all overthe
place; he went to his mother and his brothers,
blubbering most piteously, and told them what had
happened to him. Thou unlucky wight! said Re-
bia, what need hadst thou to do this ? Verily, thou
hast made us a tale of tales: never can we raise up
our heads to any one again. Never, never, said


REBIA’S REPROACHES. , . 2


Amarah, will I quit the tents again; never will I
let a creature see me—not a walker or a rider, if you
do not retaliate for me, and remove from me this
shame. Oh! that I had thought better of it, and
had left myself dead by the side of the lake! Oh,
that I had not seen myself in so foul a condition!
and Ibla too, she laughed at me, and cursed me, and
stopped her nose at me. Thou accursed fellow, thou
son of an accursed woman, cried Rebia—what reta-
hation wouldst thou ? The man has not struck thee,
or wounded thee, that we can retaliate for thee:
thou wouldst indeed play the bravo to thy mistress,
and thy plight proves thy courage. ‘But by the past
and future, thank the glorious God that he did not
leave thee dead on the lake side. By God, he has
treated thee nobly; it will be well for thee to aban-
don such practices, and talk no more to us of Antar.
` The girls will soon lampoon thee in their songs, and
` thou wilt be disgraced amongst slaves and chiefs.
Ah, woe! woe! grief of griefs! said Amarah, An-
tar will enjoy those charms, those beauties ; and I—
this disgraceful situation must ever bespeak my fears.
- Rebia still abused him ; Thy ill stars will not cease,
. he cried, till thou hast worked our total rum. Avaunt
from before me this instant; let the miquity of thy
acts suffice us. May God curse the father of thy
mustachioes! Thus Amarah remained, emanci-
pated by the consequences of his terror, and sa
- his brother’s presence.

This circumstance with Ibla soon spread abroad,
and all the women, and men, and girls, and boys,

Q2


228 AMARAN LAMPOONED BY THE GIRLS.


and slaves, and slave-girls, joined in the laugh against
Amarah, singing these verses, whilst Amarah heard
them. The women and shepherdesses sang them
at their spindles; for there was a girl among the
_Absians who could compose verses: she was very
eloquent, so she repeated these verses on Amarah
the cuckold; and they were recollected by all the
women and girls, and they were as follows:
s Amarah, leave alone the beautiful, full-hipped
& damsels; let alone all disputes about the lovely
- © girls, for thou canst not plunge into the sea of
“ deaths, and thou art no horseman in the day of
“battle. Aspire no more to Ibla; if thou dost but
‘‘ look at her, thou wilt see horrors from the lion of
‘‘ the forests. As to the thin quivering spear, touch
& not its strength, nor the cleaving scimitar. Ibla
“is a fawn chased by a lion, with eyes that afflict
‘‘ with disorder the stoutest in health. Let alone
“ all contest about her, or the unflinching Antar
& will make thee drink of death. Thou didst not
“ cease thy obstinacy, till thy foul condition gave
& evidence against thee. All the girls laughed at
‘“‘ thee; thou wert the carrion of the plains and de-
“ serts; thou wert the common talk of the merry,
“ and the laughing-stock for every passenger. Thou
«& camest to us in the robes of dyed silk, thou black
s greasy kettle! As thou didst meet us, a lion
‘Smet thee, whom all the lion-heroes acknowledge
“ in the carnage: then fear trembled in thy heart ;
sc intoxication quitted thee, and thou wert restored
.“ to thy senses. Nothing but contempt remained


NEWS OF FRESH TROUBLES. A29


“ for thee, when thou didst retire like a dunghill.
“ Ibla beheld thee laid low, stretched out; and all
“ the beautiful high-hipped damsels with her. We
“ held our noses at thee, as we laughed at thee,
“ and quizzed thee. The Antar of Knights, the
“ lion of the cave came—he, who in generosity is a
“ sea of liberality; and thou art the vilest of all
“& those that ever crossed a horse—the noblest of
“ those who are tenacious of their lives. We are
& like the sweetest flowerets; scented like the violets
“ and the camomile; and Ibla amongst us is like
“ the branch of the tamarisk: her beauty is the full
“ moon, and the sun of the desert. Thou wouldst
s possess her by violence and outrage—thou, the
“ vilest of all the dogs that bark. Die ‘in grief,
& otherwise live in contempt ; for never, never, will
“ there be an end of our lampoons upon thee.”
These verses were soon made public amongst the
women and young girls, who used to sing them at
their spindles. Amarah and his brothers heard
them, and they melted from rage and shame.
About this time arrived a slave from Mootegeredah
to Cais, announcing fresh troubles and disasters, and
saying, Numan has sent against you his brother
Aswad, and with him an innumerable army, among
which are the tribe of Aamir, with the Brandisher
of Spears, and the tribe of Darem with Locait. Be
on your guard also against the tribe of Fazarah, for
they are assembling bodily against you, and are pre-
paring to fight you. The cause of this new misfor-
tune was the contemptible Sinan ; for he despatched


280 NUMAN'S VIEWS AGAINST ANTAR.


the men he had with him to King Numan, direct-
ing them to inform him of what had passed, and the
disgrace and indignities he had suffered from the
tribe of Abs and Adnan, and that Antar had said,
Were Chosroe Nushirvan, or the Emperor of the
Worshippers of the Cross to demand Harith, I would
not deliver up to any of them even a single hair of
his head, till after the contest of swords that blinds
the sight, and mangles bodies.

Numan’s fury increased, and his two eyes were
` like fire-balls. As long as this tribe exists in the
desert, he cried, I shall have no authority. I shall
enjoy no esteem, no consideration with any one.
.He at the instant summoned Prince Aswad, and
told him what had happened, and was preparing,
adding, The tribe of Abs is harbouring against me
acts of iniquity and perverseness. Harith is now
with Antar, and he presumes to protect him against
me, and he fears me not, knowing as he does, that
Harith slew my child, and has set my heart on fire,
and that he also murdered Khalid in my private
apartments; it is incumbent on me to tear out
every vestige of him, and of the tribe of Abs, were
they even to fly from me to the rising of the sun.
Know, my brother, said Aswad, much troubled,
that as this tribe has committed acts of rapacity
against your government, your influence is di-
minished ; and there is no other expedient, but that
you unburthen your heart of your enemies, and
despatch an army with me to be employed in the
establishment of your sacred dignity. Draw forth


ALARMS AND COURAGE OF THE ABSIAXS. 931


-all the Arabs from every quarter against them, and
let us devastate their whole country.

Numan felt his pains relieved; he ordered out,
under his command, an army of twenty thousand
horse, and he sent messengers to every Arab tribe
to enforce their obedience, ordering them to march
in his service. Mootegeredah was much distressed,
and was alarmed for the tribe of Abs and her bro-
ther; and as Numan had already cast her off, and -
had renounced all affection for her from the time he
had heard of her delivering Harith from his grasp,
she sent one of her slaves to her brother to inform
him of what was preparing. Aswad is proceeding
against you, said she, with twenty thousand war-
riors, armed with sharp swords and spears, besides
the hordes to which messengers are despatched.
Aswad exhibited all his active zeal; he felt strong-
hearted as to the tribe of Fazarah, and he depended
upon them above all. As to King Cais, as soon as
the messenger arrived, as we mentioned, and related
the march of Prince Aswad, he was greatly alarmed ;
he summoned the noble Absian Chiefs, and the
dreadful Antar, and consulted with them about en-
gaging Prince Aswad. May it be easy on thee,
O King, said the Chiefs; we will march with thee,
and before thee, and we will not be sparing of our
lives for thee: we will meet Aswad, were all that
dwell on the waste and the wilds with him. Q
King, said Harith, it is for those condemned to die
that I should weep and lament. I am the object of
this wrath. I am he who is the cause of these wars.


232 TURY INVADE THE TRIBE OF FAZARAN.


But I will instantly write to my tribe of Marab,
and I will show thee what I will do with this Aswad
and his armies. No, by the faith of an Arab, said
Antar, we require not thy aid in this affair. We
are sufficient for the whole uniyerse, were I not
alarmed for our families at the treachery of the tribe
of Fazarah, that they would, during our absence,
invade our lands, and capture out families, and
plunder our property. But let us instantly proceed
against them, and let us scatter them over every
wild and plain, or else let us make Hadifah swear
he will not be either for us or against us. In such
circumstances and calamities, this is the wisest plan;
for if the sons. of Beder are not fettered down by
us, they will occupy our hearts in the hour of
battle. When Antar had finished, he cried out,
‘To arms, my cousins! come -on to the tnbe of
Fazarah! retaliate on them! Thus saying, he
sprang on the back of Abjer. And when the Ab-
sians heard what he said, and saw what he did, they
followed him, and amongst the foremost was King
Cais. They set out, resolved on fighting the tribe
of Fazarah, amounting to four thousand horsemen,
mailed and clothed in armour, undaunted at death,
and fearless of defeat. .

Hadifah was confounded; he called out to his
tribe and his assembled host; they put on their
armour and their brilliant corslets, seeking the
battle and the combat, life and death being indif-
ferent to them; in number about ten thousand
horsemen, headed by Hadifah, an adept in perfidy


HADIFAH ENCOURAGES HIS TRIBE. 233


and treachery. He was mounted on Ghabra, and
in his hand he bore his tall spear; but his heart
and mind were on fire, as he thus encouraged his
troops:

“ Sons of Beder, if ye do not exert your whole
“ souls in the field of battle with the cleaving sci-
“ mitars, the arrows of infamy will hurl ye down
“ on every side, and ye will become a common tale
“ to the ear. What! can our eyes know rest now
“my brother Awef is gone? Shall our eyelids
“ swoon in sleep on the couch of ease? We were
“ content with the murder of Malik from the Ab-
“ sians, and copious tears ulcerated their eyes: they
s“ have grieved, but they have tortured my heart by
“ the murder of the warrior; and the death of Awef
“is the severest of pains. O, may I lose the spi-
“ rited horsemen, and may my fingers be unable to:
“‘ move the spear in the hot contest, if I do not
“ leave the land of Abs a desert, and their women
“ captives, deprived of their garments. I will wreak
‘í my vengeance on all the tribe of Abs, and no in-
& tercessor shall avail them.”

The tribes soon came in sight of each other, and
they met on a sand-hill called Moreicab. When
their eyes encountered, the shouts arose, so that
both armies were startled. The Absians cried out,
Vengeance! retaliation for Malik! The Fazareans
cried out, Retaliation for the slaughtering knight !
In the excess of their rage and rancour, there was
not one but rushed on and shouted; the horses


crushed against each other and neighed—the men


234 DESCRIPTION OF THE BATTLY.


launched forward, and then burst asunder—long
Jasted the sword-blow—the combat was fierce—
misfortune and calamity were at their height—the
troops were mingled together--ambition was roused
—swords clashed—every drinker was glutted with
the wine of agitation—clouds of dust mounted east
and west—horrors and wonders were exhibited by
the Chief Antar. He succeeded in his wishes against
the foe—he overpowered them with the force of a
tyrant, never seen in later days—the dead fell singly
and in couples—blood gushed from the jugular
veins—reproach and pretences were in vain—the
universal bray and din grew more terrific among the
warriors—what a frightful day! The horses tossed
about the skulls of the dead, and the warnors were
disgusted with their corslets and mail—the mace
and battle-axe laboured among them—every fierce
hero roared, and the day was dreadful, as one, who
has described it, thus says:

sc The millstones of war revolved in death, and
“ warriors were pounded by them. Heroes were
“ hurled dead on the field, where many knights lay
“ stretched out. Swords cleaved every joint, and
“ spears rent open the bowels. The blow of the
« battle-axe dashed off the eyebrows, as the arrows
“tore out the eyeballs. In the scene of car-
“ nage were heard echoes from the blows of the
“ sword edge against the skulls of the combatants.
“ Breast-plates were shivered by the spears, and
“ the pierce of the lance rent through all opposition.
“ In every direction heroes lay dead, felled low in


ANTAR’S ILLUSTRIOUS DEEDS. 235


“ every plain. Hands and legs were cut off on op-
‘¢ posite sides, and heads flew off from the branch-
“ tops. The steeds galloped over the’ plain, whose

“ brave riders were disgraced, hacked to pieces. -
“ The eagles of the air hovered over them, pouncing
& upon them to pluck out their eyes. The coward
“ fled openly, and ran away alarmed at his very
“ imagination. The courageous in war bellowed
“ like wild beasts, and resembled contending lions.
“ The messengers of death prowled about for lives,
“ and separated families from their children. The
“ cup-bearer of death circled’ every glass to the
‘¢ chieftains that intoxicated them for ever. The
“ swords rang a tune, at which every warrior re-
“ joiced in his glory. Men were dotted about, and
‘* rushed promiscuously to the fight. The chargers
“ of the combatants pranced in sport, and charged
s incessantly over the back of the earth. The
‘¢ dancers started up, and every tribe had recourse
s to all its manceuvres. Antar, the knight of
«c knights, kindled the hell-fire on the day of the
“ combat of the armed warriors. He rushed upon
“ the foe, and extirpated the chieftains that re-
“ mained as pledges of his victory—he dis —
“c he drove them stupefied away, great and noble
“as they were. He captured the first of their
€ tribes and princes clothed in iron. He protected
& the chieftains of the race of Abs, who exhibited
“‘ their martial feats in the field. Every instant he
“ left a foe dead—he every moment defended those
« he loved. The Chiefs of Adnan were encon-


986 HE GLUTS HIS VENGEANCE ON THE FOL


& raged; they persevered in their exertions and their
“ achievements.” |

The battle continued to rage, and the eagles of
death to hover over their heads; every spot and
place was darkened—man and beast were exhausted
by the fall of the spear and the sabre. They per-
sisted in this horrid contest till evening came on,
when the two armies separated, the whole country
being crammed with the dead. The greatest num-
ber were of the tribe of Fazarah, for Antar cut
through them, and he relieved his heart amongst
them on account of the murder of Prince Malik. He
_ retired towards evening, and the blood was coagu-
lated on his shoulders, like camel's livers. The
Absians descended to a retired spot, exulting in the
intrepidity of Antar, and what he had done that
dusty day, among the Fazareans; and as they counted
the dead, they amounted to thirty, all stern-faced
warriors. O Ebe-ool-Ebyez, said he to Oorwah, in
one day then, thirty of us have been slain by the
tribe of Fazarah. By the faith of an Arab, to-
morrow I will not permit any one to anticipate me
in the field, and the theatre of sword-blows and
spear-thrusts: I will myself challenge them. O
Aboolfawaris, said Oorwah, mayst thou be ever pro-
tected from harm; if the Fazareans have slain thirty
of us, we have filled the tombs with their dead, who
‘cannot be less than a thousand horsemen and war-
riors; and to-morrow, by the grace of the Almighty
Forgiver, we will entirely crush them. ‘Thus they
went to rest, establishing guards round the plain,


DISGRACE OF MAKNZ200M. 237


till morning dawned, when the troops being drawn
up, Antar wished to start into the field of battle.
But an Absian, called the Sheikh Makzoom, ad-
vanced. O Aboolfawaris, said he, I ask thee, in the
name of the two eyes of Ibla, daughter of Malik, to
permit me to open the door of the battle, and to
relieve my heart amongst the tribe of Fazarah, by
the force of my thrust and my blow. Antar was
ashamed at his adjuring him, so he said, On then,
do what you please, O Sheikh, and should your
antagonist refuse to fight, point him out to me, that
I may show you wonders: and the Sheikh stood
forth between thetwo lines; he galloped and charged.
Come on, O tribe of Fazarah, he cried. On to the
contest! ye shepherds, ye who are the slaves and
herdsmen of the tribe of Abs. The Sheikh Makh-
zoom had not finished his speech, when Malik,
Hadifah’s brother, stood before him. Eh! thou
son of a cuckold, said he, when were the Fazareans
thy shepherds? and instantly he attacked him. The
Sheikh Makhzoom met him, and charged with him
for an hour; but fatigue soon falling on his limbs,
Malik, son of Beder, shouted at him, and smote him
with his sword on the side of the neck, and gave
him a dreadful wound. So he wheeled round and
fled, his neck bathed in blood, and pursued with
hisses from the tribe of Fazarah. Eh! thou con-
temptible Sheikh, cried Antar, thou foul dog! what
did such a coward as thyself mean by adjuring me
in the name of the eyes of Ibla, daughter of Malik ?
By the faith of an Arab, were there not between


238 ANTAR CHALLENGES: NO ONB REPLIES.


thee and me some kindred, I would make thee drmk
of perdition. He quitted him for the battle, and
when he came nigh to the Fazarean ranks, Eh!
sons of Beder, he exclaimed, what honour is there
in sallying forth against an old Sheikh, whom age
has bent double? But there is honour in attacking
one like Antar, and in subduing him under the dust ;
let me wreak my vengeance for my lord; I will
show you a scene of battle like sparks of fire, and
he thus recited :

“« O sons of Beder, come on to the contest; un-
“ sheath before us the sharp scimitar. Ye have
* acted foully, and treachery shall root out every
“ vestige of ye, and shall orphan your children. Ye
“ have followed Hadifah, and ye think that he knows
“ how to guide ye on the desert course. He has
“ contradicted what his brother asserted, for he
“ thought peace and perfidy were alike. Ye have
‘6 slain Malik, and he was noble. Ye struck Dahis,
“ and he was of generous blood. Ye have outraged
“ us, and ye claimed the bet. Was that pretension
“ not an act of violence? Ye have acted foully in
“ every deed. Allof ye have acted perfidiousl y—
“ deep are ye in depravity. Behold the sword that
“ destroyed the foul dealer Pharaoh, and before
“ him Themood, and Aad. Now, meet the re-
“ ward of your deeds, and taste of speedy death.”

Not one of the tnbe of Fazarah dared to answer ;
so he assaulted the right like an eagle: he charged
them like an all-powerful lion. Again he challenged,
but no one would sally forth against him. He


` HIS TAUNTS: SLAYS AKHTAL. 239


assaulted the left; he rolled round them, as a re-
volving millstone, and slew multitudes. He again
returned into the open plain. Eh! O sons of Beder,
he shouted out, cannot ye ride? Cannot ye fight?
Cannot ye speak? And will ye not fly? What! think
ye after your treachery to the tribe of Abs, that ye
shall escape? Come on—on to the fight; if ye are
as ye pretend to be, warriors. It is I who slew
your brother Awef; I filled your hearts with terror
and dismay. At these words, Hadifah’s heart was
still more infuriated, and he wished to stand forth;
when lo! a knight called Akhtal, son of Sohab,
anticipated him ; and he was one of the grandees of
Fazarah. Eh! thou ordure-born, cried he at Antar,
we are come to enjoy the battle; but is there no
reason for our declining to contend with thee ? Thou
canst not know who we are—we cannot combat with
a slave, and then presume to seat ourselves among
the noble horsemen. As Antar halted to listen to
his antagonist, he burst into a loud laugh, and going
up to Akhtal, Eh! thou son of a harlot, said he,
why art thou ashamed at a black outside, which the
Omniscient has created? And thus saying, he rushed
at him, and began the contest of thrusts and blows,
till, perceiving his adversary give way, he roared at
him, in a voice like the thunder in a cloud—it terri-
fied him, and paralysed all his efforts; he smote him
under the jaw, and severed his head from his shoul-
ders. The Absians gave a shout of exultation ; but
the tribe of Fazarah was confounded and stupefied.
As Antar continued to gallop and charge, the brother


240 HADIFAH AND RIS TROOPS DEFEATED.


of the dead started forth, whilst the tears streamed
down his cheeks. Antar would not permit him even
to wheel once, but he thrust at him with the head of
his spear, and hurled him off his horse. It was then
Hadifah gave a shout, and throwing his helmet off
his head, he roared aloud and attacked, followed.
by the tribe of Fazarah. Antar met them as the
parched land the first of the rain. Whatever he
smote he dissected—at whomever he thrust, hehurled
dead ; and when the horse hemmed him in, his roar
drove them back on their haunches, and made them
hurl their riders off their backs. Seeing what the
Fazareans had done, and how foully they had acted
by Antar, King Cais shouted to the Absians, and
they attacked as he attacked, and they did as he did.
Men met men, and heroes heroes—blood flowed,
and streamed—limbs were hewn off. How many
brave men were precipitated from their horses! the
day was imperceptible—the heroes roared— the
warriors still advanced—the cowards fled—spears
were shivered—hearts were rent open—heads were
cut in twain—blood gushed out—warriors were slain
in troops—and it was a scene of calamities, that
staggered the imagination. How many necks were
severed ! how many old and young were slaughtered !
The action continued, till night advancing with ob-
scurity, the two armies desisted from the blow of the
sword; and Hadifah alighted. Bewildered as to
what he should do, he sent for Sinan to consult.
My son, said he, I feared this event; I told you
not to fight the Absians till the armies of King


HADIFAR CHALLENGES KING CAIS. 941


Numan should come. Their arrival is at hand.
The Absians will never be subdued as long as this
black slave of a cuckold is with them. The best
plan for us is, to fortify ourselves in the mountains.
If not, to-morrow you must start forth between the
two ranks, and challenge Cais and his brothers to the
combat, that I may show you what I can effect by
art and stratagem. Hadifah acquiesced in this
project, and early next day he mounted Ghabra,
the cause of all these troubles, and hastened over
the plain, galloping and charging, and challenging
to the contest, and shouting, O tribe of Abs, know,
a tribe should not forsake truth, and he is the best
of men who distinguishes justice and follows it.
This is an affair that has resulted from the race of
Dahis and Ghabra ; and now, O Cais, here are you
and I; between us was the wager. We are the
persons who have excited this disturbance among the
warriors. Belonging to me and you have been slain |
persons most dear to us. Let us not permit, O Cais,
the women to complain of us; but let us extinguish
the war with our lives; let us appease our hearts
with our swords and the barbs of our spears. King
Cais being alarmed, lest he should be blamed and
upbraided, left one of his brothers at his post, and
with the rest issued forth to the plain. But no .
sooner saw Antar what the sons of Zoheir, were
doing, than he advanced towards Cais. O my lord,
said he, why do you thus stand forth to the contest
whilst your slave Antar is able to answer your foes

in your presence ? .The man, replied Cais, oer

VOL. IV.


242 . INTERFERENCE OF THE ELDERS.


_ plained to me in the name of justice; and were I
not to reply to his demand, the Arabs, far and near,
would be scandalized at me. Antar, at these words,
retired abashed; but the sons of Zoheir rushed
upon the sons of Beder. Men met men, and heroes
heroes; but the spear-thrust had not commenced
against them, when Sinan, accompanied with the
Sheiks of the tribe of Fazarah, all bare-headed, came
forth. Disgrace to the tribes of Fazarah and Dibyan,
they cried, woe to the tribes of Abs and Adnan!
May God be on ye! O people, may the descent of
our grandfathers and progenitors not be cut off!
renounce this outrage—this malice; ride not over
the paths of perverseness and dissension ; haste not
to destroy your lives with the sharp swords ; let not
your names live amongst posterity for iniquity and
sedition! Sheath then the swords of violence and
oppression, for they are still sharper than the
sharpest scimitar; and consider how many warriors
Jheretofore have been destroyed by perfidy. Upon
this, they each seized the bridle of a horseman;
they forced him to retire from the spear-thrust and
the sword-blow, and compelled them to peace and
abandonment of obstinacy. Cais was abashed at
their conduct, and acquiesced in their demands,
- saying, As to your project, I will not thwart it—as
to your engagement, I assent to it; but ona
condition, that shall be stipulated on your part,
namely: Hadifah shall give us hostages from the
children of the grandees of the Fazarah tribe, to
remain with us till our dispute with Numan is


FAZAREANS GIVE MOSTAGES. 243


decided, and moreover, he must swear to us, that
he will be neither for us nor against us; for, as our
enemies are numerous, and as we have no allies or
confederates, we cannot leave in our vicinity persons
who may act against us. When Sinan heard this,
he felt aware that Cais was an experienced man;
but being sensible too, that if he did not agree to
this proposal, his life would be exposed to imminent
hazards, he repaired to Hadifah, and explained
Cais’s proposal. My opinion, he continued, is, that
you accept the proposition, otherwise, what havoc
will they make among us! Wait till we find a pro-
per object for the sword, and till we see the means
and road to victory ; for King Numan will assuredly
root out every vestige of this tribe, and will leave
you lords of the highest honours. Thus he brought
about a meeting between him and King Cats, and
they bound themselves by reciprocal oaths. King
Cais then returned home with his horsemen; as did
Sinan and Hadifah also, to the tribe of Fazarah.
But at early dawn, they collected the children of
the horsemen, about two hundred and fifty of the
sons of the chiefs, from the age of five to ten, and
sent them to King Cais, who, on their arrival, ac-
commodated them with a separate dwelling on ome
side of the horde, and whatever they wanted was
supplied in abundance, and not sparingly, and the
whole tribe was greatly delighted at this arrange-
ment.


R2


244 HARITH AND ANTAR PREPARE


CHAPTER XXXV.


Ix the course of a few days, after this was settled,
they received news of Prince Aswad’s approach,
swearing he would not leave one of the whole tribe
of Abs alive. Confound his iniquity! cried Kmg
Cais, in great dismay. Alas! Aswad will not leave
in our dwellings ten men to grind the wheat and
barley, or milk the sheep. He summoned Antar
and the chief warriors to his presence, and relating
to them what he had heard, he requested their ad-
vice. O king, said Harith, may you be protected |
from every peril! Know that this expedition is on
my account: I am the object, and these armies are
only advancing in quest of me. On me devolves
the duty of encountering them. It is I must pa-
tiently endure their chastisements: but to-morrow
I will go and meet them; and by the faith of noble
Arabs, men of integrity, word, and honour, I will
not go against them but with ten men alone. I
will encounter this Aswad and his warriors, and I
will scatter them right and left. No, said Antar,
we will not go but in a body to engage Aswad, and
we will fight in thy presence with our well-tried
swords till not a breath remains. O great king,
added Antar, addressing Cais, what means this
waiting for further news? the foe is at hand. March


TO ENGAGE ASWAD'S WARRIORS. 245


with us against him, that we may extirpate him,
root and branch, before the hoofs of their horses
trample down our lands. Upon this, Harith wrote
a letter to his brother Cosoorah, telling him to join
him with the warriors of the tribe of Marah; and
he despatched the letter with one of his own horse-
men. As to King Cais, he sent forward a thousand
men as the advance of his army, and also commis-
sioned some one to go to the tribe of Ghiftan to de-
mand their assistance in this crisis; and they came
with a thousand lion warriors, and Antar’s nephew
Hatal, whom the king left to protect the women and
property.

As to Prince Aswad, he was marching with
armies over the desert, when a ferocious lion, of the
size of a bull and bigger, crouched among the rocks,
appeared before them, roaring and bellowing at the
troops: the men retreated from its presence, and
the warriors stood still. The troops continued at a
halt till Prince Aswad arrived with the rear of the
army, and inquired what was the matter? they told
him a lion was in front of them.: Ye filth, he cried
in a violent passion, has all this consternation seized
you on account of a lion, the veriest dog of the
waste and wilds? How will you encounter men, or
contend with heroes in the field of battle? He had
not finished his harangue, when a youth, in whom
shone the tokens and evidences of intrepidity, started
forth against the lion. He was one of the sons of
Bekir, son of Wayil: he made towards the lion,
having first thrown away his armour and corslet,


246 JERRAH SLAYS THE LION.


till he remained in his plain clothes with short
sleeves; he tucked them up to his shoulder, and
twisting his skirts round his girdle, he unsheathed
his broad sword, and brandished it in his hand, and
stalked away towards the lion, his heart harder than
a rock of flint; and when he came nigh, he gave a
terrific shout, which the lion hearing, he opened his
mouth like a grappling iron, and clenched his fangs
like a vice, and then collecting himself, as if it were
into a third of his real size, he sprang at him like a
flash of lightning. As soon as the youth was aware
of his intent, he nerved his arm, he strengthened
his wrist, and smote the lion with his sword between
the eyes; the sword continued to work through till
it issued forth between his thighs, and the lion fell
cut in twain. The youth returned to his arms, and
put on his corslet, when lo! the satraps of Prince
Aswad encompassed him, and ordered him to ap-
pear in his presence. Amazed at his courage, he
inquired his descent and parentage, and who were
his Arab connexions? O prince, said the youth, I
am called Jerrah, the Wayilite; and I came to
offer my services to you, hearing of your mun
ficence, and that you required the attendance of all
the warriors from every tribe: I am at your com
mands, that I may show you what may gratify your
sight. Aswad smiled, and ordered him an honorary
robe: he also presented him some generous steeds, but
Jerrah refused the robe and horses, at which Aswad
being exceedingly moved, Eh! young man, said he,
I perceive you refuse my favours and my robe; if


PROMISES OF ASWAD'S HEROES. 247


you think the donation small, we will greatly en-
large it. O noble prince, cried Jerrah, kissing the
ground, and praying for him, I shall have done no-
thing in your presence to merit this bounty unless
I can hurl at your feet the head ‘of Antar, son of
Shedad, in quest of whom these troops are march-
ing. But who is this camel-tender, that you should
on his aceount assemble these armies and warriors ?
O youth, exclaimed Aswad, vastly gratified, and
smiling in joy, if you perform your engagement I
will make you a prince to rule over all your Arabs.
The youth kissed Aswad’s hand and retired. O
prince, exclaimed Locait, son of Zararah, this youth
has engaged for himself to slay Antar ; I engage to
kill King Cais and all his brothers. After him
eame forward the Brandisher of Spears, the knight
of the tribe of Aamir, and promised to slay all the
families of Zeead and Carad. The joy and the
smiles of Prince Aswad were greatly heightened at
these words. O noble Arabs, said he, and I too en-
gage myself to you to give fifty dinars to every one
who shall bring me a head of those vile Absians.
Thus marched the warriors, promising and ex-
pressing their obligations; and they continued tra-
velling over the country and mountains in their
way to the land of Abs, till they reached a place
called the land of Mesalik, an extensive waste, and
fraught with dangers; and when they came nigh to
the spot they beheld tents and dwellings, and spears
and swords, and horses and chargers. And these
were the heroes lying in wait for Prmce Aswad ;


248 ASWAD'S LETTER TO CAIS.


for King Cais, when he quitted home, having sent
on forward the thousand horsemen, marched after
them, and he chanced to meet Cosoorah, Hanith’s
brother, on the road, who saluting him and kissing
his hand, thanked him for the protection he had
granted to his brother Harith. They continued
their march till they reached this place, where they
had remained three days, and on the fourth came
up Prince Aswad and his armies, and beheld the
Absians, who had anticipated him. He ordered his
troops to halt, saying, Let us send to the Absians
a messenger, that we may hear what King Cais has
to say for himself: if he delivers up Harith, it is
well; otherwise we will attack him with these armies,
which are like the tempestuous seas. Accordingly
he sent a letter to the Absians by a court messenger,
who repaired with it to the Absians, and the first
person he met was the Chief Antar, who conducting
him to King Cais, snatched the letter from him, and
gave it to the King, who opened it, and read it, and
it began thus: Know, O Cais, that my brother,
whose command is to be obeyed in every quarter,
and under whose subjection you have been exalted,
thus says, if you wish to accommodate this business,
and to be thanked for all your actions, deliver up
to him Harith, son of Zalim, and make the excuses
of a repentant sinner before your horsemen are
obliged to fly. Know also, that this army, with
which I am, is only the advance of the grand army,
whieh is following us like the gushing springs. - So
agree to this-proposal, and be not obstinate and re-


CA18°S ANSWER. 249


fractory, or perils will light upon you. Health to
him who obeys and is peaceable, but curses on him
who rebels and makes disturbances! Were this pro-
posal suchas we could accept, said Cais to the mes-
senger, it would be well; but know, O Arab, we:
are a tribe that having once given their words, fol-
low it up with their actions; and when we have
granted our protection to any one, we secure him
against the events of day and night. Now we have
engaged ourselves to this man, who retaliated for
us on Khalid, son of Giafer, and never can we with-
hold our protection from him till our heads fly off
before him. But say to your prince, whose armies
are following him, that this is a point we fear not
and dread not. Return to him, and tell him te re-
nounce his rapacity, and not to expose himself to
destruction and‘death ; and let him repent of what
he has done. When Antar heard the letter and
the answer, he repented of having let the messenger
escape in safety ; but the man slunk away, his senses
in a state of bewilderment. He knew not what to
say till he stood before Aswad, where he shook
in terror, and kept looking behind, repeating to him
the words he had heard. What’s behind thee? said
the prince, thou foul-mustachioed fellow ! wherefore
dost thou turn about, right and left? O prince, said
he, behind me is violent death and every figured
evil, all comprised in that accursed slave Antar.
By the faith of an Arab, O prince, had not King
Cais kept him off, he would have destroyed me in
the most dreadful of deaths; and now indeed I


250 ASWAD'S FURY: THE BATTLE BEGINS


should say that he was close behind me listening to
my discourse. Upon this, Aswad smiled from his
heart of rage and passion. Verily, folly and rapacity
have entered these fellows’ brains, he cried; re-
monstrance has no effect on them, and never will
they feel the value of their lives till the chargers
play over their heads.

It was now evening; so they reposed that night
till day dawned, when the prince mounted at the
door of his pavilion; they elevated above his head
the banners and ensigns, and the armies and nations
rolled on like waves. Prince Aswad had resolved
on drawing up his troops in right-.and left wings,
but the rapacious Absians gave him not time, for
they had mounted before the rising of the sun, eager
for the battle and combat. Amongst the fore-
most was the Chief Antar, and Harith, who was a
blazing flame, with the horsemen of Marah, and his
brother Cosoorah. March with me, said Harith to
his brother, that we may attack the left; and I, said
Antar, will assail the right. ‘They attacked, and
their comrades cast their lives into perils and hor-
rors. Upon this, shouted the armies of Irak; and
the wilds and the wastes were agitated at their
clamour. The Absian army appeared contemptible
in their eyes, and their minds assured them of con-
quest; so they flowed down hke the tempestuous
seas, and at their head was Locait, hke a hovering
eagle, with his shouts and his roars; also the Bran-
disher of Spears attacked with the Aamirites. The
convulsion became’ more furious; the mountains


HARITH’S EXERTIONS IN THE CONFLICT. 251


tottered ; the scimitars laboured against backs and
kidnies; the doors of the sepulchres were opened,
and the decrees of the all-powerful Monarch de-
scended upon them; the clouds of dust mounted on
high from the trampling of hoofs; the winners were
distinguished from the losers; the portion of the
brave was the most abundant. Horsemen rushed
upon horsemen ; the sword and spear were at work
amongst heads and bodies; hands were exhausted ;
equals contended; heroes and warriors mangled
each other; the field was too confined; the intoxi-
cated were sobered; perseverance exerted itself’;
artifice and fraud availed not. Fierce were the blows
of the crossing instruments; the brave were hurled
from their saddles. God prospered that memorable
day, defending those whose bodies were cased in
_ iron: God prospered Antar and the generous Ab-
sians in their slaughter of hundreds and of thou-
sands! As to Harith, he cut through the people
and the nations, for he was a man of sorely-wounded
spirit; so he fought with the fiercest resolution ; he
hacked through the armies in his highly roused
ardour. But though we have already mentioned
his intrepidity, and force, and superiority, nothing
could have carried him through those dreadful
scenes but his sword Zoolhyyat; and his brother
almost equalled him in courage and steadiness; and
had it not been for the numbers of the foe not one
could have stood firm against him, for how great
the difference between the wolf and the sheep, ‘and
between foxes and the lions of the forests! Before


252 . ASWAD BEPROACHES HIS TROOPS.


midday blood flowed and streamed; heroes com-
plained of calamities and sorrows, and what was
before in order was now all in confusion; the form
of death was conspicuous, and prowled about; cups
were poured out of the wine of death; the sword
continued to labour, and blood to gush forth, and
men to slay, and the fire of battle to blaze, till even-
ing came on; then had Antar massacred the nght
with his assaults; he never flagged ; and as he re-
tired with his uncles, his sword was drenched in the
blood of horsemen, and he had appeased his heart
among them in blows and thrusts. Thus also Oor-
wah, with his firmness and superiority in arms, and
the other horsemen. Harith too, with his brother
Cosoorah, retired, making their way through the
left, till they reached the tents, Darkness having
thrown its veil over the land, Prince Aswad too re-
tired, but he would not even look at any one, for
he had that day seen terrifying horrors; he had be-
held warriors who feared not death, and who scorned
to yield. When he alighted at his tent, he assem-
bled his people, and reproached them for their com-
bat, exclaiming, This is not the battle by which we
- shall succeed in our objects; our disorders will not
thus be cured. The Absians are less than six thou-
sand men, and we amount to forty thousand strong-
limbed warriors; but they have routed. our heroes,
and particularly that overpowering slave, whom fire
cannot: effect ; he alone discomfited the right, and
slew the standard-bearer, and had it not been for
the approach of night he would have assaulted me


WIS CHIEFS CONSOLE HIM WITH PROMISES 2593


beneath the banners; and also that Harith, whom
we are come to seek, he alone cut through the left ;
and these are circumstances I did not expect. There
is that tribe of Fazarah too, on which I depended ;
I have no news of them; I should say, they had
forfeited my relationship, as the Absians have for-
feited the relationship of my brother. Moreover,
if they thus resist us, they will mangle our re-
putation, and will overthrow our glory; our heroes
will be slaughtered; our horsemen be scattered
over the wilds, and no one will have any respect for
us; and behold, they have not fulfilled their en-
gagements; those horsemen I mean, who made
such fine promises. O dread King, said Locait, be
not distressed ; harass not your mind; to-morrow’s
night the Absians shall not pass but as your cap-
tives. Our projects against Antar and the dastardly
Absians must succeed, for the warriors who pro- .
mised the destruction of the tribe of Abs did not
take part in the engagement; they smote not, nei-
ther did they thrust. Conceal your feelings till to-
morrow, and you shall see what will gratify your
heart; and when they display their courage in
your presence, they will merit your ee robes
and your favours.

At hearing this, the bart of Aswad was con-
soled, and his passion and fury relented: he dis-
solved the assembly, and comforted himself.. As to
the tribe of Abs and Adnan, when they returned
to the tents, they searched for the killed and
wounded; the former amounted to fifty-one, and


25% EXULTATION OF THE ABSIAN CHIEFS.


the latter to a hundred and seventy; but they
heard from some one, that of the armies of Irak
were slain three thousand and odd: they were de-
lighted, and King Cais feeling sure that he had
gained a victory: O my cousins, said he, my heart
prompts me, we shall defeat the foe were they even
as numerous as the sands of the desert, notwith- .
standing the slaughter of our horsemen, whose
equals the age cannot produce. We form but a
small tribe, yet to me one of our horsemen is more
valuable than a whole tribe. O King, said Antar, :
calm your mind and brighten your eye, to-morrow
I will exhibit death to them. I am aware they will
to-morrow challenge me to the fight. O Abool-
fawaris, said Harith, I will not permit you to do
any thing of the sort, till I and my brother have
drunk of the cup of death. This is a point, said
Antar, that can only be decided to-morrow, and
every one that is called out by name must start
forth to the contest. In this guise they reposed
till day dawned, when the armies being in battle
array, the first that sought the plain was Jerrah,
the Wayilite, for Prince Aswad had ordered his
officers to prevent the tribes from attacking in a
body. Jerrah charged and galloped over the field
of battle, manceuvring upon the back of his swift
horse, till the wits of the wisest were confounded ;
and as he advanced towards the Absians; Tribe of
Abs, he cried out in a loud voice, by the faith of an
Arab, ye are the horsemen of destruction and in-
stant death; were it not so, ye would not oppose


JERRAH CHALLENGES ANTAR. 255


the kings of the age, ye being so few in numbers.
Do ye intend to encounter these armies and war-
riors? Foul play would proceed from a deficiency
in liberality and evil dispositions; but to attack
you is the triumph of every noble exertion for one
who aims at eminence and honour by the blow of
the sword and the thrust of the spear. Let your
black knight come forth against me, he, your illus-
trious warrior, who has raised for you a strong
tower of glory. None will reproach his dark com-
plexion, but those who cannot cope with him, those
who hate or envy him. I think meanly of every
one, notwithstanding his forefathers and progenitors.
I acknowledge no honour, but in him who thrusts
-~ with the long spear in the scene of action and battle.
So send forth against me Antar, that I may exhibit
through him a memorable contest ; for I have pro-
mised to slay him in the presence of Prince Aswad,
and to bring down sorrow and misery upon him ;
and Jerrah thus recited :

“‘ The parentage of the brave is his words and
“ his acts, his resolution in the day of encounter,
“ and his style of combat. Cowardice renders the
“ youth contemptible, although his maternal and
í paternal uncles may be of the race of Hashem.
‘£ Patience in the day of spear-thrusts is the glory
‘¢ that will endure, however circumstances may have
‘ reduced him: not every one that wields a sword
“in his hand, and labours for high honours, attains
“ them; but he who plunges into the sea of dust,
and braves the flame of’ the raging contest that


256 COMBAT OF ANTAR AND JBRRAH.


“ destroys his limbs. So soothe my heart with
“ the contest, and approach me, hero, whose
“ death is at hand; for ever will I destroy men in
“ the fight, and this day shall his limbs be mangled.
“ They have a slave indeed, whose deeds are famed,
“ whose acts are celebrated in every land. This
“ day I will erase his name with my sword, whose
“ terror scatters wide the crowded enemies.”
Jerrah had not finished, when Antar stood before
him ; he roared in his voice like thunder in a cloud,
and attacked him. Antar was about to reply to him
in some extempore lines, but his thoughts were con-
fused, so he rushed at him. The youth received
him as the parched earth the first of the rain.
These two fierce heroes turned upon each other
like voracious wild beasts, and a combat took place —
between them that sickened the eyeballs and amazed
the stoutest hearts; whilst thick dust arose above
them, till it concealed them from the sight. When
the Brandisher of Spears saw Antar stand forth
against the youth, and occupied in the engagement,
he challenged another to the plain, and he was fol-
lowed by the other ten heroes, who had made high
promises in the presence of Aswad, thus taking ad-
vantage of Antar’s absence. When Harith saw the
Brandisher of Spears come forth, with the ten horse-
men, imagining they intended to outrage Antar,
and being afraid that some peril or accident might
befal him, he advanced also, followed by his brother
Cosoorah, like a blazing flame. He wielded Zoolhy-
yat in his hand, and cried out to the Brandisher of


PARLEY OF HARITH AND GITESHM. 257


Spears, That is a deed of thine, son of Malik, whicli
will be repaid with death!, How darest thou to
outrage a man engaged with his antagonist, after
he had called him out by his name? May God
curse the entrails that bore thee, and the cuckolds
of thy kindred, said the Brandisher of Spears, there
is no treachery but what proceeds from thy nature
and disposition, and wert thou not in need of the
tribe of Abs, thou wouldst have betrayed them
even yesterday, but they are not yet secure from
thy atrocities., And when thou art slain, thou wilt
ever be known to every one that moves and halts
by thy infamous deeds: for thou didst kill the
Chief of the tribe of Aamir when he was asleep;
thou didst murder Shirjibeel, King Numan’s son,
quite an infant, and thy evil omen is over the high
and low; but we are come forward to execute our
promise, for which we have pledged ourselves.
And he repeated the names of the horsemen.
Harith only laughed ; O Gheshm, said he, this en-
gagement proves thy little wit; for I donot see that
thou hast promised to slay me, knowing as thou
dost, that I am his greatest enemy; and it was in
_ the private apartments of his brother that I slew
Khalid, son of Giafer; and I slew also his son Shir-
jibeel ; but I do not know whether thou hast omitted
to engage to kill me through fear of me, or out of
contempt for me. Know, O Harith, said the Bran-
- disher of Spears, thou didst not occur to the mind
of any one, for we did not suppose that thou wert
with the Absians; but we thought that thou wert
VOL. 1V. s


258 ANTAR TAKES GHESHM PRISONER.


returned to thy desolation amongst the mountain-
tops. Thou art right, replied Harith, and thou
hast not advanced but what is perfectly true. But
I intend this day to dye my sword in your blood,
and to destroy ye all, high and low, and to avert
your vexations from the tribe of Abs.

And he rushed upon the Brandisher of Spears,
and Cosoorah assailed the Aamirite horsemen. The
Semherian spears were extended; the dust sprang
up from the hoofs of the Arab steeds, and calamities
- fell upon them. Antar bellowed at the horses to
drive them far from the contest; he made an assault
at the Brandisher of Spears, with the rush of an
illustrious warrior. He grasped the rings of his
corslet and breast-plate, and taking him prisoner,
threw him down to Shiboob, who bound down his
arms, and tied fast his shoulders.

The battle continued to rage, and blood to flow,
and the flame of war to burn, till evening came on,
when the armies quitted the contest. Antar had
made about two hundred prisoners that day, whom
Shiboob pinioned one after another, but those that
resisted him he slew.

When Prince Aswad alighted at his tent, behold,
a black, tall, lanky slave presented himself. He had
every appearance of having performed a long journey,
and travelled in haste; he kissed the earth, and did
obeisance. Who art thou, Arab born? asked As-
wad. My lord, said he, I am one of the slaves of
Hadifah, Chief of the tribe of Fazarah: he has sent
me to. you to congratulate you on what he has done


SHIBOOB’S MEMORABLE CONTRIVANCE. 259.


to your enemy the tribe of Abs, and the miseries
and woes he has brought down upon them; for
after their expedition against you, he surprised
the dwellings, with the warriors of Fazarah. He
plundered their property, and slew their men, and
captured their women; and by to-morrow’s dawn
he will join you. He has sent me to you with
this message: disperse in separate divisions your
army now surrounding the Absians, that they may
not fly elsewhere; for he is afraid of the escape
of Antar and Harith, who hereafter may still occa-
sion us fresh trouble. Thus may success attend us!

The Prince jumped up, and stood erect in the
fulness of the joy he felt; but never was this inci-
dent forgotten by him. He ordered his men to draw
off the horsemen from the tribe of Abs and Adnan
on all four sides, into the wilds and wastes, and in |
less than an hour they were scattered over the de-
sert, and he himself mounted with those that re-
mained about him, and marched on till he came nigh
unto the tents of the Absians, where he concealed
himself. Return, O Arab born, to thy master, said
he to the slave-messenger, and tell him we have
obeyed his directions.

Now the slave who concerted that plan, and dis-

rsed the armies of Aswad over the barren waste,
was the lion Shiboob. Far when the troops alighted
in the tents, O my cousins, said King Cais, my
opinion is we should surprise Aswad’s army under
the night ; perhaps we may disperse his army over
the desert and waste. Shiboob was present in at-

s2


260 ASWAD SURPRISED BY NIGHT.


tendance on his brother Antar: O my brother, said
he, if you will hear what I have to say, I will most
certainly disperse the armies, mighty and extensive
as they are, and you shall catch Aswad himself in
his own pit, and defeat his troops and armies. May
God bless thee, O Shiboob ! cried the Absian chiefs,
if thou canst effect such an enterprise.

At the moment, Shiboob sprang forth to his
portmanteau, and putting on some clothes suitable
to stratagem, he ran away, and in an hour returned
and told his brother and King Cais what he had
done. Now surprise Aswad, said he; he is now in
such a particular spot, and has only a small party
with him.

King Cais ordered them to prepare the warlike in-
struments, and before midnight they were on horse-
back. King Cais sent for Harith, and attached to
him one thousand men, and sent him to the left.
As to Oorwah, he stationed him with one thousand
men to the right: Do you, said he to Antar, assault
the centre, my cousin. The King himself mounted
with the remainder of the warriors, accompanied by
Antar’s nephew, with whom he brought up the rear.
As to Aswad, he had concealed himself with his
men, and dispersed his troops, and every one dis-
mounted and slept near him. Suddenly screams
came upon them, and the blow of the murderous
scimitars, and the thrust of the calamitous spears
surprised them. The armies were aghast, and their
senses were disordered. Every one started from his
sleep and drew his sword; every one fell upon him


HIS ARMIES DISPERSED—HIMSELF TAKEN. 201


who was before him. - Bewildered by sleep, and ter-
rified at the dreadful Antar and the noble Absians,
they attacked each other with the edge of the sword,
‘but they knew not whom to address, or whom to
strike. Base cowards! cried out Antar at the head
of the Absians, I am Antar, son of Shedad. No
sooner did they hear the voice of Antar, the daunt-
less hero, than despair, and misery, and woe fell
upon them; brave warriors were slain in the very
spots where they fought, till every horseman thought
- wherever he turned, there was the voice of the lion
Antar.

Aswad withdrew his troops; they not only with:
drew, but dispersed in confusion over the waste.
His only resource was to wheel about and fly, but
he had not proceeded far, when Oorwah and his
men encountered him, and surrounding him, were
about to kill him, but he cried out for quarter, dis-
‘covering himself to them, and demanding protection;

.on which they made him dismount from the back of
his horse, and took him prisoner, dragging him along
abject and miserable.

The contest continued to rage, and blood to be
spilt, and the flame of war to blaze, till Shiboob,
seeing how easy the business had become, mounted
to the top of a sand-hill, and making himself as one
of Aswad’s followers, cried out with a loud voice,
O Absians, grant us quarter and protection; with-
draw from us the blow of the sword: no one but
Aswad forced us against ye, and him ye have taken
prisoner. Let us retire; relieve us from this fear


262 MASSACRE OF THE INFANTS.


and tribulation. On hearing these words, Aswad's
troops dispersed among the wastes; and -there was
not one who looked at another whilst Antar and
Harith pursued them, till they had cleared the whole
country of them, when they returned to the scat-
tered horses and dispersed arms: and having col-
lected the tents and property, they halted, exulting
in their victory and conquest.

The next day they assembled the prisoners,
amongst whom were Locait, and the Brandisher of
Spears—in all, about fifty of the most celebrated
Arab leaders, and their most renowned knights, with
whom they set out on their return home, rejoicing
in the defeat of the enemy, and their dispersion over
the wilderness.
=- They travelled on till the following morning, and

about mid-day there appeared some of their own
friends, advancing from the direction of their country,
and hastening over the plain in the most miserable
plight, their ears cut off, their bodies besmeared
with blood, and shrieking out, O by Abs! O by
Adnan! haste to us, and retaliate! till they came
into the presence of King Cais. Know, O King,
said they, that Hadifah, after your departure, sur-
prised us one day with five thousand horse; he not
only slew our men, plundered our property, and
rescued the hostages that were with us, but he mas-
sacred: four hundred youths of our children, from
the age of five to ten, whom he dragged forward
one after the other, as he cried out to them, Now
call out for some one to rescue you from death ! and


REPROACHES OF HADIFAHR’S WIFE. 268


then made each in turn a mark for his arrow. He
captured our women and our families, and is now
gone to his own country. The cause of this was
Hadifah’s wife, who, observing her husband slack
in the cause of retaliation, one day appeared beforé
him, when he was seated with the chiefs of Fazarah.
She was bare-headed, and her hair dishevelled. Son
of Bedr, she cried, restore me to my family and my
native land, for I want nocoward husband ; and she
thus recited :

“ May the curse of God light on the coward !
“ May he never give thee to drink of the mdisture
“< of rain; may the rain-clouds never extend theit
“ bounty to the lands of his tribe! may they never
“ robe his deserts in verdure!- Thou hast clothed
“ thyself, son of Bedr, in garments of infamy, that
‘© can never change their ignominious effect; and .
“ were it not for this disgrace, my eyelids would
“be ulcered’with tears. Cais has involved us in
“ woe for a youth; were they to weigh all Abs
‘against him, he would equal them. He has
‘¢ moreover slain the Chieftains of Bedr, and has
‘© made the Semherian spears drink of their blood.
“ Never, never, will my tears cease; my sorrows,
“ my afflictions, are endless. How many miserable
& women like me, in the tribe, are mourning in woe !
€ Rise then, seek the land of thy enemy; fear not—
‘ their defender is absent—leave not one alive among
“ them, and-let not their screams keep thee away from
“ them. The Absians have indeed spilt your blood ;
“ so drive away their camels, and capture their


964 HADIFAH SEIZES THE ABSIAN WOMEN.


s wives; for your blood is noble, and generous,
‘‘ and high-priced to those that purchase it. But
“ ye, sons of Bedr, my cousins, ye are brave, the
‘© most illustrious of men; be therefore like the
s progenitors that are gone, the forefathers that
& are passed away, and let their glory live for
“ever” = >

These verses were called the “ Exciters of Sor-
row.” When Hadifah. heard his wife’s address,
Toarms! to arms! my cousms, he cried, and before
midday, he was surrounded by five thousand well-
armed horsemen. Hadifah mounted Ghabra, and
the horsemen followed him. ‘The Sheikhs endea-
voured to prevent this treachery and perjury ; but
said Sinan, What is this? How? The Absians are
absent, the women have no protector—no one to
defend them, and this tribe are in duty bound to
wreak their vengeance. What greater advantage
can accrue from such oaths? Thus Hadifah, and
the tribe of Fazarah, travelled on till they reached
the tribe of Abs and Adnan, whom they attacked
on all sides, and when the Ghiftanians saw what the
Fazareans were doing, they plunged themselves into
corslets and breastplates, consisting, as we mentioned,
of two thousand men, all harsh-featured lions: they
fought that day, and the next, even till the fourth
day, when the tribe of Ghittan being routed, Ha-
difah, with his Fazareans, gained possession of the
Absian tents, and their property, and their daugh-
ters, and their children, and having rescued their


hostages, they massacred four hundred children of


ABSIANS PREPARE FOR VENGEANCE. 265


‘the tribe of Abs, all boys, from five to ten years old,
making them marks for their arrows. As he re-
. turned home, his wife met him, and she beat the
-Absian women with a whip, and abused them, thus
relieving her own heart. Hadifah put all the pro-
perty apart, saying to his surrounding warriors, We
must not divide this property yet, till we see what
Aswad will do to the tribe of Abs. . But Hadifah
had scarcely finished this sentence, when lo! a dust
obscured the land, and when it cleared, there came
forth the warriors of the tribe of Abs and Adnan,
and Antar at their head, like a furious lion. The
_ cause of their coming was the men whom they met,
as we mentioned, who told them what Hadifah had
done. The Absians screamed, in agony of woe and
distress, for the men and children that had been
massacred. King Cais assembled the prisoners, and
delivered them over to Harith, saying, These are
thy enemies: take them, and precede us to our
country, whilst we march against the tribe of Faza-
rah, for thou canst not fight Hadifah, on account of
your relationship. So he sent with him a party of
. Absians, and took the remainder with him, and
departed, a flame burning in his heart, and he thus
‘addressed them :

“ Prepare, ye heroes, implements of war; this
“ point can only be settled with arms; your little
& ones have been massacred—it is a disgrace upon ye;
& but it is unavoidable. Hadifah! mayst thou never
drink a drop of liquid ! may the rains of the desert
* never moisten thee! thou hast indeed made a war


: 266 CONTEST OF ABS AND FAZARAB..


“ against us that would choke a Sheikh, as if with
“ poisoned water. But I am now mounted on a
steed, that surpasses the lightning and the winds
' “ in speed, one hindfoot white, black-haired, broad-
“ faced, whose forehead resembles the first burst of
“dawn. O my cousins, all my joys are crushed on
“ your account, whilst you groan in pain of wounds.
“ As to my life, I regard it not, when the thick tears
“ of grief stream down my cheeks. Behind me are
“ chiefs of the race of Abs, waving long spears in
“ their hands—warriors irresistible—generous—in
“ the exposure of their lives they flinch not. Come
“ on then! shed the blood of the sons of Beder, with
“ the cleaving scimitar.”

As soon as Cais had finished, pride rushed like a
blast into their heads; they hastened on, till they
came nigh to the tribe of Fazarah, who no sooner
ascertained they were Absians, than they were con-
founded and bewildered. Now then, my cousins,
cried Hadifah, come on, here is your hated foe.
Spring upon them in the contest, otherwise they will
exterminate ye—they will ravage your property, and
capture your wives. Men soon met men, and war-
riors warriors—blood flowed and streamed—limbs
were hewn off—horrible were the scenes of peril;
the convulsions were tremendous—men wete pre-
cipitated on the plain of battle. King Cais attacked
in person, and made the carnage rage against his
kindred. Hands were extended to grasp the objects
of their wishes, but did not all succeed. Calamities

smote the tribes of Abs and Fazarah, whilst King


CAIS’s ORDERS FOR RETALIATION. 267


‘Cais exclaimed, Cousins, whomsoever the hand
touches, slay not; let us deliver them all to the
mothers of the children, whom Hadifah killed with
his arrows. At that time, above four hundred
of the Fazareans had been already slain on the field
of battle ; but when they heard this harangue, the
Absians only exerted themselves to take prisoners.
Antar on that day performed achievements to be
recorded, on account of the murder of his friend
Malik. At last, the Absians forced the Fazareans .
into their tents; there they slaughtered about a
thousand horsemen, and took five hundred more,
rescuing their own wives, and all their property, and
they returned, exulting in having retaliated. But
when they were settled, King Cais delivered to the
mothers of the children four hundred prisoners,
taking for himself one hundred to murder, in reta-
hation for his own son; and he directed all the
women, each to repair to her prisoner, and to torture
him the whole night; and, in the morning, to drag
him forth between the hostile ranks, and murder
him, in retaliation for her child. Each took charge of
her respective prisoner, and she passed the night in-
flicting the severest torments, till the crow cawed.
As to the tribe of Fazarah, they retired totheir tents,
repenting of what they had done. Hadifah alighted,
gnawing his hands in contrition, as he said to his
brothers, I have no other anguish in my heart, but
in not having succeeded against the Absians. To-
morrow will I start forth to the contest, and I will
appease my whole heart among them. I will suc-


268 HADIFAH REPENTS OF HIS DEEDS.


ceed in my hopes, or I will drink of the cup of
death and perdition. Then he wept, and his brothers
too wept; and as he wept, What mean these tears
and alarms? said Sinan; soon will come the armies
of King Numan, who will extirpate the tribe of Abs.
And know, O Hadifah, the Absians have only
fought with such fury, on account of your massacre
of their children, and your plunder of their pro-
perty, and the capture of their wives and families.
Fortune consists of two days. As to the prisoners,
redeem them.with cattle, or by war and battle. O
Sinan, said Hadifah, as to the prisoners, not one
will be released, but after a contest that will turn
infants gray, and frighten the stoutest warriors ;
if indeed they escape beheading to-morrow. But I
should now like to know what has happened be-
tween the Absians and Prince Aswad. He imme-
diately sent for one of the prisoners he had that day
taken, and to his inquiries, the Absian told him how
Aswad and fifty chiefs had been captured, and
that they were sent home with Harith. Hadifah
shuddered, and was stupefied. Disgraced are the
Arab chiefs, by the violence of this black slave,
whose obstinacy and fury are incontrollable, ex-
claimed Hadifah, and by the outrages of that
treacherous tribe of Abs. Now then, the destruction
of the tribe of Fazarahis at hand. And they remained
in this state till, as the day dawned, the two armies
mounted, and the armour and brilliant mail glittered.
King Cais mounted beneath the banners and stand-
ards, and ordered the women to appear, who came,


THE WORK OF RETALIATION. 269


each dragging her prisoner by the chin. He com-
manded them to slay them, and thus to wreak their
vengeance. Immediately every woman led out her
captive in front of the two armies; she made him
lie down between the two ranks, and slaughtered him,
cutting him across the jugular vein, like the slaughter
of a sheep, whilst her husband assisted her in the
deed ; and when all the four hundred warriors were
massacred, King Cais ordered his slaves to murder
the hundred warriors, in retaliation for his own son.
Hadifah and the chieftains of Fazarah were on horse-
back, viewing the fate of their cousins. Their
affliction was intense, and there was not one but
dismounted from his horse, and taking off his rustic
clog from his feet, dashed it down on his head, till
he shook out all his double teeth. The news reached
the wives of the murdered, and they rushed out;
overwhelmed with anguish. Upon that, the tribe of
Fazarah brandished their spears and their swords.
The Absians received them on the barbs of their
long lances, and cut through them with their
polished scimitars. It was a day to frighten the
senses—lives were dearly sold—evening and morning
appeared the same—shouts were raised on high—
the morrow and the dawn were annihilated. Lives
were plundered from bodies, and the resolute warrior
cried out, Flinch not from the battle and the cons
test! All was exertion—no jest. The Absians
made one universal shout, What a glorious morn!
The Fazareans stood firm with their bold counte.
nances. How many heroes fled from the fight and


TW THE BATTLE DESCRIBED.


sought the wilds and the waste ! blood streamed and
flowed—the whole army was covered with wounds,
and between them lasted an action whoee like had
never occurred at that period, and amongst the many —
descriptions of it are the following lines :

“ I have braved fortune, experienced and wise.
‘‘ I have endured calamities all my life long, but
“never saw I so hostile a day. I never felt from -
4 any one a severer misfortune than that Absian
“ contest, when they assaulted the sons cf Beder.
“ The tribes were exterminated on that terrific day,
“ that might be considered as a thousand months of
“time. I saw the cloud of their dust, and the
“ gleaming flash of their swords and spears. How
“ many heroes I beheld prostrate, struggling with
“ their feet as the horses passed over them! How
- “ many youths I heard beneath the black columns
“ of sand, uttering groans that bewildered my facul-
“ ties! But had it not been for the Absian slave, who
“encountered the Fazarean troops in every direc-
“ tion, who destroyed the heroes with the Redeinian
“ spear, as the horses of the sons of Beder rushed
“ upon him, and slaughtered the enemy with the
“ sabres, with a heart cut out of the solid rock !!—
* God prospered the noble slave, who overthrew a
“thousand freeborn in the combat, and when he
“ wielded his sword in the day of battle, the heroes
s might be seen tumbling down before him.”

At the close of the day, the two parties alighted
at their respective tents. King Cais then consulted
with Antar, about sending the property and families


HADIFAH’S SPERCH TO CAIR. 71


to the land of Shurebah and Mount Saadi. Do as
you please, O king, said Antar. Accordingly, he
gave them an escort of one hundred horsemen, under
his brother Harith. Conduct your mother, said he,
and the rest of the women home, and remain with
Harith, son of Zalim, for I will not quit the tribe of
Fazarah till I extirpate every vestige of them, amd
leave no record of them. Antar, indeed, had re-
. solved to take charge of them, but King Cais would
hot permit him ; so he remained behind, that he
might incur no blame or reproach; and Harith
departed with the property and families. As to the
Fazareans, they halted at their tents, and more than
a third of them had been slain. What say you?
said Sinan to Hadifah, shall I go to your brother-
in-law, Harith, son of Zalim, and throw myself on
his mercy? Perhaps he will now fight for us, or, at
any rate, make peace for us. No, that wall not
do, said Hadifah. They continued in conversation .
till, the darkness having disappeared, Hadifah de-
scended into the plain, and as he came nigh to the
standards of King Cais, O son of Zoheir, he cried,
the wager was:between thee and me. The affair
indeed is gone too far, and we have put on the
garments of treachery and outrage, for thou hast
slain my son, and thy slave slew my brother; I slew
thy brother, and it was I who ordered the blow against
thy horse. ‘The other day I slew the infants, and
you, in their stead, have slain as many men. It ts
not liberal, that we should permit the women to com-
plain of us; but let us terminate this affair with our


S72 . HE CHALLENGES HIM.


lives, till one of us be dead : thus will all anxiety and
doubt be at an end; one of us will succeed, and let
the survivor reign over the whole land. Come on
then, I will attack thee, and never will I desist till
thou hast destroyed me, or I have destroyed thee;
and Hadifah thus recited :

& Fortune disregards all respect and engagement ;
“ ofttimes she cajoles us and favours the coward.
« In our fathers we are glorified, and from our fore-
‘¢ fathers we are made heirs to glory and supremacy.
« I have built a mansion of glory, sublime on high,
‘‘ with spears that make no distinction between
& sacred and profane; with swords with which we
< encounter horrors and the calamities of the age.
& At all times the cleaving sword is my protection;
& the sword whose edge fractures bones. I have
& granted wealth to the poor, and never withheld
“ it, and never have I heard reproach. I have par-
& doned where I have been able; in my decisions
‘‘ I have been impartial; I have never broken my
“ engagements. But I know fortune is a niggard;
& its disposition is perfidious, and it owns no no-
« bility. If joy has its day, and should it even last
& awhile, the hand of misfortune will turn it into
& sorrow for a year. So be impartial to me. in the
& combat; charge; behold my resolution when the
“‘ battle rages, for we have left the women wild with
‘¢ grief, dashing their hands against their cheeks and
& sleepless.”

When King Cais and his brothers heard these
verses, they were afraid the Arabs would regard


THEY FIGH?. HADIFAR’S TREACHERY. 273


them with the eye of inferiority; so King Cais
started forth, mounted on the back of his horse, and
thus spoke :

“‘ If thou art in want of compassion, I will con-
«c fess on some occasions I travel in the paths of
“ weakness. ' I have a steed for mercy bitted with
“ mercy, and I have a horse for folly saddled with
“ folly. With him who challenges my resolution I
“ am straight; and for him who would make me
& swerve aside I am crooked. Thou hast outraged
& us, son of Beder; and the deed by. which thou |
« hadst conquered is more odious than all that is
& most vile; taste, then, the chastisement of violence
< before thou drinkest of the cup of death that is
« impregnated with poison. I have taken captive
“ bim whose aid ye required. I have returned with
« him, and the flame of war increases, and is kindled
& anew. We are all lion horsemen, all brave heroes
« crowned with glory.”

King Cais rushed upon Hadifah, who met him
as the parched earth the first of the rain, both
expressing the deep resentment rankling in their
hearts. In less than an hour they both vanished
from the sight, and the dust thickened over them.
There was not one in the two armies but prepared
for the combat, fearful lest death should overtake
their leaders. Hadifah, before he attacked King
Cais, had already enjoined his brothers, saying,
When you see me drawing King Cais towards you,
rush at him and slay him, and let the Arabs abuse
us to eternity.. He thus purposely kept retiring till:


VOL. IV. | T


R74 ANTAR'S TIMELY AID.


he came close to his brothers, who immediately at-
tacked, and attempted to put Cais to death. But
when Antar saw this treason on the part of the Fa-
zareans, he assailed them, shouting at them in a
voice like thunder in a cloud, and they instantly
retreated from the scene of action. Antar advanced,
and thus exclaimed: |

“ I am the son of Shedad, truly the knight of the
‘ Arabs, and the reliever of grievances with the
“ sharp edge of my sword. The atmosphere i is
** dust-darkened; the whole region is obscured im
“ gand-clouds; the light of the sun is veiled; the
‘¢ dust-wave is on high; warriors charge and ap-
“ proach the scene where death will be quaffed ; the
“ horses neigh, and the horsemen charge, and the
“ earth is convulsed at the excess of horrors; it is
“ a day to turn every hero old, and no one braves
s it but the valiant. I have stood firm in it with a
& heart that knows no tardiness; conscious of no
“ fear or alarm. I have plunged into it, and the
& dust of death pours over my noble steed, ambling
“ as he goes. Every eye beholds me and is bewil-
& dered; they approach me, and they are repaid with
' © death. ‘There is no virtue in the act where death
& is not at hand, nor is there any exaltation of soul
s“ to be recorded in history. My parentage is
‘¢ known amongst the noblest of the creation, for
“ my resolution, my vigilance, my virtues, and my
‘¢ superiority.”
- Having finished, he rushed upon the tribe of Fa-
zarah ; he put them to confusion; he cleft down


RETURN OF THE HORSEMEN. 275.


their horsemen, singly and in pairs, til] he came up
to King Cais and Hadifah, whom he saw clinging
to each other like one individual; he rushed at
them, and dispersing those that surrounded them,
he thrust at Hadifah with his spear, and hurled
him from the back of his horse on the ground, and
brought forth King Cais from the battle, whilst
the Absians turned upon the Fazareans, and let
down infamy and ruin upon them. They took four
hundred prisoners, and two of Hadifah’s brothers ;
and they continued this cruel work till evening came
om, when they retired to their tents. As soon as
darkness had veiled the earth, behold, three horse-
men arrived out of the hundred whom King Cais
had sent with Harith, son of Zalim, to guard the
prisoners.


T2


276 SAD TIDINGS REACH CAIs. |


CHAPTER XXXVI.


Ex! what has befallen you? said Cais; who
among men has cast you down? Know, O king,
they replied, we accompanied Harith till we reached
our own country. Harith guarded the prisoners,
and remained watching them three days, ever
menacing them till night-fall; but one morning
we looked for him and his prisoners, but we
could not find either him or them; so out of our
alarms for you, knowing well his perfidy, we are
come to apprise you. Cais shuddered at this intel-
ligence; And did this event, asked he, take place
before the families arrived, or afterwards? No wo-
men, no families, no camels, no cattle, have we
seen, replied they. Then the light became dark in
the eyes of King Cais. Alas! then our advantages
have turned out to our prejudice, he exclaimed, and
these ordures of Fazareans will still exult over us.
O king, said Antar, when he saw the anguish of
Cais at this corroboration of the news, this fact
proves indeed the difference between appearances
and reality, as widely distinct are they as existence
from annihilation; an experienced man can see the
whole proceeding from beginning to end. I am
persuaded that Aswad and his companions have ul-
. timately engaged to procure King Numan’s protec-
tion for him, and that he has agreed to their plans,


ANTAR DEPARTS TO ARRANGE MATTER 277


and has consequently released them from bondage ;
and as he was coming with them against us, he
must have met our women travelling along the road
(no better opportunity to open a door to the heart
of King Numan could they find), they must have
seized them, and they are now on their way to
Hirah. King Cais was convinced of the probability
‘of Antar’s conjectures; O my cousin, said he, if it is
so, truly we'are fallen between two perilous cata-
strophes, and two deadly afflictions, and I do not
comprehend which we should undertake first ;. for
if we pursue Harith in a body the Fazareans will
turn upon us, and if we remain here every vestige
of us will be extirpated. O king, said Antar, it is
my opinion that I go alone after Harith and his
prisoners ; I will rescue the property and families ;
I will replace Aswad himself and his comrades into
chains and fetters; and I will show you what I will
do with that Prince Aswad and all his people. Do
you in the meanwhile stand firmly opposed to the
tribe of Fazarah. Ah, my cousin, said Cais, much
relieved, do as you please; but if it is so, and you
really must go, take with you some one to aid you
in the contest. O king, said Antar, if my heart
were easy about you, I would attack every human
being on the earth single-handed. But he took his
nephew Hiatal, and altogether ten men, on whose
firmness he could rely in battle. Shiboob by his
side, he sought the barren waste, followed by his
warriors. o


-As to the tribe of Fazarah, after Hadifah and his


278 . HARANGUE OF A STRANGER KBIGHT. .


brothers were taken prisoners, they took to a pre-
cipitate flight, and repaired to Sinan, who exhorted.
them to resist till the morrow, as something would
probably happen to occupy the Absians attention.
The next day there started forth from the Fazareans
a sturdy warrior and an intrepid hero; he was a
horseman of the dimensions of an elephant, or a
towering palm-tree; he galloped, and charged, and
challenging to the fight, thus exclaimed, O tribe of
Abs, come forth to the spear-thrust and the sword-
blow. By the faith of an Arab ye are the knights
of the age, the lions of Adnan, the conquerors of the
brave, and truly ye are just; on this account the
God of the holy shrine has aided you, and has hum-
bled your foes to you. We, moreover, have out-
raged you, and we have oppressed you, and we had
No propriety in our transactions. Such indeed have
been our proceedings: but you have slain our
horsemen; you have hurled dead our brave heroes ;
and all this has fallen upon us m consequence of our
massacre of your children, and our perfidious con-
duct towards you; and, moreover, our warriors
were taken captives by you, and their outrage has
been visited upon them in the result of their in-
famous conduct and disgraceful actions. We were
last night resolved on flight, though we are more
numerous than you, and our means more abundant,
but ye are more steady than us in the field of com-
bats and contests. Now, then, all we demand of
you is justice, and the abandonment of all violence
and outrage, so that when you accomplish your de-


. HIS GENERAL CHALLENGE, : 279.


signs upon us, and possess: yourselves of our pro--
perty and women, our families: and our wives may
not have a word or a syllable to say against you,
and no blame or reproach be attached to you. Come
forth, then, against me, ye that desire the combat,
for ye are the chiefs of Adnan, and the warriors of,
Hijaz. Beware of treachery, ye heroes, or the ca-
lamities nocturnal and diurnal will overwhelm ye.
~ After this harangue the knight thus continued :

<¢ ‘Whoso has tried fortune, him its marvels have
“¢ terrified; into him its misfortunes have fixed their
“fangs. I truly know that the results of violence
< are repentance, and that its consequences will re-
s quite us. There is nothing remaining for us but
& to drink of the cup of death under the dust-cloud
“<< when the whole country is blackened. Cool then
& my sickness with the spear-thrust; rush then
<‘ upon a brave man, to whom every thing is easy.
& Shame has pitched her abode on him from every
« direction, though once the revolutions of fortune
€< were his friends. Ye judges, be impartial towards
& us, for we have a land whose female mourners
« shriek in terror. Perhaps too the revolutions of
< fortune will befriend us with its justice, and will
“send down its evils upon you. Confide not in
“ fortune, for the age is fraught with evil; and
& sorrow, as you see, may inflict its wondrous works
& on you.”

King Cais listened, and was exceedingly asto-
nished at the mild tone of the warrior: his heart
pitied the tribe of Fazarah, as he recollected the re-


280 HIS DEADLY DEEDS AGAINST THE ABSIARS.


lationship and kindred that existed between them.
By the faith of an Arab, said he to those around
him, were this knight anxious to make peace with
us I would be reconciled to them, and forgive the
blood of the children on account of the tenderness
of his expressions. But it is too late: so now come
on. And as to this knight who demands fair play,
let him have it; and if any one of ye 1s able to take
him prisoner, let him capture him. Upon that, the
Absian warriors rushed upon him from all quarters,
and although King Cais called out to them, they
would not return; for their ambitious feelings were
excited against that knight, who, when he saw the -
Absian forces making towards him, smiled conceit- -
edly; and as he joyfully urged on his horse, Eh!
Absians, he exclaimed, ye have not failed in this in-
stance of impartiality ; ; but this is what the : strong
ever do against the weak, and as he spoke he bent
his head over the saddle-bow ; he assaulted the Ab-
sians, and met them with dreadful sword-blows and
powerful spear-thrusts. Wreaking his vengeance
upon them, he cut through them with his sword,
and in less than an hour he hurled down twenty of
their most puissant knights. ‘The horsemen still
assailed him in every direction, and shouted at him;
but he was silent and returned no answer, neither
did he make any address, but he dealt his blows
right and left, cleaving down the horsemen on the
field of battle. The tribes stared at him and at the
plain, in order to distinguish the vanquished from
the vanquisher, but of that lion-hero they could only


RAGE OF CAIS AT THIS REVERSE. 981.


discern the sword-blade as it glittered, and where it
fell it cleft in twain, till all the warriors fled from
him, and sought safety in the presence of King Cais,
who eagerly asked them what that knight had done
to them. On our lives, O king, they exclaimed, we
never saw a more valiant fellow than this hero; he.
has cut down our horsemen with his scimitar, and
has brought death upon us. Well, said Cais, and
what is this hero’s name? who is this lion? O king,
we know him not, they replieds there is not one of
us that can give any account of him, for never
did we behold his like amongst all the warriors, or
one that could equal him in the field of battle: he
has already slain twenty horsemen, all lion heroes.
The heart of Cais was sorely grieved; and as he
listened to the acclamations of the tribe of Fazarah,
his rage and anguish were more intolerable; for he
felt assured those shouts were the shouts of victory.
His grief and sorrow pressed heavier upon him, and
he ordered his brothers and the horsemen of his tribe
to make a united attack, saying, Come on to the
knight who softened us to pity by his speech, and.
who destroys our’ horsemen with the edge of his-
scimitar. Upon this, the Absian heroes rushed
upon him; they slackened their reins, and poised
their spears; but they had not approached the field
of contest before the enemy appeared, and the youth
started forth in their rear, roaring and bellowing
like thunder in a cloud, and blood was trickling
from his sword edge, and death was glaring in his
eyes. 7


982. HARITH TAKES CAIS PRISONER.


The horsemen shuddered and shrunk back, whilst
the Knight continued to cleave skulls, and to crush
bones, till coming near the banners and standards of
the King, he roared O by Marah! O by Marah!
Hail, O Cais, to thy death and destruction! I am
Harith, son of Zalim, the slayer of lion-warriors.
And he rushed at the standard-bearer, and smote him
on the head with his sword, and divided him down to
the girdle of his back, and felled him cut in twain.
He assaulted King Cais, and dragging him off his
horse’s back, took him prisoner, and delivering him
over to one of his attendants, he renewed his attack.

The Fazareans rushed on to his assistance, their
hearts encouraged by his intrepidity; men met men,
and heroes met heroes: blood flowed and streamed ;
limbs were hewn asunder; warriors were stretched
low upon the field of contention ; the well-propor-
tioned spears, and the cleaving blades, laboured
amongst them. Heads flew off; wrists were severed;
the eagles of death hovered over them. The war-
riors crowded round King Cais and Harith, and
the market of war continued its traffic. This one
died, that one escaped; the scimitars flashed ; the
spears stung; mails were split ; lives were in agony ;
the ground was drenched in blood; the glories of
the heroes were exalted ; the flame of war increased,
and numberless were. the sword-blows and the spear-
thrusts ; the easy became arduous, and the whole
scene boiled like the bubbling of a caldron. Eagles
and vultures hovered over them; the coward was
overthrown, and the brave vanquished. Men en-


HARITH LISTENS TO LOCAIT AND ASWAD. 283 .


gaged, and the horrors became still more terrific, till
the day departed, and night came on in obscurity,
when the two armies separating, alighted in a neigh-
bouring spot.

The Fazareans carried off King Cais, intending
to ransom Hadifah with him, and to obtain through
him security after all their terrors. The cause of
this was, that after King Cais had delivered over the
prisoners to Harith, with an escort of one hundred.
men, he conducted them to the land of the Absians,
where he beheld the carcasses of the dead, and the
streaming of blood. The Absians cannot stand out
long, said he to himself: so he pitched his tents on
the sand-hills and mounds, and remained guarding
the prisoners till the third day, when he went unto
them, and found them consulting about the de-
liverance of their persons. O Harith, said Aswad,
how trifling is your compliance with the times; how
strange is your conduct among the horsemen ! just
as if thou wert only created a rock, cast down on the
plain for every one to stumble against thee. What
can I do? he replied: I am the horseman of horse-
men and heroes. O Harith, said Locait, the cause
of these disasters was your murder of Numan’s son,
and though you contrived to escape after all your
dangers, you have persisted in your obstinacy and
rebellion, and have reconciled yourself to a life with
an insignificant, worthless slave; but if you have
a mind to rescue Numan’s brother and his com-
panions, and to make your apoldgies, and demand
their protection, haste then before it is too late, and


984 HE SETS THEM AT LIBERTY,


repent not of what is past, only when misfortunes
befal you—so that we may engage Numan’s protec-
tion for you, and your former deeds be cancelled by
your subsequent conduct, and every man alive will
thank you. But the Absians, said Harith, it does not
become me to afflict them—but then Antar! Ah! in-
deed, against him my heart is sick with envy: no
man’s frame is more disordered than mine; for he is
superior in feats of arms and horsemanship; were it
not so, the Arabs would be under my control; and
had I not been in want of him, I would have mur-
dered him, and would have captured his cousin Ibla.

Prince Aswad now began to indulge hopes of
success. What is it you wish? said he, that we may
grant it, and engage for its fulfilment? I wish you
would go with me, said Harith, to the tribe of Fa-
zarah, and assist me in the destruction of Antar,
and insure me Numan’s protection. O Harith, ex-
claimed Aswad, who only required his liberty and
return to Irak, I engage for Antar’s death, were he
encompassed by multitudes.
- Upon this, Harith released them from bondage,
and brought them arms and horses, and only wait-
ng for the darkness of night, they set out for the
land of Fazarah ; and as they met the wives, and
property, and families of the Absians on the road,
My opinion, said Aswad, is, you should drive away.
these baggage-camels, and depart for King Numan
before the dread Antar pursue us, and return us to
captivity and infamy.

So they surrounded the baggage-camels on all


BUT SOON REPENTS. 285


sides, and ordered the people to turn them towards
the land of Irak. Who is it, said Harith, son of
Zoheir, who has sent you against us? Surrender!
exclaimed the Brandisher of Spears, or I will make
thee dwell in thy tomb. We are the horsemen of
‘Aamir, and with us is Harith, son of Zalim, and
Prince Aswad, brother of King Numan. Thus
saying, he attacked Harith, son of King Zoheir, and
took him prisoner: and as the remaining horsemen
saw death was in him, they wheeled round, and
sought flight; but lo! in front of them were sturdy
knights; so they surrendered themselves to cap-
tivity and chains; and when morning dawned, the
hundred horsemen were pinioned.

Harith looked at Ibla, who was in tears, ‘and cast-
ing her eyes round right and left, and he would have
spoken to her. O Harith, said ‘Aswad, knowing his
situation, we cannot let you do such an act as that;
it is impossible, till you see Antar dead. ` And
Harith soon repented of having rescued them, as
he communed with himself,—If I go to Numan,
and Mootegeredah should ever hear that I have re-
leased her brother’s foes, and have captured the Ab-
sian women, never will she permit her husband to
give me any favourable answer: the best thing I
- can do, will be to go with these ordures, that I may
watch my opportunity with them, and make them
all drink of the cup of death; and then seize Ibla,
and fly with her to some corner of the earth. (

The Brandisher of Spears knew what he was
about. O Prince, said he, turning to Aswad, Harith


y


~
2886 CAIS RELEASED FOR MADIFAH.


repents of having rescued us; it will be as well to
remove him from us before evening. You know, O
Chief of the tribe of Marah, said Aswad to Harith,
that we are now marching to the tribe of Fazarah.
But I am aware, that Cais and Antar must have
annihilated them. My advice is, that you jom them
till I send you aid from my brother Numan ; for I
cannot permit you to enter Irak, till Cais be led be-
fore you in fetters and chains, and the head of Antar
be on the tallest of spears.

Harith knew they were afraid of him; however,
he had nothing for it but to turn away his horse’s
head, and seek his tribe and his people. He con-
tinued his road till he reached the tribe of Fazarah,
whom he informed of the release of the prisoners,
and that he had sent the Absian baggage-camels to
Trak; and I, he added, will consent to assist you.
Sinan burst into tears in a fit of joy, and felt con-
vinced that all was now right. Harith asked about
Antar; We know nothing of him, said they.

Harith concealed himself, till ascertaining that
Antar was absent, he discovered himself, and at-
tacked the troops, and dispersed the camp, and took
King Cais prisoner. But in comphance with Sinan’s
advice, that he should release Cais, and ransom
Hadifah and his brothers, he summoned Cais, and
made a covenant with him, to which Cais gave his
consent, and swore he would release Hadifah and
his brothers from bondage.

They accordingly set him at liberty, and he re-
turned to the Absians, who were delighted at his


HADIFAH REFUSES TO MAKE PEACE 287


arrival, and inquired what had happened to him
with the Fazareans. He ordered Hadifah and his
brothers into his presence, and he gave them he-
norary robes, and released them: returning them
their horses and their arms, he sent them home,
having first asked them to make peace ; but Hadifah
refused. When they reached the tribe of Fazarah,
their troubles diminished, and their joys increased.
Sinan and Harith advanced, and saluting them, con-
ducted them to the tents; and on that day there was
no fighting. l m

As to the Absians, when Kińg Cais had liberated
Hadifah and his brothers, he assembled his bro-
thers, and Rebia, and his tribe, and began to consult
with them how he should conduct the war against the
Fazareans. My advice, O King, said Rebia, is,
that we should protract the combat ; perhaps pur
cousin may come to us, he, the reliever of our sor-
rows—Antar, son of Shedad, and repay them for
their outrages. We must, said Cais, make one
united attack, and perhaps we may punish the ini-
quity of that Harıth, son of Zalim. Thats the
thing, said the Absians.

The next day the Fazareans mounted, and sought
the contest; the Absians also made an universal as-
sault ; limbs were soon cut off; the polished blades
and lengthened spears laboured ; heroes were laid


~ low on the scene of horrors. The affair continued


in this state till mid-day, the Fazareans being well
backed against the Absians by the presence of Harith.
But lo! a dust arose, and covered the land ; and


288 ZAYIDAH JOINS TRE ABSIANS.


in an hour there appeared five hundred horsemen in
armour, and at their head was a knight like a mass
of a mountain, or the declivity of a vast rock; and
he shouted out, O by Abs! O by Adnan! Retalia-
tion for Malik, son of Zoheir! I am Zayidah, son
of Museeb: then repeating his shout, he attacked
the Fazareans. His men followed him to the as-
sault, and in less than an hour they drove back the
Fazareans to the tents.

When Harith saw this, he uncovered his head,
and attacked till he retrieved the day by his vigorous
resistance. Thus the combat continued till evening,
when the two armies separated. ‘The Fazareans
alighted at their tents, and thanked Harith for his
exploits: and thus also the Absians alighted at
their tents, and thanked Zayidah for his achieve-
ments.

King Cais having asked Zayidah about the cause
of his coming, O King, said he, I heard what had
happened to you with the filthy tribe of Fazarah,
and how they had massacred the children. I could
not endure such deeds: I thought indeed you would
have sent to require my assistance; but as no one
- came to me from you, I mounted with these war-
riors, and am here to aid you; and were it not for
Harith, I would easily defeat the Fazareans. To-
morrow, however, I will challenge him; perhaps I
may kill him, and relieve the Arabs from his atrocities,
and his treacheries, and malice. On hearing this,
King Cais reposed quite happy. As to the tribe of
Fazarah, By the protection ofan Arab, said Harith,


HARITH’S AVOWAL OF TREACHERY. . 289


verily that Zayidah is a noble horseman, but to-
morrow I must kill him. l
They reposed that night, revolving under the will
of the most merciful God, whom nothing human can
change, till the day dawned, when the two parties
having mounted to the scene of action, lo! Harith
started forth, eager for the contest; and as he gal-
loped and charged, he thus recited: _
. “ I regard no man as a friend, and J riike ab-
& sence an exchange for enjoyment. Whenever a
“ friend asks a favour of you, betray him, and re-
‘* quite a good action with an evil one, as a foe, and
“ hurl down every one with the long spear. Ply |
‘the sword amongst all your relations, and slay
“ every one with the polished sabre. Betray your
<&c companions and family, till you see the dearest in
“infamy. When you want a comrade, associate
“ with a spear, and be not separated. from your
“ bright scimitar. Abandon your family, forsake
“ friends; laid low on the back of the earth, let
“them lic dead. O Absians, I will singly attack
“ you this day with deeds that ages shall record.
“ My sword shall not rest in the darkness of its
“ sheath, and it will not be reconciled to any one
e instead of me. My scimitar, and my arms, and
“ my spear, shall tear ye out, root and branch. _
“ Think not I regard a friend that he can please
« me. I love no friend; come forth then, and be-
“ hold the combat of a youth, a vanquisher, who
& considers numbers as nought; see how he will
“ act among ye on the back of his colt that will
VOL. IV. u


do ‘HIS PROPOSALS TO THE ANSIANS.


trample down heroes in the day of battle. My
“ heart this day is sick, ease therefore my sickening
“ heart with the contest. I am Hanth, son of
“ Zalim; my name is famed for perfidy throughout
“ the tribes.” 7

The Absians replied to Harith’s verses with curses
and abuse. Zayidah longed to attack him, but one
of his cousins anticipated him ; he was a stout horse-
man, and a noble warrior; he rushed on Harith;
he stood up on his saddle; then stretched himself
out on his stirrups, and drove at Harith a fierce
thrust. But as Harith watched the spear aimed
at his chest, he unsheathed his sword, and at one
blow clipped off its point. Then he closed on him,
and pierced him with his lance through the chest,
and forced the barb out quivering through his back ;
he hurled him down dead, weltering in his blood.
Again he rushed at the standards of King Cais,
shouting, O Absians, this is not your custom, thus
to let others fight for you; why stand ye still on the
backs of your horses? Sally forth, if ye are desirous
of glory. If you wish to withdraw, I will let you,
on candition that ye abandon for ever the land of
Shurebah and Mount Saadi. I will accommodate
you among my tribe of Marah, and I will intercede
for you with King Numan, provided you first send
me your slave Antar bound in chains, that I may
kill him, and retaliate on him, and deliver him to
King Numan. On hearing this harangue, King
Cais was anxious to order his army to attack, but


Zayidah would not permit him, for rushing upon


DEATH OF ZAYIDAH. 291


Harith, he thus exclaimed, Eh! how foul are thy
qualities! Art thou not ashamed barely to men-
tion such odious propositions? and thus he con-
tinued :

“ If thine eye regards iniquity as virtue, by my
“ life, thy blindness has lasted too long. If per-
sí fidy were to smite thee with the cleaving sword,
< it would see its favourite disgraced. ‘Thou hast
“ gained a name by the murder of Khalid, till thou
“ hast filled the unwatered deserts with the talk of
“ thy deeds. ‘Thou didst go to him as he slept,
“ and thou didst force the polished sword against
« him in the obscurity of night. But now hail to
s thee! verily thou shalt taste of prolonged tor-
& tures from the edge of my scimitar and the barb
“ of my spear.”

These two intrepid heroes met like two ferocious
leopards, and a contest ensued that startled the
boldest, and amazed the stoutest. ‘They continued
in this state till mid-day, when they were enveloped
under the dust. Harith despised his antagonist ;
but perceiving his uncommon powers, he exerted
himself in the combat of blows and thrusts, fearful
that the tribe of Fazarah should regard him with
an eye of inferiority. So he assaulted Zayidah like
an enraged lion, and smote him on the head, split-
ting his casque and his chains; the sword continued
to work through him till it issued between his
thighs, and he fell dead, cut in two. The Faza-
reans sent forth shouts of exultation, when lo! a
knight advanced towards King Cais: he was close

u2


292 COMBAT OF THE TWO BROTHERS,


vizored: Dost thou not know who I am? said he.
No, young man, said Cais. I am Cosoorah, Ha-
rith’s brother, said he, who has outraged you after
all your kindness. I am resolved to go out agamst
him myself, and, perhaps, I may relieve the Arabs
from his iniquities ; for greatly has he dishonoured
our kindred by his acts. I wish therefore to try
myself in the combat with him, and whether I am
victorious over him, or he kill me, I shall be eased
of his perfidy. King Cais was exceedingly asto-
nished. These two are brothers by the same father
and mother, said he to his chiefs; but what a dif-
ference is there between them in courtesy and ge-
nerosity! Thus started forth Cosoorah against his
brother. Eh! thou faithless villain! he exclaimed,
what means this deprayity ? this outrage against the
warriors? hast lost thy senses? or is it thy folly
that goads thee on? ‘Thou bastard ! cried Hanth,
recognising him, and he was immediately inflamed
with intense wrath and indignation, I sent after
thee'to come and assist me, but thou wert gone to
the Absians, and fearest not my power: now thou
art come even ‘to fight me. And as he spoke, he
assailed his brother with the utmost fury; but Co-
soorah met him like a sparkling fire. (The Arabs,
in those days of ignorance, used to call Harith the
Violator, and Cosoorah the Intrepid). And they
continued the spear-thrust and sword-blow till every
eyeball was sickened. They continued in this state
till evening came on, when Harith desisted from
the engagement, saying, Return to thy comrades


HARITH SLAYS COSOORAH. 293


for this night; had I wished thy death, I would
have slain thee at the very first. By the faith of a
noble Arab, said Cosoorah, thou hast no escape but
by flight; if thou retirest from before me, I will
pursue thee to the tribe of Fazarah, and will bring
defeat down upon thee; for I only came to fight
thee, because thou hast glutted the universe with
‘the scandal thou hast brought on the Arabs. On
hearing this, the light became dark in the eyes of
Harith. He rushed at him, and smote him with
Zoolhyyat on the head, and divided him down to the
‘belt of his back, and he hurled him over cut in
‘twain. Confounded at Harith’s deed, the two
armies shuddered at the hardness of his heart against
his brother, the son of his father and mother. As
to King Cais,-he vanished from existence at the `
horror of this catastrophe. He remained that night
in the greatest distress at being thus abandoned by
Harith, for he could not imagine what would hap-
pen, or how it would all end. As to Harith, when
he had slain his brother Cosoorah, he retired to the
tribe of Fazarah, where Hadifah and Sinan met
him, and thanked him for his achievements, and for
the murder of his brother. .
At the dawn of day the two armies prepared to
engage, when lo! Harith started forth galloping and
charging, and challenging to the contest. Come forth,
ye Absians, he cried, against the grasper of lives! him
who converts joy into sorrow—him who regards no


engagement—him who acknowledgesno brother—no


294 — ANTAR COMES TO THE RELIEF OF CAIS.


cousm. King Cais would have ordered the troops
to a general assault, but the Chief Shedad started
out against Harith, who encountered him, and com-
menced the blow, and the draughts of instant death :
he had even wounded him ; but just as he was about
to close upon him, lo! a dust arose, and as it cleared
away, there appeared the bridegroom of war and
battle—the destroyer of sturdy warriors—the ser-
pent of the bowels of the desert—the instructor of
heroes in battle—he, in whom the world glones—
the Chief Antar, son of the Chief Shedad, and his
companions were like devouring lions; and as the
' Absians beheld Antar advance, they set up the
shout of joy, Oh what a glorious morn! King Cais
kissed him between the eyes, and told him what
Harith had done, how he had slain his brother,
and wounded Shedad. And to his inquiries of
Antar about what had happened with Aswad and
their wives and property, O King, said Antar, I
have rescued our prisoners and our heroes, and I
have returned Aswad to bondage and captivity, and
_ we have not lost a single article, not even the value
of a halter. The cause of this was, that Antar with
ten warriors and Shiboob followed Aswad’s track ;
and when their eyes met, Antar roared in a voice
that made the mountains and the whole country
resound, Ignoble dastards! I am Antar, son of
Shedad: let go those women and children. No
sooner did Aswad and his companions hear the
voice of Antar, the lion-knight, than they were
stupefied and confounded ; their bodies were struck


ANTAR OVERTAKES ASWAD AND LOCAIT. 295


with horror; their complexions changed. Come on, ~
cried Aswad to Locait and the Brandisher of Spears;
on to the sturdy slave, for he has only a small party
of cowards with him. Comfort your heart and
brighten your eye, cried they all; soon will we show
you a day of horrors. But our opinion is, you
should station a party of us over the prisoners, that
our hearts may not be occupied in the hour of
battle. This being done, the Brandisher of Spears
and Locait with their warriors returned to engage
Antar, who received them as the parched earth the
first of the rain: he yelled in their horses’ faces,
and thus drove them on their haunches, and made
them hurl their riders off their backs. As soon as
the women heard the voice of Antar, their pain and
sorrow vanished; joy and gladness visited them.
Shiboob sought the post of the prisoners ; he met
the heroes that were stationed over them sitting still,
and contemplating the battle. He rushed towards
Harith, son of Zoheir, in the rear of the guards,
who were leisurely enjoying the spectacle of the
combat: he released him from bondage, and, in less
than an hour, they had released one another: then
mounting the horses to which they had before been
bound, they made an assault to assist Antar, ex-
claiming as in one voice, O by Abs! O by Adnan!
At this shout his powers expanded; but Aswad
seeing the prisoners rescued, was alarmed. He
would have fled, but Shiboob perceived him. Fol-
low me, O Prince, he cried out to Iarith, son of
Zoheir. But the warriors of Aamir and Darem,


296 ASWAD SIZED BY SHIBOOB.


when they saw Aswad fly, gave their bridles to their
steeds. Antar pursued them with the Absians,
till théy drove them out of that country, having
first taken ten prisoners, and slain twenty heroes;
the remainder bent their fugitive course towards the
wastes and the wilds.

Antar and his comrades were returning, when
lo! Shiboob and Harith, son of Zoheir, advanced
with Prince Aswad their prisoner, whom they drag-
ged along as they would a camel. Eh! O Ebe
riah, said Antar, how didst capture Adwad ? Know,
my brother, replied Shiboob, when he beheld you,
and how you slaughtered his men, he fled; but I
pursued him till I overtook him ; I smote his horse,
and wounded him in the pasterns. Aswad fell off;
I jumped on his breast; he resisted; I drew forth
my dagger, and he cried, Quarter, O Shiboob ! and
surrendered himself to me. I pinioned him well,
arms and shoulders. Antar congratulated them on
their safety, and wishing the women joy on their
security, he stationed a guard over Aswad and his
comrades. O Antar, said Aswad, what advantage
is there in keeping me in captivity? Let me go
this once, and accept me as your friend and compa-
nion in every strait and difficulty. Eh! and why
should I let thee go? said Antar; just to assemble
against me all thy host and tribes, and come and
engage me a second time? Who, said Aswad, can,
ever dare to fight thee again, or ever come near
thee in the combat? Never will I approach the
spot where thou art. Know too, O Aboolfawaris,


ANTAR HASTENS TO HIS FRIENDS, 297


' that Harith is gone to fight on the side of the Fa-
zareans. Upon this the-heart of Antar was alarmed
for the Absians, till day dawning, he mounted with
his brave companions, and they travelled over the
wastes and the sandhills till they reached home,
where they reposed in the tents one night, . and
having placed Ibla and the other women fn security,
Antar again mounted; and as he passed over the
deserts and the wastes, he recollected all the wars
he had been engaged in, and thus recited :

‘‘ I bade adieu to her whose absence has deposited
“ in me a flame whose smallest work is its blazing.
“ I have quitted her, but my heart is with her, and
“ I have preserved my covenants and stipulations
“ with her. O Ibla, were absence a substance, thou
“ wouldst see what burthens I have borne. As to
“ the calamities of fortune, were they scimitars, their
“ flash should not terrify me. O Ibla, how oft the
& raven of the desert croaks in love, and truly its
“ croaking gives me ease. I was born for the tumul-
“ tuous war of vengeance, when the bright foreheads
“ of the high mettled steeds rush impetuously to
“ the contest, and the brilliancy of the atmosphere
s is blackened with their dust, and the lustre of the
“ sun’s rays vanish, and the thursts clash with the
“‘ barbs of the spears, whose lacerating gores wrench
© out the folds of the entrails. Never have I been
& present in the battle, on. the day of horrors, but
* that I have made the whole country flow in blood.
“ The horsemen look at me, in the day of the battle,
s with eyes, whose balls are fixed on high. They


298 ANTAR ABUSES HARITH.


“ avoid me, and their fears tell them that the sheath
“of my sword is their necks. They abuse my
& complexion for its swarthiness, day and night;
“ their hypocrisy is the least evil they speak. I have
“ a sword, were it brandished in Hajir, even Irak
“ would sparkle with its lightning.”

As Antar repeated his verses, his companions
were much delighted at his expressions, and his
compliance with the times. They hastened forward
till they came up to the Absians. King Cais
had not finished speaking of Harith, son of Za-
lim, when Shedad, Antar’s father, returned from
his engagement with Harith ; he was wounded, and
his shoulder was raw with blood. Antar, as he
viewed his father, wounded, and in that plight, had
not the command of his senses. He rushed against
Harith, who, observing the confusion, was still waver:
ing between truth and doubt, uncertain what to
think, till Antar himself stood before him, in the
plain of battle; and as he looked at him, his limbs
shook as with an ague: he was stupefied—he was
aghast. Eh! thou ordure-born, cried Antar, how
speedily thou hast forgotten favours! how quickly
hast thou betrayed thy friends! verily, thou hast
no honour, no word to be believed. By the faith
of an Arab, I must slay thee, and thus Antar re-
cited : 3
« Congratulate thyself, O Harith, that thou hast
‘¢ fallen on a hero, accustomed to plunge into dark-
‘© ness, ever amongst warrior princes. Thou shalt
« see in me this day a lion-hero, that deals the blow


HARITH’S ARTIFICE, 299


<< of tombs; the battle is veiled—the contest is
s< darkened, but retreat not, that my soul’s anguish
‘may be extinguished. How many lion-heroes
« have I slain with my sword, and how many gores
“ have I driven with my spear! Never has the
‘¢ flourish of the spear-barb glittered in the morn,
“< but I was the first among the troops. I launch
64 into the hottest of the fight, and the dust is its
“ pavilion far extended over the plains. Death, in
“ the day of contention, serves my arm, and my
& sword hews away the joints. Fiends dread my
“ power and my assault. Man, too, has felt my
4 virtue. Iam fate amongst the foe—I am the
& calamity—I am the establisher of woe amongst
6 the tribes. My star is above the minutest stars in
& the constellation of the Great Bear; and as tomy
& ambition, kings talk of it in their assemblies. My
€s chest is broad, and my spear is a tearer, and my
& vehemence is acknowledged in every army.”

Now Harith hung down his head towards the
ground in fear of Antar. He meditated a while,
and was confounded ; again he had recourse to his
artifices and stratagems. Welcome, welcome, O
Aboolfawaris, he cried, thou ornament of assemblies!
thou lion of the land! thou sublime in glory ! thou
pardoner of sinners! thou defender of children and
women! O Aboolfawaris, verily I have sinned
- against thee, and what thou hast said of me was
justifiable, for thou hast reduced me to that state,
that I can no more raise up my. head among the
warriors. Indeed, I repent of my conduct towards


)
300 HARITRH’S FEIGNED HUMILITY.


thee, in the deepest manner; but thou art ac
quainted with my story, and what has happened to
me. I perceived my chance of success with Numan
was weakened, and my apprehensions were real-
ized. So I set at liberty Aswad and his horsemen,
thinking that thy matters would be easily arranged
with Numan. But the reverse is the event; for
they still demand me, and had I not fled, they
would have put me to death. But now that is all
over; and I have no apology thou canst accept ; I
must exert myself in the contest with thee; but
afterwards I will dismount from my horse, and cast
myself under the hoofs of thy horse, Abjer, and will
humbly ask thy forgiveness. Canst thou then pardon
me this once? And if I ever again betray thee, may
the mother of Harith be no more a free-born woman.
May God curse thee, Harith, said Antar, above all
mankind, and all that put their trust in thee or
believe thee! But if I could suppose that for-
giveness could purify thee, I would pardon thee.
O champion of the Absians, cried Harith, thou
knowest my sword Zoolhyyat is my greatest joy, and
dearer to me than the life that antmates my body
—take it and forgive me, and he actually sheathed
his sword and delivered it to Antar. Antar was
amazed at his words, and astonished at his actions;
for the surrender of arms prohibited all contest, and
he dared not raise his hand against him. O Harith,
said he, restoring his sword, I cannot from my heart
confide in thee, and from me towards thee there
can be no security or protection, but through King


HE WOUNDS ANTAR, AND FLIES. 301


Cais. And I know there is too much resentment in
his heart against thee, for mê to be responsible for _
him, and to engage his protection for thee. Yet
march on before me, that I may intercede with him.
So Harith went on before him, and whilst the two
parties were amazed at seeing him (for they knew
not what had happened), Hadifah began to quiz -
Harith. Eh! Hanth, he cried, hast thou then
returned to fight for this bastard slave ? Woe! woe!
O Aboolfawaris, cried Harith, turning round (for
his back was towards Antar), scandal to the Arabs
that they should thus speak of thee, and call thee
bastard, and the least of thy acts towards me is this
thy act, and this thy beneficence. Neyer will I re-
__ turn to the presence of King Cais till I have white-
washed my face with him,’either by the death of
Hadifah or his captivity. And he drew forth his
sword, quicker than the lightnirig’s flash, and struck
Antar a full blow on the head, and he attempted to
kill him in the presence of the assembled nations.
On Antar’s head was one of the Chosrowean helmets,
on which he always depended; but Harith’s sword
split it, cut the lining and wadding, and fell
upon his head, making a gash on his forehead, and
causing the blood to flow over his beard. Afraid,
Jest he should repeat the blow and destroy him,
Antar exhibited the utmost steadiness. He shouted
out to Harith with the roar of a lion, and directing
his spear against him, resolved to pierce him; but
Harith fled from before him, and sought the tribe
of Fazarah. The day now disappearing, Antar


802 JOY OF HADIFAH.


retired. The Absians met him on horseback, and
stanching the blood, bound up his wound. King
Cais and his brother also hastened up and inquired
how he was. Antar told them the whole circum-
stance, and repaired to his father’s tents, bellowing
in the excess of his fury and rancour. He reposed
that night, but was all anxiety for the dawn of day, -
that he might sally forth to the battle, and relieve
his heart in the blows of the scimitar. As to the
tribe of Fazarah, they reposed in a state of most
perfect happiness. Hadifah went to meet Harith,

and thanked him for what he had done, saying,
Truly thou hast eased my sorrows, and hast done
a deed shall be recorded from generation to genera-
tion ; and hadst thou but slain that dæmon, thou
wouldst have been the paragon of the age! O Ebe
Hijar, said Harith, this hero cannot be numbered
amongst the warriors thou hast ever krown. Speak
not much to me on this subject, for I am well aware
of Antar’s style of fighting, and I only dealt him
the blow of one already terrified. I had deceived
him, but my heart did not feel secure in him, so I
resolved to exert my power over him, before he
should exert his power over me, and I have wounded
him. He has courted the combat, and in every re-
spect he isa true hero. They continued thus till
the laughing morn approached, when the warriors
drew their swords, and extended their spears. The
first who started forth to the field was the knight of
the precipitate attack—the serpent of the bowels of
the desert—the raiser of the lofty column—the noble


HARITH ABANDONS HIS FRIENDS. 303


Prince Antar, son of Shedad. He sought the con-
test, calling out for Harith, his heart full of resent-
ment; and when the Fazareans saw him, and heard
his harangue, they were bewildered and amazed,
Hadifah inquired for Harith, but they could not
find him, and it was said that he had fled, taking
with him ten of the most intrepid horsemen. Now
Harith, in fact, was aware that Antar would not care
for his wound, but would come ‘forth in the morning
to challenge him, when he would be under the
necessity of fighting him; therefore, only waiting
till the darkness thickened, and the eyes of mortals
were asleep, he took with him ten horsemen, and
carried off a good string of camels, belonging to the
tribe of Fazarah, and sought the land of Mecca.
Hadifah was greatly troubled. May God ‘curse
Harith, son of Zalim, and afford him no security on
the road, said he; for he has not regarded the rights
of his friend. Antar’s rancour was at its height.
He assailed the Fazareans, and rushed upon them—
he laid low the horsemen—he destroyed the brave
—and he cut his way through the heroes; and when
the Absians saw his attack, they prepared to assist
him; but Cais prevented them, saying, Let us
abstain from the combat, that we may ascertain what
is become of Harith; perhaps he may be concealed.
So he sent word to Antar, and told him of the state
of things. Antar bore the battle alone till evening,
when he retired. The tribe of Fazarah was in the
greatest consternation ; all their forutude was stag-
gered—their heads hung down, and they passed


304 DESPAIR OF THE FAZANEANS


that night in fears, forming various conjectures.
The next day, they again mounted for the combat,
and long lasted the thrust with the tall spears, and
the blow with the polished scimitars. Antar and
the horsemen set fire to the hearts of the tnbe of
Fazarah—they drove them to their tents. The
parties continued in this state for three days ; on the
fourth, the horsemen allied to Hadifah separated,
and sought their own country, frightened at Antar
and his assaults. ‘Thus the tribe of Fazarah being
disgraced, depended on the heights of the mountains.
The Absians seized their dwellings, and took up
their abode there, surrounding the Fazareans on all
quarters, and cutting off every communication ; for
Antar vowed, that he would not leave of the tribe
of Fazarah one to speak or one to hear. This state
of things continued ten days; they were in the
grcatest difficulties, and every friend and comrade
had abandoned them. They lighted fires by night
on the mountain tops, and fortified themselves
amongst the sandhills. By day, Hadifah descended
on foot with his brothers, possessing themselves of
the ways and defiles, and defending their families
with their scimitars and glittering swords, but feeling
certain of overwhelming calamities. On the eleventh
day, Hadifah assembled them. O my cousins, said
he, know that Antar will not quit us, and will not
leave a remnant of us alive ; so fight the foe—expose
your lives—pierce them with the spears, and dearly
sell your existence. Thus he continued to encourage


them with harangues, ull they disregarded life.


CAIS DECOYS THE FAZAREANS. ` $05


Armour felt light; they mounted their generous
steeds, and snatching up their tall spears, they pre-
cipitated themselves from the mountain-tops. But
the women began to weep and lament, and a crowd
of noble slaves followed them. The Absians were
eager for the contest, and Antar hastened to the
scene of spear-thrusts and sword-blows ; but Cais,
observing the desperate fury of the Fazareans, said
to Antar and the Absians, O my cousins, by the
God of heaven, attend to me, retire to some distance
from them ; thus urged on by their own virulence,
they will soon be mixed with us in the desert, then
let us turn upon them and plunder their lives. And
he wheeled away his horse, and Antar followed him.
The others, secing the banners move away, also
turned their horses heads and retired. The Faza-
reans were greatly delighted; their eagerness was
excited—they raised their shouts, and galloped for
ward to capture the Absians. The dust arose—the
sun was veiled; and Hadifah cried out, O my
cousins, py the sword on the foe; let not one survive!
King Cais and Antar exulted, and wheeled all at
once, followed by the noble horsemen; and the
spear-thrust commenced after this short suspension.
The heroes clashed against each other—exertion was
universal —artifice availed not—conversation was at
an end—horses trampled over the plain—hands,
right and left, were palsied—vallies were not dis-
tinguished from mountains. The dust arose like
night, and war was in all its terrors. The brave
exulted on their saddles, and persisted—the coward
VOL. IV. x


306 APPEARANCE OF ABDULMOTALLEB.


felt assured of death and despair—blood flowed and
streamed—the hearts of the bravest failed—the
battle continued to rage till the Almighty permitted
the day to depart ; the warriors were laid low upon
the sands, and gray were the locks of infants on
that day. But God prospered the Absians, and
nothing appeared sweeter to them than death, aod
the approach of fate. This was their condition,
when lo! a dust drew nigh, and it moved along like
a cloud that equalized the hills and the vallies. The
arms of both parties instantly relinquished the blow
and thrust, for they thought it was the dust of Ha-
rith returning, and with him a party of villains. In
an hour, the dust cleared away, and there appeared
a tribe of Hijaz, and some horsemen of Mecca, in
Yemen cloaks, and turbans of Kufian silk, all girded
with straight spears, and scimitars of India; and
their countenances were like the sparkling constella-
tions: round them were slaves with Yemen javelins,
all like lions, and clothed in panther skins; and
when they advanced out of the dust, they moved
gently between the two ranks and exclaimed, O by
the Arabs! sheathe your swords, from stnking
bodies and skulls. Ye have agitated the chiefs of
the sacred shrine: this is the Lord of the Holy
Wall and Zemzem, the obeyed monarch, Abdul-
motalleb, of the tribe of Hashem. Withdraw from
the contest; hear what he says, and presume not to
oppose his word. At hearing this, the two parties
separated.


King Cais came forward, and saluting him, kissed


HIS CONVERSATION AXR ADVICE. 307


his land. He attended him, and followed his tilt
they reached the land of Shurebah, where the horse-
men alighted at their tents, and the people were
united to their wives. King Cais ordered sheep to
be slaughtered, and a feast to be prepared, whilst
Abdulmotalleb began to describe to them the pecu-
liarities of Mecca, and the holy shrine, the virtue of
Zenzem and the temple, and the appearance of our
Lord Mohammed, the lamp of darkness. (May the
peace of God be on him and his noble associates as
long as the ringdove moans and the pigeon sings!)
He informed him of his existence and appearance, _
and excited their wishes to live long, that they might
perhaps comprehend him, and be guided by his
light; and there was not one but anxiously longed
to survive till his time that he might behold him,
and might fight for him.

When the feasts of the tribes of Fazarah and Abs
were over, Hadifah requested Aswad’s liberty of
King Cais, who assenting, asked the opinion of Ab-
dulmotalleb on that point. It would be right, said
he, to loosen his bonds. Summon him here, that I
may make peace between you, and I will invite him
to repair to King Numan, for he is the king of the
ape over every prince, and he commands all the
Arabs; and by the truth of the God of old, no one
is made a monarch or sultan but that there is im-
parted to him some secret knowledge to which a
common man is not admitted; and were it not a
favour from the God of heaven and earth, the post
of honour of one would not be raised above another,

x 2


j j e
308 HIS SPR&ECH TO ASWAD-


for we are all of the race of Adam and Eve. King
Cais conformed with the orders of Abdulmotalleb,
and sent some of his chief attendants to Aswad to
release him from bondage. He invested him with
a magnificent robe, and paid him every honour and
respect, and begged his pardon for all that had
passed. Abdulmotalleb took him by his side, and
presented him some victuals. He ate till he was sa-
tisfied, and conversed; and in Abdulmotalleb’s last
words to Aswad he concluded by saying, Know, O
prince, that God did not create men useless and
helpless, and it is incumbent on his slaves to defend
themselves against violence and oppression. Your
brother is now King of the Arabs and Irak. Every
thing is easy to him, because he has the language
and the sword of a king; but it is his duty to settle
the disputes of his people, and the Arabs, and the
tribes, and not to act like a foolish man, for God
will make him responsible for his tyranny. Thou
hast seen how he has sent thee with armies and
troops, but they have all been dispersed. Al this
is by the command of God, far and near. Itis now
‘deemed meet that thou shouldst return to thy bro-
ther Numan, and prohibit him from acts of outrage
and hostility; advise him not to cut asunder the
connexion between him and the tribe of Abs, and
let him not act in a manner to incur the reproaches
of kings and of the Arabs. It is ever particularly
praiseworthy to respect kindred and relationship.
O chief, said Prince Aswad, all these events were
owing to Harith; but now that business is ter-


PRACE BETWEEN ABS AND FAZARAH. 309


minated, and Harith has departed out of this land,
I will request my brother to withdraw his aggres-
sions from this tribe, and I will fill his ears with
reproof and reproach.

Thus ended the day in feasts and merriment.
The next day Abdulmotalleb took his departure,
saying to King Cais, Every one must be aware that
the horses of death are pursuing him, and that he is
a captive in the grasp of fate and destiny; let him
therefore content himself with a little in this world.
Thus saying, he departed, accompanied with the
chiefs of Abs and Fazarah, in order to bid him fare-
well. Aswad rode out also till mid-day, when he
departed on his return to Irak. Abdulmotalleb .
halted in that country, and having made peace be-
tween the Absians and Fazareans, taking their
bonds and covenants for the preservation of tran-
quillity, to which the Sheikhs of the two tribes were
witnesses, he travelled over the wilds and the wastes.
King Cais and Hadifah, with their companions, re-
turned to their respective lands; but heart burnings
and deep recollections still remained.


310 HARITH AT MECCA.


CHAPTER XXXVII.


As to Harith, when he fled from the tribe of Fa-
zarah, he could find no asylum but at Mecca, for
there every wanderer was secure. There he re-
mained, and connected himself with his grandfather,
who was called Marah, son of Luvee. Now one
day when Antar was sitting alone in his tent, there
came to him a man from Mecca, one of the hermits
of the tribe of Abs that seldom quitted the sacred
shrine. Antar inquired of Harith. I saw him, said
he, in the sacred place established, eating and drmk-
Ing, enjoying the property he had plundered ; but
in his heart there is a flame blazing against you. I
beheld in him what I never beheld in any human
being. What hast thou seen in him? said Antar.
My cousin, said he, Harith was one day walking
round the sacred shrine, his sword slung over his
shoulders, when a man called Amroo, son of Atna-
bah, the Yathrabite, stared at him. He inquired who
he was? they told him it was Harith, son of Zalim.
How! this must be the man, said the Yathrabite,
who slew Khalid, son of Giafer, when he was asleep ;
and is his murderer now alive? O Arab, cried Ha-
rith, overhearing him, how art thou called among
horsemen? I am called Amroo, son of Atnabah.
Yathrab is my place of abode and birth, said he.


AMROO ABUSES HIM FOR MIS CONDUCT. 311


What mean you by your question? You, have
abused me, said Harith, for murdering Khalid in
his sleep; perhaps I may meet you when you are
awake. Again the Yathrabite began to satirize
Harith in the following manner :

« O my friends, soothe me with pleasures, and
& make me drink of the wine of enjoyment. Let
“ me hear the damsels strike the cymbals at the
‘© time of joy and relaxation, when every new moon
‘‘ sparkles before me, and every true lover passes
'& the evening with his mistress. I belong to a noble
<c tribe, but that is not my boast; their parentage
& ig known by the purity of their faith. My kindred
& is a. branch of the race of Adnan, brilliant and
. © resplendent with virtues. I am a knight, whom
‘‘ the sword and lance obey when the spears are in-
& terwoven. My companion and my aid in cala-
& mities is my sword, whose edge I adore. Tell —
‘© Harith, son of Zalim, that I have spoken of him
& the words of a true reporter, and that no one but
“a coward kills a man asleep, and no one but a
« hero can kill a man when awake.” .

When Amroo, son of Atnabah, had finished his
verses, he set out on his return to Medina Yathrab,
his heart boiling against Harith, for he dared not
lay his hand upon him in the sacred shrine. Ha-
rith, learning from his spies and emissaries that
Amroo had quitted: Mecca on his way to Medina,
followed him till Amroo entered his own dwelling.
Waiting till night, he repaired to his house, and
knocked at his door. Who art thou? said Amroo.


312 HARITH CALLS HIM OUT BY NIGHT.


‘A suppliant for protection, said Harith. I will
protect thee, said Amroo, by the faith of an Arab,
‘were even Harith, son of Zalim, thy foe. 1f thou
‘wilt aid me, added Harith, come not forth but
merged in armour. Upon that, Amroo put on his
arms, and plunged himself into his coat of mail; but
his wife hung about him, saying, I smell blood in
the voice of this caller; but he tore himself away
from her, and paid no attention to her words. He
went forth to the suppliant, and followed him ; and
when they had passed the palm-trees of Yathrab, O
‘Amroo, cried Harith, turning round upon him, I
ain Harith, of whom you said he could only murder
the sleeping. ‘Thou art prepared, awake, clad in
thy armour, and mounted on thy horse; now be on
thy guard. Amroo was astonished, but resolved to
fight him; he brandished his spear, and roared
and bellowed. Son of Zalim, verily thou hast acted
fairly, he cried, as he rushed at him. Harith met
him, and the two engaged under the veil of obscurity,
and continued to combat till the greatest part of the
night was passed. Being now tired and exhausted,
each stood apart from his antagonist; but Harith
had again recourse to his artifices and perfidy:
What say you, said he to Amroo, to cancelling the
contract and abandoning the contest? Sheath thy
‘sword, that I may also sheath mine. I heard your
verses concerning me at, Mecca, where you abused
ame for my conduct; they surprised me. 1 am de-
siruus therefore to reply to them. <Amroo sheathed
his sword, and leaned against his spear, saying,


HIS SPEECH AND TREACHERY. 813


Well then, O Harith, let me hear what you have on
your mind. And Harith thus recited :

“ Supply me, dearest friends, with pleasures, be-
“ fore my situation becomes too severe. Let not
€ the railers glut themselves upon me, or see me a
“ prey to sorrow. I care not when I wake on
“ Tuesday whether they call me upright or a pro-
“ fligate. Ever let me replenish the ewers with
« excellent wine morning and evening. Moreover,
“é never have I betrayed my engagement to God in
‘* my life; but a story from my enemies has reached
“ me that would make the heart forget the cruellest
« disease, that no one but a coward slays a man
“ asleep, and no one slays one awake but a hero.
“ So I have traversed the deserts on my black steed,
‘* resembling the obscurity of night, anxious to en-
& gage in combat with the youth of Yathrab, that
“ virtue may not appear like vice. I visited him
‘¢ when darkness had spread out its foot: he was
s like a full moon in the cup of the Pleiades. I
s“ challenged, and swift as a lion he welcomed me as
& soon as he saw me. I challenged him, and I be-
“ held a hero mighty in the contest; a knight, at
‘© whom knights might quake with horror when he
© shakes swords or Semherian spears.”

Amroo dismounted from his horse, and hastened
in the fullest security of mind to embrace him, and
to adjure him to enter Medina Yathrab with him.
But Harith, as he saw Amroo approaching him, ex-
tended his arm, and opened wide his elbow, and
stretching forth his spear more rapid than lightning,


”


814 ASWAD RETURNS TO NUMAN


he picrced Amroo through the chest, and drove it
sparkling through his back, and hurled him down
dead. He ran at him; he carried away his horse,
and spoiling him of his arms, abandoned him cast
down on the desert.

When Antar heard this account of Harith, the
fire was kindled in his heart, and he placed spies and
scouts over him. But Harith, after he had slain
Amroo, and left him on the waste, returned to
Mecca, and sold Amroo’s arms and horse in his
fears, saying to himself, There is nothing now to be
done but to go to Aswad, and request of him to
make peace between me and his brother King Nu-
man, and to secure his protection for me. He set
out in the night, and travelled on till hé reached
Hirah, where he saw multitudes and armies like the
rolling ocean.

Now Prince Aswad, on being released by Abdul-
motalleb, repaired to his brother, to whom he re-
lated what had happened to him with the Absians
and Antar, and the arrival of Abdulmotalleb, who
had adjusted the disputes between the tribes of Abs
and Fazarah. O my brother, he added, he is a wise `
man, between whom and the Absians there is no al-
tercation, as long as Antar the violent death is
among them, for he fears not whole hosts, and no


‘power alarms him. As soon as he encountered us,


he only made one dash at us; he defeated us; he
made his way right through us; and there was not


-one of us left in his senses, If matters are as you,
amy brother, represent them, said Numan, consider


THEY WISH FOR HARITH’S ASSISTANCE. 315


what must be done. By the faith of an Arab, added
he, I am aware of, and I have proved Antar’s su-
perior intrepidity, and so has every army you have
sent against him and the Absians; for there was no
warrior that engaged him, the lord of battles, but
he discomfited him were he even attacked ten times
over. Verily, I have beheld in Antar what I never
saw in any mortal man before. If matters stand
thus, continued Numan, where shall we meet a war-
rior that can cope with Antar in the field, and make
him drink of the cup of death? O my brother, re-
plied Aswad, if you are desirous of Antar’s death,
there is no one but Harith, son of Zalim; for he
nears him in courage and resolution, and general
excellence, and in fraud and deceit he is the most
subtle of men. As to Harith, said Numan, who
knows where he is that we may send for him, and
offer him wealth and property? I will bring him to
you, said Aswad. Equip an army for him against
the Absians, and see what he will do; and every
one he may slay of them it will be so much gained
for you. Do whatever you please, my brother, said
Numan.

Aswad returned home,.and found Harith in his
house, who sprang up towards him, and kissed his
hands. The prince, much pleased, and feeling as-
sured that Antar would at any rate be slain this
time, received him with every attention and kind.
ness, and told him what had passed with his brother.
Early next day Numan’s messenger entered to
order Prince Aswad into his presence. Return, eaid


316 HARITH FORGIVEN AND RECEIVED.


he, to my brother, and tell him I have a guest, and
he is afraid of him.

The messenger returned and told him, and Nu-
man gave him a mantle of security, with which the
messenger went back to the prince, saying, Your
brother sends his compliments, and says, Bring me
your guest; and if it be even Harith, son of Zalim,
this is a mantle of security. Upon this, Harith
started up together with the prince, and proceeded.
to the presence of Numan, where they saw a nu-
merous assemblage of chiefs, and horsemen, and
warriors; and when Harith’s eyes fell-on Numan,
he kissed the ground in fear and terror: he kissed
his hand, piteously stating his apprehensions
and dread, and the grievances-and evils he had
endured; and whilst they were eating, and the cups
of wine were circling among them, the conversation
fell upon the horsemen and warriors of the age;
they also mentioned Harith, and how he had by
stratagem contrived to wound Antar. O cousins,
said Numan, a man’s subtlety and stratagem for
conquest are the perfection of the art of war; and
were not a knight to be subtle as well as expert in
arms, he would not be called brave, and he would
not be talked of by the heroes for his battles and
his contests. And as the turn came to Harith, Nu-
man continued, saying, Tell us something of your
treacheries and artifices. On condition, said he, that
you will permit me to relate what happened to me
the other day. Well, let us hear it, said Numan.

O king of the age, began Harith, know that the


HARITH’S TALE OF TREACHERY. 317


knights of the age, men of faith, are seven, viz. Di-
reed, son of Samah ; Amroo, son of Wad, the Aami-
rite; Amroo, son of Maadi Kereb, the Zebeedian ;
Zoolkhimar, the Himyarite; Aamir, son of Tofeil ;
the Brandisher of Spears; and the Chief Antar, son
of Shedad. ‘The impostors are also seven, viz. Cad-
moos, son of Majid; Marah, son of Abdulazee ;
Jareer, son of Mubadir; the Knight Awis; Amroo,
the Kelbian; Saleek, son of Selikah; and he was
silent. And you are the seventh ? said Numan. Yes,
said he. |

And now, continued Numan, tell us some of your
perfidious acts, and what stratagem you lately prac-
tised. O King, said Harith, my story is extraor-
dinary, and it ought to be recorded after my death.
It is thus: after my adventure with Antar, I left
the Fazareans, taking with me ten of the noble
Arab horsemen; and when we had travelled half
way, we stopped in a country called Mancabit ool
Mesalik ; we became very hungry, so much so, that
we were reduced to infinite distress and perplexity,
when lo! we saw a hovel built of straw, and a small
tent pitched, at the entrance of which was a well-
proportioned spear, and a sword suspended, and a
horse saddled, and a youth of the dimensions of a
lion, cooking his victuals on the desert. We gal-
loped up to him; Young man, said we, is there any
Arab horde near you? The youth raised up his
head, and smiling at us, said, Why ask ye for vil-
- lages and hordes? ‘These victuals are enough.
Know, O Arabs, victuals were only formed to be


$18 HE MEETS A YOUTH AED A DAMSRL.


eaten, and property was only created to be spent.
Liberal men are only esteemed by the wise; and the
niggard is only fit to be killed: and ye are now en-
titled to honour and every attention. ;

When, O. King, we heard this, we were surprised
at the elegance of his mind: he immediately entered
the tent, and returned bringing with him a large dish
full of camel’s milk, and mixed with the honey of
bees cooled in the wind ; and we drank of something
sweeter than the purest water. We then let our
horses loose to graze, and sat down.

As we were examining the young man’s tent, and
his arms, and his armour, and were wondering at his
solitary life in the barren waste, I happened to turn
round; my eyes fell on a damsel more lovely than
the refulgent sun. Look, said I to my comrades,
at that damsel, who is linked to the seat of my rea-
son and my heart. She must be mine, were even
this youth to give me to eat all the bread and salt
in the universe. We therefore laid our plans to
violate his faith, and to destroy his life; and whilst
he was cooking victuals for us till all was ready, we
were meditating villany and perfidy.

At last the youth entered the tent, and brought
out a great quantity of Indian corn, which he put
into a dish, and mixing it up with some meat and
wine, he took up the dish by the handles, and placed
it before us, saying, Advance, noble Arabs, come
on ; here are some victuals. So we ate till we were
satisfied, and the youth stood waiting on us. And -
when he was about to take away the dish, I said,


HARITRH’S PERFIDIOUS CONDUCT. 319


What is this damsel to you? What mean you by
that question ? replied he. Know, O youth, I added,
that your property is sacred to us, but we are a gang
of Arab depredators, who admit of no faith; we
acknowledge no sect; and every one that receives
us kindly, we outrage. But as to you, we will spare
you on account of your hospitality, as we have eaten
your victuals. ‘Take whatever horse you please of
ours, escape, and leave the damsel, and your horse,
and your tent, and say no more about it.

At hearing this, the light became dark in the eyes
of the youth. This damsel, said he, who is in the
tent, is my sister; and out of my great anxiety about
her, I have secluded myself in this barren waste ;
but between you and me, there is a sacred respect
and engagement, as you have eaten and drunk with
me; and I wish you would leave usin peace. Know
then, youth, said I, I must carry away this damsel
and horse, were they even surrounded’by a thousand
of the noblest heroes: make no more noise about it,
or I shall leave some food for the beasts and birds
of prey. If it be so, said the youth, and you will
not quit this desert, wait a little for me, that I may
bid my sister farewell, and give her my last exhorta-
tion. That you may do, said I. And he repaired
to his sister, and found her in tears, as she thus
spoke :

. & Never be the day that the troops mounted on
« roan steeds should see us prisoners. They desire thy
s death, my brother, maliciously ; before this never
s knew I of sorrow or guilt. Fight then for thy


$20 FAREWELL OF THE YOUTH AND DANSEL..


“ sister, who depends on thee; thou art her brother,
“ thou art her father. Let not these wretches pos-
*< sess themselves of my person, or seize me by force,
“ whilst I am with thee; for shame would fall on
“‘ thee, son of my father, and the horsemen east and
‘“‘ west would reproach thee. Fear not death, sped
“ by the hand of man: no one dreads it but a heart-
<< Jess coward.”

When the youth heard his sister speak thus, O
King, he repeated these verses :

“ ‘Take thy farewell of me, O maiden, before I die;
“ aid me with thy prayers against the foe. Per-
“ haps the Creator of heaven and earth may pre-
“ serve thy brother from death. A perfidious party
“ has fallen upon us; in them there is no warmth
“ of heart to pity thy sorrows. ‘They have broken
“ the sacred rights of hospitality ; they have be-
“ trayed us, and they consider as lawful my blood,
“ and the dishonour of thy protector. Follow me,
“ and behold my exploits, when the steeds charge,
“ assaulting thy dwelling; weep for me with the
“ sorrowing matrons, should I, alter my combat, be
“ left dead. And when the dove mourns on the
“ Erak, O dove of the Erak, then aid me with thy
‘¢ plaints. O daughter of Aamir, if they give me
“ fair play in the contest, I will destroy them for
“love of thee; but if the party outrage me,
“and play me foul in the fight, my life will be
“thy ransom. Alas! alas! should I die in my
“ transport, and the foe, when thy protector is no
& more, take thee captive, O send my adieu to my


HARITH’S COMPANIONS SLAIN. 321


“ father, and tell him I died by treachery in the
« meshes of a net.”

As soon as the youth, O King, had finished his
verses, he came towards me with a resolute heart.
Thou motherless coward, he cried, come on to the
fight, that I may show thee horrors. Seeing that he
was determined to fight, and that he would slay the
first that should go out against him, Go thou forth,
said I to one of my comrades; and at the word, my
companion rushed at him. The youth cried out,
What is thy name? for I have sworn by an oath,
that I will not fight with one whose name is like the
name of my father. ‘My name, said the other, is
Nabish*. Ay, said he, and the gnawers shall gnaw
thy flesh; and thus he addressed him:

‘¢ Whoever covets a girl, or a horse and spoil, for
« him there is a sword that deals death, and a knight .
« like a lion, of Arab race, who, were he to see
“ death distinctly, would not fly.”

Thus saying, he rushed down upon my comrade
like a driving cloud, and shouted at him like a roar-
ing lion, and pierced him between the paps, thrusting
his spear out between his shoulders. When I saw
my companion fall dead, I said to his brother, Away
now with thee, and retaliate for thy brother; and
he sallied forth, but he slew him. Thus I sent one
after the other, but the youth slew them, till my
nine comrades were all killed, and I remained alone.


The youth must be fatigued and exhausted in the


* i. e Gnawer, or dog.


VOL. IV. Y


822 HARITH MURDERS HIS HOST.


field, said I tomyself; now I will stand forth against
him, and will slay him, and enjoy the spoil and the
damsel. I sprang at him like a lion of the forest.
What ! said he to me, dost thou wish that I should
sin against my oath? and he attacked me. I met
him, and there ensued between us acontest in blows
and thrusts, that would have stupefied the eyeballs,
and amazed the stoutest warriors.

We continued the engagement till it was dark,
when crying out at me, Thou son of accursed pa-
rents! he assaulted like a lion, darting at his prey.
He drew his scimitar from its scabbard, and I saw
death sparkling from the lustre of his sword. But I
dismounted quicker than respiration. I threw my-
self under the belly of his horse; Save me, O bro-
ther of the tribe of Aamir, I cried. Come forth,
said he, thou art under my protection. And he im-
mediately dismounted, and taking me by the hand,
led me into the tent.

The youth stood up, and took off his armour and
his other garments, as he said to his sister, Lay out
thy knees for me that I may sleep. And he slept
on his sister’s knees, whilst she kept her eyes fixed
on him. At last a drowsiness came over her also.
I gazed at them till a third of the night was passed.
On a sudden I jumped up, and unsheathed my
Zoolhyyat in my right hand ; I smote him on the
chest, and divided him down to his girdle. The
damsel, when she felt the blood of her brother, and
heard the blow, opened her eyes, and seeing her
brother dead, she rolled herself in his blood, and


CONSUMMATION OF HIS GUILT. $23


drew a dagger from his Waist, and placing it against
her bosom, she leant upon it, and it issued out
through her back. Then, O King, I grieved for
her, and repented of what I had done. Sol seized .
the youth’s spoils, his sword, and his horse, his arms,
and the clothes of the damsel, and all the property
of my comrades, their horses, and their arms ; leav-
ing their carcasses stretched out on the waste, not
even covering one of them with earth: and this is
the end of my tale, and its consummation.

No sooner had Harith finished, when lo! an old
man started up; Art thou not ashamed, O Harith;
he cried, to lie in the presence of this King? I know
those people. If thou hast spoken the truth, show ©
me some proof of it. Here is this ring, said Harith.
Alas! my children, he cried. O King, this youth
and damsel were my children, and Harith has mur-
dered them; I must slay him: this is the ring of
my son—read it. Numan took the ring, and read
it, and lo! there was written thereon—Amroo, son
of Harith. My vengeance is even more urgent than
thy vengeance, said Numan to the old man; my
fury is fiercer than thy fury: and he commanded
his attendants to seize Harith. They accordingly
seized him, and cast him into the dungeon of wrath.
And the old man, the father of the youth, thus re-
cited in the hearing of Numan:

“ It is thus fortune acts with the great, and per-
s forms the deeds of revolving calamities; it gives
‘© all mankind sweets to drink at first, but its end
‘is bitter as the meal of gall; it permits them to

Y2


324 AN OLD MAN’S SORROWS.


«“ enjoy themselves, and become intoxicated with
‘¢ pleasure, but afterwards precipitates them into the
‘ grave. I have seen how the world betrays its
“ inhabitants, for it has outraged me inwardly and
“ outwardly. O King of the Universe, listen to my
“ tale. I had ason, a knight among the tribes, and
“ he had a sister like the full moon when it rises, of
“ beautiful aspect, and of elegantly-shaped hands.
“ During my whole life I never possessed but them ;
“ but the revolutions of the age quickened its trea-
& cheries against me; a violent death has destroyed
« them in the middle of the desert, and annihilated
‘them with the cleaving scimitars. If I live with
“ man, I will seek retaliation. The son of Zalim I
“ have met in the presence of Numan:.he related
“ the story true and authentic, and confirmed by
“ the assertions of the actor. O King, this day wreak
“ vengeance on him, and slay him, who has made
& my tears to flow in waves. Truly, my son was
“ asleep, and thou hast betrayed him: this is a fact,
“ for Harith was awake. Had it not been so, and
“ had he been mounted on the back of his colt,
“ that outstrips the blustering tempest, he had been
“ his match, fearless of the assaults of the Arab or
“ the Persian. Hadst thou not betrayed him, thou
« coward born, he would have shown thee a blow
‘in the midday heat. But tis the decree of the
« All-Merciful, who acts thus with all mankind;
s *tis predestined fate. How many monarchs have
‘ been annihilated ! How many warriors destroyed !
« But the God of the celestial vault still endures, to


NUMAN’S AFFLICTIONS. 825


& whom all secrets are known. My peace be with
“ the world, since my only one lies dead, felled by
€ the vilest of the tribes.”

When the old man had finished, and Numan had
heard his tale, astonished at his eloquence, he thus
replied :

“ Let the heart, O old man, give way to its sor-
“ rows; for in the murder of Shirjibeel, I have been
“heir to woe. The great God has decreed against —
“‘ me the severest pains:in grief and affliction, and
“ the loss of his society: O fortune, aid me with
“ tears and lamentations for the loss of a chief that
“ would have been the champion of the tribe ; had
“ he lived, he would have relieved the poor every
“‘ hour, and would have struck his antagonist with
“ the Yemen sword. But this cursed wretch hastened
“ him away with his perfidy, and made him, guilt-
“ less as he was, drink of the cup of death. O that
“ the whole tribe in a body had ransomed him with
“ my life and my property, and then my friends
“ and my family! But the decree of the All-Mer-
“ ciful has separated us with the cup of division.
“ His will has decided: be patient, submit to fate,
“ in the dispersion of friendship, and the absence of
‘“ my beloved. Though Harith has overwhelmed
“ us with his perfidy, soon shall the people see him
“ an object of vengeance. We will hang him by his
“ hair, after torturing him, and we will abandon
“him on the gate of the city. O that Shirjibeel
“ were present on such a day, and could ease the


pangs of his bosom from all fear; O that on this


826 PUNISHMENT OF HARITH.


‘‘ day he could understand what is said of him, and
« hear the words of my prayer! but, O son of
“« Zalim, we will open his tomb and uncover the
“ recesses of his grave.”

When Numan had finished, he ordered the herald
to proclaim in Hirah, that every one who wished
to see the spectacle of Harith’s execution, should be
present the. next day early at the centre gate. At
hearing this, the people were delighted, and re-
posed. Early next day King Numan ordered a
huge camel to be brought; they then produced
Harith, and stripping him of his clothes, they nailed
his hands to a long pole, and lighted candles of napht
on his shoulders, his chest, and his back, and having
mounted him on the camel, they paraded him
round Hirah, that every one might behold him:
this was a great day, the like of which never oc-
curred in any other realm. When Harith per-
ceived his fate, he repented of having come to
Numan, and thus he spoke:

« Am I then Harith the lion of the valley, the
“ man renowned for iniquity ? The murder of war-
“ riors by treachery was my glory, but I never fled
“from the fiercest combat. How many women
“ have I captured from the tribes who never found
“ransom from torture! My boast was to slay
& sleepers-in the night, and to capture women and
“children. Atrocity is my nature; deceit my dis-
‘‘ position; and I slay those that are present, and
4& those that are advancing. I knew not for what
“ I was coming, and that death without a guide wes


HIS EXECUTION. $27 `


“ driving me along; they have mounted me on a
. huge camel, and have lighted candles over my
& hands. Alas! how foul is this death in which
“ my foes and my haters triumph. There is no
< means to escape after all this; no-ransom can
‘* release me out of their power. I could wish for
< one day of life, and to be possessed of my sword
& and horse: I would cut down the skulls with the
< decisive blow, till my wrist and hand were ex-
‘‘hausted. I would scatter far and wide every
“ combination with my shout, that should make
‘“every heart quake with horror. I would take
& vengeance on them with my arm. I would charge
s them like the lion of the valley. I would slay
“« Numan and the old man who said, I am Harith,
“‘the father of the children. I would destroy all
& the horsemen in the battle with a sword of fire
& without a firestick. I would capture their women,
“ and then violate them, and would relieve my
“c heart of every sorrow. I am Harith, son of
« Zalim, the destroyer, one who never acknowledged
“ the sacred rights of hospitality.” |
Harith having finished these atrocious expressions,
all the mob cursed him and reviled him; they drag-
ged him off the camel, and nailed him against the
city-gate, and shot at him with arrows till he was
like a hedgehog, and pelted him with stones. After
that they dug a pit for him and kindled a fire, and
burnt him. And may God never have mercy on
the mound of his tomb, or the tomb of his father !
King Numan retired to his palace and held a coun-


328 MOCRI-UL-WA8H COMES TO NUMAN.


cil, when lo! the messenger of Mocri-ul-wahsh *
presented himself to give him joy on his arrival.
And who is Mocri-ul-wahsh? said Numan. O
King of the age, said one of his attendants, this
knight is from the land of Syria; he has van-
quished horsemen and warriors, and wishes to ex-
hibit his prowess in your presence: he states that
he demands no property, no favours of you, till he
has proved his superiority over armies and heroes.
At hearing this, Numan was rejoiced, and smiled:
By the faith of an Arab, said he, if this knight
fulfils his promise, I will give him whatever he de-
mands, and I will send him to fight Antar, son of
Shedad; for a wary knight takes advantage of
every thing. He then directed Mocri-ul-wahsh into
his presence, and received him in the most ho-
nourable manner. Now this Mocn-ul-wahsh was a
horseman and a valiant hero; he had overcome all
the armies of Syria; neither high nor low were
able to cope with him. The reason of his coming
to Hirah was, that he was enamoured of a damsel
called Maseeka, the daughter of the King of
Hooran. He had demanded her of.-her father,
whose name was Majeer, son of Sahl, and he be-
trothed her to him, but required an immense
quantity of cattle, and amongst other things, a
thousand Asafeer camels. Mocri-ul-wahsh assent-
ing to his request, made preparations that very day,
and taking with him fifty horsemen of his tribe, he


* Feeder of wild beasts.


PROMISES TO SLAY ANTAR. 329


sought the land of Irak, when presenting himself to
Numan, he told him what we have stated, and King
Numan was amazed at his conversation and the
immensity of his stature, and the thickness of his
arms, and the agitation of his eyes. He took him
by his side, and saluting him, called for dinner, and
when it was brought, O knight of Syria, said he,
know that I have a foe in the land of Hijaz, against
whom all the armies and warriors have failed: all I
demand of you is to vanquish him in the combat.
O King, said Mocri-ul-wahsh, this is exactly what
I wished and desired. Show me this knight who
vanquishes armies and disgraces heroes; I will let
you see what I will do with him in the field of
battle, and with all his tribe and his warriors. By
the faith of an Arab of Medher, said Numan, if
you will but vanquish this Antar, and bring him a
prisoner before me, I will not let you return home,
but as a great king, with all the Asafeer camels.
Mocri-ul-wahsh reposed for three days in the ple-
nitude of enjoyment and noble hospitality ; but on
the fourth day Numan directed his men to order
the armies to mount, that he might behold the
prowess of Mocri-ul-wahsh. King Numan’s troops
being mounted to the number of twenty thou-
sand, he himself also mounted, and the standards
and banners were fixed over his head. Then
mounted Mocri-ul-wahsh, the knight of Syria.
They beat the drums, and the cymbals, and the
trumpets sounded. Upon this the horsemen started
forth and charged. Soon after, Mocr-ul-wahsh,


330 ADDRESS OF MOCRI-UL-WAHSH.


the horseman of the tribe of Ghasan, came forth
flourishing his spear on the plain, to the amazement
of all the horsemen; and as he thought of his be-
loved Meseeka, he thus spoke :

“ I am the Feeder of wild beasts in every desert,
“ and their provisioner in the flesh of every hero.
“ I am the Feeder of wild beasts in every battle; I-
“ destroy the foes with the sharp-edged scimitar.
“ I am the Feeder of wild beasts; that is my name
“ and title. I destroy enemies and noble lion-
“ heroes. I am the Feeder of wild beasts in every
“ city, and I am the assaulting lion with warriors.
“ The inhabitants of Coori and Syria well know
“ that I destroy the Arab and the Persian. This
“ day, O King, thou shalt see that I am the knight
“of knights with the spear-staff. If I do not
s destroy Antar and his tribe, may my hand never
‘“ bear a lance or a sword. I will leave the country
“ of his tribe a waste, and I will drag its inhabitants
“ along in fetters like wild beasts. Alas! O Ma-
“ seeka, keep thy engagement with me, and listen
“not to the words of my bantering foes. I will
“ soon cast down the kings of the earth, east and
“‘ west, and I will sheathe my sword in the necks of
« the Persians; otherwise I shall never succeed in
“ my wishes, and I shall never accomplish what my
“ heart so ardently desires.”

‘When Mocri-ul-wahsh had finished, he galloped
and charged and played with his spear over the
plain, challenging his antagonists.. (There were
twenty thousand that day on the plain.) A knight


HIS SUPERIORITY IN ARMS. $81 -


of the tribe of Wayil started forth, in whom shone
every proof of courage, but Mocri-ul-wahsh stopped
him short, as he was closing on him, and taking his
foot out of his stirrup, he kicked him; and he fell
headlong on the ground, he and his horse. A second,
of the tribe of Lakhan, sallied out. He rushed at
Mocri-ul-wahsh, and drawing his sword, he was
about to smite him; but as he raised his hand with
his sword, Mocri-ul-wahsh pierced him with a pike
under the armpit, and threw him off his horse on
the ground. A third, of the tribe of Shiban, then
came out and assailed, but Mocri-ul-wahsh per-
mitted him not to charge over the plain before he
cast his pike out of his hand, and grasping him by
his rings and his corslet, he dragged him off his
saddle, and hurled him to the distance of twelve
yards. They now came forward in tens, and twen
ties, and thirties. The business pleased him; and
as he tossed up his head he attacked and assaulted
the horsemen, and scattered them about, far superior
to all the heroes. He continued thus till the day
departed, and he had overcome five hundred lion-
horsemen; but when Numan saw the intrepidity of
Mocri-ul-wahsh, he was amazed at his force and
skill: convinced he would vanquish Antar, he sent
for him into his presence, and treating him with
distinction, he gave him an honorary robe; he took
him by his side, and returned with him to Hirah.
On the next day King Numan again mounted ;
the horsemen were drawn up in ranks, and: Mocri-


ul-wahsh, the horseman of the tribe of Ghasan,


- 382 NUMAN TREATS HIM LIKE A PRINCE.


advanced: he sent for a basin full of saffron, and
fastened at the head of his spear a wadding steeped
in the mixture, instead of a barb, in order to mark
the horsemen with it, saying, That any one who
could vanquish him in the charge might kill him,
and should not be responsible for his blood; but
that every one, whom he should mark, should retire
from the field. Upon this, one thousand horsemen
assaulted -him—he met them and shouted in their
faces—the horses reared up their heads, and cala-
mities fell upon the riders—he rushed upon them
—the dust encompassed them up to their bridles—
till the sun was about to set, when Mocri-ul-wahsh
had marked the thousand horsemen. King Numan
ordered them to introduce Mocri-ul-wahsh to him;
so the horsemen surrounded him, and conducted
hini to Numan, who gave him an honorary robe,
and set aside some generous steeds, and treated him
with all respect and attention, fixing over his head
the standards and ensigns; he thus preferred him
above the thousand brave knights, and also gave
him tents, and pavilions, and banners; and Mocri-
ul-wahsh became one of the princes of the age. I
shall not deserve these honours and attentions, said
he to Numan, unless I throw down before you the
head of Antar, son of Shedad. Numan’s heart was
gladdened, and he wrote to all the Arab tribes.
About that time, the death of Harith, son of Za-
lim, was made known in every place, till the account
reached the tribe of Abs and Adnan; and they were
highly pleased at it, for they now knew that the


JOY OF ASWAD AND HADIFAH. 338


prop of the tribe of Fazarah was cast down. The
heart of Hadifah was reconciled to Antar and King
Cais, and they passed much of their time together,
as also the other horsemen of the two tribes, till at
last the Absians began to consult about Antar’s
nuptials: for King Cais had persuaded Malik, Ibla’s
father, to consent. About that time came a letter
to Hadifah from his brother-in-law Aswad, telling
him of Mocri-ul-wahsh, and saying, Rejoice, O Ha-
difah, in what will please you with respect to the
Absians, for their total ruin is at hand; a horseman
of the tribe of Ghasan is come to my brother, and
he is now advancing towards you with armies like
the swoln sea, and with them the Knight of the tribe
of Ghasan. Rejoice in the completion of your wishes,
and in the death of Antar, son of Shedad! On
reading this letter, Hadifah was highly delighted,
and he anticipated every good; but this news he
kept secret. At the feast there was to be no one
present but Rebia, of the family of Zeead, for he
was the cleverest of them all; he was assiduous in
his attendance on King Cais, and rejoiced in his
joys, and in the security of his brothers, who were
dispersed among the pastures, amusing themselves
in the wilds and wastes with the slaves and shep-
herds, that they might not be eye-witnesses of
Antar’s marriage-feast, and not join in the general
satisfaction.


. 8% HASKIN MURDERS TALIB.


CHAPTER XXXVIII.


Now it happened soon after, that Talib, Rebia’s bro-
ther, went out to the pastures with the camels, and
was sitting under an Erak-tree, drinking and singing;
and whilst he was thus occupied, lo! a horseman of
the tribe of Fazarah passed by, called Hasem, son
of Dhemdhem-ul-Meree (this warrior was the son
of Hadifah’s sister). Observing Talib sitting down
in a state of intoxication, he went up to him; Son
of Zeead, said he, you are singing here very jolly
and merry, under no apprchension of the Arab
warriors. Eh! O Hasein, said Talib, is there any
security but in ourland? Victory is on our banners,
every good is in our merriment, and evil dwells in
the country of our foes; for our swords are sharp,
our spears long, and our arms strong and vigorous.
Talib had not finished his reply, when Hasein
rushed upon him, and shaking his spear in his face
pierced him through the chest, driving the barb out
through his back, and threw him down dead, welter-
ing in his blood. He fled instantly to the tribe of
Fazarah, and presenting himself to his maternal
uncle, Hadifah, he told him what had happened.
At which being much pleased, he, with a smile, told
the warriors of Fazarah to repose under arms that


night. But Talib’s slaves and shepherds, when they


CAIS PREPARES FOR RETALIATION. $35


saw the fate of their master, placed him on his horse,
and returned to the dwellings of the tribe of Abs,
where they proclaimed the murder of Talib, and
that Hasein was his murderer. At this, the family
of Zeead knocked down their tents, and cut off the
tails of their horses. May God destroy the tribe of
Fazarah! cried Cais, much distressed ; how infamous
are their frauds! And they all began to weep and
wail in grief, men and women.

King Cais summoned the family of Zeead and
the noble Absians, and sent to order Hadifah to
give up Hasein; but when the messenger arrived,
and communicated his orders, Hadifah ordered him
away: Tell Cais, said he, my nephew was intoxi-
cated; and, besides, I am not a man to give up my
sister's son to any king of the earth: but if you wish
for the compensation, I will give you ten times the
price of blood, so that the engagements between us
may not be broken. ‘The messenger returned, and
reported Hadifah’s answer. Rage and resentment
took possession of King Cais; he shouted to the
Absians, and ordered them to mount, and instantly
the warriors and the heroes were ready ; and no one
remained behind but Antar and the family of Carad,
it being only an affair of retaliation for the family of
Zeead. .

King Cais had just cleared the tents, and the
eagle banners were just fixed over his head, and all
were eager to march to the fight against the Faza-
reans, when lo! a special messenger appeared, ad-
vancing over the desert. King Cais halted, and the


336 HE HEARS OF NUMAN’S APPROACH.


Chieftains stared; the messenger dismounted from
his camel, and hastening towards King Cais, he
kissed his feet in the stirrup: and behold it was
one of Mootegeredah’s slaves. What's the matter,
worthy slave? said Cais. O my lord, replied he,
there are advancing in my rear armies like the swoln
ocean, and with them a giant-knight and an intre-
pid lion, called Mocri-ul-wahsh, the knight of the
tribe of Ghasan, the destroyer of the brave; be on
your guard against death and destruction, for the
armies in less than three days will be in this country :
prepare, therefore, your implements of war against
slaughter and ruin. At hearing this, the light be-
came dark in the eyes of Cais. And why did not
your mistress, said he, inform us before the enemy
marched against us, that we might have written to
our allies, and those in whom we trust in our
troubles and our relaxations? My mistress, added
the slave, could not do so till the armies had de-
parted ; no one was permitted to stir out, for Numan
had stationed guards over all the horse-roads till
the moment the troops marched; then my mistress
ordered me to set out with the news ; so make your
preparations, ere death overtake you. ` Cais’s heart
was greatly perplexed at these occurrences. He
instantly. sent for Antar, and told him what was
planning, and that Numan was on his way with
armies and Mocri-ul-wahsh, the knight of Syria.
This is all owing to your temporizing conduct, said
Antar; had you permitted me to strike off Aswad’s
head, and slay his companions, many of these


THE ABSIAN CHIEFS CONSULT. 837


troubles would have been avoided. My. opinion is,
we should march first against the tribe of Fazarah,
and put them all to the sword, and leave them not
a tent standing; then we will meet the armies of
King Numan, were there even with him man and
genii, and the fiends that rebelled against our Lord
Soliman.. O Aboolfawaris, said Cais, the foe is nigh _
at hand; and if we go against the Fazareans, we
cannot reach them till evening; we must there repose
till the morning; and certainly in two or three days
we shall not be relieved of them; and I fear these
foreign Arabs may reach our country whilst our
property is unprotected, and thus succeed in their
projects against us, and our troubles be prolonged.
It will be more expedient for us to remain here and
prepare to encounter the foe. My lord, said the
slave who brought the news, the carnage amongst
you will be trifling, but the prisoners numerous ;
for Numan has prohibited them from slaying, and
has recommended them only to make prisoners, and
for that purpose he has sent a number of his satraps,
with Mocri-ul-wahsh, who, however, has engaged to
slay Antar, the subtle hero, and has demanded as a
reward a thousand Asafeer camels. Evil be his fate !
false are all his hopes, said Antar, for by the faith of
an Arab, I will have no knight of camels in our
country, but hung to a gibbet. Do not consider us,
cousin, said Cais to Rebia, as he retired, as neglect-
ful of your retaliation; but when we have defeated
Numan’s armies, we will return upon the tribe of
Fazarah, and will destroy their land, otherwise we
VOL. IV. | z


| $88 THEY PREPARE TO ATTACK NUMAN’? TROOPS.


shall never be quiet. Thus the heart of Rebia was
consoled ; and the Absians alighted at their tents,
preparing for the slaughter and the battle.

As to Hadifah, he was expecting the attack of the
Absians, in retaliation for the son of Zeead, that
he might raise a war against them, and appease
his heart. The news reached him that Cais had
mounted, and that his march was only interrupted
by the arrival of a messenger, bringing news of
Numan’s approach with his armies. Hadifah was
overjoyed, for he now anticipated the total destruc-
tion of the Absians, and he ordered the tribe to
prepare for battle. As soon as day dawned Hadifah
mounted Ghabra, and the horsemen followed him.
As to Cais and Antar, they reposed that night,
when lo! the next day the desert was filled with
armies, and horsemen, and troops, like the swoln
ocean, till the whole region was crowded, and the
waste and wild appeared too confined for the mult-
tude of banners and standards. ‘Antar shouted to
the warriors, and they mounted their chargers, whilst
the weeping was loud among the women, alarmed
at captivity and dispersion. Well, my cousin, said
Ibla to Antar, this day the foe will take us captive
At this word the light became dark in Antar’s eycs.
Daughter of my uncle, he exclaimed, at thy captivity
there will be the violent death, and the blow that is
irresistible and unfailing. Antar uncovered his head
and attacked, and his assault made the valleys and

_ the mountains tremble. Now Antar had a shout of
wrath, that made the mountains shake and the


ANTAR'S FIRST ASSAULT, S39


hollows resound ; it drove back the horses in affright,
and they hurled off their riders in the excess of their
agitation, and trampled down each other. Antar
shouted to the attack in the presence of Ibla, and
assaulted the armies with a heart resolute in dangers.
The Absian warriors attacked in his rear, all light-
hearted in the intrepidity of Antar and his nephew
Hiatal : they met the armies of Numan with cleaving
sword-blows that even Davidian corslets could not
repel.. Antar poured forth roars like crashes of
thunder, whilst the Absian women encouraged the
men to the carnage, crying out, Where is he who
protécts the women and the maidens? ‘Thus the
Absians were engaged in the war of life and death,
till they drove back the enemy from their tents by
main force. |

As to the Fazareans, Hadifah ordered them to
the fight; they assailed the Absians on all sides.
Calamities thickened upon them, and misfortunes
and catastrophes multiplied upon them; and had
not Antar been a dreadnought hero, the Absian
tribe could not have survived that day, for the
armies that attacked them consisted of fifty thousand
bold horsemen; and the tribes of Abs and Ghiftan
amounted even to less than six thousand, and this
proportion is wide of any proportion by which any
calculation can be made. But in less than three
hours horror of Antar pervaded the hearts of Nu-
man’s army, and the foremost shrunk back upon the
rear, shouting at Antar from a distance, but not
daring to approach the spot, where stood Antar, the

z 2


$40 HASEIN WOUNDS ANTAR,


violent death. Mocri-ul-wahsh was highly incensed
at the armies having commenced the attack without
his permission, and at the assault of the Fazareans.
Had I wished to destroy them, said he to his com-
rades, I would not have left them a spot to stand
on: but Prince Aswad sent with me these foreign
Arabs, that they might settle in their country, and
be neighbours to the tribe of Fazarah. At last he
resolved to attack Antar, the object of his amaze-
‘ment, saying, By the truth of the Messiah, this slave
is a brave knight and a sturdy warrior. Should I
vanquish him in the combat, I may boast over all
the dwellers on earth. Inthe meantime Antar was
in the fiercest of the fight, and the hottest of the
thrusts and blows, raving like a camel, when lo!
Hasein, son of Dhemdhem, treacherously came be-
hind, and raising his spear in his hand aimed a
dreadful thrust at him, crying out, Take this, thou
ordure-born, at the hand of Hasein, son of Dhem-
dhem-ul-meree, the vanquisher of heroes. Antar
turned round to see what was the matter, and the
barb of the spear fell on the circle of the eye, and
wounded him. Born of filth, thy blow has failed,
he cried; a warrior is proof against the blows of
such a poltroon. And he aimed his spear at him;
but when Hasein saw this, he gave the reins to his
horse and fled, and sought the tribe of Fazarah,
where he related to his uncle Hadifah how he had
deceived Antar and wounded him. Hadifah re-
joiced: God prosper thee, O Hasein, said he, for
what thou hast done to this son of a coward; hadst


WHO IS ANXIOUS TO FIGHT MOCRI. 341


thou slain him, thou wouldst have been exalted
above all mankind. After this wound Antar kept
a wary eye on the tribe of Fazarah, slaying an in-
numerable, incalculable number of them, till evening.
Numan’s army retired and halted, in the greatest
astonishment at the prowess of Antar, and the ge-
nerous Absians. As to Antar, he retired at the
head of his comrades, like a Judas tree, so great
was the quantity of blood that streamed over him.
King Cais met him, and saluting him kissed him
between the eyes, and inquired about his wound.
My wound, O King, said Antar, is quite well.
To-morrow I will challenge Mocri-ul-wahsh to the
combat; if he accepts it, all further trouble will be
prevented. We will not permit you, O uncle, said
Hatal, to engage in the contest whilst you are in
this condition: depute me on this affair. O Hatal,
said Antar, thou art indeed a noble fellow in the
battle, but thy name is not Antar, son of Shedad.
I know also, O Hatal, that the Absians besides An-
tar have no strong support, and to-morrow were I
not to be present in the field, their women would
be made captives, and their children orphans. O
cousin, said Cais, may God never deprive me of thy
exalted courage ! Thus they separated, having first
stationed the night-patroles ; and when the men had
quitted Antar, his uncle’s;women and Ibla came to
him, and congratulated him on his safety. Ibla ad-
vanced, and bound up his wound and wept. Check
thy tears, said Antar to her; he lives not who can
harm thee. -


$43 HASEIN’S PRESUMPTION,


Early next day they mounted, with Antar at their
head like a devouring lion and a ferocious tiger.
He had tied bandages round his head in order to
excite Hasein against him, that perhaps he might
challenge him.’ Numan’s troops also mounted with
Mocri-ul-wahsh, the knight of Syria, as did also the
tribe of Fazarah; but the satraps of Numan or-
dered them back. Hasein ran up to Hadifah;
Uncle, said he, what means this? noone can comply
with such orders. Can I too, I, who wounded An-
tar, son of Shedad, and left him nearly dead ? Shall
I leave to-day another to enjoy his death in the
battle and contest? That shall never be, were I to
drink of the cup of perdition. And he rushed into
the field, and galloped and charged, challenging to
the contest; and as he directed himself against the
family of Carad, he thus addressed them :

“ O my mother, sleep, be satisfied, and rejoice;
“this day will I relieve my thirst with Antar.
“« When thou seest the birds mangle his carcass
& under the dust, then extol me and thank me.
“ The slave—I left him with a spear-thrust over
& the face, the mark of which will ever endure as a
“ frightful eye-sore. The top of my spear-barb
& tore out his eye, and I left him like a blind
“camel. This day I will leave him on the face of
& the earth, where he shall lie dead on the barren
<¢ waste. I will makehim taste thrusts from my spear-
* head, and I will smite him with my never-failing
“ highly-polished scimitar. I will leave the beasts
“ of the desert to run at him, and prowl round him


ANTAR’S INDIGNATION, $438


<< on the wings of the turbid night. I will wipe out
“‘ my shame with my sword and spear, and I will
& wreak my vengeance on the swarthy slave. I will
“ destroy the Antar of Abs in the day of battle with
4 my sabre, my lance, and my spear. When he is
& no more, the land of the Absians will soon remain
** an abandoned waste, like the barren desert; and
“ all the slender maidens, like the sun whose glory
4$ is opposed to Jupiter, shall tremble.”

When Hasein had finished, Hatal longed to en-
gage him, but his uncle would not permit him: he
returned his feet into the stirrups, and snatching up
his spear off the ground, he rushed upon Hasein
like a lion darting from the forest, and as he as-
saulted him in a tremendous manner, he thus
answered :

s“ O Ibla, grieve not for my wound. Rejoice in
< the victory of the scimitar of the swarthy youth.
« O Ibla, fear not for me thefoe, but fill thy eyes with
‘* sleep, and watch not. O Ibla, round thy dwell-
& ing in the blackness of the night I am a man
4 fiercer than the ravenous lion. Check thy plaints,
« for thy tears pierce sharper through my entrails
‘‘ than the barb of the Semherian spear. Wouldst
“ thou ask the horse of me? O daughter of Malik
“ (if thou art watching, why dost thou not see me?)
‘‘ he would tell thee of him who plunges into the
“ dust, and that I have dispersed the whole army
«on my Abjer. I have scattered afar the tribe of
‘© Fazarah over the wastes, trembling through fear
* of Antar. As to the heroes of the age, I will an-


$44 DEATH OF BASEIN.


“ nihilate them with the sword, and the lance, and
“ the spear. Pride not thyself, thou coward-born,
“on my wound; thou wouldst say, thou hadst
$‘ riven a rock-bound veil. Verily the wound of a
“ hero is in the face, but thy wound in the day of
“ battle is in thy back. I am the son of Shedad,
“ whose fame is on high, mounting till it approaches
“ the sphere of Jupiter.”

Antar shouted at Hasein, and rushed onward.
Hasein was filled with exultation when he saw the
bandages on Antar’s head; so he thought that he
would soon fall within his grasp. But as Antar
made that assault he was aghast and stupefied, and
repented of having ventured against him; yet no
longer able to fly, he, began to engage Antar, an
charged him. Mocri-ul-wahsh could not view thie
event with indifference. This tribe of Fazarah is a
treacherous tribe, said he, as he resolved to attack
Antar; but he saw him a mountain, mountains
could not overpower, and a sea visited by no calm,
and a measure for which there was no standard.
Antar continued to engage Hasein ull he had fa-
tigued and tired him ; he closed on him, and hemmed
him in, and stopping every means of escape, he
stood up on his stirrups, and stretching out on his
saddle, he struck at Hasein with Dhami between
the eyes. Hascin received the blow on his shield,
but Antar’s sword split it in two, even dividing his
helmet in twain, and continuing its course down be-
tween the thighs even through the belly of the horse

-down into the ground, and Hasein and his horse


i


MOCRI’S ABSURD PROPOSITION. 345


fell cleft in four parts, and Antar cried out, O by
Abs! I will not be controlled. I am the lover
of Ibla, I will not be restrained! Numan’s armies
were startled; the Fazareans were eager to assault
him, but Numan’s satraps ordering them back, out
started Mocri-ul-wahsh between the ranks, and he
appeared in front of the two armies, till standing in
the presence of Antar: Eh! O Antar, he cried, by
the truth of the Messiah, my compassion for thee
and thy tribe induces me to save you from death
and total extirpation, for ye are indeed the horse-
men of death; but ye have destroyed yourselves by
incurring the hostility of King Numan, which you
cannot possibly resist. It is my opinion you should
surrender ‘yourself to me immediately, and I will
swear to you by the cross to engage Numan’s protec-
tion: I will receive you as my friend and companion
for ever and ever. Trouble not yourself to fight with
me now you are in such a condition. ` Return in or-
der to bring about an amicable arrangement, so that
you may not be talked of, and your glory defaced
amongst men, and let not your focs and enemies
exult over you. Eh! thou son of a cuckold, cried
Antar, away with thy nonsense. What! shall I.
surrender myself to thee without fighting? I, whom
the lions of the forest dread? Come on; on to the
plain, that I may tear out such absurdities from thy
brain. As he spoke, he shouted at Mocri-ul-wahsh,
andushed upon him; but he also received him as the
parched earth the first of the rain. Now these two


346 FIRST COMBAT OF ANTAR AND MOCRI


giants met like two ferocious lions, and sent forth
hideous yclls that seared their horses’ ears; the
limbs of their warriors quaked with horror, and
those present imagined the very heavens were rent
asunder, and that the day of judgment was at hand ;
the mountains were convulsed, and the earth trem-
bled. After these shouts, they dashed against each
other like butting rams; and as they rebounded
they wielded their spears, and kept up a fierce con-
test till the eyeballs of the spectators sickened, and
the whole country shook. They exhibited a com-
bat replete with terrors, and every horror was re-
doubled : they retired; they advanced, ready with
the draught of instant death. The two armies were
amazed, and widened the scene of battle for their
efforts, whilst the heroes charged. They continued
in this state, calamitous and terrifying, till the even-
ing came on, when they both separated in security,
neither having been able to vanquish his antagonist
either in blows or manceuvres. Mocri-ul-wahsh
sought his own horsemen, almost at his last gasp at
what he had endured in the combat with Antar.
Antar also retired, and the bandages of his wound
were loosened; the blood trickled down his face,
and he returned in a condition not to give pleasure
to his friends. The tribe of Abs and Adnan met
him with King Cais; they saluted him, and inquired
about his adversary. My cousins, said he, he is
indeed a valiant knight, and a stout warrior in the


contest; but to-morrow, God willing, I will make


THEY AWAIT THE MORROW'S CONFLICT. 347


it a decided business. And as he dismounted from
Abjer, Ibla met him, and stanching the blood,
bound up his wound.

As to Mocri-ul-wahsh, he went back to his
people, where Hadifah met him. O knight of Syria,
said he, grieve not thy heart, for know, wert thou
not the paragon of the age, thou wouldst not have
returned in safety from the presence of Antar; for,
in his life, he never engaged a knight and quitted
him without deciding the combat, or accomplishing
his hopes. O Hadifah, said Mocri-ul-wahsh, never
in my life did I behold a more valiant fellow than
that Antar; but to-morrow I will make it a business
of certainty. He passed that night vexed and uneasy
that he had not succeeded against Antar. It was
scarcely morning when he mounted his horse, and
the armies of Numan were also ready. Thus too
the tribe of Abs and Adnan sought the theatre of
war. Antar remained behind, for feeling somewhat
tired in the morning, he said to his brother Shiboob, -
As soon as you see Mocri-ul-wahsh start forth into
the plain inform me, that I may sally out to fight
him. When the troops were drawn up, Mocri-ul-
wahsh appeared on the plain; and as he galloped
and charged, challenging to the engagement, he
called to mind his beloved Maseeka, and his separa-
tion from her, and thus he spoke:

“ Sweet to me is the zephyr, O land of Syria; it
& is sweet when my disorder afflicts me. Blow, then ;
« perhaps the breath of Maseeka may meet thee,
“and her breath convert thee into perfume. The


348 . ADDRESS OF MOCRI. -


« maiden! musk dwells under her veil, and when
“ impregnated with the moisture of her mouth be-
** comes most fragrant. When she moves, the ele-
« gance of her shape waves like the reed agitated
‘“‘ by the northern breeze. Wert thou to see her
“thou wouldst behold the eye of the fawn, whose
“‘ heart is fluttering at the wolf in the evemng. O
s“ Mocri-ul-wahsh, said she (and I was preparing
‘“‘ for departure, whilst my tears streamed down my
& cheeks like a river of blood), wilt thou not return ?
« My return is at hand, said I: she bade me adieu.
“« My heart pants for her society for ever; and
s“ when she calls on her:lover he will answer her. I
“went to King Numan—where is the cloud that
“‘ has not descended on him? I engaged the horse-
“ men that were dear to him; I returned, and my
“ spear was dyed in blood. He gave me property,
“ and camels, and presents: the gift was noble—
“ noble was thedonor. He sent me with his armies
“ against a knight whom all knights acknowledge;
* and he is generous. .I have engaged him with
“ the spear-thrust; then I knew him. I had
“ wronged him, but excellence is in him. I strug-
“s gled with him in the contest and in the plain; I
_“ saw in him most wonderful deeds: but if this day
“ I destroy not their support with my sword, my
“ heart will not be glad in the enjoyment of my
“ beloved.”

Mocri-ul-wahsh had not finished his verses when
Hatal stood before him, for Antar had staid behind,
and his heart was wearied with passion. Youth,


HATAL CHALLENGES HIM. 349


cried Mocri-ul-wahsh, where is Antar the great?
If his wounds prevent him from mounting, he is not
to be blamed. I gave him a lesson yesterday, and
have rendered him unequal to the fight. Let him
not be brow-beaten by me, but let him mount with
me the road of ignominy. Eh! shall he acknow-
ledge himself disqualified from fighting thee? said
Hatal. Thy death is at hand; and as to what thou
sayest about his not coming forth against thce, that
is out of contempt for thee and thy like. I adjured
him by the most serious of oaths to permit me to
sally forth to the contest; so come on, fight! and
he shouted at Mocri-ul-wahsh, thus reciting:

“ The breeze, O land of Hijaz, is fragrant to me;
& blow then in the face of my amorous adversary.
« Tell Mocri-ul-wahsh to return in safety home, or
“he will return spoiled. If Maseeka be thy final
“& object and desire, how has fortune cast thee af-
«c flicted amongst us? Thou speakest and repeatest
& her beauties and charms, and on that point, thou
& art in distress. O my friend, sing to me of the
« fame of chieftains; talk not to me of every rose-
“ bud and perfume. The sighs of love are a dis-
« grace among men, particularly when wars are ac-
“cumulated upon thee. If thou art indeed sick
« with love, the sword of my maternal uncle is a
“ doctor and a physician. How many noble horse-
& men like thee has he sought, and they have re-
“ mained dyed in the gore of wounds! Let not his
. “ wound over the face inspirit thee; it was fate,


& whose changes are ever predestined. He is the ©


$50 MOCRI'’S REPLY»


slion of every sand-hill and battle; he is the
“& greatest of heroes and princes. Antar, my uncle,
& is the bravest of men, the most valiant of all the
‘¢ dwellers on earth without contradiction.”

The knight of Syria was highly incensed: Thou
art, then, said he, the son of the sister of that Antar,
that black cuckold! and he rushed at him, and ad-
dressed him :

“« Thou hast abused me for my weakness, thou
« foulest Arab; thou art a coward, not akin to war.
“ The Absian Antar is linked to Ibla, and through
« Jove of her a flame blazes in his heart. A man in-
‘© deed weeps for the loss of his life, and mourns and
“« laments at the loss of his love. Who am I, that
“ thou shouldst censure me, son of a dastard! and
“‘ my heart is cauterised with absence, and opposi-
“ tion, and anguish. By the truth of the Messiah,
“ the purest of every living thing, who created a
“ bird out of clay with his miraculous breath, and
“ recalled life into the corpse when it was shrouded
“ and delivered to the bowels of the grave deprived
“ of life, I will stretch ye both on the centre of your
“ land, and I will lead your weeping damsels cap-
“ tive, and I will cry out with a loud voice in the
“ plain of war, Come forth towards me, behold
“wonders in me. If Antar indeed is exhaustid
“ with the wounds, I must not then annihilate him.
« Let the Arabs laugh him to scorn. I will leave
“ the land a desert; and as to its inhabitants, their
“ blood shall stream over the country. I will fight
“ Antar; then will I dash him to the earth. I will


ANTAR’S SUDDEN APPEARANCE. $51


“ make him drink the cup of death, and bring down
“ perdition upon him.”

Mocri-ul-wahsh having finished, he shouted at
Hatal, and resolved to overwhelm him in death,
on account of the foul expressions he had addressed
to him. Hatal met him, and there ensued between
them the contest of spears and swords, that amazed
the warriors, and startled the sturdy heroes for two
hours. At last exhaustion fell on the shoulders of
Hatal, for he was no match for him, nor accounted
among his equals. Mocri-ul-wahsh perceiving his
situation, determined to destroy him, as he knew
Antar was his uncle; again he assailed him, and
was about to put an end to him, when lo! a roar
that made the mountains shake, and the hollows re-
echo, and some one exclaimed, Away, thou knight
of Syria, pride not thyself in the slaughter of strip-
lings. Turn on one who will speedily give thee
thy death and extinction. The warriors awhile con-
sidered who could have sent forth. that tremendous
shout, when Jo! it was the noble warrior—the de-
stroyer of stout heroes, Aboolfawaris—the chief
Antar, son of Shedad. He delivered Hatal from
Mocri-ul-wahsh, and then attacked him. The
cause of Antar'’s coming was Shiboob, who, on see-
ing Hatal nearly overcome, quitted the field, and
informed his brother. Come to thy nephew, Hatal,
said he, or Mocri-ul-wahsh will slay him. Bring
me Abjer, said Antar, and he sprang from the
ground on his back, like an eagle, without putting
his foot into the stirrup, and equipped himself in his


$52 ANTAR'’S TAUNTIKG SPEECH.


armour and his shining corslet. He attacked, and
dismissed his nephew from the scene of contention,
thus addressing Mocri-ul-wahsh. Eh! thou bas-
tard, wouldst pride thyself in slaying children? As
to me, by the faith of a noble Arab, had I enemies
as numerous as the sands, like this youth, I'd heed
them not. I am he, who will give thee enough of
spear-thrusts and sword-blows ; for the slaughter of
this youth could have been no advantage to thee,
neither could the extinction of his name have been
any glory to thee. Thou art only come to seek me:
come on, then ; fight: perhaps thou mayest succeed.
Shouldst thou take me a captive or slay me, the
tribe of Abs will be unprotected, and from thy
sword every calamity may overwhelm them; for
when I am no more, there will not be a horseman
to contend with thee in all this country. Now
be just, and give up all outrage and foul play;
and Antar rushed at Mocri-ul-wahsh, thus re-
citing : 3 )

“ Hola! O Ibla, arise and. behold me; see in me
“ truth without guile. Artse, and behold my blow
“and thrust, like a flame, that burns in flashes.
s“ Mourn not for my wound, it is only like the rent
“ in a man’s garment. The thrust of man wounds
“ not, it is only like the bore in the ear of a woman.
“ But if my spear and my'sword have sway, the
“ skull and heaviest leathern -mail are cleft. This
“ day thou shalt see the descents of my sword, and
the thrusts of my spear.’ Hey! O Mocri-ul-
“ wahsh, return thee home, before thou remainest-


MOCRE'S ANSWER; THEY FIGHT. 353


<< emboweled, I will soon relieve the Arabs from thee,
“ and truly Maseeka shall remain my wife. I will
“ plunder her property and slay her father, and I
<¢ will leave her abode a desert, with my sword.
s&s My name is well known, east and west, and every
<< horseman dreads a contest with me.”

At hearing these verses, Mocri-ul-wahsh was
enraged and indignant. Eh! thou coward-born,
said he, is it consistent with thy greatness to address
me in such language, and I the knight of Syria?
and as he rushed upon Antar, he thus spoke :

s“ Hola! man of wily words, forth to the combat,
“and establish my fortune. Hola! race of Abs,
<< ye shall acknowledge me. I am Mocri-ul-wahsh
« over the mountains. Soon will I slay Antar with
& the sword of conquest, and I will leave him dead
< on the sand. I will seize Ibla, and return home,
& and she shall serve my wife as her mistress.. I
“will take Numan’s camels, and will, in happy
é mood, return towards Maseeka, I am ever the
“knight of knights, and this day will I consum-
& mate my glory. ‘This day Numan’s armies shall
“route these troops, bewildered and powerless.
<¢ The Arabs shall be left ague-struck at my prowess,
& and truly the warriors have already witnessed it.
« Tam the hero of Syria, and of every land, and
€ this day my exploits shall be renowned.”

He. had no sooner finished, than Antar shouted
and rushed upon him; and they began a contest of
swords and spears, at which the warriors were con-
founded, and the valiant heroes cried out, Heaven


VOL. IV. AA


$54 MOCRI FLIES IN FEAR OF DEATH.


protect us! The blow and the thrust, the struggle
and assault, and the draughts of sudden death con-
tinued ; their blows anticipated the messengers of
death, and their shouts were like the thunder-crash
in a cloud. Both combatants were nearly dead.
Mocri-ul-wahsh was stupefied at Antar’s prowess,
-and repented. Still he exhibited all bis steadiness,
and concealed the anguish and regret he felt. They
persisted in these perils and horrors till the day
departed: they were tired and exhausted ; but de-
bility had fallen on the shoulders of Mocri-ul-
wahsh, for Antar had wounded him in two places.
He desisted from the fight, and requested Antar to
stop. No, said Antar, by the truth of Him who
firmly rooted the mountains, there is no termination
for thee but in success and the approach of death.
He was aghast, and shuddered. O Aboolfawaris,
he added, no one can resist my thrusts but you;
but you have wronged me in breakmg my spear:
all I ask of you is to wait for me, whilst I repair to
my party and take another spear ; then will J return
to you, and will not separate from you, till the affair
be decided. TIl not let thee stir, continued Antar,
and he assailed him, and recommenced the contest.
But the troops crowded upon them, and drew their
swords round them, each party forming conjectures
of its lord. ‘They continued in this state till midnight.
Mocri-ul-wahsh felt assured of destruction, and
knowing that Antar would not quit him but in
death, he slackened his mare’s bridle and fled,
lanching: into the waste and desert. Eh! O Ebe


ANTAR FOLLOWS: THE ABSIANS BEATEN. 355


Reeah, cried out Antar to Shiboob, overtake him
before he roams wide over the waste: and Shiboob
let out his feet. Antar followed him, and they were
cut off from the army. In the meantime, Hadifah
(that man of deceit and guile), as soon as the sound
of Antar and Mocri-ul-wahsh was far distant from
the scene of contention, cried out to his tribe and the
surrounding horsemen, Come on, come on, now re-
lieve the mind of the lord of empire, King Numan.
Now cut off that black wittol, Antar. Thus the
tribe of Fazarah outraged the tribe of Abs and
Adnan, and attacked them on all quarters. The
Absians shouted at the Fazareans, and descended
upon them like a fall of rain under the night. Men
met men, and heroes heroes—blood flowed and
streamed—limbs were hacked off—men were knock- _
ed down on the plain—the armies of Numan also
attacked—the mountains and the deserts were
agitated, till brother knew not brother, and son
recognised not his father. They cantinued plunder-
ing each others lives from the beginning of the night
till the white streak of the dawn brightened, when
every friend knew his comrade, and the foe was
distinguished from the ally. King Cais looked round,
north and south, but saw nothing of Antar. He
was amazed and alarmed. The armies had accupied
every road against them, and raised shouts at them
in every direction. Apprehensive that the Absians
would be dispersed over the barren waste, he had
no other measure to adopt, but to cry out to them,
O cousins, follow me to the sand-hills, end Mount


AAR


856 THE FOE SEIZES THE ABSIAN WOMEN.


Saadi ; it is impossible any longer to resist the shock

of these armies. At hearing this, they followed
him, abandoning their property and their families ;

and they assembled on the top of the sand-hill and
Mount Saadi. The troops assaulted their tents, and
plundered their property, and captured their -wives
and families; even captivity fell on the families of
King Cais, and Modelilah, and Jemanah, and Ibla,

and Shereehah, and Semiah were taken prisoners.
Above all the women, most poignant was the grief
and anguish of Ibla, Mahk’s daughter. - The

Arabs of Yemen threw down the dwellings of the
Absians to their very foundations, and did not leave
them the value of a halter, for some of them loaded
their horses, and each person, too, carried away a
horse-load besides; and in less than an hour they
left the country a waste, and set out for the deserts
and sand-hills ; whilst the Absians remained looking
at their wives driven away in bondage. No good
can ever visit us now, said they to Cais, not a head
will be raised up towards us, now that our wives and
families are enslaved. O cousins, replied Cais, I

had only recourse to this act, as I knew you were
unable to continue the combat. Behold our property
and our families driven away by the foe; come on
now with me. And King Cais bared his head -and
made the attack ; the Absians did the same; they
precipitated themselves from. the mountain-top,

crying out, O by Abs! O by Adnan! and rushed

down upon the armies of Numan. This. was the

calamitous and desperate: state of the Absians, when


DEATH OF TEMADHUR, - 357


said’ Amarah to Rebia, Let us make our attack in
the direction where Ibla is; perhaps we may rescue
her from captivity and infamy, and love for Amarah,
to the exclusion of other horsemen, infuse itself into
her heart. ‘Thou poltroon, thou driveller, said
Rebia, dost not see thy mother and thy sister and
thy brothers’ wives are all prisoners, and that our
property is pillaged, and that we are degraded before
the world? By the faith of a generous Arab, were
Antar but present in the contest, not one of all these
disasters would have befallen us. It happened that
Ham], son of Beder, had taken King Cais’s mother,
Temadhur, prisoner, and conducted her to a valley.
Eh ! son of Beder, cried Temadhur, for what pur-
pose hast thou brought me down to this valley?
That the Arabs may indulge foul suspicions of me?
And that our hearts be pained and never at rest?
My purpose, said Haml, is to ravish thee, and
murder thy children on thy bosom. At this, death
became easy to Temadhur. Alas! alas! she cried,
woe to the small number of horsemen! On thee, O
` Cais, and thy brothers, be thy mother’s blessing!
At the word, she threw herself off the camel on the
ground; she fell on her head, and her neck was
broken; she instantly expired, whilst her maidens
wept around her. During all this, the Absians were
in the fiercest of the carnage, and the hottest of the
combat of spears and swords: nearly destroyed and -

annihilated, they had resolved either to fly and seek
the desert, or demand quarter and surrender them-
selves to King Numan, when lo! shouts arose ‘in


358 THE ABSIANS RELIEVED BY ANTAR.


front of the armies, and yells that convulsed the
neighbouring wilds. King Cais and his warnors
stopped awhile in suspense, conjecturing whence
could issue these tremendous sounds. At that in-
stant, the chief Antar, the generous hero, started
forth in front of King Numan’s army, and repulsed
‘them over the wilderness; and with him was Mocri-
ul-wahsh, the knight of Syria, ‘fighting by Antar’s
‘side, and dealing blows like descending thunder-
‘bolts. The souls of the Absians revived, and ther
spirits recovered. Hey! cousins, said King Cais,
here is our champion, Antar, and Mocri-ul-wahsh
4s our friend. Now, then, take courage for retalia-
tion, and remove away your disgrace, and he who
takes hot kindly to the fight is no legitimate-born.
, Upon this, all the fire of the Absians was roused,
and they returned to the combat of the foe, like tall
sea-monsters. When Numan’s armies beheld Antar
return safe, and Mocri-ul-wahsh in his company,
dealing blows Davidian corslets could not repel, and
Shiboob occupying the way before them, they saw no
expedient but in flight and escape; so they threw
‘away all their booty, and lanched into the wilds and
‘the wastes.

As soon as Mocri-ul-wahsh fled, under the night,
‘Shiboob shot forth in pursuit of him, followed by An-
‘tar, and they continued to drive him over the desert,
till morning dawned, when Mocri-ul-wahsh perceiv-
ing his life was in imminent danger, and that he could
not escape, halted at once, saying, O Arab, thou wilt
kill me, and thou hast destroyed thyself with fatigue.


MOCRI AND ANTAR BECOME FRIENDS 859


I have no property to plunder, neither hast thou any
retaliation to demand of me; neither can thy heart
harbour any resentment against me. I never insulted
thy.cousin Ibla. I have nothing with me but my horse
and my arms, that are dearer to me than life. Take
them and forgive me, Aboolfawaris. I covet not
thy mare, said Antar, my only object is to take thy
life; for thou appearest a brave fellow and a valiant
knight. Then will I return to these troops, and will
not permit the first of them to join the last. O
Aboolfawaris, continued Mocri-ul-wahsh, now I
am aware that I was a fool among horsemen.; never
henceforward will I mount a stallion; never again |
will I be present in a battle, but I will seek the
church of Bekhran, there to settle among the her-
mits, and I will renounce my projects on my bride
Masecka, daughter of the King of Hooran. Q
Moceri-ul. wahsh, said Antar, if such be thy story,
I will wipe away that trouble from thy heart; I
will go with thee to the land of Syria, and will seize
thy bride for thee, were she even on the back of the
clouds. O Aboolfawaris, said Mocri-ul-wahsh, all
my hopes are centered in thee, that thou wouldst
accept me as thy horseman, and receive me as thy
elave. I wall be thy ally in all thy calamities; and
he dismounted from the back of his mare and
hastened towards Antar, and kissed his feet in the
stirrup. „Antar also jumped off his Abjer; he
embraced Mocri-ul-wahsh, and kissed him between
= the eyes, and having both vowed to preserve a
mutual affeetion, and to plunder and spoil the


860 CAIS SEEKS VENGEANCE FOR HIS MOTHER.


" generous Arabs together, they mounted and re-
turned, as we described, and. attacked the armies as
we mentioned. This therefore was the cause of
the friendship of Antar and Mocri-ul-wahsh, and
now let us return to our originel story.

After the flight of Numan’s forces, King Cais went
up to Antar, and kissed him between the eyes. ‘The
Absians also being collected, they searched for their
property and families, and they found Temadhur
dead, and her.damsels round her. On King Cais’s
demanding, who did this deed? they told him
Haml, son of Beder. The light became dark in the
eyes of the sons of Zoheir, and they swore they
would not leave the Fazareans a tent to shelter them;
not even a man to blow a fire. King Cais ordered
the Absians to collect the property and return to
the dwellings, whilst he mounted with half his war-
riors, and took to the right hand road, saying to
Antar, Cousin, take thou the other half, and go the
left, for I know the Fazarean horse must be some-
where here, and I should say they have not.quitted
the .well of Hebat, and have not yet entered the
wilds and the wastes. Antar acquiesced in King
Cais’s orders, and departed in company with Mocri-
ul-wahsh, and the family of Carad. King Cais also
departed, and as he wept for his mother, he thus
recited :

“ Alas! O eyes, weep torrents this day, over my
“ cheeks copiously, and abundantly. Alas! O eyes,
“ weep with me for Zoheir, and his son Malik; now
“their glory is past. Alas! O eyes, announce


CAIS MOURNS HER DEATH. 861


“ their death in agonies of grief; the heart cannot
“ longer bear it. Alas! O eyes, weep the loss of
“ Shas, but yesterday reduced to dust after all his
“ greatness. _Calamities beguiled them ; misfortune
“ overwhelmed them; violence destroyed them.
“ Ah! O race. of Beder, ye have done a deed of
“ universally acknowledged outrage in the murder
“ of my mother; ye imagined ye would this day
“ escape, and would be excited with glory and
< happiness; but the revolutions of death. shall
“ requite ye; we will come upon:ye openly with
“ our swords. Antar will come upon ye; he lusts
“ to meet ye, were ye even far distant from him over
“ the waste ; were even the Emperor of Rome and
“ Greece with ye, or the inhabitants of Syria and of
“ verdant Europe. Were ye to come with all the
“ dwellers on earth ; were even Chosroe, King of
<< Persia, to come with ye, we will meet ye with our
“ sharp-edged scimitars, on our well-trained roan
“ steeds. Sons of Beder ! verily ye have outraged
‘Sus, but we would have abandoned the contest.
“ Cousins, this was not my intention; it was not
« in my heart, that this war should take place. It
“« was ye that commenced; this calamity and- op-
& pression ever originated in ye. Alas! alas! my
“ grief for thee, O Temadhur ! that accursed Haml,
“ son of Beder, murdered thee. Soon will I extir-
& pate them all with my avenging sword; I will
« make their blood flow like a sea; I will retaliate
“‘ on them, and they shall remain a tale for ages, as
« long as the world endures.”


362 HADIFAH'S FAREWEL TO BIS SON.


Having finished his verses, he went on tll being
at some distance from that land, he beheld the im-
pression of Ghabra’s hoof, Hadifah’s mare; for
when he fled with the tribe of Fazarah, the girths of
his horse being loose, he dismounted, and tightened
them ; and the impression of Hadifah’s feet remained
also by the side of his mare’s. King Cais recognised
the impression.

Now Hadifah in his flight galloped on till he came
to the well of Hebat. He had a son named Husn,
who was at that time along with him, and he was a
rare child. Hadifah pressed him to his'bosom, and
kissed him between the eyes, saymg, O Husn, this
is the kiss of farewell. My sole request of you, my
son, is this; if you die after me, and have power
over the Absians, murder their infants, enslave their
women and families; let not avestige remain of them; ,
and know, O my son, that I am quitting this world,
and have no other regret in my heart, but that for-
tune gave me not the means to exterminate their war-
riors, to enslave their wives and families, and to de-
stroy their land and country. Thus saying, he threw
himself down by the side of the well, with his warrior
companions ; and they were insensible to every thing
till King Cais and his companions encompassed them.

Hadifah started up with the Fazareans; they at-
tempted fo mount their horses and fly, when lo!
Antar and the Carad horsemen rushed between
them and their steeds, then seized them all, and
pinioned them. Antar and his companions retired
to a different quarter, whilst King Cais advancing


NIE EXPRESSES HIS HATRED OF ÇAIS. 368


with his brothers, cried out, Ah! ye sons of Beder,
how oft have I had mercy on you, but you have
ever betrayed me! How oft have I believed you,
but you have falsified yourselves! I should like to
see who will this day rescue you from death. Who

will avert from you our cleaving sabres, and our

sparkling spears? As to thee, Hadifah, remember

what thy hands have done: may God curse thy

` father and thy mother! Remember the murder of
the infants with thy arrows. As to thee, Haml, re-

member thy words to my mother—‘‘ My purpose

is to ravish thee, and assassinate thy children on

thy bosom.”

: On hearing this, Hadifah turned towards Cais, ,
‘saying, Eh! son of Zoheir, why dost thou upbraid
me with thy words? Cease these reproaches and
reproofs, for I, by the faith of an Arab, had I sworn
to thee a thousand times a day, § would have -be-
trayed thee; and had I been able to murder thee,
and murder thy brothers, never would I have par-
doned. Now then do as thou listeth, act as thou
wilt; leave not one of us to root out thy every ves-
tige. As tome, before thou camest, I had proposed
that we should slay each other; for we covet not
life, whilst thou art on the face of the earth. But
O my cousins, by the consanguinity of wombs that
exists beiween us, do not bring us face to face—to.
confront each other is hard indeed: to catch each
other’s eye at such an hour is the severest of pangs.


And Hadifah hung his head towards the ground,


364 — DEATH OF HADIFAH AND HIS BROTHERS


and wept. Retaliation for children! cried Cais:
come on, cousins, retaliate !

At the word, his brother Harith dismounted from
his horse, and pierced Hadifsh with his spear through
the back, and the barb issued glittering through his
bosom. He cut off his head, and remounted his
horse, exclaiming, O retaliation for Malik ! and thus
he spoke :

“ Dig up the grave of our brother; let him see
“ our exploits, when we grieve no more. O that
“ the earth were riven over him, that Malik might
“ see the deeds of men. We have left the chiefs
“ of Beder at Hebat, spouting out death at our
“ spear points. Hadifah and Haml, sons of Beder —
“and Jabir, with Yezid and Betal, them have we
“ left dead round the well, slain by our: sharp In-
“ dian blades. We have slaughtered them, but it
‘‘ was a cruel day to us, when death sped from
“ their arrows. ‘They were the chieftains of men
“ wherever they went, and the lions of war in every
“ combat. ‘They wronged us, and perfidy leaves
“ every land a desert, deprived of its inhabitants.”

When Rebia saw what Harith, son of Zoheir, had
done, he also dismounted, and crying out, O for re-
taliation for my brother Talib! he pierced Haml
with his spear between the shoulders, and drove it
out through his paps: then he pounced upon him,
and cut off his head, and thus spoke :

« We have made the chiefs of Beder drink of the
“cups of death with sword and spear at Hebat.


AT THE WELL OF HEBAT. 965


“ We have encircled them with calamities, and they
“ staggered over the plain, but not intoxicated with
“ wine. In power they were the most puissant of
“ the two tribes, and in every undertaking their
“ resolution was abundant. When they mounted
“ their generous steeds, their horses stirred up the
“ dusty cloud in every desert. When they even gave
“ away a little in their bounty, the country was filled
‘“‘ with the land and sea of their liberality. Had
“ they no heirs, I should ever weep at what has
“ befallen them for their iniquity. But the youth
“ Haml, son of Beder, betrayed us, and treachery
“ roots out every recollection. How oft I warned
“ them, but they sinned again, and they have died
“ against my will. Fortune beguiled them; they
«& deceived us; but the revolutions of fortune de-
“ ceive every one. We are the losers by what we
“ have done. Alas! alas!. to the sons of Beder!
“ By destroying their horsemen, we have cut off our
“ support, but I have eased the anguish of my heart
“ among them.” |

. When Rebia had finished his verses, the reta-
liators followed him, and cut off the heads of the
tribe of Fazarah, and left them convulsed in death
on the banks of the well. King Cais observed the
catastrophe, and his heart was appeased, till he re-
pented of having slaughtered them, for they were
his cousins. He wept bitterly over them, and at
their miseries in the wild and waste, and thus he
mourned their death : -


“ Truly the day of Hebat has brought evil upon


366 CAIS BEWAILS THEIR FATE.


“ us, and the oppressor has become the oppressed.
“ This is the day of my losing the chiefs of the sons
“ of Beder, and they were stars in the eyes of all
“ beholders. I slew them because they wronged
“ me, and for their former perfidy. They smote
“ Dahis, and he was a generous steed: they mur-
“ dered Malik, and he was a noble youth. I heve
“ slain them all, and I have assuaged the fire of my
“ heart; but still the poisonous blast will increase it.
“ O that before I had slain them, I had been slain,
“ or had lost all my sense of joy. By their perfidy,
“ they injured us: we have oppressed the whole
“ body, but their day was fixed by fate. My an-
“ guish increased when I heard their cries, and
“ when we are no more, who will defend our
“ women *® ?”

When King Cais had finished his verses, the
Absians shed torrents of tears. Just then, Husn,
son of Hadifah, presented himself to the King, and
kissed the ground. Then drawing his sword, he
surrendered it to Cais, and wept as he stood before
him, saying, If it will appease thy heart, slaughter
me thyself. But King Cais burst into tears, and
said, O Husn, hadst thou done this before, I should
have stretched out my hand against thee, but the
business has been pushed too far already. Thou
shalt lord over these people in the place of thy father;
I will protect thee, and respect thee.


* The destruction of this family at the well of Hebat is mentioned
by Abulfeda, `


HIS KINDNESS TO HUSN. 367


And King Cais remained there that night till the
morning lustre shone, when he set out for the land
of Abs. But they had scarcely left that spot, when
lo! a dust arose. See, what means this dust? cried
Cais. The horsemen moved on, and returning, in-
formed him that it was the dust of the women of |
Fazarah, with their daughters and infants, who were |
coming to take retaliation for their husbands. They
are right, said Cais, for we have tortured them in
their husbands. But turning towards Husn, he
added, O my son, keep them off ; let them bury their
dead, and let them demand the aid of God in their ;
distresses. Upon this Husn returned, and sent away
the women, whilst King Cais continued his journey.
home, full of woe and anguish, and thus he gave
vent to his sorrows :

“ I am returning, but the sleep of my eyes will
“ torment me. My resolution is diminished; my
“ courage is languid, at what the sons of Beder, son
“ of Amroo, have suffered of infamy at the well of
« Hebat. We have tainted the water with the
“blood of the tribe, and its colour has appeared
“ like the Judas tree. I have appeased my spirit
“on Haml, son of Beder, and my sword has as-
“ suaged me on Hadifah. They were of our fa-
“ mily, but they acted perfidiously to us, and the
“ perfidy of relatives can never be forgiven. They
“« excited the war of enmity and aggression in the
“ horse-race; on the day of the match they were
“ obstinate in their hostility to us. So they have
“ suffered as the family of Abdul Modan suffered.


368 THE ABSIANS GRIEVE, AND RETURN HOME.


“ Had they asked for mercy, I should have forgiven
“ them; but they persisted, and their death was at
“ hand. Though I have relieved my anguish with
“ them, still I have cut off my own support, and
“ my own strength.” |

As King Cais spoke, tears streamed from the eyes
of all the warriors. They continued their journey
till they reached the dwellings, and alighted at the
tents; and when they were quietly established, the
warriors came to King Cais to condole with him
about the tribe of Fazarah, and to congratulate him
on his victory and triumph for seven days.


FEAST OF ZAT*UL-IRSAD. 369


CHAPTER XXXIX.


On the eighth day came Antar and Mocri-ul-wahsh
unto Cais, accompanied by the Absian chieftains.
O King, said they, how long these’ tears, and this
affliction? ‘The catastrophe of thy foes proceeds
from thy good fortune. It is over: it is now in-
cumbent on thee to make feasts and entertainments,
and take advantage of this period of festivity.

Thus they continued till they made him drink
some wine; and on the second day he gave a mag-
nificent feast at the lake of Zat-ul-irsad, where the
whole tribe of Abs was collected; and when they
had eaten, the wine was brought to them, and they
conversed about their battles, commemorating their
victories. O my cousins, said King Cais, that was
our severest day, when we engaged the tribe of Fa-
zarah; for on that day also drew near the armies of
King Numan, with Mocri-ul-wahsh, the Knight of
Syria, and noone relieved us from disasters, but our
cousin Antar, and Mocri-ul-wahsh, on the day he
became Antar’s friend; for then he performed deeds
to be recorded. Mocri-ul-wahsh, on hearing this,
started on his legs, and kissing the King’s hand, O
King, said he, I used formerly to reckon myself
amongst the valiant in war, and in the charge, till I
was overpowered by this swarthy knight, and this


VOL, IV. x B B


370 THE FRIENDSHIP OF ANTAR AND MOCRI.


lion of death; but when I tasted of his combat, I
knew my opinion of horsemen was false, and that I
was a fool among the brave; for bravery is divided
into two sorts: the first belongs to all mankind, the
second is exclusively Antar’s.

Antar sprang up, and kissing him between the
eyes, exclaimed, Witness for me, ye chiefs of Abs
and Adnan, and all ye here present, that I am for
ever the slave of this hero, and all the wealth and
property my power shall obtain shall be made over
to him ; let no one interfere on this point, and verily,
I have engaged on my existence, that I will effect
his union with his bride Maseeka, daughter of the
King of Hooran. To-morrow will I commence this
undertaking ; for ye all know, that I ever assist the
union of absent lovers, and how anxious I am to
relieve the afflictions of those who sigh for each
other ; thus, perhaps, the Lord Creator may faci-
litate my business ; but I do not speak thus in the
way of complaint or opposition to fate ; for that time
will come, sooner or later, either by death or by a
meeting and realization of hopes. And as he spoke,
he wept. When Malik, his uncle, beheld his grief,
O son of my brother, he cried, running towards him
in the excess of his malice and guile, by the faith of
an Arab, were I not afraid of interrupting the feast,
I would wed my daughter, Ibla, to thee before to-
morrow. But when the feasts of King Cais are
concluded, we will consult about our affairs, and the
cup óf joys shall draw nigh. Thou knowest, O
Aboolfawaris, thou art our protector in every peril,


CAIS RESOLVES ON ANTAR'S MARRIAGE. $71


and from every foe. Moreover, we would have
already terminated this business, and consummated
all thy hopes, had it not been for the arrival of King
Numan’s troops, and the convulsions of the times.
But now our troubles are removed from us, and
by thy sword every opponent, every enemy, has been
put to death, and there remains no one, black or
white, to thwart our wishes. No! no! exclaimed
King Cais, turning towards him, these excuses I will
no longer admit or endure. As he spoke, he gave
the cup to his wine-bearer, adding, listen to the
words I now say. O Wine-bearer! lock up this
cup, and keep it, for, by the faith of an Arab, I
will not again drink of wine, or interest myself in
any one affair, till my cousin, Antar, be wedded
unto his cousin, and his affliction be removed. All
the he and she camels I possess shall be supplied for
seven days, as also fodder for the horses. Arise this
moment, he added, addressing Malik, and prepare
thy daughter. Malik quitted the presence of King
Cais, expressing his obedience and submission ; and
the whole assembly dispersed, Antar’s friends re-
joicing, and his enemies sorrowing. When the
family of Carad heard of Ibla’s marriage, they were
delighted, men and women, daughters and sons;
they. commenced their merry-making and joys,
and grief was banished. Malik knew not what to
do, and he felt aware his perfidy and machinations
could avail him nought; for should he resist, the -
morrow would see him dead ; so he repaired to his
wife. Mother of Amroo, said he, prepare for thy
) BB


372 ! ANTAR’S UNCLE CONSENTS.


-daughter’s wedding, for she, in a few days, will be
married to her cousin, Antar. I verily blush before
him, for he has acted so generously towards us; but
I have requited him with evil, and particularly at
this time, when he has repulsed King Numan’s
armies; for had it not been for Antar’s sword, we
should all have been dispersed over the wilds and
the wastes. When Ibla’s mother heard this from
her husband, she rejoiced on her daughter's account,
for she loved Antar exceedingly for his intrepidity
and superior excellence; she was, moreover, con-
vinced that Ibla could suit no one but Antar, for he
aloħe could protect her. Bring Antar to me, said
Malik to his son. Amroo went forth and told Antar
his father wanted him. So Antar sprang up and
put on his finest clothes, and departing with Amroo,
presented himself to his uncle, who arose and
embraced him, treating him with great distinction,
and saying, Nephew, invite thy friends, and thy
comrades, and thy associates, that we may prepare
thy wedding, and accomplish thy wishes. At these
expressions, Antar’s bosom dilated, and he was full
of joy. He instantly started forth, and returning
home, sent for Oorwah. O Ebe-ool-Ebyez, said
Antar, my uncle has consented to my marriage, and
has directed me to invite my friends and confe-
derates, and in three days he will acquiesce in my
desires, but I would put it off for ten days. O
Aboolfawaris, said Oorwah, take advantage of the
opportunity, and let our hearts be relieved of this
anxiety. O Ebe-ool-Ebyez, continued Antar,_ I


ANTAR NUMBERS HIS FEASTS AND GUESTS 373.


wish to send to all my friends, as I fear they may
otherwise reproach us, particularly the chief Bostam ;
for he suffered much with us, in the affairs of the
Kendehans. The least, said Oorwah, that you can
wish to slaughter on your marriage, will be ten thou-
sand he and she camels, for thy guests will be nu-.
merous. O Ebe-ool-Ebyez, said Antar, ten thou-
sand shall not suffice for the slaves alone; the least
that I shall slaughter will be twenty thousand she
eamels, and twenty thousand he camels; twenty
thousand sheep, and twenty thousand goats, and
a thousand lions, for my guests will be many. I
wish to make at Ibla’s wedding five separate feasts ;
I will feed the birds and the beasts, the men and
the women, the girls and boys, and not a single
person shall remain in the whole country but shall
eat at Ibla’s marriage festival. Well, do as you
please, Aboolfawaris, said Oorwah. Now write,
added Antar, to the chief Bostam, a letter, with my
good wishes, to request his company, with all the
warriors of the tribe of Shiban; and a second to
Hassan, the Mazinite; and a third to the chief
Hijar, son of Aamir, the Kendehan ; and a fourth
to Maadi Kereb, the Zebeedian; and a fifth to the
chief Moshajaa, son of Hosan, the Khoolamian ;
and a sixth to King Niamet, son of Ashtar, lord of
the land of Sawdah, and the volcano mountain.
Thus he wrote numerous letters to all the Arab
tribes, and the number of letters he despatched to
the tribes was three hundred and sixty, to the
three hundred and sixty tribes of Arabs of the


874 HE SLAYS LIONS AND TIGERS


cultivated and uncultivated plains; and whilst he
was making preparations, O Ebe-ool-Ebyez, said
he to Oorwah, I wish you would go to the land of
Syria, and procure some wine for us. Oorwah ex-
pressed his obedience, and mounting with his men,
set out for the land of Syria, till he reached Azeilem,
now called Mazeireeb, where he staid with his people,
expecting the wine merchants. As to King Cais,
he ordered his slaves to bring forth his tents, and
pitch the canopies and standards, and thus the whole
tribe of Abs exhibited all their riches; and it was
a wonderful day in the display of the quantity of
different coloured tents and decorated dwellings.
The tents for the men were put on one side ; on the
other were the tents for the women; and they felt
secure from the night depredators of the time, and
the revolutions of events. Antar was at the summit
of his happiness and delight, congratulating himself
on his good fortune and perfect felicity, all trouble
and anxiety being now banished from his heart,
Praise be to God, the dispenser of all grief from the
hearts of virtuous men! Antar every day mounted
his horse, and roamed over the mountains and the
hollows, hunting lions and tigers, till he had taken
seven hundred lions and two hundred tigers, which
he secured in a valley, and he stationed a number of
slaves over them to feed them. He then exhibited
the pavilion which he had brought with him from
Chosroe, and ordered his slaves to pitch it for Ibia;
and when spread out, it occupied half the land of
Shurebeh, for it was the load of forty camels; and


IBLA’S MARRIAGE CANOPY, 375


there was an awning at the door of the pavilion,
under which four thousand of the Absian horse could
skirmish. It was embroidered with burnished gold,
studded with precious stones and diamonds, inter-
spersed with rubies, and emeralds set with rows of
pearls, and there was painted thereon a specimen of
every created thing, birds, and trees, and towns, and
cities, and seas, and continents, and beasts, and
reptiles; and whoever looked at it was confoundéd
by the variety of the representations, and by the
brilliancy of the silver and gold; and so magnificent
was the whole, that when the pavilion was pitched,
the land of Shurebah and Mount Saadi were illu-
minated by its splendor. The Absians produced
their richest stores ; in short, the dwellings appeared
like a flower-garden; the whole country was in
agitation; and the sun shone with reflected rays.
The happiest of all, at Antar’s marriage-feast, were
King Cais and his brothers, and also the family of
Carad; for these days were like so many holidays
to them. As to the family of Zeead, their hearts
were bursting. Oorwah was not absent more than
three days, and on the fourth day he appeared, and
with him abundance of wine; and whilst they were
in this state, behold, some she camels advanced,
and he camels came forward from the valleys and
the mountains, amounting to sixty thousand she
camels, and sixty thousand he camels; and Antar
ordered Shiboob ‘to conduct three thousand of
them tothe mountains, there to slaughter them, and
skin them, and feed the birds. Shiboob obeyed,


S76 RE FEASTS THE BIRDS AND THE BEASTS.


and went to the mountains, where he slaughtered
the camels ; and as the slaves flayed them of ther
hides, Shiboob ascended the highest mountain, and
cried out in a loud voice, O ye birds of prey, ye
vultures of death! come down and eat of Antar's
marriage-feast; he this day invites ye all The
next day, he took two thousand more, and slaugh-
tered them on the mountain-tops, crying out, O ye
voracious lions, ye mighty tigers, all of ye come
down and eat of the marriage-feast of Antar, son of
Shedad, for he this day invites ye all. After this,
Antar ordered the butchers to slaughter he and
she camels, and sheep, and fattened deer, and to
prepare every species of viand, and to make the wine
to flow, and to decorate the dwellings of his guests
and friends for four days, when lo! there appeared
a dust. Antar and the Absians mounted to meet it,
and the dust opened and discovered the chief
Bostam, accompanied by a thousand horsemen of
the tnbe of Shiban. Antar saluted him and his
comrades, and conducted them to a magnificent
tent, and they presented them meat of the flesh of
sheep and deer. ‘The next day, also, was seen ad-
vancing towards them a cloud of dust, which the
Absians went out to meet, when lo! it discovered
Hassan the Mazinite, Prince Malik’s foster brother,
and in his rear were seven thousand horsemen, all
mailed and armed. Antar received them, and con-
ducted them to a magnificent tent, supplying them
abundantly with meat and wine. They reposed till
morning, when lo! a dust again arose: Antar and


ARRIVAL OF ANTAR’S FRIENDS. 877


the Absians went out to meet it, and Maadi Kereb,

the Zebeedian, appeared, accompanied with nine
thousand horsemen of the tribes of Zebeed, Khitaam,

and Morad. Antar received and accommodated
them with a superb dwelling: he treated them most
hospitably, and supplied them with abundance of
wine. They passed a night of joy and festivity ;
and in the morning there appeared another dust,
and it discovered a knight close-visored and per-
fectly formed. The warriors marked him, and be-
hold it was the chief Hijar, son of Aamir, the Ken-
dehan, accompanied with eight thousand heroes of
Kendeh, all famed for their bravery and firmness.

The Absians and Antar received them, and saluting
them, conducted them to a magnificent mansion, and
presented them meat and wine, paying them every
attention. On the next day there was seen another
dust, and it cleared away from the chief Moshajaa,

son of Hosan, the Khoolanian, attended by seven
thousand horsemen of the tribe of Khoolan. The

tribe of Abs and Adnan received him, and made
him alight at a splendid tent, overwhelming them
with meat and wine. Antar was delighted at their

arrival, and treated them all with distinguished

hospitality. ‘The Absians continued in this state of
mirth and merriment, receiving in succession all the
Arab tribes of Adnan and Cahtan. (Were I to

write down, says Asmaee, all the Arab tribes that

assisted at Antar’s nuptials, the tongue would fail,

and the hearer be wearied, and the book be filled ;

so we have abridged the account.)


378 A VAST CONCOURSE COLLECTED.


The Arabs continued to flock into the land of the
tribe of Abs and Adnan, till the wilderness and de-
sert were crammed, as also the mountains and sand-
hills. Praise be to God, the enricher of mankind !
Antar ordered the butchers to slaughter night and
day, and the cooks to cook day and night, and the
slaves to prepare bread and pastry: and all the
tribe of Abs stood waiting in attendance on the Arab
chiefs, and inhabitants of the wilds and wastes, even
to King Cais himself and all-his brothers. ‘There
were reckoned, by‘one who was present at Antar’s
marriage, one hundred and forty-five thousand war-
riors, lords of the sword-blow and spear-thrust;
and the total of those who were present, men and
women, amounted to three hundred thousand.
Power is with the only God, great and munificent !
On this account, Antar’s wedding was known far
and wide in those days; and when these tribes
were assembled, the country was too confined for
them ; so that brother could not see his brother, nor
son distinguish where stood his father. Antar
ordered the chamberlains to spread carpets, that the
victuals might not spoil, and that they might eat
walking, eat standing, eat on horseback, eat sitting,
and eat in their sleep: and there was not one but
was satisfied with every variety of meat. (Whereas,
says Asmaee, I was at Mecca when I heard of An-
tars nuptials; I hastened to the land of Shurebah,
that I might be an eye-witness, and write down
what I saw; and when I arrived, I perceived an
infinity of things that had never been mentioned


BOSTAM’S PRESENTS AND CONGRATULATION. 3879


before; and I reckoned that Antar had expended
in barley, and wheat, and millet, and other grain,
seven hundred and seventy Irdebbs*.)

They thus continued in constant enjoyment: the
horsemen every morning mounted their steeds,
flourishing their arms and tilting on the plains, till
the heat became too powerful, when they returned
to the tents, where they found provisions prepared,
minced meats served up, and victuals all ready and
cooked. They ate, and the wine-bearers supplied
them with generous old wine; and thus they went on
seven days and nights. On the eighth day, the
chief Bostam sprang up on his legs, and kissing the
ground before Antar, presented him the presents
he had brought with him, consisting of one hundred
of the finest horses, with their accoutrements and
armour ; fifty balls of the most fragrant musk ; fifty
dishes of ambergris, and a hundred chains of the
purest gold ; a hundred robes of velvet, two thou-
sand she camels, and two thousand he camels, with
one hundred female slaves; and thus he addressed
him :

“ May heroes rejoice in the continuance of thy
“ glory, and the noble witness the abundance of thy
‘ greatness! may every day be renewed to thee in
« life, and every joy be in its return more plentiful !
“ Thine is a palm for mankind, that gives comfort
“ with wealth, and every bounty ; thy hand is well


è One Irdebb is equal to fifteen bushels.


$80 MAADI KEREB’S PRESENTS, &c.


«& known, and its celebrated munificence testifies it..
« May the generosity of thy right hand never fail,
“as my heart will never fail in its love for thee:
“may this wedding be propitious to thee amongst
«men. O knight of knights, and of noble heroes,
“ accept the presents of one most grateful to thee.
“ O Aboolfawaris, thou most merciful of warriors,
“ mayest thou never fail in thy beneficence! may
“ thy joys abound to thy gratification, and may thy
& abundance ever increase.”

Antar accepted his presents, and seated him ac-
cording to his rank. Then the chief Maadi Kereb
advanced, and kissing the ground, presented one
thousand she camels, and one thousand he camels;
five hundred horses, with their accoutrements and
armour; one hundred robes of crimson silk;
twenty strings of jewels; twenty dishes of amber-
gris; twenty balls of the most precious musk; one
hundred male slaves, and as many female slaves;
and as he requested Antar’s acceptance, he thus
spoke :

s This day, its light is illumined by thy nuptials,
“ and the glory of its lustre is raised by thy happy
“ star. O Antar of horsemen, rejoice in the ac-
& complishment of every hope and wish. The
“ night, whenever thou comest, loses its obscurity ;
“ and the desert, wherever thou art, loses its barren-
“ ness! Glory, then, above all men, in thy pro-
“ sperity ; all confess thy greatness is their greatness.
“ In thy beneficence accept, my lord, a present


©


HIDJAR’S PRESENTS AND ADDRESS, 381


“c from one, whose possessions are all thine. Kindly
“ regard thy slave, who is come to thee, and
“ shouldst thou refuse him, it will prove his ruin.”

Antar thanked him for his verses, and accepting
his present, seated him according to his rank. Then
came forward the Chief Hidjar, son of Aamir, the
Kendehan, and kissing the ground before Antar, he


presented one thousand she camels, and two thou-


sand he camels; five hundred horses, with their


accoutrements and armour; five strings of jewels ;
one hundred robes of twisted velvet ; twenty balls
of musk’; five thousand sheep; one hundred male
slaves, and a hundred female; and thus he spoke:
“s The generosity of all generosity is seen, when
“thou advancest with a shout; and mankind has
< proved it at the time thou chargest in the field.
« Thou art extolled on high, at the moment when
“ every great man, noble as he is, cries out to thee
“ foraid. Thou art celebrated for thy liberality in
“ the eloquence of Persia, for the hand of the most
« bountiful is found niggardly by thee. Thou art
“ a youth whose every thought, disposition, word,
“ and act are magnificent, in spite of thy malicious
« foes. Thou art a youth that hast mounted to the
“ summit of praise, lofty as it is; and must bear its -
“ accumulated weight, heavy as it is. O Knight of
‘“‘ Battle, may thy nuptials be propitious to thee!
« thou paragon of horsemen, at the moment thou
‘‘ Jeadest the charge! Accept, I conjure thee, this
‘‘ present from me, and excuse its insufficiency, O


< my lord and my friend !”


882 | PRESENTS AND CONGRATULATIONS


Antar thanked him for his address, and accepting
his present, seated him according to his rank. Then
advanced Hassan, the Mazinite, who kissed the
ground, and presented seven hundred horses, with
their accoutrements and armour ; and three thousand
he and she camels; two thousand goats, and two
-thousand sheep; twenty velvet garments; twenty
necklaces; twenty balls of musk, and twenty dishes
of ambergris; with a hundred male slaves, and as
many female; and thus he spoke :

& Shall others congratulate thee? but I will never
“ cease to felicitate thee. O Knight of Knights, m
“ the day of horrors thou art the lion, and the van-
“ quisher of the brave. The chiefs have accorded
“ thee the inheritance of eloquence ; ’tis well, for
‘© thou art wiser than Sohban * himself: accept these
‘‘ presents of one bound in gratitude to thee, O thou
& my refuge, my crown, and my defender !”

Antar thanked him for his address, and accepting
his presents, seated him according to his rank. Then
sprang forward Moshajaa, Chief of the tribe of
Khoolan, and presenting a thousand horses, with all
their accoutrements, and four thousand he and she
camels; ten thousand sheep; ten silk cushions; a
hundred velvet robes; fifty balls of musk, and fifty
dishes of ambergris—he requested his acceptance,
and thus addressed him : |

« Hail to thy hand, that has no bounds! Prose
“ and rhyme fail to express my thanks. How can


© A king celebrated for his wisdom.


OF MAZIN, MOSHAJAA, AND OBAD. 383


& gratitude be conveyed to the noble hero, when the
‘¢ Pisces and the Lyra fall short of it? He pos-
& sesses those virtues of liberality, could I describe
“them, the age would be adorned, and fortune
« would boast thereof. His fingers are the dew, and
“ his munificence the falling shower: his virtues a
‘‘ garden, and his words flowers. Rejoice in the
‘* happiness that may bring thee glory; and nuptials
“ that may produce festivity and triumph! Accept,
“‘ then, I beseech thee, of me, this present; and ex-
‘‘ tend thy pardon, my lord, for its insufficiency.”
Antar accepted his presents, and seated him
according to his rank ; when up sprang the Chief
Obad, and presenting five hundred horses with their
housings and armour; three thousand he and she
camels; five thousand goats; two thousand sheep;
two hundred dishes of ambergris ; two hundred balls
of precious musk, and a thousand robes of crimson
silk.; with one hundred male slaves, and as many
female; he thus expressed his admiration of Antar:
“ Is there for judgment any justice-throne but
‘‘ thine? Beyond thycourt is there any hope amongst
“man? Had a man wished to express praise or
“ gratitude before this, rhymes would have failed.
“ O, by the Lord of Heaven, were all languages to
“ be heaped together, poetry would fall short of
«& what I feel. Thou art the man, were it not for
‘‘ whose sword, there would be no refuge for the
“ hopes of mortals. Marriage is noble among men,
“ and truly in thee is proved what futurity will never
“ produce. Thy success is peculiarly thine own;


884 NIAMET’S PRESENTS.


“ no scene of glory is there, but thine arm was there
“ seen extended—munificence, resolution, and con-
“ vincing wisdom! What is the ram? or the lion?
6‘ or the sword? the hero of horsemen, when the
‘© armies close; the lion of armies, when the armies
« close. As to his virtues, their liberality every pe-
“& titioner has witnessed ; but on the day of battle,
“ they are absynth. He protects those who beg
« his mercy; his benignity enriches before they even
“ ask. Accept then the presents of one, who is come
“to thee in joy—whose power truly depends on
“thee. Never will I praise any one but thee; for
« in the qualities of thy glory I shall cite proverbs
“ among men. O thou, my friend, my associate!
“ may nothing ever disturb or taint thy happiness !”
Antar expressed his thanks, and congratulated
him, and accepting his presents, seated him accord-
ing to his rank. ‘Then came forward Niamet, son
of Ashtar, who presented a thousand horses, with
their accoutrements and armour; and a hundred
necklaces of jewels, and a thousand crimson silk
robes; five thousand he and she camels; twenty
thousand shecp; two hundred male slaves, and as
many female; one hundred balls of precious musk;
one hundred dishes of ambergris. And as he re-
quested Antar’s acceptance, he thus honoured him:
‘“‘'To describe thee would require all we can say
& or write. It is no wonder that we are prolix or
“ flowery. Thy deeds and thy greatness must ever
“ be known: why should we not detail thy eulogy,
“ and compose verses on thee? If indeed there be


HIS EULOGY ON ANTAR. 385


“ no end to words, there is also no term to thy vir-
“ tues. Should glory itself aim at thy height, ex-
‘< ceeding the distance of the stars, it might approach
“ thee; and should it not reach so high, thou hast
“ attained that supremacy we cannot describe, how-
& ever we extend our expressions and our rhymes.
s Man is totally unable to praise the worth of a
“hero, who puts at nought every eulogist, and
“every admirer. As to his actions, his bounty to
&è his foes is cited from east to west. Pens of spears
“ have inscribed his generosity, and tongues of In-
© dian swords have spoken of him inthe East. His
*¢ scimitar has raised him to a pinnacle of glory, on
s“ the very extremity of fame, far and near. He rides a
“ high-mettled steed that never falters, and deals out
< death to the enemy. May this marriage be. au-
“ spicious to thee, thou Knight of war, and mayst
‘s thou succeed in every attempt! May the world
“ be ever a garden under thy command, and by thy
‘¢ bounty may it be refreshed with showers! Ac-
“ cept from me a present that I offer thee, for thou
é art skilled and daring in every deed. May thy
& existence never fail us! thou art our object, and
& we consider thy generoaty as the utmost boundary
& of our wishes.”

The heroes and warriors were much delighted.
Antar thanked him for his address, and accepting
his presents, seated him according to his rank.

Now when all the Arab chiefs had presented their
offerings, each according to his circumstances, Antar
rose, and called out to: Mocri-ul-wahsh ; O Knight |


VOL. IV. cc


386 ANTAR'S GENEROSITY REWARDED.


of Syria, said he, let all the he and she camels, high
priced horses, and all the various rarities I have re- _
ceived this day, be a present from me to you. But
the perfumes of ambergris, and fragrant musk, be-
long to my cousin Ibla; and the slaves shall form
my army and troops. (The number of slaves Antar
received that day amounted to two thousand five
hundred ; to whom he gave as many horses, and as
many damsels, and also arms and weapons; and they
all mounted when he rode out, and ‘halted when he
halted.)

When the Arab chiefs heard Antar’s harangue,
and how he had given away all his property, they
marvelled at his generosity; and they requested him
to terminate his nuptals, fearful of any treachery
or opposition. © Arabs, said King Cais, your
earnestness shall not be thrown away upon us,
nor your visit to us be unavailing; for ye are the
horsemen of magnanimity, and joy should ever suc-
ceed to difficulties. It was the justice of fortune that
released Antar from the bonds of servitude, and en-
dued him with liberality, intrepidity, and boldness
in arms; and he is become our champion, and the
remover of all our pains and sorrows.

Rebia was highly indignant at this speech; and
as King Cais observed him, O Rebia, he added,
verily Antar deserves even more than this, for he has
been patient, and has never failed us; he has pro-
tected: our wives and our families; and there is no-
thing to be done but to conclude the marriage.

And when the Arabs heard this, they kissed the


HIS HUMILITY: THEY TILT AND JOUST. 387


ground before him. Bravo! exclaimed Antar,
springing forward from behind them. All ye that
are present here, know that I am the slave of this
Absian tribe; I will redeem it with my life and my
property from every distress, and every calamity ;
from every misfortune and every adversity: if they
marry my cousin to me, I consent ; if they still re-
sist, I will have patience ; if they wish to delay me,
it is for them to command ; but whatever they do,
I shall still be the object of insult and envy. O
Aboolfawaris, exclaimed they all, there is no oppo-
` sition to the nuptials—thou art our knight and our
champion. Upon which Antar ordered ten thou-
sand he and she camels to be slaughtered that day,
and also twenty thousand sheep, and twenty thou-
sand goats, and a thousand lions and honesses.

Then mounted the Chief Bostam, with the tribe
of Shiban, and the Chief Hijar, with the people of
Kendeh; and Maadi Kereb, with the tribe of Zebeed ;
and Moshajaa, with the tnbe of Khoolan; and Ha-
tal, with the tribe of Ghiftan ; and also King Cais,
with the tribe of Abs and Adnan; and Hassan, the
Mazinite ; and Rowdhah, son of Meneea; and King
Niamet, son of Ashtar; and Rebia, son of Zeead ;
and also all the horsemen: and the whole desert was
illumined with the flash of helmets, and armour, and
corslets. They gave the bridles to their horses, and
tilted and jousted with each other with barbless
spears, till mid-day. (It was now the season of the
spring, and the country was enamelled with the lustre
of the new-born flowerets.)

cc2


$68 THEY FEAST: A MARRIAGE CUSTOM


And the sun being risen to the meridian vault of
heaven, the warriors returned to their tents and the
dwellings that were fixed for them: there the dinner
was already served up for them, and there was not
one but found before him a portion of the lion’s flesh,
of which the men ate till they were satisfied, and
then came the wine-bearers round with cups and
goblets.

Afterwards, Antar directed them to lay out a se-
cond range of tables, covered with victuals for the
poor, and the orphans, and the widows. His orders
were obeyed ; and the herald proclaimed, Whoever
wants meat and provisions, let him repair to the
kitchen of Antar, son of Shedad. So all the girls
and boys, women andchildren, advanced; and Antar
stood up with his brothers, waiting on all the noble
guests amongst the slaves and attendants: but King
Cais prohibited Antar from serving in such menial
offices.

Now there was a curious custom current among
the Arabs at that period. The night on which a
bridegroom should wed his wife, they brought a
quantity of camel packsaddles, and heaped them one-
upon the other, decorating them with magnificent
garments. Here they conducted the bride, and
having seated her on high, they said to the bride-
groom, Come on, now for thy bride! And the
bridegroom rushed forward to carry her off, whilst
the youths of the tribe drawn up in line, right and
left, with staves and stones in their hands, as soon
as the bridegroom rushed forwards, began beating


ABOLISHED IN FAVOUR OF ANTAR. . 989


and pelting him, and doing their utmost to prevent
his reaching his wife. If a rib or so were broken in
the affair, it was well for him ; were he killed, it was
his destiny. But should he reach his wife in safety,
‘the people quitted him, and no one attempted to ap-
proach him. (I inquired about this circumstance,
says Asmaee, and what it was they were about.
Asmaee, they answered, the meaning of this is to
exhibit the bride. to the warriors, that should her
husband die, any one else might take a ai to
her, and take her off.)

At this period, as Antar’s nuptials were sea, 3
King Cais assembled his brothers; Know, sons of
my father and my mother, said he, this night is the
night of Ibla’s appearing in state to Antar; and I
fear that some enemy of his may betray him: but
this custom has prevailed for ages past. My opinion,
said Harith, is, that this custom should be abolished |
with respect to Antar, and renewed with every one
else.

King Cais saw the expediency of such advice,
and accordingly ordered the herald to proclaim to
the assembled nations, that King Cais, King of the
tribe of Abs and Adnan, ordains that every one’
who attends Antar’s nuptials with a sword, or staff,
or any instrument, shall be put to death, and his
property be given to Antar: and I will excuse, says
the King, those who make offerings, and I will be
impartial to those who take warning: for I have
abolished this custom at the nuptials of Antar; but:
I shall reinforce it on every future occasion. Thus


AMARAH'S ENVY AND MALIGNITY.


proclaimed the herald throughout the tents of the
tribe of Abs and Adnan. The Arabs heard it, and
all Antar’s friends were exceedingly pleased at the
precaution thus taken.

Now when Amarah heard that Antar was about
to consummate his marriage with Ibla, he was seized
with a violent fever, and an ague-fit suddenly fell
upon his whole body. He sent for forty of his
slaves, and exciting their avarice, ordered them to
be on the watch the night of Ibla’s marriage with
Antar, that they should rush unawares upon him,
and put him to death. They went away in order
to execute Amarah’s commands; but hearing the
proclamations among the tents, that no one should
attend Antar’s wedding with arms, they returned,
and told Amarah of the circumstance. Then his
heart burst—he started up, and ran to his brother
Rebia, exclaiming, O my brother, I am dying.
What’s the matter now, my fine fellow ? said Rebia.
Amarah related his disappointment; but added to
Rebia, You have frequented the privacies of kings,
and have travelled over lands and countries: so ex-
plain to me some deadly herb, that I may give it
this slave in such a manner that no one may know
any thing about it. Amarah, said Rebia, I know
of an electuary, which one of King Numan’s con-
fidants explained to me, saying, Rebia, this is an
electuary ; should any one eat thereof, it will extin-
guish the burning warmth of his body ; and, for one
day and night, should it circulate through his frame,
he will sink into a state of inanition and lethargy.


HIS PLAN TO RUIN ANTAR. 391


Brother, said Amarah, give me some of this elec-
teary, that I may give it this black Antar to eat.
And who will give it Antar to eat ? said Rebia. My
female slave Kehla, said Amarah; Khemisa, Ibla’s
handmaiden, is very fond of her, and this day, very
early, she will go to assist her. Upon this Rebia
gave Amarah the electuary, which he took, and
returned home.

Now this slave-girl Kehla was in high favour with
Amarah, for she was in lieu of Ibla to him, and
when he came home he sent for her. Kehla, said
he, I have an important affair for you, and I cannot
trust its execution to any hands but yours. What’s
this mighty affair, my lord? said Kehla. i want
.you, continued Amarah, to take this electuary with
you, when Khemisa invites you ‘to the feast, and
take special care to mix it with Antar’s meat, that
he may eat of it. But, my lord, said Kehla, what
are the effects of this medicine, should any- one eat
it? Itis not deadly? I should never escape out of
the hands of the family of Carad. No, no! O Kehla,
said Amarah, it is not deadly ; it isa drug to excite
hatred, and you well khow what I have suffered on
account of Ibla, ahd now at last Antar has got the
better of me; he has taken her by force, and all my
wish is, that he may eat this drug, so that he may
hate her. Kehla expressed her obedience to his
commands, and Amarah was all joy and delight,
recommending her to keep the affair secret.

_ Kehla took the drug, and set out for Antar’s


392 AMARAH CAUGHT IN HIS OWN .TRAP.


feast; and: when she arrived, she saw one of the
Carad slaves, called Naeem, standing in attendance
amongst the other slaves; round his head was a
crimson turban, and he wore one of Antar’s honorary
robes. Kehla was passionately in love with him;
and when she saw him so fine, she said to herself,
"Tis true Amarah loves me, but he will not let me
go out to the pastures and meet my beloved—he
says this medicine is good to produce hatred, so the
best thing I can do will be to give it my master,
Amarah, himself to eat, that he may hate me, and
let me go out to the pastures; and I will let Antar
be happy. So she went to Khemisa, Ibla’s hand-
maiden, and related what had occurred with Ama-
rah; and giving her the medicine, Khemisa, said.
she, there is nothing to be done but for you to infuse
this drug into the meat, and take it to my master,
Amarah ; for he will not refuse it from your hands.
Khemisa acquiesced, and taking the drug from her,
put it into a platter full of meat, smothered with
saffron and gravy; and having thus melted the drug
in the meat, she carried away the dish, and went in
search of the Chief Amarah, before whom she placed
it. As soon as he saw Khemisa, he asked her about
Kehla. My lord, she replied, I left her waiting on
my master, Antar; and I have brought you this
meat. Amarah was highly pleased, and said, Let
not Kehla delay giving Antar the medicine to eat ;

and let the slave be a Black greasy Pot, as Rebia
= has said. And he ate up the whole meat; in the


JOY OF TRE MATRONS AND GIRES, 398


excess. of his joy licking the very dish with his
tongue. However the meat was not long settled in
his stomach before he felt the effects of the drug.
And now when the Arabs assembled for Antar’s
marriage had eaten their dinner, the cups of wine
were brought round to them; the men and women
were promiscuously moving together ; the girls came
forth, and the slave-women were amusing them-
selves, enjoying the happy moments. Hola! cried
the matrons and the virgins, we will not remain
covered on Antar’s marriage. And they threw aside
their veils, and the full moons appeared in all their
lustre ; and they flaunted the branches of their forms
in the excess of their delight; and it was a famous
day for them. By the faith of an Arab, said the
matrons and virgins, we will not remain thus con-
cealed behind these curtains; the doors shall not be
shut upon us; we will see Ibla in her magnificence,
and we will walk in her train, and make our offer-
ings to her and Antar, and we will not keep a dir-.
‘hem or a dinar to ourselves; for a happier night
than this can never be, and no one but a madman
would miss it.
When the women of the tribe of Carad heard this,
they were alarmed for the scandal and censure that
would thus be occasioned : so they resolved to finish
Ibla’s ceremony. They clothed her in the most
magnificent robes and Chosroweean garments, and
superb necklaces; they placed the coronet of Chosroe
on her head, and tiaras round her forehead. Ibla |
was remarkable for her beauty and loveliness: the.


`~ $94 IBLA COMES FORTH IN STATE.


tirewomen surrounded her, and they requested An-
tar to let her come forth in state. He gave them
permission, whilst his brothers and slaves stood
round the pavilion with their swords, and javelins,
and weapons. He ordered them to place a lofty
throne for Ibla in front of the pavilion. They exe-
cuted his commands—they lighted briliant and
scented candles before her, and spread afar the odour
of aloes and camphor, and scattered the perfumes
of ambergris and musk—the lights were, fixed in
candlesticks of gold and silver—the torches blazed—
and whilst the women shouted and raised their voices
to whistles and screams, Ibla came forth in state.
In her hand she borea drawn sword, whose lustre
dazzled the eyesight. All present gave a shout;
whilst the malicious and ill natured cried aloud,
What a pity that one so beautiful and fair should
be wedded. to one so black! As to the Chief Ama-
rah, he felt that his life had quitted his body, and
the universe appeared all darkened to him; he was
stupefied, and in the greatest consternation; and
- though he wished to stand up, he fell down, for an
arrow from Ibla’s eyes shot him, and he was upset.
I know, said he to himself, this black slave will be
happy with Ibla; but I must put a stop to. this
business; so he ran home, and took two necklaces
of jewels, and went with them to Simiah, Shedad’s
wife. O Simiah, said he, I have a particular favour
to beg of you; I wish you would fulfil it, and take
these two necklaces of jewels. What is it you want,
my lord? said Suniah. What I want of you, said


AMARAR’S SECOND PLOT. 395


Amarah, is to say to Zebeeba, Antar’s mother,
God forbid you should do such an act, O Zebeeba !
If she asks you what you mean by this speech, tell
her, Your son Antar has endured much vexation ;
but his trouble is not lost, for Ibla, after having
been his foster-sister, is now become his wife. Ze-
beeba is but of little wit, so she will perhaps tell her
son Antar; and should she say, I nursed Ibla with
your milk, may be his high spirit will mount up,
and he will not venture near his bride. Amarah’s
intention was to stop Antar’s marriage that night,
that the medicine might have its full effect upon
him, ignorant, as he was, that the drug was in his
own bowels. Simiah agreed to his proposal, for she
much coveted the necklaces. Amarah departed, his
heart full of joy. Simiah turned towards the pavi-
lion, and met an immense concourse of people, all
huddled one upon another. ‘The candles were
burning, and the torches were waving—Ibla came
forth in state, looking about right and left, and as
some one has described :

“ She exhibited the play of her charms in her
“ features and her form, as her elegant shape moved
“ about. She looked and shot arrows from her eye-
“ lashes, and threw amongst us penetrating darts.


“ The beauties of her face exclaimed to her admirers, `


“ Be not ignorant, and attach yourselves to her
“ charms. Every charm was united in her that
‘¢ could captivate the senses, when she either sat still
‘“‘ or moved.”


396. ` ANTAR’S JOY INTERRUPTED.


When Ibla had appeared in state amongst the
people, her mother took the sword out of her hand,
and wished to dress her a second time; but fire and
animation seized Antar; urged by his pride, he
darted at Ibla, and snatched her off the throne of
state like a sparrow, and entered the pavilion with
her, leaving pain and regret in the hearts of all the
bystanders: but Shiboob and Jareer remained at
the door of the pavilion, protecting their brother
from every harm.

Simiah, Shedad’s wife, imparted to Zebeeba what
Amarah had instructed her to say; and as Zebeeba
was very deficient in sense, and not a little careless,
she let her son alone till he had entered the tent
with his cousin Ibla, when she went to him, and
seating herself by his side, congratulated him on his
marriage. O my son, said she, thanks be to God
that thy trouble has not been thrown away, for Ibla,
after having been thy sister, is become thy bride.
But, my son, do not tell any one of this. At these
words the light became dark in his eyes. What is
this you say, my mother? he cried. Know, my son,
said his mother, that I frequently suckled Ibla with
thy milk. And why did you not inform me of this
circumstance before now? asked Antar. Because,
replied Zebeeba, I never thought you would obtain
her. But now I tell you; so do as you please.
And away she went. Antar was bewildered at the
vicissitudes of fortune; he did not approach Ibla,
but passed the night reflecting on the misfortunes
directed against him from all quarters.


AMARAH’S CONFUSION AND MISERY. 397


As to Amarah, he returned home, and sent for
 Kehla: when she came, he ordered her to bring him
cups and goblets, which she did; and when he
had drunk three cups of wine with her, and was
caressing her, he fell almost senseless. Amarah was
startled, and in despair; Surely, said he to her, you
have not made any mistake with the drugs! Whats
that you say? cried Kehla; it is all your aversion
for me that makes you speak thus: you saw Ibla
this evening, and have been looking at her charms.
Amarah remained doubtful, whether to believe it or
not ; sometimes talking of the drugs, and sometimes
of the wine, till he perceived a lethargy come over
his limbs and senses; and he was in a dreadful state
of confusion. |

As to Antar, he remained, as we said, till day
dawned, when Ibla’s mother came in, with’ the
women of the Carad family, to congratulate her on
her marriage, as was customary.. They entered;
but seeing her exceedingly distressed, her mother
asked, What was the matter? O my mother, said
Ibla, my cousin loves me not} and says he has
heard something that must part us for ever.

At hearing this, her mother was greatly exas-
perated. She sent for Antar; What have you done
here ? cried she. You black! you cuckold ! do you
wish to make us a scandal among the Arabs? What
has happened? What's the matter? my mistress,
said Antar. You have taken my daughter by force,
said Shereeha, and have kept off all suitors and
lovers from her; and now she is yours, you have


1


398 SHERERMA CLEARS UP THE DIFFICULTY,


cast her from your heart, and don’t care about her.
I desire you will tell me what this means, for never
will I quit you till it is cleared up. I will take away
my daughter, if you don’t want her; but if you are
a nasty greasy pot, I will put you on woman’s
clothes, and give you a hurdy-gurdy or a dulcimer,
you filthy fellow! O my mistress, replied Antar,
didst ever see any one approach his sister, or con-
sider her as his wife? Who's your sister? said She-
reeha. Ibla, replied Antar; and then he told her
what his mother Zebeeba had related to him.
Whither and how? cried Shereeha: I was not big
with Ibla tall you were ten years old, and you were
constantly roaming about the wilds and mountains,
tending camels and sheep; and she immediately
sent for Antar’s mother: Zebeeba, said she, hast
thou at any time suckled Ibla with Antar’s milk?
I don’t understand you; I know nothing about it,
said Zebeeba. My mistress Simiah desired me to
` say all this to my son Antar. O my mistress, one
night I was in a deal of trouble; I lay down, and
I was terribly agitated about this sad affair: I was
so confused that I said to myself, Which is tallest,
I or my son? and when I stood by him, I perceived
that I did not come up to his knees; then I thought
he was my father, and that I was his daughter.
When Ibla’s mother and the other women heard
this, they all laughed; but as Shereeha wished to
know the truth of it, What could you mean by
these suggestions? said she to Simiah; thus to
disturb the happiness of my daughter and her


AND ANTAR 1S MARRIED TO IBLA. 399


cousin! O Shereeha, said Simiah, know then, that
Amarah gave me this diamond necklace, and made.
me swear to instruct Zebeeba thus; but though I
was aware no one could possibly prove the fact, I
could not reconcile myself to the loss of this neck-
Jace merely for a word or so, feeling assured that
for this night my son would bear with me. Antar’s
countenance now brightened with joy, and his bosom
expanded with delight. Away, then, said he to the
women, you have finished your congratulations.
He went to Ibla, and as he looked at her, he
thought of Zebeeba’s expressions, and all she had
said to procrastinate his happiness, and thus he
spoke:
_ “ Zebeeba thought Ibla was her daughter; Ze-
“ beeba lied, and she too who instructed her. Ze-
“ beeba is like the obscurity when it rises; the
“ night is in her, and is as if she were fraternised to
‘it. But the sweet Ibla is like the morning, and :
« her charms are pre-eminent. Who would draw a
‘ parallel between the owl and the dove? and who
“ would find fault with the sun at noon-day? My -
“ mother came with a horrible story ; she came with
“ an insidious falsehood in her speech.”
When he had recited his verses, he quitted Ibla,
scented as he was with musk and ambergris. The
shouts arose, and the slave-girls whirled the cymbals
in every direction; but the happiest of all were
King Cais and his brothers; and as Antar came to
him with the Arab chiefs, Cais congratulated him
on his nuptials, as did every one else, kissing him


400 HE EXPRESSES HIS LOVE FUR HER.


between the eyes. King Cais having invested him
with an honorary robe, and also all the Arab chiefs
present on the occasion of Antar’s marriage, ques-
tioned him as to his heart’s contentment. O, my
lord, replied Antar, I have succeeded in obtaining
my cousin only by your noble firmness, and the de-
cision of your character; and thus Antar addressed
him:

‘‘ I swear by thee that I have passed a time of
« happiness, and I enjoyed the most perfect delight
« in her socicty till dawn. As Ibla lay, musk spread
« delicious fragrance from her person, and her
« breath to me is more delicious than oil of roses.
« I kissed her bosom and her cheeks, ornamented
& with precious jewels, and the flush of wine. I
‘ grasped in her the branch of the tamarisk, steeped
‘ in-clouds of beauty from the distilling rain ; she
« leant on me with her hand, her elbow, and her
« wrist. We were cheek to cheek and neck to neck.
« Never did | behold amongst the human race any
“ thing like Ibla; lovelier and more beautiful than
“ the sun and moon. When she stirs, her graceful
& movements resemble the wave of the branch with
‘its green leaves. O, I vow no other charms will
“ I ever love in my life; never, whilst the world
s endures, will I ever fail in my fondness for her.
s Ibla is indeed a matchless nymph; thin loined,
& and delicate waisted. Love for her penetrates my
« heart and my entrails: it is as if the tears that
‘- flow down my cheeks should flow in blood. Away,
‘ away, never will I forget her love; no, never till


AWTABAN DISTURBS THE FEASTS. 401


“ I rest in my grave. She is my object and desire
“ in every desert; never will 1 abandon her till the
“ day of judgment.”

King Cais and all present were in admiration of
his eloquence, saying, God be praised, that has en-
dued thee with intrepidity and skill in arms, and
fluency of speech! Thus they continued feasting
and enjoying themselves for seven days successively,
and after that the Arabs separated for their re-
spective homes, surprised at the marriage, and the
quantity of wealth expended at it.

When the Arabs were gone, the Absians re-
mained two days quietly in their tents, but on the
third day King Cais gave a splendid feast at the
lake of Zat-ul-irsad to the tribe of Abs, in honour
of Antar’s nuptials; and when they had eaten their
dinner, the wine circled among them, and as they
were thus occupied, behold a dust like smoke arose.
Antar and Mocri-ul-wahsh mounted with the Ab-
sian chiefs to meet it, in order to see what it meant,
and lo! it discovered a close-vizored knight, fol-
lowed by ten thousand horsemen clad in armour
and steel. ‘This warrior was called Awtaban, son
of Semaamaa, and the reason of his coming into the
land of Abs was this: As he was on a predatory
excursion against the property of the Arabs, he
quitted the land of Yemen, his own country, and
continued his expedition through the land of Cah-
tan, anu entered the country of the tribes of Adnan,
where meeting the Arabs who were separating from
Antar’s nuptials, he inquired about their movements,

VOL. Iv. DD


402 MEETING OF ANTAR AND AWTABAN.


and they told him all about Antar’s marriage, and
the wealth and cattle he had expended on that oc-
casion. At this description of Antar, he was highly
incensed and indignant, for he was also one of the
famed giants in those days of ignorance. We must
now proceed, said he to his heroes, to plunder the
goods of the Absians, and kill their men, and slay
Antar, whose name is thus famed and celebrated.
I will take his cousin Ibla captive, and make her
my concubine; and he hastened on till he came
nigh unto the Absians.

When Antar saw the armies and horsemen, he
turned towards the tribe of Abs to consuk with
them on what they should do in this affair. Be-
holding their countenances turn pale from fear, Cou-
sins, said he, banish these terrors and alarms; com-
fort yourselves, and rejoice in the defeat of your
foes; and he attacked in front of the Absians.
Ibla, with the other women, came out to see what
was going on; and as Antar beheld Ibla as she
stood among the women without the tents, he was
afraid she would look upon him with the eye of
inferiority, so he rushed upon Awtaban’s troops.
Hola! O Arabs, he cried, tell me whence ye are,
and what has brought ye hither? He had scarcely
finished when Awtaban stood before him ; Eh ! black
wretch, coward, poltroon, cried he, what slave of
the tribe of Abs and Adnan art thou? Thou son
of a base coward, said Antar, I am the vanquisher
of heroes; I am he who enjoys with my sword the
tribute of all these countries. I am the Chief An-


THEIR RECIPROCAL CHALLENGF. 403


tar, son of the Chief Shedad. And I am come im
quest of thee, said Awtaban in answer: this day I
must slay thee, and take captive thy cousin Ibla;
and if thou dost not know me, thou son of a pol-
troon, I am Awtaban, the knight of Yemen, and in
my tribute are the Jands of Senaa and Aden. He
had not finished when Antar shouted at him and
attacked. Awtaban met him, and addressed him
in these lines : |

s O Chief Antar, a hero has come against thee,
& whose power in the girded sword is to be dreaded :
“it cleaves the neck of the horsemen and the foe,
“ and lays them low at every stroke. How many.
“ knights have I slain in the plain of battle, where
“ they fall on their cheeks, and struggle with their
“ hands! Come on, then; in me is an impetuous |
“ knight, whose ambition soars above every hero.”

May thy mother forfeit thee, and may thy family
and tribe be deprived of thee! replied Antar. This
day will I make the last of thy days; and he thus
answered :

“Thou liest, by the shrine of God! thou most
& ignorant of men, thou son of a coward, thou
ss vilest of wretches! Come on to the fight! Soon
s thou wilt meet a lion whose power is a match for
‘every antagonist; whose Absian, Antarian vehe-
& mence overthrows the firmest of the foes with his
« mangling thrusts, and hurls down dead the war-
‘‘ rior-enemy with his sword, and leaves them slain
s like camels gasping in death, abundant as carrion


404 ANTAR SLAYS HIM


“‘ for the wild beasts—food for the birds of the
“ deserts, and the hawks.”

Thus saying, Antar rushed upon Awtaban. Aw-
tabım received him with a heart like a rock ; and
between them there ensued the battle of swords and
spears, that turned infants grey, and sickened the
eves. They continued in this state, plying the
sword-blow and the spear-thrust, till all the warriors
shuddered at their exploits. Antar looked at Av-
taban, and saw he was a mailed hon, and a terrific
warrior. They continued to fight, to give and take,
to sport, to exert themselves, to advance and retire,
till Antar perceiving that Awtaban was exhausted
and tired, hemmed him in, and clung to him ; then
closing every means of escape, he grasped his dread-
ful Dhami, irresistible and never-failing, and smote
Awtaban on the head, covered as he was with his
shield, but Antar’s sword cut it in two, and cleft
his helmet, and the chains, and the wadding, and
still continued its sway till it issued through his
thighs to the back of his horse, and Awtaban fell,
he and his horse, cut in four; and at the effects of
his blow he shouted out, O by Abs! O by Adnan!
I will ever be the lover of Ibla. All the Absians
gave an universal shout, May thy hand be never
palsied! may no foe ever triumph over thee! may
no one ever harm thee! thou knight of the age;
thou champion of the tribe of Abs and Adnan!

As to Awtaban’s troops, when they saw that An-
tar had felled their chief, they attacked with all


AND HIS TROOPS. ANTAR'’S EXULTATION, 405


their ten thousand like one man, crying out, O thou
black! thou wretch! thou coward! thou poltroon !
. thou hast slain a knight whose equal the age will
never produce. Antar received them on the chest
of his horse Abjer, whilst the Absians also assaulted
to assist him; men met men, and heroes heroes;
blood flowed and streamed; limbs were hewn off;
the Absians exerted all their powers in the presence
of their wives and families, and destroyed the foe
with their force and vigour. As to Antar, he ex-
posed himself to death and destruction, for he knew
Ibla was looking at him. Mocri-ul-wahsh performed
-ìn the presence of Antar deeds to be recorded, and
in less than two hours Awtaban’s troops fled; but
the Absians and Antar pursued them closely, till
having driven them out of the country, they re-
turned to their scattered horses and dispersed ar-
mies; and having collected their property, they
went home, Antar at their head, as if drowned in a
sea of blood; and thus he spoke:

“« My heart is at rest; it is recovered from its in-
“ toxication. Sleep has calmed my eyelids, and
“ relieved them. Fortune has aided me, and my
“ prosperity cleaves the veil of night, and the seven
‘¢ orders of heaven. I am the slave that encounters
“ death on the day of terrors, and fears not destruc-
“ tion. I have slain Awtaban, and he was a knight -
“ stout armed and bitter palated; I hurled him to
“ the ground, laid low by my sword, his feet and
“ legs wallowing in blood. I have made the horse-
“ men drink of the cup of death mixed with tortures,


406  GRNERAL SATISFACTION OF THE ABSIANS.


“ at my scimitar’s edge. I am the man from whom
“ they experience on the day of fears insufferable
“ justice: a youth that fells the horsemen on the
‘¢ day of battle, and dreads not the thin edge of the
“sabre. Ah! O Ibla, if thou hadst beheld my
“ deeds, and my thrusts with the straight spear,
“ thy love for me would increase, and thou wouldst
“ truly applaud my acts as long as people walk or
‘¢ move on the earth. My glory is on high, in the
‘¢ towers of the Pleiades, and my ambition rends the
“ seven ranges of heaven.”

When Antar had finished, the heroes and war-
riors were astonished at his eloquence; they retired —
home, and dividing the horses and the spoil amongst
the horsemen, they renewed their feasts, and enter-
tainments, and sports, at the lake of Zat ul irsad
and the purling streams, the slave-women beating
the cymbals, and the men flourishing their swords.


THE END.


a ee ee ee oe


LONDON: R os
PRINTED BY THOMAS DAVISON, WHITEYASA AS.


a~
= een Pg Re ee Se


O


Digitized by
