Ante-Nicene Fathers, Vol. 6: Fathers of the Third Century: Gregory Thaumaturgus, Dionysius the Great, Julius Africanus, Anatolius, and Minor Writers, Methodius, Arnobius
Alexander Roberts & James Donaldson (eds.), various translators (1885)
Source: Internet Archive
Public Domain. Staged for the Tower of Babel digital library.

========================================================================

IVIicrosoft Corporation


s.


THE


ANTE-NICENE FATHERS


TRANSLATIONS OF


The Writings of the Fathers do\ n to A.D. J2^.

THE REV. ALEXANDER ROBERTS, D.D.,

AND

JAMES DONALDSON, LL.D.,

EDITORS.

AMERICAN REPRINT OF THE EDINBURGH EDITION.


REVISED AND CHRONOLOGICALLY ARRANGED, WITH BRIEF PREFACES AND

OCCASIONAL NOTES,

BY

A. CLEVELAND COXE, D.D.


VOLUME VI.

GREGORY THAUMATURGUS, DIONYSIUS THE GREAT, JULIUS AFRICANUS, ANATOUUS AND
MINOR WRITERS, METHODIUS, ARNOBIUS.


AUTHORIZED EDITION.


BUFFALO: \0^


THE CHRISTIAN LITERATURE COMPANY.

1886.


THE CHRISTIAN LITERATURE COMPANY,


ELECTROTVPED AND PRINTED

BY RAND, AVERY, AND COMPANY,

BOSTON.


FATHERS OF THE THIRD CENTURY:


GREGORY THAUMATURGUS, DIONYSIUS THE GREAT, JULIUS AFRICANUS, ANATOLIUS
AND MINOR WRITERS, METHODIUS, ARNOBIUS.


AMERICAN EDITION.

CHRONOLOGICALLY ARRANGED, WITH BRIEF NOTES AND PREFACES,

BY
A. CLEVELAND COXE, D.D.


Ta apyxjla tOr] KpaTUTU).

The NicENE Council.


INTRODUCTORY NOTICE.


In this volume a mass of fragmentary material ' has been reduced to method, and so harmo-
nized as to present an integral result. The student has before him, therefore, (i) a view of the
Christian Church emerging from the ten persecutions; (2) a survey of its condition on the eve
of that great event, the (nominal) conversion of the empire ; (3) an introduction to the era of
Athanasius ; and (4) a history of events that led to the calling of the first Catholic council
at Nic^ea.

The moral grandeur and predominance of the See of Alexandria are also here conspicuously
illustrated. The mastery which its great school continued to exercise over Christian thought,
its hegemony in the formation of Christian literature, its guardian influence in the development of
doctrinal technology, and not less the Divine Providence that created it and built it up for the
noble ends which it subserved in a Clement, an Origen, and an Athanasius, will all present them-
selves forcibly to every reflecting reader of this book. One half of this volume presents the
Alexandrian school itself in its glorious succession of doctors and pupils, and the other half in
the reflected light of its universal influence. Thus Methodius has no other distinction than that
which he derives from his wholesome corrections of Origen, and yet the influence of Origen
upon his own mind is betrayed even in his antagonisms. He objects to the excessive allegorizing
of that great doctor, yet he himself allegorizes too much in the same spirit. Finally we come
to Arnobius, who carries on the line of Latin Christianity in Northern Africa ; but even here we
find that Clement, and not Tertullian, is his model. He gives us, in a Latin dress, not a little
directly borrowed from the great Alexandrian.

This volume further demonstrates — what I have so often touched upon — the historic fact that
primitive Christianity was Greek in form and character, Greek from first to last, Greek in all its
forms of dogma, worship, and polity. One idea only did it borrow from the West, and that not
from the ecclesiastical, but the civil, Occident. It conformed itself to the imperial plan of ex-
archates, metropoles, and dioceses. Into this civil scheme it shaped itself, not by design, but by
force of circumstances, just as the Anglo-American communion fell in with the national polity,
and took shape in dioceses each originally conterminous with a State. Because it was the capital
of the empire, therefore Rome was reckoned \}ciQ. first, but not the chief, of Sees, as the Council
of Nicsea declared ; and because Byzantium had become " New Rome," therefore it is made
second on the list, but equal in dignity. Rome was the sole Apostolic See of the West, and, as such,
reflected the honours of St. Paul, its founder, and of St. Peter, who also glorified it by martyrdom ;
but not a word of this is recognised at Nicasa as investing it even with a moral primacy. That was
informally the endowment of Alexandria ; unasserted because unquestioned, and unchallenged
because as yet unholy ambition had not infected the Apostolic churches.

It is time, then, to disabuse the West of its narrow ideas concerning ecclesiastical history.
Dean Stanley rebuked this spirit in his Lectures on the Eastern Church? He complained that
" Eastern Christendom is comparatively an untrodden field ; " he quoted the German proverb,^
" Behind the mountains there is yet a population ; " he called on us to enlarge our petty Occi-
dental horizon ; and he added words of reproach which invite us to reform the entire scheme of

' See the Edinburgh series. 2 See p. 3, ed. of 1861. 3 " Hinter dem Berge sind auch Leute."


vi INTRODUCTORY NOTICE.

• .

our ecclesiastical history by presenting the Eastern Apostolic churches as the main stem of Chris-
tendom, of which the church of Rome itself was for three hundred years a mere colony, unfelt
in theology except by contributions to the Greek literature of Christians, and wholly unconscious
of those pretensions with which, in a spirit akin to that of the romances about Arthur and the
Round Table, the fabulous Decretals afterwards invested a succession of primitive bishops in .
Rome, wholly innocent of anything of the kind.

" The Greek Church," says Dean Stanley, " reminds us of the time when the tongue, not of
Rome, but of Greece, was the sacred language of Christendom. It was a striking remark of the
Emperor Napoleon, that the introduction of Christianity itself was, in a certain sense, the tri-
umph of Greece over Rome ; the last and most signal instance of the maxim of Horace, Grcecia
capta ferutn victorem cepit. The early Roman church was but a colony of Greek Christians or
Grecized Jews. The earliest Fathers of the Western Church wrote in Greek. The early popes
were not Italians, but Greeks. The name of pope is not Latin, but Greek, the common and now
despised name of every pastor in the Eastern Church. . . . She is the mother, and Rome the
daughter. It is her privilege to claim a direct continuity of speech with the earliest times ; to
boast of reading the whole code of Scripture, Old as well as New, in the language in which it
was read and spoken by the Apostles. The humblest peasant who reads his Septuagint or Greek
Testament in his own mother-tongue on the hills of Boeotia may proudly feel that he has access
to the original oracles of divine truth which pope and cardinal reach by a barbarous and imper-
fect translation ; that he has a key of knowledge which in the West is o?iiy to be found in the
hands of the learned classes.^''

Before entering on the study of this volume, the student will do well to read the interesting
work which I have quoted ; ' but the following extract merits a place just here, and I cannot
deprive even the casual reader of the benefit of such a preface from the non-ecclesiastical and
purelv literary pen of the Dean. He says : - " The See of Alexandria was then the most impor-
tant in the world.^ . . . The Alexandrian church was the only great seat of Christian learning. Its
episcopate was the Evangelical See, as founded by the chair of St. Mark. ... Its occupant, as
we have seen, was the only potentate of the time who bore the name of pope.* After the Coun-
cil of Nicsea he became the fudge of the world, from his decisions respecting the celebration of
Easter : and the obedience paid to his judgment in all matters of learning, secular and sacred,
almost equalled that paid in later days to the ecclesiastical authority of the popes of the West.
'The head of the Alexandrian church,' says Gregory Nazianzen, 'is the head of the world.' "

In the light of these all-important historic truths, these volumes of the Ante-Nicene Fathers
have been elucidated by their American editor.5 He begs to remind his countrymen that eccle-
siastical history is yet to be written on these irrefragable positions, and the future student of his-
tory will be delivered from the most puzzling entanglement when once these idols of the market
are removed from books designed for his instruction. Let American scholarship give us, at last,
a Church history not written from a merely Western point of view, nor clogged with traditional
phraseology perseveringly adhered to on the very pages which supply its refutation. It is the
scandal of literature that the frauds of the pseudo-Decretals should be perpetuated by modern
lists of " popes," beginning with St. Peter, in the very books which elaborately expose the em-
piricism of such a scheme, and quote the reluctant words by which this gigantic imposition has
been consigned to infamy in the confessions of Jesuits and Ultramontanes themselves.

' Late editions are cheap in the market. It is filled with the author's idiosyncrasies, but it is brilliant and suggestive.

' Lect. vii. p. 268. On the verse of Horace (£/., i. book ii. 155), see Dacier's note, vol. ix. 389.

3 He adds: "Alexandria, till the rise of Constantinople, was the most powerful city in the East. The prestige of its founder still
clung to it."

■* That is, of " the pope," as Wellington was called " the duke." But Cyprian was called papa, even by the Roman clergy.

-' He owes his own introduction to a just view of these facts to a friend of his boyhood and youth, the late Rev. Dr. Hill of the Ameri-
can Mission in Athens. He was penetrated with love for Greek Christians.


CONTENTS OF VOLUME VI.


I. GREGORY THAUMATURGUS. A Declaration of Faith 7

A Metaphrase of the Book of Ecclesiastes 9

Canonical Epistle 18

The Oration and Panegyric addressed to Origen 21

A Sectional Confession of Faith 40

On the Trinity 48

Twelve Topics on the Faith 50

On the Subject of the Soul 54

Four Homilies 58

On all the Saints 72

On the Gospel according to Matthew 74

II. DIONYSIUS THE GREAT. Extant Fragments 81

EXEGETICAL FRAGMENTS Ill

III. JULIUS AFRICANUS. Extant Writings 125

IV. ANATOLIUS AND MINOR WRITERS 141

Alexander of Cappadocia 153

Theognostus of Alexandria 155

PiERius OF Alexandria 156

Theonas of Alexandria 158

Phileas 161

Pamphilus 165

Malchion 168

V. ARCHELAUS. The Acts of the Disputation with the Heresiarch Manes . 179

VI. ALEXANDER OF LYCOPOLIS. Of the Manich-eans 241

VIL PETER OF ALEXANDRIA. The Genuine Acts of Peter 261

The Canonical Epistle 269

Fragments 280

VIII. ALEXANDER OF ALEXANDRIA. Epistles on the Arian Heresy and the

Deposition of Arius 291

IX. METHODIUS. The Banquet of the Ten Virgins 309

Concerning Free-Will 356

From the Discourse on the Resurrection 364

Fragments 37S

Oration concerning Simeon and Anna 383

Oration on the Palms 394

Three Fragments from the Homily on the Cross and Passion of Christ, 399

Some other Fragments 401

X. ARNOBIUS. The Seven Books of Arnobius against the Heathen . . 4'3

vil


GREGORY THAUMATURGUS,


[TRANSLATED BY THE REV. S. D. F. SALMOND, M.A.]


/


INTRODUCTORY NOTE

TO

GREGORY THAUMATURGUS.


[a.d. 205-240-265.] Alexandria continues to be the head of Christian learning.' It is
delightful to trace the hand of God from generation to generation, as from father to son, inter-
posing for the perpetuity of the faith. We have already observed the continuity of the great
Alexandrian school : how it arose, and how Pantsenus begat Clement, and Clement begat Origen.
So Origen begat Gregory, and so the Lord has provided for the spiritual generation of the
Church's teachers, age after age, from the beginning. Truly, the Lord gave to Origen a holy
seed, better than natural sons and daughters ; as if, for his comfort, Isaiah had written,^ forbidding
him to say, " I am a dry tree."

Our Gregory has given us not a little of his personal adventures in his panegyric upon his
master, and for his further history the reader need only be referred to what follows. But I am
anxious to supply the dates, which are too loosely left to conjecture. As he was ordained a
bishop "very young," according to Eusebius, I suppose he must have been far enough under
fifty,i\\Q age prescribed by the "Apostolic Canons" (so called), though probably not younger than
thirty, the earliest canonical limit for the ordination of a presbyter. If we decide upon five and
thirty, as a mean reckoning, we may with some confidence set his birth at a.d. 205, dating back
from his episcopate, which began a.d. 240. He was a native of Neo-Caesarea, the chief city of
Pontus, — a fact that should modify what we have learned about Pontus from Tertullian.^ He
was born of heathen parentage, and lived like other Gentile boys until his fourteenth year {circa
A.D. 218), with the disadvantage of being more than ordinarily imbued by a mistaken father in the
polytheism of Greece. At this period his father died ; but his mother, carrying out the wishes of
her husband, seems to have been not less zealous in furthering his education according to her
pagan ideas. He was, evidently, the inheritor of moderate wealth ; and, with his brother Atheno-
dorus, he was placed under an accomplished teacher of grammar and rhetoric, from whom also he
acquired a considerable knowledge of the Latin tongue. He was persuaded by the same master
to use this accomplishment in acquiring some knowledge of the Roman laws. This is a very
important point in his biography, and it brings us to an epoch in Christian history too little noted
by any writer. I shall return to it very soon. We find him next going to Alexandria to study
the New Platonism. He speaks of himself as already prepossessed with Christian ideas, which
came to him even in his boyhood, about the time when his father died. But it was not at Alexan-
dria that he began his acquaintance with Christian learning. Next he seems to have travelled into
Greece, and to have studied at Athens. But the great interest of his autobiography begins with the
providential incidents, devoutly narrated by himself, which engaged him in a journey to Berytus
just as Origen reached Caesarea, a.d. 233, making it for a time his home and the seat of his
school. His owTi good angel, as Gregory supposes, led him away from Berytus, where he pur-
posed to prosecute his legal studies, and brought him to the feet of Origen, his Gamaliel ; and
"from the very first day of his receiving us," he says, " the true Sun began to rise upon me." This

I Vol. ii. pp. 165, 342. 2 Isa. Ivi. 3. 3 Vol. iii. p. 271.

3


INTRODUCTORY NOTE.


he accounts the beginning of his true Hfe ; and, if we are right as to our dates, he was now about
twenty-seven years of age.

If he tarried even a Httle while in Berytus, as seems probable, his knowledge of law was,
doubtless, somewhat advanced. It was the seat of that school in which Roman law began its
existence in the forms long afterward digested into the Pandects of Justinian. That emperor
speaks of Berytus as " the mother and nurse " of the civil law. Caius, whose Institutes were
discovered in 1820 by the sagacity of Niebuhr, seems to have been a Syrian. So were Papinian
and Ulpian : and, heathen as they were, they lived under the illumination reflected from Antioch ;
and, not less than the Antonines, they were examples of a philosophic regeneration which never
could have existed until the Christian era had begun its triumphs. Of this sort of pagan philoso-
phy Julian became afterwards the grand embodiment ; and in Julian's grudging confessions of
what he had learned from Christianity we have a key to the secret convictions of others, such as
I have named ; characters in whom, as in Plutarch and in many retrograde unbelievers of our day,
we detect the operation of influences they are unwilling to acknowledge ; of which, possibly,
they are blindly unconscious themselves. Roman law, I maintain, therefore, indirectly owes its
origin, as it is directly indebted for its completion in the Pandects, to the new powers and pro-
cesses of thought which came from " the Light of the World." It was light from Galilee and
Golgotha, answering Pilate's question in the inward convictions of many a heathen sage.

It is most interesting, therefore, to find in our Gregory one who had come into contact with
Berytus at this period. He describes it as already dignified by this school of law, and there-
fore Latinized in some degree by its influence. Most suggestive is what he says of this school :
" I refer to those admirable laws of our sages, by which the affairs of all the subjects of the
Roman Empire are now directed, and which are neither digested nor learnt without difficulty.
They are wise and strict (if not pious) in themselves, they are manifold and admirable, and, in a
word, most thoroughly Grecian, although expressed and delivered to us in the Roman tongue,
which is a wonderful and magnificent sort of language, and one very aptly conformable to impe-
rial authority, but still difficult to me." Nor is this the only noteworthy tribute of our author
to Roman law while yet that sublime system was in its cradle. The rhetorician who introduced
him to it and to the Latin tongue was its enthusiastic eulogist ; and Gregory says he learned the
laws " in a thorough way, by his help. . . . And he said one thing to me which has proved
to me the truest of all his sayings ; to wit, that my education in the laws would be my greatest
viaticum, — my i(f)6Btov (for thus he phrased it);" i.e., for the journey of life. This man, one
can hardly doubt, was a disciple of Caius (or Gains) ; and there is little question that the digested
system which Gregory eulogizes was " the Institutes " of that great father of the civil law, now
recovered from a palimpsest, and made known to our own age, with no less benefit to jurispru-
dence than the discovery of the Philosophumena has conferred on theology.

Thus Gregory's Panegyric throws light on the origin of Roman law. He claims it for " our
sages," meaning men of the East, whose vernacular was the Greek tongue. Caius was probably,
like the Gaius of Scripture, an Oriental who had borrowed a Latin name, as did the Apostle of
the Gentiles and many others. If he was a native of Berytus, as seems probable, that accounts
for the rise of the school of laws at a place comparatively inconsiderable. Hadrian, in his
journey to Palestine, would naturally discover and patronize such a jurist ; and that accounts for
the appearance of Caius at Rome in his day. Papinian and Ulpian, both 'Orientals, were his
pupils in all probability; and these were the "sages" with whose works the youthful Gregory
became acquainted, and by which his mind was prepared for the great influence he exerted in the
East, where his name is a power to this day.

His credit with our times is rather impaired than heightened by the epithet TliaumaturguSy
which clings to his name as a convenient specification, to distinguish him from the other ' Grego-

* See Dean Stanley's Eastern Church and Neale's Introduction.


INTRODUCTORY NOTE.


ries whose period was so nearly his own. But why make it his opprobrium? He is not responsi-
ble for the romances that sprung up after his death ; which he never heard of nor imagined. Like
the great Friar Bacon, who was considered a magician, or Faust, whose invention nearly cost him
his life, the reputation of Gregory made him the subject of legendary lore long after he was
gone. It is not impossible that God wrought marvels by his hand, but a single instance would
give rise to many fables ; and this very surname is of itself a monument of the fact that miracles
were now of rare occurrence, and that one possessing the gift was a wonder to his contemporaries.

To like popular love of the marvellous I attribute the stupid story of a mock consecration by
Phsedimus. If a slight irregularity in Origen's ordination gave him such lifelong troubles, what
would not have been the tumult such a sacrilege as this would have occasioned? Nothing is
more probable than that Phsedimus related such things as having occurred in a vision ; ' and this
might have weighed with a mind like Gregory's to overcome his scruples, and to justify his
acceptance of such a position at an early age.

We are already acquainted with the eloquent letter of Origen that decided him to choose the
sacred calling after he left the school at Csesarea. The Panegyric, which was his valedictory,
doubtless called forth that letter. Origen had seen in him the makings of a Krjpv$, and coveted
such another Timothy for the Master's work. But the Panegyric itself abounds with faults, and
greatly resembles similar college performances of our day. The custom of schools alone can
excuse the expression of such enthusiastic praise in the presence of its subject ; but Origen doubt-
less bore it as philosophically as others have done since, and its evident sincerity and heartfelt
gratitude redeem it from the charge of fulsome adulation.

For the residue of the story I may refer my readers to the statements of the translator, as
follows : —

TRANSLATOR'S NOTICE.

We are in possession of a considerable body of testimonies from ancient literature bearing on
the life and work of Gregory. From these, though they are largely mixed up with the marvellous,
we gain a tolerably clear and satisfactory view of the main facts in his history, and the most patent
features of his character.^ From various witnesses we learn that he was also known by the name
Theodorus, which may have been his original designation ; that he was a native of Neo-Caesareia,
a considerable place of trade, and one of the most important towns of Pontus ; that he belonged
to a family of some wealth and standing ; that he was born of heathen parents ; that at the age
of fourteen he lost his father ; that he had a brother named Athenodorus ; and that along with
him he travelled about from city to city in the prosecution of studies that were to fit him for the
profession of law, to which he had been destined. Among the various seats of learning which he
thus visited we find Alexandria, Athens, Berytus, and the Palestinian Caesareia mentioned. At
this last place — to which, as he tells us, he was led by a happy accident in the providence of
God — he was brought into connection with Origen. Under this great teacher he received les-
sons in logic, geometry, physics, ethics, philosophy, and ancient literature, and in due time also
in biblical science and the verities of the Christian faith. Thus, having become Origen's pupil,
he became also by the hand of God his convert. After a residence of some five years with the
great Alexandrian, he returned to his native city. Soon, however, a letter followed him to Neo-
Csesareia, in which Origen urged him to dedicate himself to the ministry of the Church of Christ,
and pressed strongly upon him his obligation to consecrate his gifts to the service of God, and in
especial to devote his acquirements in heathen science and learning to the elucidation of the Scrip-
tures. On receipt of this letter, so full of wise and faithful counsel and strong exhortation, from

* Recall Cyprian's narratives, vol. v., and this volume infra, Life of Dionysius of Alexandria.

* Thus we have accounts of him,, more or less complete, in Eusebius {Historta Eccles., vi. 30, vii. 14), Basil {De Spiritu Sancio,
xxix. 74; Epist 28, Num. i and 2; 204, Num. 2; 207, Num. 4; 210, Num. 3, 5, — Works, vol. iii. pp. 62, 107, 303, 311, etc., edit. Paris.
BB. 1730), Jerome {De virts illustr., ch. 65; in the Comment, in EccUsiasien, ch. 4; and Epist. 70, Num. 4, —Works, vol. i. pp. 424
and 427, edit. Veron.), Rufinus (//«/. Eccles., y'u. 25), Socrates {Hist. Eccles., iv. 27), Sozomen {Hist, Eccles., vii. 27), Evagrius
Scholasticus {Hist. Eccles., iii. 31), Suidas in his Lexicon, and others of less moment.


INTRODUCTORY NOTE.


the teacher whom he venerated and loved above all others, he withdrew into the wilderness, seek-
ing opportunity for solemn thought and private prayer over its contents. At this time the bishop
of Amasea, a city which held apparently a first place in the province, was one named Phaedimus,
who, discerning the promise of great things in the convert, sought to make him bishop of Neo-
Caesareia. For a considerable period, however, Gregory, who shrank from the responsibility of
the episcopal office, kept himself beyond the bishop's reach, until Phaedimus, unsuccessful in his
search, had recourse to the stratagem of ordaining him in his absence, and declaring him, with all
the solemnities of the usual ceremonial, bishop of his native city.' On receiving the report of
this extraordinary step, Gregory yielded, and, coming forth from the place of his concealment,
was consecrated to the bishopric with all the customary formalities ; ^ and so well did he dis-
charge the duties of his office, that while there were said to be only seventeen Christians in the
whole city when he first entered it as bishop, there were said to be only seventeen pagans in it at
the time of his death. The date of his studies under Origen is fixed at about 234 a.d., and that
of his ordination as bishop at about 240. About the year 250 his church was involved in the
sufferings of the Decian persecution, on which occasion he fled into the wilderness, with the hope
of preserving his life for his people, whom he also counselled to follow in that matter his example.
His flock had much to endure, again, through the incursion of the northern barbarians about 260.
He took part in the council that met at Antioch in 265 for the purpose of trying Paul of Samo-
sata ; and soon after that he died, perhaps about 270, if we can adopt the conjectural reading
which gives the name Aurelian instead of Julian in the account left us by Suidas.

The surname Thaumaturgus, or Wonder-worker, at once admonishes us of the man'elloits that
so largely connected itself with the historical in the ancient records of this man's life.^ He was
believed to have been gifted with a power of working miracles, which he was constantly exercising.
But into these it is profitless to enter. When all the marvellous is dissociated from the historical
in the records of this bishop's career, we have still the figure of a great, good, and gifted man,
deeply versed in the heathen lore and science of his time, yet more deeply imbued with the
genuine spirit of another wisdom, which, under God, he learned from the illustrious thinker of
Alexandria, honouring with all love, gratitude, and veneration that teacher to whom he was
indebted for his knowledge of the Gospel, and exercising an earnest, enlightened, and faithful
ministry of many years in an office which he had not sought, but for which he had been sought.
Such is, in brief, the picture that rises up before us from a perusal of his own writings, as well as
from the comparison of ancient accounts of the man and his vocation. Of his well-accredited
works we have the following : A Declaration of Faith, being a creed on the doctrine of the
Trinity; a Metaphrase 0/ the Book of Ecclesiastes ; a Panegyric to Origen, being an oration
delivered on leaving the school of Origen, expressing eloquently, and with great tenderness of
feeling, as well as polish of style, the sense of his obligations to that master ; and a Canonical
Epistle, in which he gives a variety of directions with respect to the penances and discipline to
be exacted by the Church from Christians who had fallen back into heathenism in times of suf-
fering, and wished to be restored. Other works have been attributed to him, which are doubtful
or spurious. His writings have been often edited, — by Gerard Voss in 1604, by the Paris
editors in 1662, by Gallandi in 1788, and others, who need not be enumerated here.

' [See p. 5, supra. Cave pronounces it " without precedent," but seems to credit the story.]

2 [So Gregory Nyssen says. It would have been impossible, otherwise, for him to rule his flock.]

3 He could move the largest stones by a word; he could heal the sick; the demons were subject to him, and were exorcised by his
fiat; he could give bounds to overflowing rivers; he could dry up mighty lakes; he could cast his cloak over a man, and cause his death:
once, spending a night in a heathen temple, he banished its divinities by his simple presence, and by merely placing on the altar a piece of
paper bearing the words, Gregory to Satan — enter, he could bring the presiding demons back to their shrine. One strange story told of
him by Gregory of Nyssa is to the effect that, as Gregory was meditating on the great matter of the right way to worship the true God,
suddenly two glorious personages made themselves manifest in his room, in the one of whom he recognised the Apostle John, in the other
the Virgin. They had come, as the story goes, to solve the difiiculties which were making him hesitate in accepting the bishopric. At
Mary's request, the evangelist gave him then all the instruction in doctrine which he was seeking for: and the sum of these supernatural
communications being written down by him after the vision vanished, formed the creed which is still preserved among his writings. Such
were the wonders believed to signalize the life of Gregory.


PART I. - ACKNOWLEDGED WRITINGS.


A DECLARATION OF FAITH."


There is one God, the Father of the living
Word, who is His subsistent Wisdom and Power
and Eternal Image : ^ perfect Begetter of the
perfect Begotten, Father of the only-begotten
Son. There is one Lord, Only of the Only,^
God of God, Image and Likeness of Deity,
Efficient Word,'* Wisdom comprehensive s of
the constitution of all things, and Power forma-
tive ^ of the whole creation, true Son of true
Father, Invisible of Invisible, and Incorruptible
of Incorruptible, and Immortal of Immortal,
and Eternal of Eternal. 7 And there is One
Holy Spirit, having His subsistence '^ from God,
and being made manifest 9 by the Son, to wit to
men : '° Image " of the Son, Perfect Image of the
Perfect ; '- Life, the Cause of the living ; Holy

' The title as it stands has this addition: "which he had by reve-
lation from the blessed John the evangelist, by the mediation of the
Virgin Mary, Parent of God." Gallandi, Vcterum Patruin Bi-
blioth., Venice, 1766, p. 385. [Elucidation, p. 8, in/ra.^

2 ;(apaKT^po? atSiov.

5 fjldvO? €K jULOl'OU,

< ^070? ei-epyds.
• jrepteKTtK^.

6 ■noir\T \.KT\,

7 (itScos ac£tov.

9 TTi^y\v6<i.

1° The words SijAaSrj roif av0pu>voi^ are suspected by some to be
a gloss that hais found its way into the text.

I- So John of Damascus uses the phrase, f'lKoiv toC Harpos 6
Yibs, (cai ToO YioO, to Uytvixa, the Son is the Image of the Father,


Fount ; Sanctity, the Supplier, or Leader,'^ of
Sanctification ; in whom is manifested God the
Father, who is above all and in all, and God the
Son, who is through all. There is a perfect
Trinity, in glory and eternity and sovereignty,
neither divided nor estranged.''* Wherefore there
is nothing either created or in servitude '5 in the
Trinity ; '^ nor anything superinduced,'^ as if at
some former period it was non-existent, and at
some later period it was introduced. And thus
neither was the Son ever wanting to the Father,
nor the Spirit to the Son ; ''^ but without varia-
tion and without change, the same Trinity abideth
ever.'9


and the Spirit is that of the Son, lib. i, De fide ortkod., ch. 13, vol.
i. p. 151. See also Athanasius, Epist. i ad Scrap.; Basil, lib v.
contra Euitom. ; Cyril, Dial., 7, etc.

13 xopiyo?-

I'' a.i:aXKoTpi.ov\t.ivt\. See also Gregory Nazianz., Orat., 37, p.
609.

15 hovKov,

16 Gregory Nazianz., Orat., 40, p. 568, with reference apparently
to our author, says: Ui/Sev t))S TpiaSos 60OA01', ov&i KH.<nov, oii6e
€7r€to"aKTOi', r\Kov<Ta. Ttoi' crot^un' Ttro? Aeyoi'To? — hi the Trinity
there is jiothing either in serzntude or created, or superinduced,
as I heard one 0/ the learned say.

17 e7rei<raicT0i'.

18 In one codex we find the following addition here : oure aO^erai
(ioi'as ci? hv6.ha, oiiSe Svaf eis Tpiata — Neither again does the
unity grow into duality, nor the duality into trinity; or = Neither
docs the condition of the one gro^v into the ca,ndition 0/ the two,
nor that of the two into the condition of the three.

19 [See valuable note and Greek text in Dr. Schaff's History,
vol. ii. p. 799.]


ELUCIDATION.


ELUCIDATION.

The story of the " Revelation " is of little consequence, though, if this were Gregory's genu-
ine work, it would be easy to account for it as originating in a beautiful dream. But it is very
doubtful whether it be a genuine work ; and, to my mind, it is most fairly treated by Lardner, to
whose elaborate chapter concerning Gregory every scholar must refer.' Dr. Burton, in his edi-
tion of Bishop Bull's works,^ almost overrules that learned prelate's inclination to think it genu-
ine, in the following words : " Hanc formulam minime esse Gregorii authenticam . . . multis
hand spernendis argumentis deinoiistrat Lardner." Lardner thinks it a fabrication of the fourth
century.

Cave's learned judgment is more favourable; and he gives the text^ from Gregory of Nyssa,
which he translates as follows : " There is one God, the Father of the living Word and of the
subsisting Wisdom and Power, and of Him who is His Eternal Image, the perfect begetter of Him
that is perfect, the Father of the only-begotten Son. There is one Lord, the only Son of the
only Father, God of God, the character and image of the Godhead, the powerful Word, the com-
prehensive Wisdom, by which all things were made, and the Power that gave being to the whole
creation, the true Son of the true Father, the Invisible of the Invisible, the Incorruptible of the
Incorruptible, the Immortal of the Immortal, and the Eternal of Him that is Eternal. There is
one Holy Ghost, having its subsistence of God, which appeared through the Son to mankind, the
perfect Image of the perfect Son, the Life-giving Life, the holy Fountain, the Sanctity, and
the Author of sanctification, by whom God the Father is made manifest, who is over all, and in
all ; and God the Son, who is through all. A perfect Trinity, which neither in glory, eternity, or
dominion is divided, or departed from itself."

' Credibility, vol. ii. p. 635. * Vol. v. p. 423. 3 Cave, Lives of the Fathers, vol. i. p. 402, ed. Oxford, 1840.


A METAPHRASE OF THE BOOK OF ECCLESIASTES.'


CHAP. I.'

These words speaketh Solomon, the son of
David the king and prophet, to the whole Church
of God, a prince most honoured, and a prophet
most wise above all men. How vain and fruit-
less are the affairs of men, and all pursuits that
occupy man ! For there is not one who can tell
of any profit attaching to those things which men
who creep on earth strive by body and soul to
attain to, in servitude all the while to what is
transient, and undesirous of considering aught
heavenly with the noble eye of the soul. And
the life of men weareth away, as day by day, and
in the periods of hours and years, and the deter-
minate courses of the sun, some are ever coming,
and others passing away. And the matter is like
the transit of torrents as they fall into the meas-
ureless deep of the sea with a mighty noise. And
all things that have been constituted by God for
the sake of men abide the same : as, for instance,
that man is born of earth, and departs to earth
again ; that the earth itself continues stable ; that
the sun accomplishes its circuit about it perfectly,
and rolls round to the same mark again ; and
that the winds 3 in like manner, and the mighty
rivers which flow into the sea, and the breezes
that beat upon it, all act without forcing it to
pass beyond its limits, and without themselves
also violating their appointed laws. And these
things, indeed, as bearing upon the good of this
life of ours, are established thus fittingly. But
those things which are of men's devising, whether
words or deeds, have no measure. And there is
a plenteous multitude of words, but there is no
profit from random and foolish talking. But the
race of men is naturally insatiate in its thirst both
for speaking and for hearing what is spoken ; and
it is man's habit, too, to desire to look with idle
eyes on all that happens. What can occur after-
wards, or what can be wrought by men which
has not been done already? What new thing


' Gallandi, Biblioth. Vet. Pair., iii. 387.

f [The wise benevolence of our author is more apparent than his
critical skill. No book more likely to puzzle a pagan inquirer than
this: so the metaphrase gives it meaning and consistency; but, over
and over again, not Solomon's meaning, I am persuaded.]
_ 3 TO. vvivixaja, for which some propose pevfj-ara, streams, as the
avtfLoi. are mentioned in their own place immediately.


is there worthy of mention, of which there has
never yet been experience ? For I think there
is nothing which one may call new, or which,
on considering it, one shall discover to be strange
or unknown to those of old. But as former things
are buried in oblivion, so also things that are now
subsistent will in the course of time vanish utterly
from the knowledge of those who shall come
after us. And I speak not these things unad-
visedly, as acting now the preacher.-* But all
these things were carefully pondered by me when
entrusted with the kingdom of the Hebrews in
Jerusalem. And I examined diligently, and con-
sidered discreetly, the nature of all that is on
earth, and I perceived it to be most various ; s
aiid I saw that to man it is given to labour upon
earth, ever carried about by all different occasions
of toil, and with no result of his work. And all
things here below are full of the spirit of strange-
ness and abomination, so that it is not possible
for one to retrieve them now ; nay, rather it is
not possible for one at all to conceive what utter
vanity ^ has taken possession of all human affairs.
For once on a time I communed with myself,
and thought that then I was wiser in this than
all that were before me, and I was expert in
understanding parables and the natures of things.
But I learned that I gave myself to such pursuits
to no purpose, and that if wisdom follows knowl-
edge, so troubles attend on wisdom.

CHAP. II.

Judging, therefore, that it stood thus with this
matter, I decided to turn to another manner of
life, and to give myself to pleasure, and to take
experience of various delights. And now I
learned that all such things are vain ; and I put a
check on laughter, when it ran on carelessly ; and
restrained pleasure, according to the rule of mod-
eration, and was bitterly wroth against it. And
when I perceived that the soul is able to arrest the
body in its disposition to intoxication and wine-
bibbing, and that temperance makes lust its sub-
ject, I sought earnestly to observe what object of


5 TTOI.KL\uiT(XTr)V.

' OTOffia,


lO


A METAPHRASE OF THE BOOK OF ECCLESIASTES.


true worth and of real excellence is set before
men, which they shall attain to in this present life.
For I passed through all those other objects
which are deemed worthiest, such as the erect-
ing of lofty houses and the planting of vines,
and in addition, the laying out of pleasure-
grounds, and the acciuisition and culture of all
manner of fruit-bearing trees ; and among them
also large reservoirs for the reception of water
were constructed, and distributed so as to se-
cure the plentiful irrigation of ^he trees. And I
surrounded myself also with many domestics,
both man-servants and maid-servants ; and some
of them I procured from abroad, and others I
possessed and employed as born in my own
house. And herds of four-footed creatures, as
well of cattle as of sheep, more numerous than
any of those of old acquired, were made my
property. And treasures of gold and silver flowed
in upon me ; and I made the kings of all na-
tions my dependants and tributaries. And very
many choirs of male and female singers were
trained to yield me pleasure by the practice of
all-harmonious song. And I had banquetings ;
and for the service of this part of my pleasure,
I got me select cup-bearers of both sexes beyond
my reckoning, — so far did I surpass in these
things those who reigned before me in Jerusa-
lem. And thus it happened that the interests
of wisdom declined with me, while the claims of
evil appetency increased. For when 1 yielded
myself to every allurement of the eyes, and to
the violent passions of the heart, that make their
attack from all quarters, and surrendered myself
to the hopes held out by pleasures, I also made
my will the bond-slave of all miserable delights.
For thus my judgment was brought to such a
wretched pass, that I thought these things good,
and that it was proper for me to engage in them.
At length, awaking and recovering my sight, I
perceived that the things I had in hand were
altogether sinful and very evil, and the deeds of
a spirit not good. For now none of all the ob-
jects of men's choice seems to me worthy of
approval, or gready to be desired by a just mind.
Wherefore, having pondered at once the advan-
tages of wisdom and the ills of folly, I should
with reason admire that man greatly, who, being
borne on in a thoughtless course, and afterwards
arresting himself, should return to right and
duty. For wisdom and folly are widely sepa-
rated, and they are as different from each other
as day is from night. He, therefore, who makes
choice of virtue, is like one who sees all things
plainly, and looks upward, and who holdeth his
ways in the time of clearest light. But he, on
the other hand, who has involved himself in
wickedness, is like a man who wanders helplessly
about in a moonless night, as one who is blind,
and deprived of the sight of things by his dark-


ness." And when I considered the end of each
of these modes of life, I found there was no
profit in the latter ; ^ and by setting myself to be
the companion of the foolish, I saw that I should
receive the wages of folly. For what advan-
tage is there in those thoughts, or what profit
is there in the multitude of words, where the
streams of foolish speaking are flowing, as it
were, from the fountain of folly? Moreover,
there is nothing common to the wise man and to
the fool, neither as regards the memory of men,
nor as regards the recompense of God. And
as to all the affairs of men, when they are yet
apparently but beginning to be, the end at once
surprises them. Yet the wise man is never par-
taker of the same end with the foolish. Then
also did I hate all my life, that had been con-
sumed in vanities, and which I had spent with a
mind engrossed in earthly anxieties. For, to
speak in brief, all my affairs have been wrought
by me with labour and pain, as the efforts of
thoughtless impulse ; and some other person, it
may be a wise man or a fool, will succeed to
them, I mean, the chill fruits of my toils. But
when I cut myself off from these things, and
cast them away, then did that real good which is
set before man show itself to me, — namely, the
knowledge of wisdom and the possession of
manly virtue. ^ And if a man neglects these
things, and is inflamed with the passion for
other things, such a man makes choice of evil in-
stead of good, and goes after what is bad instead
of what is excellent, and after trouble instead
of peace ; for he is distracted by every man-
ner of disturbance, and is burdened with con-
tinual anxieties night and day, with oppressive
labours of body as well as with ceaseless cares
of mind, — his heart moving in constant agita-
tion, by reason of the strange and senseless
affairs that occupy him. For the perfect good
does not consist in eating and drinking, although
it is true that it is from God that their suste-
nance Cometh to men ; for none of those things
which are given for our maintenance subsist
without His providence. But the good man
who gets wisdom from God, gets also heavenly
enjoyment ; while, on the other hand, the evil
man, smitten with ills divinely inflicted, and
afflicted with the disease of lust, toils to amass
much, and is quick to put him to shame who is
honoured by God in presence of the Lord of all,
proffering useless gifts, and making things deceit-
ful and vain the pursuits of his own miserable
soul.


' The text is, tuiJAos re ujv tiji" irp6(T0\l/iv KaX urrb rov ctkotovs
Tuiv TrpayiuaTioi' a(f>7)pr)niei'o?, for which it is proposed to read, Tv<f>\6i

TC UIV Kttl T)JI' TTf>6<T0\pl.V VTTO TOV (TKOTOUS, CtC.

^ Or, as the Latin version puts it: And, in fine, when I consid-
ered the difference between these modes of life, I found nothing but
that, by setting myself, etc.

^ dc£peia$.


A METAPHRASE OF THE BOOK OF ECCLESIASTES.


1 1


CHAP. III.

For this present time is filled with all things
that are most contrary ' to each other — births
and deaths, the growth of plants and their up-
rooting, cures and killings, the building up and
the pulling down of houses, weeping and laugh-
ing, mourning and dancing. At this moment a
man gathers of earth's products, and at another
casts them away ; and at one time he ardently
desireth the beauty of woman, and at another
he hateth it. Now he seeketh something, and
again he loseth it ; and now he keepeth, and
again he casteth away ; at one time he slayeth,
and at another he is slain ; he speaketh, and
again he is silent ; he loveth, and again he
hateth. For the affairs of men are at one time in
a condition of war, and at another in a condition
of peace ; while their fortunes are so inconstant,
that from bearing the semblance of good, they
change quickly into acknowledged ills. Let us
have done, therefore, with vain labours. For all
these things, as appears to me, are set to mad-
den men, as it were, with their poisoned stings.
And the ungodly observer of the times and sea-
sons is agape for this world,^ exerting himself
above measure to destroy the image ^ of God, as
one who has chosen to contend against it •* from
the beginning onward to the end. 5 I am per-
suaded, therefore, that the greatest good for
man is cheerfulness and well-doing, and that this
shortlived enjoyment, which alone is possible to
us, comes from God only, if righteousness direct
our doings. But as to those everlasting antl
incorruptible things which God hath firmly es-
tablished, it is not possible either to take aught
from them or to add auglit to them. And to
men in general, those things, in sooth, are fear-
ful and wonderful ; ^ and those things indeed
which have been, abide so ; and those which are
to be, have already been, as regards His fore-
knowledge. Moreover, the man who is injured
has God as his helper. I saw in the lower parts
the pit of punishment which receives the impi-
ous, but a different place allotted for the pious.
And I thought with myself, that with God all
things are judged and determined to be equal ;
that the righteous and the unrighteous, and
objects with reason and without reason, are alike
in His judgment. For that their time is meas-
ured out equally to all, and death impends over
them, and in this the races of beasts and men


• The text reads evai/TiioTiJTioi', for which Codex Anglicus has
ej'acTtujTaTuji',
2 Or, age.

■« Or, Him.

5 The Greek text is, KaipocncoTro? 6>j ti? TroiTjpo? tov aii'iva
TOvTOf 7r€ptKt;^T]i'ti', a'tiafLaai VTrep'^iaTctpo^ej'O? to toO ©eoi"
ir\a(T/Lta, €^ ap\r}'; avrio fxe^pt TtAoi'? TToAepeii' r'lprju^vot;. It is
well to notice how widely this differs from our version of iii. ii: " He
hath made everything beautiful in his time," etc.

*■ The text is, vi tlvl ovt , aAA ttrrii', iduva i^o^epa re o^oO Kai
0avtxa(7ra,


are alike in the judgment of God, and differ
from each other only in the matter of articulate
speech; and all things else happen alike to
them, and death receives all equally, not more
so in the case of the other kinds of creatures
than in that of men. For they have all the
same breath q/ life, and men have nothing more ;
but all are, in one word, vain, deriving their
present condition ^ from the same earth, and
destined to perish, and return to the same earth
again. For it is uncertain regarding the souls
of men, whether they shall fly upwards ; and
regarding the others which the unreasoning crea-
tures possess, whether they shall fall downward.
And it seemed to me, that there is no other good
save pleasure, and the enjoyment of things pres-
ent. For I did not think it possible for a man,
when once he has tasted death, to return again to
the enjoyment of these things.**

CHAP. IV.

And leaving all these reflections, I considered
and turned in aversion from all the forms of
oppression 9 which are done among men ; whence
some receiving injury weep and lament, who are
struck down by violence in utter default of those
who protect them, or who should by all means
comfort them in their trouble. '° And the men
who make might their right" are exalted to an
eminence, from which, however, they shall also
fall. Yea, of the unrighteous and audacious,
those who are dead fare better than those who
are still alive. And better than both these is
he who, being destined to be like them, has not
yet come into being, since he has not yet touched
the wickedness which prevails among men. And
it became clear to me also how great is the envy
which follows a man from his neighbours, like
the sting of a wicked spirit ; and / sanj that he
who receives it, and takes it as it were into his
breast, has nothing else but to eat his own heart,
and tear it, and consume both soul and body,
finding inconsolable vexation in the good fortune
of others.'^ And a wise man would choose to
have one of his hands full, if it were with ease
and quietness, rather than both of them with
travail and with the villany of a treacherous
spirit. Moreover, there is yet another thing
which I know to happen contrary to what is fit-

^ <Tvrno.<JLV,

8 [The key to the interpretation of this book, as to much of the
book of Job. is found in the brief expostulation of Jeremiah {chap.
xii. 0, where he confesses his inability to comprehend the world and
God's ways therein, yet utters a profession of unshaken confidence
in His goodness. Here Solomon, in monologue, gives vent to similar
misgivings ; overruling all in the wonderful ode with which the book
concludes. I say Soloinoti, not unadvisedly.]

'° The text is, ^lo KaTa3f3Ar)/jeVoi Ttav tTitnLvvovrtiiV r\ oAcu?
moa/iij«/)tTo^eriui' avTOut 7ra(ri79 TsavTo-xoSiv icaTexowO'lf oTropia?.
The sense is not clear. It may be: who are struck down in spite of
those who protect them, and who should by all means comfort them
when all manner of trouble presses them on all sides.

It y [Ood Kut.

'- Following the reading of Cod. Medic, which puts Tideu.ei'os for
■ri.Qni.(.v<jv. [See Cyprian, vol. v. p. 493, note 7, this series.]


12


A METAPHRASE OF THE BOOK OF ECCLESIASTES.


ting, by reason of the evil will of man. He who
is left entirely alone, having neither brother nor
son, but prospered with large possessions, lives
on in the spirit of insatiable avarice, and refuses
to give himself in any way whatever to goodness. \
Gladly, therefore, would I ask such an one for
what reason he labours thus, fleeing with head- j
long speed ' from the doing of anything good, |
and" distracted by the many various passions for j
making gain.^ Far better than such are those
who have taken up an order of life in common,^ j
from which they may reap the best blessings. |
For when two men devote themselves in the ]
right spirit to the same objects, though some ;
n-uschance befalls the one, he has still at least
no slight alleviation in having his companion by
him. And the greatest of all calamities to a
man in evil fortune is the want of a friend to
help and cheer him.t And those who live to- |
gether both double the good fortune that befalls |
them, and lessen the pressure of the storm of j
disagreeable events ; so that in the day they are j
distinguished for their frank confidence in each
other, and in the night they appear notable for
their cheerfulness.5 But he who leads a solitary
life passes a species of existence full of terror to
himself; not perceiving that if one should fall
upon men welded closely together, he adopts a
rash and perilous course, and that it is not easy
to snap the threefold cord.^ Moreover, I put a
poor youth, if he be wise, before an aged prince
devoid of wisdon, to whose thoughts it has never
occured that it is possible that a man may be
raised from the prison to the throne, and that
the very man who has exercised his power un-
righteously shall at a later period be righteously
cast out. For it may happen that those who are
subject to a youth, who is at the same time sen-
sible, shall be free from trouble, — those, I
mean, who are his elders. ^ Moreover, they who
are born later cannot praise another, of whom
they have had no experience,^ and are led by an
unreasoning judgment, and by the impulse of a
contrary spirit. But in exercising the preacher's
office, keep thou this before thine eyes, that thine
own life be rightly directed, and that thou prayest
in behalf of the foolish, that they may get under-
standing, and know how to shun the doings of
the wicked.


■ TrpoTpondSrfV.

2 )(^pr)fxaTi(TaLadaL,

3 KOLVuiviav cijLta jSt'ou eareikavTO,
* a.va.KTr)(Totievov.

S The text is, /cat vvKTuip <Tep.v6Tr)Ti (TetxvvvfrrBai, for which
certain codices read o't^i.i'OTTjTt <J)ai6pui'ecr9at, and others (|>ai6poTr)Tt

^ Jerome cites the passage in his Commentary on Ecclesiastes
(iv. 12].

7 To'»« bffoi TTpoyevecT-Tepoi. The sense is incomplete, and some
words seem missing in the text, Jerome, in rendering this passage
in his Commentary on Ecclesiastes, turns it thus: iia auiem iit sub
sene rege versati sitit ; either having lighted on a better manu-
script, or adding something of his own authority to make out the
meaning.

8 6ia TO irepov on-eiparw? ix^i-v.


CHAP, V.

Moreover, it is a good thing to use the tongue
sparingly, and to keep a calm and rightly bal-
anced ^ heart in the exercise of speech.'" For it
is not right to give utterance in words to things
that are foolish and absurd, or to all that occur
to the mind ; but we ought to know and reflect,
that though we are far separated from heaven,
we speak in the hearing of God, and that it is
good for us to speak without offence. For as
dreams and visions of many kinds attend mani-
fold cares of mind, so also silly talking is con-
joined with folly. Moreover, see to it, that a
promise made with a vow be made good in fact.
This, too, is proper to fools, that they are unrelia-
ble. But be thou true to thy word, knowing that
it is much better for thee not to vow or promise
to do anything, than to vow and then fail of per-
formance. And thou oughtest by all means to
avoid the flood of base words, seeing that God
will hear them. For the man who makes such
things his study gets no more benefit by them
than to see his doings brought to nought by God.
For as the multitude of dreams is vain, so also
the multitude of words. But the fear of God is
man's salvation, though it is rarely found. ^Vhere-
fore thou oughtest not to wonder though thou
seest the poor oppressed, and the judges misin-
terpreting the law. But thou oughtest to avoid
the appearance of surpassing those who are in
power. For even should this prove to be the
case, yet, from the terrible ills that shall befall
thee, wickedness of itself will not deliver thee.
But even as property acquired by violence is a
most hurtful as well as impious possession, so
the man who lusteth after money never finds
satisfaction for his passion, nor good-will from
I his neighbours, even though he may have amassed
; the greatest possible wealth. For this also is
j vanity. But goodness greatly rejoiceth those
! who hold by it, and makes them strong," impart-
I ing to them the capacity of seeing through "^ all
I things. And it is a great matter also not to be
engrossed by such anxieties : for the poor man,
i even should he be a slave, and unable to fill his
1 belly plentifully, enjoys at least the kind refresh-
: ment of sleep ; but the lust of riches is attended
by sleepless nights and anxieties of mind. And
I what could there be then more absurd, than with
much anxiety and trouble to amass wealth, and
' keep it with jealous care, if all the while one is
j but maintaining the occasion of countless evils
' to himself? And this wealth, besides, must needs
; perish some time or other, and be lost, whether
; he who has acquired it has children or not ; '^
I and the man himself, however unwillingly, is

9 evcTToflouajj.

10 iv TJj jrepc Adyous anovi^.
j It ai'Speiovt.

t- KaOopav,
I '-3 Job XX. 20.


A METAPHRASE OF THE BOOK OF ECCLESIASTES.


doomed to die, and return to earth in the self-
same condition in which it was his lot once to
come into being.' And the fact that he is des-
tined thus to leave earth with empty hands, will
make the evil all the sorer to him, as he fails to
consider that an end is appointed for his life sim-
ilar to its beginning, and that he toils to no profit,
and labours rather for the wind, as it were, than
for the advancement of his own real interest,
wasting his whole life in most unholy lusts and
irrational passions, and withal in troubles and
pains. And, to speak shortly, his days are dark-
ness to such a man, and his life is sorrow. Yet
this is in itself good, and by no means to be
despised. For it is the gift of God, that a man
should be able to reap with gladness of mind the
fruits of his labours, receiving thus possessions
bestowed by God, and not acquired by force.^
For neither is such a man afflicted with troubles,
nor is he for the most part the slave of evil
thoughts ; but he measures out his life by good
deeds, being of good heart ^ in all things, and
rejoicing in the gift of God.

CHAP. VI.

Moreover, T shall exhibit in discourse the ill-
fortune that most of all prevails among men.
While God may supply a man with all that is
according to his mind, and deprive him of no
object which may in any manner appeal to his
desires, whether it be wealth, or honour, or any
other of those things for which men distract
themselves ; yet the man, while thus prospered
in all things, as though the only ill inflicted on
him from heaven were just the inability to enjoy
them, may but husband them for his fellow, and
fall without profit either to himself or to his
neighbours. This I reckon to be a strong proof
and clear sign of surpassing evil. The man who
has borne without blame the name of father of
very many children, and spent a long life, and
has not had his soul filled with good for so
long time, and has had no experience of death
meanwhile,'* — this man I should not envy either
his numerous offspring or his length of days ;
nay, I should say that the untimely birth that
falls from a woman's womb is better than he.
For as that came in with vanity, so it also
departeth secretly in oblivion, without having
tasted the ills of life or looked on the sun. And
this is a lighter evil than for the wicked man not
to know what is good, even though he measure
his life by thousands of years. 5 And the end of


both is death. The fool is proved above all
things by his finding no satisfaction in any lust.
But the discreet man is not held captive by these
passions. Yet, for the most part, righteousness
of life leads a man to poverty. And the sight
of curious eyes deranges ^ many, inflaming their
mind, and drawing them on to vain pursuits by
the empty desire of show. 7 Moreover, the things
which are now are known already ; and it be-
comes apparent that man is unable to contend
with those that are above him. And, verily,
inanities have their course among men, which
only increase the folly of those who occupy
themselves with them.

CHAP. VII.

For though a man should be by no means
greatly advantaged by knowing all in this life
that is destined to befall him according to his
mind (let us suppose such a case), nevertheless
with the officious activity of men he de\ises
means for prying into and gaining an apparent
acquaintance with the things that are to happen
after a person's death. Moreover, a good name
is more pleasant to the mind^ than oil to the
body ; and the end of life is better than the birth,
and to mourn is more desirable than to revel,
and to be with the sorrowing is better than to
be with the drunken. For this is the fact, that
he who comes to the end of Ufe has no further
care about aught around him. And discreet
anger is to be preferred to laughter ; for by the
severe disposition of countenance the soul is
kept upright.'' The souls of the wise, indeed,
are sad and downcast, but those of fools are
elated, and given loose to merriment. And yet
it is far more desirable to receive blame from
one wise man, than to become a hearer of a
whole chorus of worthless and miserable men in
their songs. For the laughter of fools is like
the crackling of many thorns burning in a fierce
fire. This, too, is misery, yea the greatest of
evils, namely oppression ; '° for it intrigues against
the souls of the wise, and attempts to ruin the
noble way of life " which the good pursue. More-
over, it is right to commend not the man who
begins, but the man who finishes a speech ; '^ and
what is moderate ought to approve itself to the
mind, and not what is swollen and inflated.
Again, one ought certainly to keep wrath in
check, and not suffer himself to be carried rashly
into anger, the slaves of which are fools. More-
over, they are in error who assert that a better


' Job i. 21 ; I Tim. vi. 7.

2 apTraKTLKo. in the text, for which the Cod. Medic, has apnaKTa.

3 erdujULOUjULCI/O?.

* SaraToi' -irelpav oil Kafiuiv, for which we must read probably
ffafaTov, etc.

5 The text gives, fj-rrep rw irovqpili . , . ai'an.erpijtra/iiei'o) ayaBo-
Tt)Ta fii) iTTiyvui, for which we may read either rJTrep rtp irovrjpw . . .
ai'a|u.erpr)(r<i/u.ei'os . . . tffiycw, or better, . . . avajLttTpJiaa/aeyw
. . . iniyviivoLi.


6 efi<rTT)<Ti.

8 Prov. xxii. i.

9 KaTopOovTai,

'° Calumny, cvKO(l>avrCa.
" ivajaaiv.

'2 \6yiav &e, etc. But Cod. Medic, reads, Aoyoi' Se, etc ,
right to commend a speech not in its beginning, but in its end.


H


A METAPHRASE OF THE BOOK 'OF ECCLESIASTES.


manner of life was given to those before us, and
they fail to see that wisdom is widely different
from mere abundance of possessions, and that
it is as much more lustrous ' than these, as silver
shines more brightly than its shadow. For the
life of man hath its excellence ^ not in the acqui-
sition of perishable riches, but in wisdom. And
who shall be able, tell me, to declare the provi-
dence of God, which is so great and so benefi-
cent ? or who shall be able to recall the things
which seem to have been passed by of God?
And in the former days of my vanity I considered
all things, ami s met a righteous man continuing in
his righteousness, and ceasing not from it until
death, but even suffering injury by reason thereof,
and a wicked man perishing with his wickedness.
Moreover, it is proper that the righteous man
should not seem to be so overmuch, nor exceed-
ingly and above measure wise, that he may not,
as in making some slip, seefti to sin many times
over. And be not thou audacious and precipi-
tate, lest an untimely death surprise thee. It is
the greatest of all good to take hold of God, and
by abiding in Him to sin in nothing. For to
touch things undefiled with an impure hand is
abomination. But he who in the fear of God
sulmiits himself,^ escapes all that is contrary.
Wisdom availeth more in the way of help than a
band of the most powerful men in a city, and it
often also pardons righteously those who fail in
duty. For there is not one that stumbleth not.-*
Also it becomes thee in no way to attend upon
the words of the impious, that thou mayest not
become an ear-witness 5 of words spoken against
thyself, such as the foolish talk of a wicked ser-
vant, and being thus stung in heart, have re-
course afterwards thyself to cursing in turn in
many actions. And all these things have I
known, having received wisdom from God, which
afterwards I lost, and was no longer able to be
the same.*^ For wisdom fled from me to an
infinite distance, and into a measureless deep, so
that I could no longer get hold of it. Where-
fore afterwards I abstained altogether from seek-
ing it ; and I no longer thought of considering
the follies and the vain counsels of the impious,
and their weary, distracted life. And being thus
disposed, I was borne on to the things them-
selves ; and being seized with a fatal passion, I
knew woman — that she is like a snare or some
such other object.^ For her heart ensnares those
who pass her ; and if she but join hand to hand,
she holds one as securely as though she dragged


' <t>avipo)Tipa, for which <l>avorepa is proposed.

2 nepiyiyveTai.

3 vireiKUiv,

* I Kings viii. 46; 2 Chron. vi. 36; Prov. xx. 9; i John i. 8.
5 avTriKoo";,

* OU0109.

7 The text is evidently corrupt: for Tr)v yvva'iKa, 7^1/ ni-d, etc.,
Cotelerius proposes, tij^ yvvalxa, aayrjvriy Tifd, etc.; and Bengel,
7ra-yl7f Ttl'a, etC.


him on bound with chains.^ And from her
you can secure your deliverance only by finding
a propitious and watchful superintendent in
God ; 9 for he who is enslaved by sin cannot
(otherwise) escape its grasp. Moreover, among
all women I sought for the chastity '° proper to
them, and I found it in none. And verily a per-
son may find one man chaste among a thousand,
but a woman never." And this above all things
I observed, that men being made by God sim-
ple '^ in mind, contract '3 for themselves manifold
reasonings and infinite questionings, and while
professing to seek wisdom, waste their life in
vain words.

CHAP. VIII.

Moreover, wisdom, when it is found in a man,
shows itself also in its possessor's face, and^
makes his countenance to shine ; as, on the
other hand, effrontery convicts the man in whom
it has taken up its abode, so soon as he is seen,
as one worthy of hatred. And it is on every ac-
count right to give careful heed to the words of
the king, and by all manner of means to avoid
an oath, especially one taken in the name of
God. It may be fit at the same tiine to notice
an evil word, but then it is necessary to guard
against any blasphemy against God. For it will
not be possible to find fault with Him when He
inflicts any penalty, nor to gainsay the decrees
of the Only Lord and King. But it will be bet-
ter and more profitable for a man to abide by
the holy commandments, and to keep himself
apart from the words of the wicked. For the
wise man knows and discemeth beforehand the
judgment, which shall come at the right time,
and sees that it shall be just. For all things in
the life of men await the retribution from above ;
but the wicked man does not seem to know
verily '* that as there is a mighty providence over
him, nothing in the future shall be hid. He
knoweth not indeed the things which shall be ;
for no man shall be able to announce any one
of them to him duly : for no one shall be found
so strong as to be able to prevent the angel who
spoils him of his life ; 'S neither shall any means be
devised for cancelling in any way the appointed
time of death. But even as the man who is
captured in the midst of the battle can only see


8 (caTe'xet f) ei. This use of >) ei is characteristic of Gregory
Thaumaturgus. We find it again in his Paiiegyr. ad Orig., ch. 6,
>7 ei (cai Trapa TravTa;, etc. It may be added, therefore, to the proofs
in support of a common authorship for these two writings.

9 CTTOTTTTJl'.

'° (TaxfrpocruvTji'.

" [Our English version gives no such idea, nor does that of the
LXX. The cru)(^po<rufT) of our author is discretiou, or perhaps
etitire balance of jni'nd. Wordsworth gives us the thought better
in his verse; "A perfect woman, nobly planned." It was not in
Judaism to give woman her place: the Magnificat of the Virgin
celebrated the restoration of her sex. J

■- Upright, airAoi.

'^ €7Ttcr7rci»i/Tai,

«♦ \iav.

IS t^v\riv.


A METAPHRASE OF THE BOOK OF ECCLESIASTES.


15


flight cut off on every side, so all the impiety of
man perisheth utterly together. And I am aston-
ished, as often as I contemplate what and how
great things men have studied to do for the hurt
of their neighbours. But this I know, that the
impious are snatched prematurely from this life,
and put out of the way because they have given
themselves to vanity. For whereas the providen-
tial judgment ' of God does not overtake all
speedily, by reason of His great long-suffering,
and the wicked is not punished immediately on
the commission of his offences, — for this reason
he thinks that he may sin the more, as though
he were to get off with impunity, not understand-
ing that the transgressor shall not escape the
knowledge of God even after a long interval.
This, moreover, is the chief good, to reverence
God ; for if once the impious man fall away
from Him, he shall not be suffered long to mis-
use his own folly. But a most vicious and false
opinion often prevails among men concerning
both the righteous and the unrighteous. For
they form a judgment contrary to truth regard-
ing each of them ; and the man who is really
righteous does not get the credit of being so,
while, on the other hand, the impious man is
deemed prudent and upright. And this I judge
to be among the most grievous of errors. Once,
indeed, I thought that the chief good consisted
in eating and drinking, and that he was most
highly favoured of God who should enjoy these
things to the utmost in his life ; and I fancied
that this kind of enjoyment was, the only comfort
in life. And, accordingly, I gave heed to noth-
ing but to this conceit, so that neither by night
nor by day did I withdraw myself from all those
things which have ever been discovered to min-
ister luxurious delights to men. And this much
I learned thereby, that the man who mingles in
these things shall by no means be able, however
sorely he may laboui with them, to find the real
good.

CHAP. IX.

Now I thought at that time that all men were
judged worthy of the same things. And if any
wise man practised righteousness, and withdrew
himself from unrighteousness, and as being saga-
cious avoided hatred with all (which, indeed, is
a thing well pleasing to God), this man seemed
to me to labour in vain. For there seemed to be
one end for the righteous and for the impious,
for the good and for the evil, for the pure and
for the impure, for him that worshipped ^ God,
and for him that worshipped not. For as the
unrighteous man and the good, the man who
sweareth a false oath, and the man who avoids
swearing altogether, were suspected by me to


be driving toward the same end, a certain sinis-
ter opinion stole secretly into my mind, that
all men come to their end m a similar way.
But now I know that these are the reflections of
fools, and errors and deceits. And they assert
largely, that he who is dead has perished utterly,
and that the living is to be preferred to the
dead, even though he may lie in darkness, and
I pass his life -journey after the fashion of a dog,
j which is better at least than a dead lion. For
] the* living know this at any rate, that they are
to die ; but the dead know not anything, and
there is no reward proposed to them after they
have completed their necessary course. Also
hatred and love with the dead have their end ;
for their envy has perished, and their life also
is extinguished. And he has a portion in noth-
ing who has once gone hence. Error harping
still on such a string, gives also such counsel
as this : What meanest thou, O man, that thou
dost not enjoy thyself delicately, and gorge thy-
self with all manner of pleasant food, and fill
thyself to the full with wine? Dost thou not
perceive that these things are given us from God
for our unrestrained enjoyment? Put on newly-
washed attire, and anoint thy head with myrrh,
and see this woman and that, and pass thy vain
life vainly.3 For nothing else remaineth for thee
I but this, neither here nor after death. But avail
I thou thyself of all that chanceth ; for neither
i shall any one take account of thee for these
I things, nor are the things that are done by men
known at all outside the circle of men. And
Hades, whatever that may he, whereunto we are
said to depart, has neither wisdom nor under-
standing. These are the things which men of
! vanity speak. But I know assuredly, that neither
I shall they who seem the swiftest accomphsh that
! great race ; nor shall those who are esteemed
I mighty and terrible in the judgment of men,
overcome in that terrible battle. Neither, again,
I is prudence proved by abundance of bread, nor
is understanding wont to consort with riches.
Nor do I congratulate those who think that all
shall find the same things befall them. But cer-
tainly those who indulge such thoughts seem to
me to be asleep, and to fail to consider that,
caught suddenly like fishes and birds, they will
be consumed with woes, and meet speedily their
proper retribution. Also I estimate wisdom at
so high a price, that I should deem a small and
poorly-peopled city, even though besieged also
by a mighty king with his forces, to be indeed
great and powerful, if it had but one wise man,
however poor, among its citizens. For such a
man would be able to deliver his city both from
enemies and from entrenchments. And other
men, it may be, do not recognise that wise man,


TTpovoia..
lAatTKO/jterou.


3 The text gives, naKtiv-qv ii fj.aTaiu><;, etc.


i6


A METAPHRASE OF THE BOOK OF ECCLESIASTES.


poor as he is ; but for my part I greatly prefer
the power that resides in wisdom, to this might
of the mere multitude of the people. Here,
however, \visdom, as it dwells with poverty, is
held in dislionour. But hereafter it shall be
heard speaking with more authoritative voice
than princes and despots who seek after things
evil. For wisdom is also stronger than iron ;
while the folly of one individual works danger
for many, even though he be an object of con-
tempt to many.'

CHAP. X.

Moreover, flies falling into myrrh, and suffo-
cated therein, make both the appearance of that
pleasant ointment and the anointing therewith
an unseemly thing ; ^ and to be mindful of wis-
dom and of folly together is in no way proper.
The wise man, indeed, is his own leader to right
actions ; but the fool inclines to erring courses,
and will never make his folly available as a guide
to what is noble. Yea, his thoughts also are
vain and full of folly. But if ever a hostile spirit
fall upon thee, my friend, withstand it coura-
geously, knowing that God is able to propitiate ^
even a mighty multitude of offences. These
also are the deeds of the prince and father of all
wickedness : that the fool is set on high, while
the man richly gifted with wisdom is humbled ;
and that the slaves of sin are seen riding on
horseback, while men dedicated to God walk on
foot in dishonour, the wicked exulting the while.
But if any one devises another's hurt, he forgets
that he is preparing a snare for himself first and
alone. And he who wrecks another's safety,
shall fall by the bite of a serpent. But he who
removeth stones, indeed shall undergo no light
labour ; * and he who cleaveth wood shall bear
danger with him in his own weapon. And if it
chance that the axe spring out of the handle,5 he
who engages in such work shall be put to trou-
ble, gathering for no good ^ and having to put to
more of his iniquitous and shortlived strength. 7
The bite of a serpent, again, is stealthy ; and
the charmers will not soothe the pain, for they
are vain. But the good man doeth good works
for himself and for his neighbours alike ; while
the fool shall sink into destruction through his
folly. And v/hen he has once opened his mouth,
he begins foolishly and soon comes to an end,
exhibiting his senselessness in all. Moreover, it
is impossible for man to know anything, or to
learn from man either what has been from the


' Kav TToAAois (cara^pdi/riTos rj; SO the Cod. Bodleian, and the
Cod. Medic, read. But others read no\v = an object of great con-
tempt. For KaTa<f)poi'r)To? the Cod. Medic, reads eiJ<aTa0p6i'r)TO9.

2 The text gives xpiaiv, for which Cod. Medic, reads xph'^'-",
use

i iAdtratrSat.

* Reading aAAa ixriv for aAAa ju.)}.

s (TTeAeoO, for which others read o-TeAe'xou?.

6 ovic in ayaSiii avyKOit-i^uiv.

' iirav^uiv aiiThi: Trfv iavrov a&iKOV koX itKVjxopov SuVafiif.


beginning, or what shall be in the future. For
who shall be the declarer thereof? Besides, the
man who knows not to go to the good city, sus-
tains evil in the eyes and in the whole counte-
nance. And I prophesy woes to that city the
king of which is a youth, and its rulers gluttons.
But I call the good land blessed, the king of
which is the son of the free : there those who
are entrusted with the power of ruling shall reap
what is good in due season. But the sluggard
and the idler become scoffers, and make the
house decay ; and misusing all things for the
purposes of their own gluttony, like the ready
slaves of money,^ for a small price they are con-
tent to do all that is base and abject. It is also
right to obey kings and rulers or potentates, and
not to be bitter against them, nor to utter any
offensive word against them. For there is ever
the risk that what has been spoken in secret may
somehow become public. For swift and winged
messengers convey all things to Him who alone
is King both rich and mighty, discharging there-
in a service which is at once spiritual and rea-
sonable.

CHAP. XI.

Moreover, it is a righteous thing to give (to
the needy) of thy bread, and of those things
which are necessary for the support of man's life.
For though thou seemest forthwith to waste it
upon some persons, as if thou didst cast thy
bread upon the water, yet in the progress of
time thy kindness shall be seen to be not un-
profitable for the'e. Also give liberally, and give
a portion of thy means to many ; for thou know-
est not what the coming day doeth. The clouds,
again, do not keep back their plenteous rains,
but discharge their showers upon the earth. Nor
does a tree stand for ever ; but even though men
may spare it, it shall be overturned by the wind
at any rate. But many desire also to know
beforehand what is to come from the heavens ;
and there have been those who, scrutinizing the
clouds and waiting for the wind, have had nought
to do with reaping and winnowing, putting their
trust in vanity, and being all incapable of know-
ing aught of what may come from God in the
future ; just as men cannot tell what the woman
with child shall bring forth. But sow thou in
season, and thus reap thy fruits whenever the
time for that comes on. For it is not manifest
what shall be better than those among all natural
things.9 Would, indeed, that all things turned
out well ! Truly, when a man considers with
himself that the sun is good, and that this life
is sweet, and that it is a pleasant thing to have
many years wherein one can delight himself


" apyvpiif ayioyi/ioi,

9 OTTOta avTuiV tijTai ajuetVo) Ta>i' (ftueVra)!', perhaps -.
those natural productions shall be the better.


: which of


A METAPHRASE OF THE BOOK OF ECCLESIASTES.


17


continually, and that death is a terror and an
endless evil, and a thing that brings us to nought,
he thinks that he ought to enjoy himself in all
the present and apparent pleasures of life. And
he gives this counsel also to the young, that they
should use to the uttermost ' the season of their
youth, by giving up their minds to all manner of
pleasure, and indulge their passions, and do all
that seemeth good in their own eyes, and look
upon that which delighteth, and avert themselves
from that which is not so. But to such a man I
shall say this much : Senseless art thou, my
friend, in that thou dost not look for the judg-
ment that shall come from God upon all these
things. And profligacy and licentiousness are
evil, and the filthy wantonness of our bodies
carries death in it. For folly attends on youth,
and folly leads to destruction.

CHAP. xn.

Moreover, it is right that thou shouldest fear
God while thou art yet young, before thou givest
thyself over to evil things, and before the great
and terrible day of God cometh, when the sun
shall no longer shine, neither the moon, nor the
rest of the stars, but when in that storm and
commotion of all things, the powers above shall
be moved, that is, the angels who guard the
world ; so that the mighty men shall fail, and
the women shall cease their labours, and shall
flee into the dark places of their dwellings, and
shall have all the doors shut. And a woman shall
be restrained from grinding by fear, and shall
speak with the weakest voice, like the tiniest
bird ; and all the impure women shall sink into
the earth ; and cities and their blood-stained
governments shall wait for the vengeance that
comes from above, while the most bitter and
bloody of all times hangs over them like a blos-
soming almond, and continuous punishments
impend like a multitude of flying locusts, and
the transgressors are cast out of the way like a
black and despicable caper-plant. And the good
man shall depart with rejoicing to his own ever-
lasting habitation ; but the vile shall fill all their
places with wailing, and neither silver laid up in
store, nor proved gold, shall be of use any more.
For a mighty stroke ^ shall fall upon all things,
even to the pitcher that standeth by the well,
and the wheel of the vessel which may chance to

' KaTa\pritT0ai.,

2 KaOf^-u irkriyrj. CEcolampadius renders it, ma^nus ejiim/ons,
evidently reading jtijy)).


have been left in the hollow, when the course of
time comes to its end ^ and the ablution-bearing
period of a life that is like water has passed away.^
And for men who lie on earth there is but one
salvation, that their souls acknowledge and wing
their way to Him by whom they have been made.
I say, then, again what I have said already, that
man's estate is altogether vain, and that nothing
can exceed the utter vanity which attaches to
the objects of man's inventions. And superflu-
ous is my labour in preaching discreetly, inas-
much as I am attempting to instruct a people
here, so indisposed to receive either teaching or
healing. And truly the noble man is needed
for the understanding of the words of wisdom.
Moreover, I, though already aged, and having
passed a long life, laboured to find out those
things which are well-pleasing to God, by means
of the mysteries of the truth. And I know that
the mind is no less quickened and stimulated by
the precepts of the wise, than the body is wont
to be when the goad is applied, or a nail is fast-
ened in it.5 And some will render again those
wise lessons which they have received from one
good pastor and teacher, as if all with one mouth
and in mutual concord set forth in larger detail
the truths committed to them. But in many
words there is no profit. Neither do I counsel
thee, my friend, to write down vain things about
what is fitting,*^ from which there in nothing to
be gained but weary labour. But, in fine, I shall
require to use some such conclusion as this : O
men, behold, I charge you now expressly and
shortly, that ye fear God, who is at once the
Lord and the Overseer ^ of all, and that ye keep
also His commandments ; and that ye believe
that all shall be judged severally in the future,
and that every man shall receive the just recom-
pense for his deeds, whether they be good or
whether they be evil.^


^ The text is. kv tw KOtAwjuart Travaafx^uy]^ \p6yov re Trepcfipo-
^'■r|^;, for which we may read, ev t(Z KoiAcuyu.aTi, wavaaijievrii XP°^'"''
T6 7repi6po^7J?. Others apparently propose for Trauo-a/u.ei'^s, 6efa^te-
i'7J? = at the hollow of the cistern.

■• The text is, Kal ttjs fit' v6aTos ^luijs TrapoSciicrai'Tos Toi) Aovrpo-
(bopov aiuivo';. Billius understands the age to be called AnvTpo'()opou,
because, as long as we are in life, it is possible to obtain remission
for any sin, or as referring to the rite of baptism.

S rjAu) iixnepovriGevTa. The i>eptuagint reads, Ao-yot <TOif)Uit> w<; to.
BovKiVTpa (cac lus ^Aoi Tre^uTei'/uei/oi, like nails planted, etc. Others
read TreTrvipoi/u.ei'oi, igfiiti. The Vulg. has, quasi clavi in aitum
defixi.

^ rrepl to ■Kpo(Tr]Kov, for which some read, Trapd to it po<ST\K.ov ,
beyond or contrary to what is fitting.

7 €7r67rT7]9.

* [The incomparable beauty of our English version of this twelfth
chapter of Koheleth is heightened not a little by comparison with
this turgid metaphrase. It fails, in almost every instance, to extract
the kernel of the successive cttixo' of this superlatively poetic and
didactic threnode. It must have been a youthful work.]


CANONICAL EPISTLE.


CANON I.

The meats are no burden to us, most holy
father,- if the captives ate things which their
conquerors set before them, especially since
there is one report from all, viz., that the barba-
rians who have made inroads into our parts have
not sacrificed to idols. For the apostle says,
" Meats for the belly, and the belly for meats :
but God shall destroy both it and them." ^ But
the Saviour also, who cleanseth all meats, says,
" Not that which goeth into a man defileth the
man, but that which cometh out."+ And this
meets the case of the captive women defiled by
the barbarians, who outraged their bodies. But
if the previous life of any such person convicted
him of going, as it is written, after the eyes of
fornicators, the habit of fornication evidently be-
comes an object of suspicion also in the time of
captivity. And one ought not readily to have
communion with such women in prayers. If
any one, however, has lived in the utmost chas-
tity, and has shown in time past a manner of
life pure and free from all suspicion, and now
falls into wantonness through force of necessity,
we have an example for our guidance, — namely,
the instance of the damsel in Deuteronomy,
whom a man finds in the field, and forces her,
and lies with her. " Unto the damsel," he says,
"ye shall do nothing; there is in the damsel no
sin worthy of death : for as when a man riseth
against his neighbour, and slayeth him, even so
is this matter : the damsel cried, and there was
none to help her." 5

CANON II.

Covetousness is a great evil ; and it is not
possible in a single letter to set forth those scrip-

' Of the holy Gregory, archbishop of Neo-Cjesareia, surnamed
Thaumaturgiis, concerning those who, in the inroad of the barbari-
ans, ate things sacrificed to idols, or offended in certain other matters.
Gallandi iii. p. 400. [Written a.d. 258 or 262.] There are schoha
in Latin by Theodoras Balsamon and Joannes Zonaras on these

canons The note of the former on the last canon may be cited:

The present saint has defined shortly five several positions for the pen-
itent; but he has not indicated either the times appointed for their
exercise, or the sins for which discipline is determined. Basil the
Great, again, has handed down to us an accurate account of these
things in his canonical epistles. [Elucidation 11.] Yet he, too, has
referred to episcopal decision the matter of recovery through penalties
[i.e., to the decision of his comprovincial bishops, as in Cyprian's
example. .See vol. v. p. 415, Elucidation XIII.; also Elucidation 1.
p. 20, infra.

2 [Elucidation III. p. 20.]

^ I Cor. vi. 13.

* Matt. XV. II.

S Deut. xxii. 26, 27.

18


tures in which not robbery alone is declared to
be a thing horrible and to be abhorred, but in
general the grasping mind, and the disposition
to meddle with what belongs to others, in order
to satisfy the sordid love of gain. And all per-
sons of that spirit are excommunicated from
the Church of God, But that at the time of the
irruption, in the midst of such woful sorrows
and bitter lamentations, some should have been
audacious enough to consider the crisis which
brought destruction to all the very period for
their own private aggrandizement, that is a thing
which can be averred only of men who are im-
pious and hated of God, and of unsurpassable
iniquity. Wherefore it seemed good to excom-
municate such persons, lest the wrath (of God)
should come upon the whole people, and upon
those first of all who are set over them in office,
and yet fail to make inquiry. For I am afraid,
as the Scripture says, lest the impious work the
destruction of the righteous along with his own.^
" For fornication," it says, 7 " and covetousness
ai-e things on account of which the wrath of God
cometh upon the children of disobedience. Be
not ye therefore partakers with them*- For ye
were sometimes darkness, but nOw are "ye light
in the Lord : walk as children of lTght^(for the
fruit of the light ^ is in all goodness, and right-
eousness, and truth), proving what is acceptable
unto the Lord. And have no fellowship with
the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather re-
prove them ; for it is a shame even to speak of
those things which are done of them in secret.
But all things that are reproved are made mani-
fest by the light." Li this wise speaks the apos-
tle. But if certain parties who pay the proper
penalty for that former covetousness of theirs,
which exhibited itself in the time of peace, now
turn aside again to the indulgence of coveteous-
ness in the very time of trouble (i.e., in the
troubles of the inroads by the barbarians), and
make gain out of the blood and ruin of men
who have been utterly despoiled, or taken cap-
tive, (or) put to death, what else ought to be
expected, than that those who struggle so hotly
for covetousness should heap up wrath both for
themselves and for the whole people ?


' Gen. xviii. 23, 25.

7 Eph. V. 5-13.

8 ToO (/)o)Tos for the received Trj-eu^aros.


CANONICAL EPISTLE.


19


CANON III.

Behold, did not Achar ' the son of Zara trans-
gress in the accursed thing, and trouble then
lighted on all the congregation of Israel ? And
this one man was alone in his sin ; but he was
not alone in the death that came by his sin.
And by us, too, everything of a gainful khid at
this time, which is ours not in our own rightful
possession, but as property strictly belonging to
others, ou2;ht to be reckoned a thing devoted


rade in old age, Euphrosynus, with this view,
that he may deal with you in accordance with
our model here, and teach you against whom
you ought to admit accusations,* and whom you
ought to exclude from your prayers.

CANON VI. 5

Moreover, it has been reported to us that a
thing has happened in your country which is
surely incredible, and which, if done at all, is


For that Achar indeed took of the spoil ; and ; altogether the work of unbehevers, and impious
those men of the present time take also of the : men, and men who know not the very name of

- 'the Lord ; to wit, that some have gone to such

a pitch of cruelty and inhumanity, as to be de-
taining by force certain captives who have made
their escape. Dispatch ye commissioners into
the country, lest the thunderbolts of heaven fall
all too surely upon those who perpetrate such
deeds.


spoil. But he took what belonged to enemies ;
while these now take what belongs to brethren,
and aggrandize themselves with fatal gains.


CANON IV.


Let no one deceive himself, nor put forward
the pretext of having found such property. For
it is not lawful, even for a man who has found
anything, to aggrandize himself by it. For Deu-
teronomy says : " Thou shalt not see thy broth


CANON VII.


Now, as regards those who have been enrolled
among the barbarians, and have accompanied


er's ox or his sheep go astray in the way, and j t^gj-^ in their irruption in a state of captivity,
pay no heed to them ; but thou shalt in any wise , ^nd who, forgetting that they were from Pontus,
bring them again unto thy brother. And if thy ■ ^nd Christians, have become such thorough bar-
brother come not nigh thee, or if thou know , barians, as even to put those of their own race
him not, then thou shalt bring them together, ' jq death by the gibbet ^ or strangulation, and to
and they shall be with thee until thy brother [ ghow their roads or houses to the barbarians,
seek after them, and thou shalt restore them to | ^^^o else would have been ignorant of them, it
him ag^in. And in like manner shalt thou do j jg necessary for you to debar such persons even
with his ass, and so slialt thou do with his rai- j {xQxi\ being auditors in the public congregations,"
ment, and so shalt thou do with all lost things of
thy brother's, which he hath lost, and thou may-


est find." ^ Thus much in Deuteronomy. And
in the book of Exodus it is said, with reference
not only to the case of finding what is a friend's,
but also of finding what is an enemy's : " Thou
shalt surely bring them back to the house ofj
their master again." ^ And if it is not lawful to \
aggrandize oneself at the expense of another,
whether he be brother or enemy, even in the
time of peace, when he is living at his ease and
delicately, and without concern as , to his prop-
erty, how much more must it be the case when
one is met by adversity, and is fleeing from his
enemies, and has had to abandon his posses-
sions by force of circumstances !

CANON V.

But others deceive themselves by fancying
that they can retain the property of others
which they may have found as an equivalent for
their own property which they have lost. In
this way verily, just as the Boradi and Goths
brought the havoc of war on them, they make
themselves Boradi and Goths to others. Accord-
ingly we have sent to you our brother and com-


until some common decision about them is come
to by the saints assembled in council, and by
the Holy Spirit antecedently to them.


CANON VI11.9

Now those who have been so audacious as to
invade the houses of others, if they have once
been put on their trial and convicted, ought not
to be deemed fit even to be hearers in the pub-
lic congregation. But if they have declared
themselves and made restitution, they should
be placed in the rank of the repentant.'"

CANON IX."

Now, those who have found in the open field
or in their own houses anything left behind them
by the barbarians, if they have once been put
on their trial and convicted, ought to fall under
the same class of the repentant. But if they


Josh. vii.
Deut xxii. 1-3.
Ex. xxiii. 4.


^ wv Sei rd? (caTriyopia? jTpo(riea6ii.

5 Concerning those who forcibly detain captives escaped from the
barbarians 1 i_ l •

*> Concerning those who have been enrolled among the barbarians,
and who have dared to do certain monstrous things against those of
the same race with themselves.

9 Concerning those who have been so audacious as to invade the
houses of others in the inroad ol the barbarians.

10 T-'oi' U7roo"Tpe'f>6i'Ta>i'.

" Concerning those who have found in the open field or in private
houses property left behind them by the barbarians.


20


ELUCIDATIONS.


have declared themselves and made restitution,
they ought to be deemed fit for the privilege of
prayer.'

CANON X.

And they who keep the commandment ought
to keep it without any sordid covctousness, de-
manding neither recompense, ^ nor reward, ^ nor
fee,-* nor anything else that bears the name of
acknowledgment.

CANON XI.5

Weeping^ takes place without the gate of the
oratory ; and the offender standing there ought


' I Partially elucidated below in (the spurious) Canon XI. See
Marshall's Pe>iite]itiat Discipline of the Primitive CIntrch.\
- ix-qvvTpa, the price of information.

3 o-iucTTpa, the reward for bringing back a runaway slave.
* eiJpeTpa, the reward of discovery.
5 [This canon is rejected as spurious. Lardner, Credib., ii. p.

^33j . . ,.

0 Trpoo-xAava-t?, disciphne.


to implore the faithful as they enter to offer up
prayer on his behalf. Waiting on the word/
again, takes place within the gate in the porch,**
where the offender ought to stand until the cate-
chumens depart, and thereafter he should go
forth. For let him hear the Scriptures and
doctrine, it is said, and then be put forth, and
reckoned unfit for the privilege of prayer. Sub-
mi3sion,9 again, is that one stand within the gate
of the temple, and go forth along with the cate-
chumens. Restoration '° is that one be associated
with the faithful, and go not forth with the cate-
chumens ; and last of all comes the participa-
tion in the holy ordinances."


a(cpoa(7t?.

iv TCU vapBfjKl
VTrOTTTWCrt^.


ELUCIDATIONS.


(The title, p. iS.)

This is a genuine epistle, all but the eleventh canon. It is addressed to an anonymous bishop ;
one of his suffragans, some think. I suppose, rather, he consults, as Cyprian did, the bishop of
the nearest Apostolic See, and awaits his concurrence. It refers to the ravages of the Goths
in the days of Gallienus (a.d. 259-267), and proves the care of the Church to maintain discipline,
even in times most unfavourable to order and piety. The last canon is an explanatory addition
made to elucidate the four degrees or classes of penitents. It is a very interesting document
in this respect, and sheds light on the famous canonical epistles of St. Basil.

II.

(Basil the Great, p. iS, note.)

The " Canonical Epistles " of St. Basil are not private letters, but canons of the churches with
which he was nearest related. When there was no art of printing, the chief bishops were
obliged to communicate with suffragans, and with their brethren in the Apostolic See nearest to
them. See them expounded at large in Dupin, Ecclesiastical Writers of the Fourth Century,
Works, vol. i., London, 1693 (translated), p. 139, etc.


IIL

(Most holy father, p. 18.)

This expression leads me to think that this epistle is addressed to the Bishop of Antioch or
of some other Apostolic See. It must not be taken as a prescribed formula, however, as when we
say " Most Reverend " in our days ; e.g., addressing the Archbishop of Canterbury. Rather, it is
an expression of personal reverence. As yet, titular distinctions, such as these, were not known.
In the West existing usages seem to have been introduced with the Carlovingian system of digni-
ties, expounded by Gibbon.


THE ORATION AND PANEGYRIC ADDRESSED

TO ORIGEN.'


ARGUMENT I. — FOR EIGHT YEARS GREGORY HAS
GIVEN UP THE PRACTICE OF ORATORY, BEING
BUSIED WITH THE STUDY CHIEFLY OF ROMAN
LAW AND THE LATIN LANGUAGE.

An excellent^ thing has silence proved itself
in many another person on many an occasion,
and at present it befits myself, too, most espe-
cially, who with or without purpose may keep
the door of my lips, and feel constrained to be
silent. For I am unpractised and unskilled ^ in
those beautiful and elegant addresses which are
spoken or composed in a regular and unbroken -*
train, in select and well-chosen phrases and
words ; and it may be that I am less apt by
nature to cultivate successfully this graceful and
truly Grecian art. Besides, it is now eight years
since I chanced myself to utter or compose any
speech, whether long or short ; neither in that
period have I heard any other compose or utter
anything in private, or deliver in public any lau-
datory or controversial orations, with the excep-
tion of those admirable men who have embraced
the noble study of philosophy, and who care less
for beaut4y of language and elegance of expres-
sion. For, attaching only a secondary impor-
tance to the words, they aim, with all exactness,
at investigating and making known the things
themselves, precisely as they are severally con-
stituted. Not indeed, in my opinion, that they
do not desire, but rather that they do greatly
desire, to clothe the noble and accurate results
of their thinking in noble and comely 5 language.
Yet it may be that they are not able so lightly to
put forth this sacred and godlike power (faculty)
in the exercise of its own proper conceptions,
and at the same time to practise a mode of dis-
course eloquent in its terms, and thus to com-
prehend in one and the same mind — and that,


' Delivered by Gregory Thaumaturgus in the Palestinian C^esareia,
when about to leave for his own country, after many years' instruction
under that teacher. [OVca a.d. 238.] Gallandi, 0/(?ra, p. 413.

2 KaAof, for which Hoeschelius has aya06i'.

3 a7reipo9, for which Hoeschelius has afacr/crjTos.
■♦ aKuiXvTw, for which Bengel suggests axokovOui,
S eiieiSti, for which Ger. Vossius gives a\jievSel!


too, this little mind of man — two accomplish-
ments, which are the gifts of two distinct per-
sons, and which are, in truth, most contrary to
each other. For silence is indeed the friend and
helpmeet of thought and invention. But if one
aims at readiness of speech and beauty of dis-
course, he will get at them by no other disci-
pline than the study of words, and their constant
practice. Moreover, another branch of learning
occupies my mind completely, and the mouth
binds the tongue if I should desire to make any
speech, however brief, with the voice of the
Greeks ; I refer to those admirable laws of our
sages "^ by which the affairs of all the subjects of
the Roman Empire are now directed, and which
are neither composed ? nor learnt without diffi-
culty. And these are wise and exact ^ in them-
selves, and manifold and admirable, and, in a
word, most thoroughly Grecian ; and thev are
expressed and committed to us in the Roman
tongue, which is a wonderful and magnificent
sort of language, and one very aptly conform-
able to royal authority,^ but still difficult to me.
Nor could it be otherwise with me, even though
I might say that it was my desire that it should
be.'° And as our words are nothing else than a
kind of imagery of the dispositions of our mind,
we should allow those who have the gift of
speech, like some good artists alike skilled to
the utmost in their art and liberally furnished in
the matter of colours, to possess the liberty of
painting their word-pictures, not simply of a
uniform complexion, but also of various descrip-
tions and of richest beauty in the abundant mix-
ture of flowers, without let or hindrance.


6 [See my introductory note, supra. He refers to Caius, Pa-
pinian.Ulpian; all, probably, of Syrian origin, and using the Greek
as their vernacular.]

^ cri/yiceijuei/ot, which is rendered by some condiiniur, by others
corfectiB j'7<k/, and by others still cotuponanticr, harmonized, — the
reference then being to the difficulty e.\perienced in learning the law;,
in the way of harmonizing those which apparently oppose each other.

^ aicpi^ei?, for which Ger. Vossius gives ei'<7e/3eis, pious.

9 [A noteworthy estimate of Latin by a Greek.]

'° ei Kai /SovAijToi', etc., for which Hoeschelius gives oi're /Soi'Atjtoi-,
etc. The Latin version gives, non enini aliter scntire aut posse
aut velle me unguam dixerim.


22 ORATION AND PANEGYRIC ADDRESSED TO ORIGEN.


ARGUMENT II. — HE ESSAYS TO SPEAK OF THE
WELL-NIGH DIVINE ENDOWMENTS OF ORIGEN IN
HIS PRESENCE, INTO WHOSE HANDS HE AVOWS
HIMSELF TO HAVE BEEN LED IN A WAV BEYOND
ALL HIS EXPECTATION.


But we, like any of the poor, unfurnished
with these varied specihcs ' — whether as never
having been possessed of them, or, it may be,
as having lost them — are under the necessity
of using, as it were, only charcoal and tiles, that
is to say, those rude and common words and
plirases ; and by means of these, to the best of
our ability, we represent the native dispositions
of our mind, expressing them in such language
as is at our service, and endeavouring to exhibit
the impressions of the figures ^ of our mind, if
not clearly or ornately, yet at least with the faith-
fulness of a charcoal picture, welcoming gladly
any graceful and eloquent expression which may
present itself from any quarter, although we make
little of such.3 But, furthermore,^ there is a third
circumstance which hinders and dissuades me
from this attempt, and which holds me back
much more even than the others, and recom-
mends me to keep silence by all means, — I
allude to the subject itself, which made me in-
deed ambitious to speak of it, but which now
makes me draw back and delay. For it is my
purpose to speak of one who has indeed the
semblance and repute of being a man, but who
seems, to those who are able to contemplate the
greatness of his intellectual calibre,5 to be en-
dowed with powers nobler and well-nigh divine.'''
And it is not his birth or bodily training that I
am about to praise, and that makes me now
delay and procrastinate with an excess of cau-
tion. Nor, again, is it his strength or beauty ;
for these form the eulogies of jouths, of which
it matters little whether the utterance be worthy
or not.7 For, to make an oration on matters of
a temporary and fugitive nature, which perish in
many various ways and quickly, and to discourse
of these with all the grandeur and dignity of
great affairs, and with such timorous delays,
would seem a vain and futile procedure.^ And
certainly, if it had been proposed to me to speak
of any of those things which are useless and
unsubstantial, and such as I should never volun-
tarily have thought of speaking of, — if, I say, it


- XapaKTrjpai Tuv T7;5 ipV)(ri^ Tvwuiv.

3 (icr7:a<7a^ei.oi ijSeuj^ CTrei Kal Trcp,j,povri^avT€<:. The passage
IS considered by some to be mutilated.

- . / ^u ^^^\. '?' "^'^•" '>'"'' " ■rp'Twi' av9c5 oAAm? KtoAu'ei, etc. For
aAAco? Haeschelius gives aAAa 6^. Bengel follows him, and renders
It, sed runtim, tertio loco, aliud est quod prohibet. Delarue
proposes, oAAa yap iv rpiroi' aOfli? dAAcu! KojAiiti.

5 TO 8e TToAii T^5 f^eco5.

6 This is the rendering according to the Latin version. The text
IS, <xniaK.tvaxiy.ivav i,6r, ^ei^oi'i Trapaa/tei;,; fj.eTavaaTd<riu)s T^s Trpbs
Tc Ctioi/. Vossius reads, /aer' arao-Tao-eu)?.

8 '^'' V-rruiv <j>povTii /car' i^iav Tc Kal ^r), AeyojueVcoi-.

1 he text is, p.v (cat \ljvxpov ^ TrepTrcpov n, where, according to
Bengel, mi has the force of ut non dicam.


had been proposed to me to speak of anything
of that character, my speech would have had
none of this caution or fear, lest in any state-
ment I might seem to come beneath the merit
of the subject. But now, my subject dealing
with that which is most godlike in the man, and
that in him which has most affinity with God,
that which is indeed confined within the limits'
of this visible and mortal form, but which strains
nevertheless most ardendy after the likeness of
God; and my object being to make mention
of this, and to put my hand to weightier matters,
and therein also to express my thanksgivings to
the Godhead, in that it has been granted to me
to meet with such a man beyond the expecta-
tion of men, — the expectation, veiily, not only
of others, but also of my own heart, for I neither
set such a privilege before me at any time, nor
hoped for it ; it being, I say, my object, insig-
nificant and altogether without understanding as
I am, to put my hand to such subjects, it is not
without reason 9 that I shrink from the task, and
hesitate, and desire to keep silence. And, in
truth, to keep silence seems to me to be also the
safe course, lest, with the show of an expression
of thanksgiving, I may chance, in my rashness,
to discourse of noble and sacred subjects in
terms ignoble and paltry and utterly trite, and
thus not only miss attaining the truth, but even,
so far as it depends on me, do it some injury
with those who may believe that it stands in
such a category, when a discourse which is weak
is composed thereon, and is rather calculated to
excite ridicule than to prove itself commensu-
rate in its vigour with the dignity of its themes.
But all that pertains to thee is beyond the touch
of injury and ridicule, O dear soul ; or, much
rather let me say, that the divine herein remains
ever as it is, unmoved and harmed in nothing
by our paltry and unworthy words. Yet I know
not how we shall escape the imputation of bold-
ness and rashness in thus attempting in our folly,
and with JitUe either of intelligence or of prepa-
ration, to handle matters which are weighty, and
probably beyond our capacity. And if, indeed,
elsewhere and with others, we had aspired to
make such youthful endeavours in matters like
these, we would surely have been bold and
daring ; nevertheless in such a case our rashness
might not have been ascribed to shamelessness,
in so far as we should not have been making the
bold effort with thee. But now we shall be fill-
ing out the whole measure of senselessness, or
rather indeed we have already filled it out, in
venturing with unwashed feet (as the saying
goes) to introduce ourselves to ears into which
the Divine Word Himself — not indeed with
covered feet, as is the case with the general mass


9 But the text reads, ovk tuAoycos.


ORATION AND PANEGYRIC ADDRESSED TO ORIGEN.


of men, and, as it were, under the thick cover-
ings of enigmatical and obscure ' sayings, but
with unsandalled feet (if one may so speak) —
),' has made His way clearly and perspicuously, and
KSn which He now sojourns ; while we, who have |
but refuse and mud to offer in these human
words of ours, have been bold enough to pour I
them into ears which are practised in hearing
only words that are divine and pure. It might
indeed suffice us, therefore, to have transgressed
thus far ; and now, at least, it might be but right
to restrain ourselves, and to advance no further
with our discourse. And verily I would stop
here most gladly. Nevertheless, as I have once
made the rash venture, it may be allowed me
first of all to explain the reason under the force
of which I have been led into this arduous
enterprise, if indeed any pardon can be extended
to me for my forwardness in this matter,

ARGUMENT III. — HE IS STIMULATED TO SPEAK OF
HIM BY THE LONGING OF A GRATEFUL MIND.
TO THE UTMOST OF HIS ABILITY HE THINKS HE
OUGHT TO THANK HIM. FROM GOD ARE THE
BEGINNINGS OF ALL BLESSINGS ; AND TO HIM
ADEQUATE THANKS CANNOT BE RETURNED.

Ingratitude appears to me to be a dire evil ; a
dire evil indeed, yea, the direst of evils. For
when one has received some benefit, his failing
to attempt to make any return by at least the
oral expression of thanks, where aught else is
beyond his power, marks him out either as an
utterly irrational person, or as one devoid of the
sense of obligations conferred, or as a man with-
out any memory. And, again, though ^ one is
possessed naturally and at once by the sense and
the knowledge of benefits received, yet, unless
he also carries the memory of these obligations
to future days, and offers some evidence of grat-
itude to the author of the boons, such a person
is a dull, and ungrateful, and impious fellow ;
and he commits an offence which can be excused
neither in the case of the great nor in that of
the small : — if we suppose the case of a great
and high-minded man not bearing constantly on
his lips his great benefits with all gratitude and
honour, or that of a small and contemptible man
not ])raising and lauding with all his might one
who has been his benefactor, not simply in great
services, but also in smaller. Upon the great,
therefore, and those who excel in powers of
mind, it is incumbent, as out of their greater
abundance and larger wealth, to render greater
and worthier praise, according to their capa-
city, to their benefactors. But the humble also,
and those in narrow circumstances, it beseems


' a(Ta(i>tov. But Ger. Voss has "<T<f>n.\i''i', safe.
2 Reading otuj, with Hceschelius, Bengel, and the Paris editor,
while Voss. reads on.


neither to neglect those who do them service,
nor to take their services carelessly, nor to flag
in heart as if they could offer nothing worthy or
perfect ; but as poor indeed, and yet as of good
feeling, and as measuring not the capacity of
him whom they honour, but only their own, they
ought to pay him honour according to the pres-
ent measure of their power, — a tribute which
will probably be grateful and pleasant to him
who is honoured, and in no less consideration
with him than it would have been had it been
some great and splendid offering, if it is only
presented with decided earnestness, and with a
sincere mind. Thus is it laid down in the
sacred writings,^ that a certain poor and lowly
woman, who was with the rich and powerful that
were contributing largely and richly out of their
wealth, alone and by herself cast in a small, yea,
the very smallest offering, which was, however,
all the while her whole substance, and received
the testimony of having presented the largest
oblation. For, as I judge, the sacred word has"^
not set up the large outward quantity of the J
substance given, but rather the mind and dispo- j
sition of the giver, as the standard by which the ■
worth and the magnificence of the offering are-)
to be measured. Wherefore it is not meet even
for us by any means to shrink from this duty,
through the fear that our thanksgivings be not
adequate to our obligations ; but, on the con-
trary, we ought to venture and attempt every-
thing, so as to offer thanksgivings, if not adequate,
at least such as we have it in our power to
exhibit, as in due return. And would that our
discourse, even though it comes short of the per-
fect measure, might at least reach the mark in
some degree, and be saved from all appearance
of ingratitude ! For a persistent silence, main-
tained under the plausible cover of an inability
to say anything worthy of the subject, is a vain
and evil thing ; but it is the mark of a good
disposition always to make the attempt at a suit-
able return, even although the power of the
person who offers the grateful acknowledgment
be inferior to the desert of the subject. For my
part, even although I am unal^le to speak as the
matter merits, I shall not keep silence ; but
when I have done all that I possibly can, then I
may congratulate myself. Be this, then, the
method of my eucharistic discourse. To God,
indeed, the God of the universe, I shall not
think of speaking in such terms : yet is it from
Him that all the beginnings of our blessings
come ; and with Him consequently is it that the
beginning of our thanksgivings, or praises, or
laudations, ought to be made. But, in truth, not
even though I were to devote myself wholly to
that duty, and that, too, not as I now am — to

3 Luke xxi. 2.


24


ORATION AND PANEGYRIC ADDRESSED TO ORIGEN.


wit, profane and impure, and mixed up with and
stained by every unhallowed ' and polluting evil
— but sincere and as pure as pure may be, and
most genuine, and most unsophisticated, and
uncontaminated by anything vile ; — not even, I
say, though I were thus to devote myself wholly,
and with all the purity of the newly born, to this
task, should I produce of myself any suitable
gift in the way of honour and acknowledgment
to the Ruler and Originator of all things, whom
neither men separately and individually, nor yet
all men in concert, acting with one spirit and
one concordant impulse, as though all that is
pure were made to meet in one, and all that is
diverse from that were turned also to that ser-
vice, could ever celebrate in a manner worthy of
Him. For, in whatsoever measure any man is
able to form right and adequate conceptions of
His works, and (if such a thing were possible)
to speak worthily regarding Him, then, so far as
that very capacity is concerned, — a capacity with
which he has not been gifted by any other one,
but which he has received from Him alone, he
cannot possibly find any greater matter of thanks-
giving than what is implied in its possession.

ARGUMENT IV. THE SON ALONE KNOWS HOW TO

PRAISE THE FATHER WORTHILY. IN CHRIST AND
BY CHRIST OUR THANKSGIVINGS OUGHT TO BE
RENDERED TO THE FATHER. GREGORY ALSO
^IVES THANKS TO HIS GUARDIAN ANGEL, BECAUSE
HE WAS CONDUCTED BY HIM TO ORIGEN.

But let us commit the praises and hymns in
honour of the King and Superintendent of all
things, the perennial Fount of all blessings, to
the hand of Him who, in this matter as in all
others, is the Healer of our infirmity, and who
alone is able to supply that which is lacking ; to
the Champion and Saviour of our souls. His
first-born Word, the Maker and Ruler of all
things, with whom also alone it is possible, both
for Himself and for all, whether privately and
individually, or publicly and collectively, to send
up to the Father uninterrupted and ceaseless
thanksgivings. For as He is Himself the Truth,
and the Wisdom, and the Power of the Father
of the universe, and He is besides in Him, and
is truly and entirely made one with Him, it can-
not be that, either through forgetfulness or un-
wisdom, or any manner of infirmity, such as
marks one dissociated from Him, He shall either
fail in the power to praise Him, or, while having
the power, shall willingly neglect (a supposition
which it is not lawful, surely, to indulge) to praise
the Father. For He alone is able most perfectly
to fulfil the whole meed of honour which is proper
to Him, inasmuch as the Father of all things has

' Travaye", which in the lexicons is given as bearing only the
good sense, all-hallowed, but which here evidently is taken in the
opposite.


made Him one with Himself, and through Him
all but completes the circle of His own being
objectively,^ and honours Him with a power in
all respects equal to His own, even as also He
is honoured ; which position He first and alone
of all creatures that exis-t has had assigned Him,
this Only-begotten of the Father, who is in Him,
and who is God the Word ; while all others of
us are able to express our thanksgiving and our
piety only if, in return for all the blessings which
proceed to us from the Father, we bring our offer-
ings in simple dependence on Him alone, and
thus present the meet oblation of thanksgiving
to Him who is the Author of all things, acknowl-
edging also that the only way of piety is in this
manner to offer our memorials through Him.
Wherefore, in acknowledgment of that ceaseless
providence which watches over all of us, alike
in the greatest and in the smallest concerns, and
which has been sustained even thus far, let this
Word 3 be accepted as the worthy and perpetual
expression for all thanksgivings and praises, — I
mean the altogether perfect and living and verily
animate Word of the First Mind Himself. But
let this word of ours be taken primarily as an
eucharistic address in honour of this sacred per-
sonage, who stands alone among all men ; "* and
if I may seek to discourse s of aught beyond this,
and, in particular, of any of those beings who are
not seen, but yet are more godlike, and who have
a special care for men, it shall be addressed to
that being who, by some momentous decision,
had me allotted to him from my boyhood to rule,
and rear, and train, — I mean that holy angel of
God who fed me from my youth,^ as says the
saint dear to God, meaning thereby his own
peculiar one. Though he, indeed, as being him-
self illustrious, did in these terms designate some
angel exalted enough to befit his own dignity
(and whether it was some other one, or whether
it was perchance the Angel of the Mighty Coun-
sel Himself, the Common Saviour of all, that he
received as his own peculiar guardian through
his perfection, I do not clearly know), — he, I
say, did recognise and praise some superior angel
as his own, whosoever that was. But we, in ad-
dition to the homage we offer to the Common
Ruler of all men, acknowledge and praise that
being, whosoever he is, who has been the won-
derful guide of our childhood, who in all other
matters has been in time past my beneficent
tutor and guardian. For this office of tutor and
guardian is one which evidently can suit 7 neither


2 eicTrcpicui' in the text, for which Bengel gives eKTreptluir, a word
used frequently by this author. In Domer it is explained as ^^ going
out of Himself in order to embrace and encompass Himself. See
the Dol trine of the Person of Christ, A. II. p. 173 (Clark).

3 AoYos.

* [The unformed theological mind of a youth is here betrayed.]

S The text gives jaeATjyopeu', for which others read ixiya.KT\-^oftiiv,

* Gen. xlviii. 15. [Jacob refers to the Jehovah-Angel.]

^ The text gives i\t.o\, etc , . . . cruu^epoi' caai Karac^atVeTai.
Bengel's idea of the sense is followed in the translation.


ORATION AND PANEGYRIC ADDRESSED TO ORIGEN.


25


me nor any of my friends and kindred ; for we
are all blind, and see nothing of what is before
us, so as to be able to judge of what is right
and fitting ; but it can suit only him who sees
beforehand all that is for the good of our soul :
f/iaf angel, I say, who still at this present time
sustains, and instructs, and conducts me ; and
who, in addition to all these other benefits, has
brought me into connection with this man, which,
in truth, is the most important of all the services
done me. And this, too, he has effected for me,
although between myself and that man of whom
I discourse there was no kinship of race or blood,
nor any other tie, nor any relationship in neigh-
bourhood or country whatsoever ; things which
are made the ground of friendship and union
among the majority of men. But to speak in
brief, in the exercise of a truly divine and wise
forethought he brought us together, who were
unknown to each other, and strangers, and for-
eigners, separated as thoroughly from each other
as intervening nations, and mountains, and rivers
can divide man from man, and thus he made
good this meeting which has been full of profit
to me, having, as I judge, provided beforehandal
this blessing for me from above from my very*
birth and earliest upbringing. And in what man-
ner this has been reahzed it would take long to
recount fully, not merely if I were to enter mi-
nutely into the whole subject, and were to attempt
to omit nothing, but even if, passing many things
by, I should purpose simply to mention in a sum-
mary way a few of the most important points.

ARGUMENT V. — HERE GREGORY INTERWEAVES THE
NARRAIIVE OF HIS FORMER LIFE. HIS BIRTH
OF HEATHEN PARENTS IS STATED. IN THE
FOURTEENTH YEAR OF HIS AGE HE LOSES HIS
FATHER. HE IS DEDICATED TO THE STUDY OF
ELOQUENCE AND LAW. BY A WONDERFUL LEAD-
ING OF PROVIDENCE, HE IS BROUGHT TO ORIGEN.

For my earliest upbringing from the time of
my birth onwards was under the hand of my par-
ents ; and the manner of life in my father's house
was one of error,' and of a kind from which no
one, I imagine, expected that we should be deliv-
ered ; nor had I myself the hope, boy as I was,
and without understanding, and under a super-
stitious father.- Then followed the loss of my
father, and my orphanhood, which ^ perchance
was also the beginning of the knowledge of the
truth to me. For then it was that I was brought
over first to the word of salvation and truth, in
what manner I cannot tell, by constraint rather
than by voluntary choice. For what power of de-
cision had I then, who was but fourteen years of


age ? Yet from this very time this sacred Word
began somehow to visit me, just at the period
when the reason common to all men attained its
full funcdon in me ; yea, then for the first time
did it visit me. And though I thought but httle
of this in that olden time, yet now at least, as I
ponder it, I consider that no small token of the
holy and marvellous providence exercised over
me is discernible in this concurrence, which was
so distinctly marked in the matter of my years,
and which provided that all those deeds of error
which preceded that age might be ascribed to
youth and want of understanding, and that the
Holy Word might not be imparted vainly to a
soul yet ungifted with the full power of reason ;
and which secured at the same time that when
the soul now became endowed with that power,
though not gifted with the divine and pure rea-
son,+ it might not be devoid at least of that fear
which is accordant with this reason, but that the
human and the divine reason 5 might begin to
act in me at once and together, — the one giving
help with a power to me at least inexplicable,^
though proper to itself, and the other receiving
help. And when I reflect on this, I am filled at
once with gladness and with terror, while I re-
joice indeed in the leading of providence, and
yet am also awed by the fear lest, after being
privileged with such blessings, I should still in
any way fail of the end. But indeed I know not
how my discourse has dwelt so long on this mat-
ter, desirous as I am to give an account of the
wonderful arrangement (of God's providence)
in the course that brought me to this man, and
anxious as nevertheless I formerly was to pass
with few words to the matters which follow in
their order, not certainly imagining that I could
render to him who thus dealt with me that trib-
ute of praise, or gratitude, or piety which is due
to him (for, were we to designate our discourse
in such terms, while yet we said nothing worthy
of the theme, we might seem chargeable with
arrogance), but simply with the view of offering
what may be called a plain narrative or confes-
sion, or whatever other humble title may be
given it. It seemed good to the only one of my
parents who survived to care for me — my moth-
er, namely — that, being already under instruc-
tion in those other branches in which boys not
ignobly born and nurtured are usually trained, I
should attend also a teacher of public speaking,
in the hope that I too should become a pubHc
speaker. And accordingly I did attend such a
teacher ; and those who could judge in that de-
partment then declared that I should in a short
period be a public speaker. I for my own part
know not how to pronounce on that, neither


- [The force of the original is not opprobrious.]
^ Reading r) Sr;. Others give r/ 6)j ; others, rj&rj; and the conjec-
ture rj Tj^T), " or my youth," is also made.


^ Aoyov.

5 Word.

^ The text, however, gives dAexTpa


26


ORATION AND PANEGYRIC ADDRESSED TO ORIGEN.


should I desire to do so ; for there was no ap-
parent ground for that gift then, nor was there
as yet any foundation for those forces ' which
were capable of bringing me to it. But that
divine conductor and true curator, ever so watch-
ful, when my friends were not thinking of such a
step, and when I was not myself desirous of it,
came and suggested (an extension of my studies)
to one of my teachers under whose charge I
had been put, with a view to instruction in the
Roman tongue, not in the expectation that I was
to reach the completest mastery of that tongue,
but only that I might not be absolutely ignorant
of it ; and this person happened also to be not
altogether unversed in laws. Putting the idea,
therefore, into this teacher's mind,- he set me to
learn in a thorough way the laws of the Romans
by his help. And that man took up this charge
zealously with me ; and I, on my side, gave my-
self to it — more, however, to gratify the man,
than as being myself an admirer of the study.
And when he got me as his pupil, he began to
teach me with all enthusiasm. And he said one
thing, which has proved to me the truest of all
his sayings, to wit, that my education in the laws
would be my greatest viaticum ^ — for thus he
phrased it — whether I aspired to be one, of the
public speakers who contend in the courts of jus-
tice, or preferred to belong to a different order.
Thus did he express himself, intending his word
to bear simply on things human ; but to me it
seems that he was moved to that utterance by a
diviner impulse than he himself supposed. For
when, willingly or unwillingly, I was becoming
well instructed in these laws, at once bonds, as it
were, were cast upon my movements, and cause
and occasion for my journeying to these parts
arose from the city Berytus, which is a city not
far distant ■» from this territory, somewhat Latin-
ized,5 and credited with being a school for these
legal studies. And this revered man coming
from Egypt, from the city of Alexandria, where
previously he happened to have his home, was
moved by other circumstances to change his resi-
dence to this place, as if with the express object
of meeting us. And for my part, I cannot ex-
plain the reasons of these incidents, and I shall
willingly pass them by. This however is certain,
that as yet no necessary occasion for my coming
to this place and meeting with this man was
afforded by my purpose to learn our laws, since
I had it in my power also to repair to the city
of Rome itself.^ How, then, was this effected?


» atTlwr, causes.

^ Reading toutco cttI vovv fiakuiv.

* The text is airoxeouo-a. Hoeschelius gives airexovira.

5 'PttifxalKtDTdpa ttw?.

° The text is, ovSkv oi'Toi? avayKalov rjv o<tov cttl rots rdjuot?
ri aayv, SwaTov ov Ka\ eTTi ti)!/ 'Pco/jtaaji/ a7roSi)fxr)<rai ttoAii'. Bengel
takes ocro;' as napi\Kov. Migne renders, niillam ei fiiisse necessi-
tateitt hue veniendi, discendi leges causa, siguidem Romain posset


The then governor of Palestine suddenly took
possession of a friend of mine, namely my sister's
husband, and separated him from his wife, and
carried him off here against his will, in order to
secure his help, and have him associated with
him in the labours of the government of the
country ; for he was a person skilled in law, and
perhaps is still so employed. After he had gone
with him, however, he had the good fortune in
no long time to have his wife sent for, and to
receive her again, from whom, against his will,
and to his grievance, he had been separated.
And thus he chanced also to draw us along with
her to that same place. For when we were
minded to travel, I know not where, but certainly
to any other place rather than this, a soldier sud-
denly came upon the scene, bearing a letter of
instructions for us to escort and protect our sis-
ter in her restoration to her husband, and to
offer ourselves also as companion to her on the
journey; in which we had the opportunity of
doing a favour to our relative, and most of all to
our sister (so that she might not have to address
herself to the journey either in any unbecoming
manner, or with any great fear or hesitation),
while at the same time our other friends and
connections thought well of it, and made it out
to promise no slight advantage, as we could thus
visit the city of Berytus, and carry out there with
all diligence ^ our studies in the laws. Thus all
things moved me thither, — my sense of duty ^ to
my sister, my own studies, and over and above
these, the soldier (for it is right also to mention
this), who had with him a larger supply of pub-
lic vehicles than the case demanded, and more
cheques'' than could be required for our sister
alone. These were the apparent reasons for our
journey ; but the secret and yet truer reasons
were these, — our opportunity of fellowship with
this man, our instruction through that man's
means '° in the truth " concerning the Word, and
the profit of our soul for its salvation. These
were the real causes that brought us here, blind
and ignorant, as we were, as to the way of secur-
ing our salvation. Wherefore it was not that
soldier, but a certain divine companion and
beneficent conductor and guardian, ever leading
us in safety through the whole of this present life,
as through a long journey, that carried us past
other places, and Berytus in especial, which city
at that time we seemed most bent on reaching,


proficisci. Sirmondus makes it, 7iiiUa causa adeo nccessaria erat
qua possetn per leges tiostras ad Ronianorum civitatein pro-
ficisci.

^ The text gives kKTsov^tjavTe.-;. Casaubon reads iKi!oir\aovTi%.

^ euAo'yot'.

9 cru/x^oAa.

>° 6; nvTov. Bengel understands this to refer to the soldier.

" The text is, ri}v a.\ridi) 6i' aviToO 7T€p'i ra rov \6yov ij.a9riti.ara,
Eengel takes this as an ellipsis, like ttji/ eavrov, TTjt' (firfv ixiav, and
similar phrases, yvuiixy]v or o66v, or some such word, being supplied.
Casaubon conjectures icai aAijS^, for which Bengel would prefer to
iAjje^.


ORATION AND PANEGYRIC -ADDRESSED TO ORIGEN.


27


and brought us hither and settled us here, dis-
posing and directing all things, until by any
means he might bind us in a connection with
this man who was to be the author of the greater
part of our blessings. And he who came in such
wise, that divine angel, gave over this charge '
to him, and did, if I may so speak, perchance
take his rest here, not indeed under the pressure
of labour or exhaustion of any kind (for the gen-
eration of those divine ministers knows no weari-
ness), but as having committed us to the hand
of a man who would fully discharge the whole
work of care and guardianship within his power.

ARGUMENT VI. THE ARTS BY WHICH ORIGEN

STUDIES TO KEEP GREGORY AND HIS BROTHER
ATHENODORUS WITH HIiM, ALTHOUGH IT WAS
ALMOST AGAINST THEIR WILL ; AND THE LOVE
BY WHICH BOTH ARE TAKEN CAPTIVE. OF
PHILOSOPHY, THE FOUNDATION OF PIETY. WITH
THE VIEW OF GIVING HIMSELF THEREFORE
WHOLLY TO THAT STUDY, GREGORY IS WILLING
TO GIVE UP FATHERLAND, PARENTS, THE PUR-
SUIT OF LAW, AND EVERY OTHER DISCIPLINE.
OF THE SOUL AS THE FREE PRINCIPLE. THE
NOBLER PART DOES NOT DESIRE TO BE UNITED
WITH THE INFERIOR, BUT THE INFERIOR WITH
THE NOBLER.

And from the very first day of his receiving
us (which day was, in truth, the first day to me,
and the most precious of all days, if I may so
speak, since then for the first time the true Sun
began to rise upon me), while we, like some
wild creatures of the fields, or like fish, or some
sort of birds that had fallen into the toils or nets,
and were endeavouring to slip out again and
escape, were bent on leaving him, and making
off for Berytus ^ or our native country, he studied
by all means to associate us closely with him,
contriving all kinds of arguments, and putting
every rope in motion (as the proverb goes), and
bringing all his powers to bear on that object.
With that intent he lauded the lovers of philos-
ophy with large laudations and many noble
utterances, declaring that those only live a life
truly worthy of reasonable creatures who aim at
living an upright life, and who seek to know first
of all themselves, what manner of persons they
are, and then the things that are truly good,
which man ought to strive after, and then the
things that are really evil, from which man ought
to flee. And then he reprehended ignorance
and all the ignorant : and there are many such,
who, like brute cattle,^ are bhnd in mind, and
have no understanding even of what they are,
and are as far astray as though they were wholly


^ [I think Lardner's inclination to credit Gregory with some
claim to be an alumnus of Berytus, is very fairly sustained.]


void of reason, and neither know themselves
what is good and what is evil, nor care at all to
learn it from others, but toil feverishly in quest
of wealth, and glory, and such honours as belong
to the crowd, and bodily comforts, and go dis-
traught about things like these, as if they were
the real good. And as though such objects
were worth much, yea, worth all else, they prize
the things themselves, and the arts by which they
can acquire them, and the different lines of life
which give scope for their attainment, — the
military profession, to wit, and the juridical, and
the study of the laws. And with earnest and
sagacious words he told us that these are the
objects that enervate us, when we despise that
reason which ought to be the true master within
us.-* I cannot recount at present all the addresses
of this kind which he delivered to us, with the
view of persuading us to take up the pursuit of
philosophy. Nor was it only for a single day
that he thus dealt with us, but for many days,
and, in fact, as often as we were in the habit of
going to him at the outset ; and we were pierced
by his argumentation as with an arrow from the
very first occasion of our hearing him 5 (for he
was possessed of a rare combination of a certain
sweet grace and persuasiveness, along with a
strange power of constraint), though we still '
wavered and debated the matter undecidedly
with ourselves, holding so far by the pursuit of
philosophy, without however being brought
thoroughly over to it, while somehow or other
we found ourselves quite unable to withdraw
from it conclusively, and thus were always drawn
towards him by the power of his reasonings, as
by the force of some superior necessity. For
he asserted further that there could be no gen-
uine piety towards the Lord of all in the man
who despised this gift of philosophy, — a gift
which man alone of all the creatures of the earth
has been deemed honourable and worthy enough
to possess, and one which every man whatsoever,
be he wise or be he ignorant, reasonably embraces,
who has not utterly lost the power of thought by
some mad distraction of mind. He asserted,
then, as I have said, that it was not possible (to
speak correctly) for any one to be truly pious
who did not philosophize. And thus he con-
tinued to do with us, until, by pouring in upon
us many such argumentations, one after the
other, he at last carried us fairly off somehow or
other by a kind of divine power, like people
with his reasonings, and established us (in the
practice of philosophy), and set us down with-
out the power of movement, as it were, beside


* The text here is, Tav9' anep t)/u.as dve'creie, ixaXitrra hiyoiv Kai
lidXa Te^i'iKWS, Tou KvpiwTaTOU, <i>r)crl, Tuiv ^y »)M'»' Ad-you, <i^i€A^-
aavTa<;.

5 The text gives e<c Trpcorrj? ■qXiKia':, which Bengel takes to be an
error for the absolute ex Trpiorr;;, to which r)fj.ipa<; would be supplied.
Casaubon and Rhodomanus read 6/u.t\ia? for ijAiKias.


28


ORATION AND PANEGYRIC ADDRESSED TO ORIGEN.


himself by his arts. Moreover, the stimulus of
friendship was also brought to bear upon us, —
a stimulus, indeed, not easily withstood, but keen
and most effective, — the argument of a kind
and affectionate disposition, wliich showed itself
benignantly in his words when he spoke to us
and associated with us. For he did not aim
merely at getting round us by any kind of rea-
soning ; but his desire was, with a benignant,
and affectionate, and most benevolent mind, to
save us, and make us partakers in the blessings
that flow from i)hilosophy, and most especially
also in those other gifts which the Deity has
bestowed on him above most men, or, as we may
perhaps say, above all men of our own time. I
mean the power that teaches us piety, the word
of salvation, that comes to many, and subdues to
itself all whom it visits : for there is nothing that
shall resist it, inasmuch as it is and shall be itself
the king of all ; although as yet it is hidden, and
is not recognised, whether with ease or with dif-
ficulty, by the common crowd, in such wise that,
when interrogated respecting it, they should be
able to speak intelligently about it. And thus,
like some spark lighting upon our inmost soul,
love was kindled and burst into flame within us,
— a love at once to the Holy Word, the most
lovely ol)ject of all, who attracts all irresistibly
toward Himself by His unutterable beauty, and
to this man, His friend and advocate. And
being most mightily smitten by this love, I was
persuaded to give up all those objects or pur-
suits which seem to us befitting, and among
others even my boasted jurisprudence, — yea,
my very fatherland and friends, both those who
were present with me then, and those from whom
I had parted. And in my estimation there arose
but one object dear and worth desire, — to wit,
philosophy, and that master of philosophy, this
inspired man. "And the soul of Jonathan was
knit with David." ' This word, indeed, I did
not read till afterwards in the sacred Scriptures ;
but I felt it before that time, not less clearly than
it is written : for, in truth, it reached me then
by the clearest of all revelations. For it was
not simply Jonathan that was knit with David ;
but those things were knit together which are
the ruling powers in man — their souls, — those
objects which, even though all the things which
are apparent and ostensible in man are severed,
cannot by any skill be forced to a severance
when they themselves are unwilling. For the
soul is free, and cannot be coerced by any means,
not even though one should confine it and keep
guard over it in some secret prison-house. For
wherever the intelligence is, there it is also of its
own nature and by the first reason. And if it
seems to you to be in a kind of prison-house, it

' I Sam. xviii. i.


is represented as there to you by a sort of second
reason. But for all that, it is by no means pre-
cluded from subsisting anywhere according to its
own determination ; nay, rather it is both able
to be, and is reasonably believed to be, there
alone and altogether, wheresoever and in con-
nection with what things soever those actions
which are proper only to it are in operation.
Wherefore, what I experienced has been most
clearly declared in this very short statement,
that " the soul' of Jonathan was knit with the
soul of David ; " objects which, as I said, can-
not by any means be forced to a separation
against their will, and which of their own incli-
nation certainly will not readily choose it. Nor
is it, in my opinion, in the inferior subject, who
is changeful and very prone to vary in purpose,
and in whom singly there has been no capacity
of union at first, that the power of loosing the
sacred bonds of this affection rests, but rather in
the nobler one, who is constant and not readily
shaken, and through whom it has been possi-
ble to tie these bonds and to fasten this sacred
knot. Therefore it is not the soul of David that
was knit by the divine word with the soul of
Jonathan ; but, on the contrary, the soul of the
latter, who was the inferior, is said to be thus
affected and knit with the soul of David. For
the nobler object would not choose to be knit
with one inferior, inasmuch as it is sufficient for
itself; but the inferior object, as standing in
need of the help which the nobler can give,
ought properly to be knit with the nobler, and
fitted dependently to it : so that this latter, re-
taining still its sufficiency in itself, might sustain
no loss by its connection with the inferior ; and
that that which is of itself without order ^ being
now united and fitted harmoniously with the
nobler, might, without any detriment done, be
perfectly subdued to the nobler by the con-
straints of such bonds. Wherefore, to apply the
bonds is the part of the superior, and not of
the inferior ; but to be knit to the other is the
part of the inferior, and this too in such a man-
ner that it shall possess no power of loosing itself
from these bonds. And by a similar constraint,
then, did this David of ours once gird us to
himself; and he holds us now, and has held us
ever since that time, so that, even though we
desired it, we could not loose ourselves from his
bonds. And hence it follows that, even though
we were to depart, he would not release this soul
of mine, which, as the Holy Scripture puts it, he
holds knit so closely with himself.

ARGUMENT VII. THE WONDERFUL SKILL WITH

WHICH ORIGEN PREPARES GREGORY AND ATHENO-
DORUS FOR PHILOSOPHY. THE INTELLECT OF


ORATION AND PANEGYRIC ADDRESSED TO ORIGEN. 29


EACH IS EXERCISED FIRST IN LOGIC, AND THE
MERE ATTENTION TO WORDS IS CONTEMNED.

But after he had thus carried us captive at
the very outset, and had shut us in, as it were,
on all sides, and when what was best ' had been
accomplished by him, and when it seemed good
to us to remain with him for a time, then he took
us in hand, as a skilled husbandman may take
in hand some field unwrought, and altogether
unfertile, and sour, and burnt up, and hard as a
rock, and rough, or, it may be, one not utterly
barren or unproductive, but rather, perchance,
by nature very productive, though then waste
and neglected, and stiff and untractable with
thorns and wild shrubs ; or as a gardener may
take in hand some plant which is wild indeed,
and which yields no cultivated fruits, though it
may not be absolutely worthless, and on finding
it thus, may, by his skill in gardening, bring some
cultivated shoot and graft it in, by making a
fissure in the middle, and then bringing the two
together, and binding the one to the other, until
the sap in each shall flow in one stream,^ and
they shall both grow with the same nurture : for
one may often see a tree of a mixed and worth-
less ^ species thus rendered productive in spite
of its past barrenness, and made to rear the
fruits of the good olive on wild roots ; or one
may see a wild plant saved from being altogether
profitless by the skill of a careful gardener ; or,
once more, one may see a plant which other-
wise is one both of culture and of fruitfulness, but
which, through the want of skilled attendance,
has been left unpruned and unwatered and waste,
and which is thus choked by the mass of su-
perfluous shoots suffered to grow out of it at
random,4 yet brought to discharge its proper
function in germination,? and made to bear the
fruit whose production was formerly hindered by
the superfluous growth.^ In suchwise, then, and
with such a disposition did he receive us at
first; and sur\'eying us, as it were, with a hus-
bandman's skill, and gauging us thoroughly, and
not confining his notice to those things only
which are patent to the eye of all, and which are
looked upon in open light, but penetrating into
us more deeply, and probing what is most in-
ward in us, he put us to the question, and made
propositions to us, and listened to us in our re-
plies ; and whenever he thereby detected any-
thing in us not wholly fruitless and profitless and
waste, he set about clearing the soil, and turning
it up and irrigating it, and putting all things in
movement, and brought his whole skill and care


' TO jrAecov.

* The text gives (rvfi.pKva-avTa <o?, for which Casaubon proposes
a-Vfj-^vaavTa. eis ei', or w? eV. Bengel suggests (rvfj-^pvaavTa. lus kv.

, * The text gives ixtl, for which Hoeschelius and Bengel read

S TeAeioCaSai Se Tjij j3Aao-Tjj.

* iirr' aWriKiav.


to bear on us, and wrought upon our mind.
And thorns and thistles,^ and every kind of wild
herb or plant which our mind (so unregulated
and precipitate in its own action) yielded and
produced in its uncultured luxuriance and native
wildness, he cut out and thoroughly removed by
the processes of refutation and prohibition ; some-
times assailing us in the genuine Socratic fashion,
and again upsetting us by his argumentation
whenever he saw us getting restive under him,
like so many unbroken steeds, and springing out
of the course and galloping madly about at ran-
dom, until with a strange kind of persuasiveness
and constraint he reduced us to a state of quie-
tude under him by his discourse, which acted
like a bridle in our mouth. And that was at first
an unpleasant position for us, and one not with-
out pain, as he dealt with persons who were un-
used to it, and still all untrained to submit to
reason, when he plied us with his argumenta-
tions; and yet he purged us by them. And
when he had made us adaptable, and had pre-
pared us successfully for the reception of the /
words of truth, then, further, as though we were
now a soil well wrought and soft, and ready to
impart growth to the seeds cast into it, he dealt
liberally with us, and sowed the good seed in
season, and attended to all the other cares of
the good husbandry, each in its own proper sea-
son. And whenever he perceived any element
of infirmity or baseness in our mind (whether it
was of that character by nature, or had become
thus gross through the excessive nurture of the
body), he pricked it with his discourses, and re-
duced it by those delicate words and turns of
reasoning which, although at first the very sim-
plest, are gradually evolved one after the other,
and skilfully wrought out, until they advance to
a sort of complexity which can scarce be mas-
tered or unfolded, and which cause us to start
up, as it were, out of sleep, and teach us the art
of holding always by what is immediately before
one, without ever making any slip by reason
either of length or of subtlety. And if there
was in us anything of an injudicious and precipi-
tate tendency, whether in the way of assenting
to all that came across us, of whatever character
the objects might be, and even though they
proved false, or in the way of often withstanding
other things, even though they were spoken
truthfully, — that, too, he brought under disci-
pline in us by those delicate reasonings already
mentioned, and by others of like kind (for this
branch of philosophy is of varied form), and
accustomed us not to throw in our testimony at
one time, and again to refuse it, just at random,
and as chance impelled, but to give it only after
careful examination not only into things mani-


7 TpijSoAovs.


ORATION AND PANEGYRIC ADDRESSED TO ORIGEN.


fest, but also into those that are secret.' For
many things which are in high repute of them-
selves, and honourable in appearance, have found
entrance through fair words into our ears, as
though they were true, while yet they were hol-
low and false, and have borne off and taken
possession of the suffrage of truth at our hand,
and then, no long time afterwards, they have
been discovered to be corrupt and unworthy of
credit, and deceitful borrowers of the garb of
truth ; aiKl have thus too easily exposed us as
men who are ridiculously deluded, and who
bear their witness inconsiderately to things which
ought by no means to have won it. And, on the
contrary, other things which are really honour-
able and the reverse of impositions, but which
have not been expressed in plausible statements,
and thus have the appearance of being paradox-
ical and most incredible, and which have been
rejected as false on their own showing, and held
up undeservedly to ridicule, have afterwards, on
careful investigation and examination, been dis-
covered to be the truest of all things, and wholly
incontestable, though for a time spurned and reck-
oned false. Not simply, then, by dealing with
things patent and prominent, which are some-
times delusive and sophistical, but also by teach-
ing us to search into things within us, and to put
them all individually to the test, lest any of them
should give back a hollow sound, and by instruct-
ing us to make sure of these inward things first
of all, he trained us to give our assent to out-
ward things only then and thus, and to express
our opinion on all these severally. In this way,
that capacity of our mind which deals critically
with words and reasonings, was educated in a ra-
tional manner ; not according to the judgments
of illustrious rhetoricians — whatever Greek or
foreign honour appertains to that tide ^ — for
theirs is a discipline of little value and no neces-
sity : but in accordance with that which is most
needful for all, whether Greek or outlandish,
whether wise or illiterate, and, in fine, not to
make a long statement by going over every pro-
fession and pursuit separately, in accordance
with that which is most indispensable for all
men, whatever manner of life they have chosen,
if it is indeed the care and interest of all who
have to converse on any subject whatever with
each other, to be protected against deception.

argument viii. — then in due succession he
instructs them in physics, geo:sietry, and
astrono:my.

Nor did he confine his efforts merely to that
form of the mind which it is the lot of the dia-


lectics to regulate ; 3 but he also took in hand
that humble capacity of mind, (which shows it-
self) in our amazement at the magnitude, and the
wondrousness, and the magnificent and absolutely
wise construction of the world, and in our mar-
velling in a reasonless way, and in our being
overpowered with fear, and in our knowing not,
like the irrational creatures, what conclusion to
come to. That, too, he aroused and corrected
by other studies in natural science, illustrating
and distinguishing the various divisions of created
' objects, and with admirable clearness reducing
them to their pristine elements, taking them all
' up perspicuously in his discourse, and going
! over the nature of the whole, and of each sev-
i eral section, and discussing the multiform revo-
lution and mutation of things in the world, until
he carried us fully along with him under his clear
teaching ; and by those reasonings which he had
partly learned from others, and partly found out
for himself, he filled our minds with a rational
instead of an irrational wonder at the sacred
economy of the universe, and irreproveable con-
stitution of all things. This is that sublime and
heavenly study which is taught by natural phil-
osophy — a science most attractive to all. And
what need is there now to speak of the sacred
mathematics, viz., geometry, so precious to all
and above all controversy, and astronomy, whose
course is on high ? These different studies he
imprinted on our understandings, training us in
them, or calling them into our mind, or doing
with us something else which I know not how to
designate rightly. And the one he presented
lucidly as the immutable groundwork and secure
foundation of all, namely geometry ; and by the
other, namely astronomy, he lifted us up to the
things that are highest above us, while he made
heaven passable to us by the help of each of these
sciences, as though they were ladders reaching
the skies.

ARGUMENT IX. BUT HE IMBUES THEIR MINDS,

ABOVE ALL, WITH ETHICAL SCIENCE ; AND HE
DOES NOT CONFINE HIMSELF TO DISCOURSING
ON THE VIRTUES IN WORD, BUT HE RATHER
CONFIRMS HIS TEACHING BY HIS ACTS.

Moreover, as to those things which excel all
in importance, and those for the sake of wluch,
above all else, the whole ■♦ family of the philo-
sophical labours, gathering them like good fruits
produced by the varied growths of all the other
studies, and of long practised philosophizing, —
I mean the divine virtues that concern the moral
nature, by which the impulses of the mind have
their equable and stable subsistence, — through
these, too, he aimed at making us truly proof


' The words aXAi Ke/cpufijiera are omitted by Hosschelius and
Bengel.

* «i Ti 'EAAjji'tKbi' rj Pap^apov eart Trj iputvjj.


3 The text is, Kal /xi) tovB' oirep eiSos SiaAcKTiKr; Ko-TopBovv /jlovt)
eiA>)xe.

4 nav TO (f>i.\6(To4)ov. Hoeschelius and Bengel read ttu)?, etc.


ORATION AND PANEGYRIC ADDRESSED TO ORIGEN.


31


against grief and disquietude under the pressure
of all ills, and at imparting to us a well-disci-
plined and stedfast and religious spirit, so that we
might be in all things veritably blessed. And this
he toiled at effecting by pertinent discourses, of a
wise and soothing tendency, and very often also
by the most cogent addresses touching our moral
dispositions, and our modes of life. Nor was it
only by words, but also by deeds, that he regu-
lated in some measure our inclinations, — to wit,
by that very contemplation and observation of
the impulses and affections of the mind, by the
issue of which most especially the mind is wont
to be reduced to a right estate from one of dis-
cord, and to be restored to a condition of judg-
ment and order out of one of confusion. So that,
beholding itself as in a mirror (and I may say
specificall}', viewing, on the one hand, the very
beginnings and roots of evil in it, and all that is
reasonless within it, from which spring up all
absurd affections and passions ; and, on the
other hand, all that is truly excellent and reason-
able within it, under the sway of which it remains
proof against injury and perturbation in itself,
and then scrutinizing carefully the things thus
discovered to be in it), it might cast out all those
which are the growth of the inferior part, and
which waste our powers ^ through intemperance,
or hinder and choke them through depression,
— such things as pleasures and lusts, or pains
and fears, and the whole array of ills that accom-
pany these different species of evil. I say that
thus it might cast them out and make away with
them, by coping with them while yet in their be-
ginnings and only just commencing their growth,
and not leaving them to wax in strength even by
a short delay, but destroying and rooting them
out at once ; while, at the same time, it might
foster all those things which are really good, and
which spring from the nobler part, and might pre-
serve them by nursing them in their beginnings,
and watching carefully over them until they
should reach their maturity. For it is thus (he
used to say) that the heavenly virtues will ripen
in the soul : to wit, prudence, which first of all
is able to judge of those very motions in the
mind at once from the things themselves, and
by the knowledge which accrues to it of things
outside of us, whatever such there may be, both
good and evil ; and temperance, the power that
makes the right selection among these things in
their beginnings ; and righteousness, which as-
signs what is just to each ; and that virtue which
is the conserver of them all — fortitude. And
therefore he did not accustom us to a mere pro-
fession in words, as that prudence, for instance, is
tbe knowledge 3 of good and evil, or of what ought


* The text gives v(j)' eaurqs, for which Bengel reads i<(>' eaur^?.
3 ejTicTTrjft)), science.


to be done, and what ought not : for that would
be indeed a vain and profitless study, if there was
simply the doctrine without the deed ; and worth-
less would that prudence be, which, without do-
ing the things that ought to be done, and without
turning men away from those that ought not to be
done, should be able merely to furnish the knowl-
edge of these things to those who possessed her,
— though many such persons come under our
observation. Nor, again, did he content himself
with the mere assertion that temperance is sim-
ply the knowledge of what ought to be chosen
and what ought not ; though the other schools of
philosophers do not teach even so much as that,
and especially the more recent, who are so forci-
ble and vigorous in words (so that I have often
been astonished at them, when they sought to
demonstrate that there is the same virtue in God
and in men, and that upon earth, in particular,
the wise man is equaH to God), and yet are
incapable of delivering the truth as to prudence,
so that one shall do the things which are dictated
by prudence, or the truth as to temperance, so
that one shall choose the things he has learned
by it ; and the same holds good also of their
treatment of righteousness and fortitude. Not
thus, however, in mere words only did this
teacher go over the truths concerning the virtues
with us j but he incited us much more to the
practice of virtue, and stimulated us by the deeds
he did more than by the doctrines he taught.

ARGUMENT X. HENCE THE MERE WORD-SAGES

ARE CONFUTED, WHO SAY AND YET ACT NOT.

Now I beg of the philosophers of this present
time, both those whom I have known personally
myself, and those of whorri I have heard by re-
port from others, and I beg also of all other
men, that they take in good part the statements
I have just made, x^nd let no one suppose that
I have expressed myself thus, either through
simple friendship toward that man, or through
hatred toward the rest of the philosophers ; for
if there is any one inclined to be an admirer of
them for their discourses, and wishful to speak
well of them, and pleased at hearing the most
honourable mention made of them by others, I
myself am the man. Nevertheless, those facts
(to which I have referred) are of such a nature
as to bring upon the very name of philosophy
the last degree of ridicule almost from the great
mass of men ; and I might almost say that 1
would choose to be altogether unversed in it,
rather than learn any of the things which these
men profess, with whom I thought it good no
longer to associate myself in this life, — though
in that, it may be, I formed an incorrect judg-
ment. But I say that no one should suppose


* Tot rrpujTa ©eoi 1<T0V eii/ai T6^' <TO(j)'ov dvOpiairov


32


ORATION AND PANEGYRIC ADDRESSED TO ORIGEN.


that I make these statements at the mere prompt-
ing of a zealous regard for the praise of this
man, or under the stimuhis of any existing ani-
mosity ' towards other philosophers. But let all
be assured that I say even less than his deeds
merit, lest I should seem to be indulging in
adulation ; and that I do not seek out studied
words and phrases, and cunning means of lauda-
tion — I who could never of my own will, even
when I was a youth, and learning the popular
style of address under a professor of the art of
public speaking, bear to utter a word of praise,
or pass any encomium on any one which was not
genuine. Wherefore on the present occasion,
too, I do not think it right, in proposing to
myself the task simply of commending him, to
magnify him at the cost of the reprobation of
others. And, in good sooth,^ I should speak
only to the man's injury, if, with the view of
having something grander to say of him, I should
compare his blessed life with the failings of
others. We are not, however, so senseless.^
But I shall testify simply to what has come with-
in my own experience, apart from all ill-judged
comparisons and trickeries in words.

ARGUMENT XI. ORIGEN IS THE FIRST AND THE

ONLY ONE THAT EXHORTS GREGORY TO ADD TO
HIS ACQUIREMENTS THE STUDY OF PHILOSOPHY,
AND OFFERS HIM IN A CERTAIN MANNER AN
EXAMPLE IN HIMSELF. OF JUSTICE, PRUDENCE,
TEMPERANCE, AND FORTITUDE. THE MAXIM,
KNOW THYSELF.

He was also the first and only man that urged
me to study the philosophy of the Greeks, and
persuaded me by his own moral example both
to hear and to hold by the doctrine of morals,
while as yet I had by no means been won over
to that, so far as other philosophers were con-
cerned (I again acknowledge it), — not rightly
so, indeed, but unhappily, as I may say without
exaggeration, for me. I did not, however, asso-
ciate with many at first, but only with some few
who professed to be teachers, though, in good
sooth, they all established their philosophy only
so far as words went.* This man, however, was
the first that induced me to philosophize by his
words, as he pointed the exhortation by deeds
before he gave it in words, and did not merely
recite well-studied sentences ; nay, he did not
deem it right to speak on the subject at all, but
with a sincere mind, and one bent on striving
ardently after the practical accomplishment of
the things expressed, and he endeavoured all the
while to show himself in character like the man

' fJiAoTcnia, for which (j>i\oi'^LKia is read.

^ The text is, v xaKuiv av e-Veyoi', etc. The Greek fi and the
Latin aut are found sometimes thus with a force bordering on that
of alioqui.

3 a<>paivoM€v. The Paris editor would read a^paCvia fiev,

* aAAa yap naai jixe'^pt pr\ixaTuiV to (/)cAo0'o<^ei^ <nrico.iji,v.


whom he describes in his discourses as the per-
son who shall lead a noble life, and he ever ex-
hibited (in himself), I would say, the pattern of
the wise man. But as our discourse at the out-
set proposed to deal with the truth, and not with
vain-glorious language, 5 I shall not speak of him
now as the exemplar of the wise man. And
yet, if I chose to speak thus of him, I should
not be far astray from the truth.'"' Nevertheless,
I pass that by at present. I shall not speak of
him as a perfect pattern, but as one who vehe-
mently desires to imitate the perfect pattern,
and strives after it with zeal and earnestness,
even beyond the capacity of men, if I may so
express myself ; and who labours, moreover, also
to make us, who are so different,^ of like char-
acter with himself, not mere masters and appre-
henders of the bald doctrines concerning the
impulses of the soul, but masters and appre-
henders of these impulses themselves. For he
pressed ^ us on both to deed and to doctrine,
and carried us along by that same view and
method,^ not merely into a small section of each
virtue, but rather into the whole, if mayhap we
were able to take it in. And he constrained us
also, if I may so speak, to practise righteousness
on the ground of the personal action of the soul
itself, '° which he persuaded us to study, drawing
us off from the officious anxieties of life, and
from the turbulence of the forum, and raising us
to the nobler vocation of looking into ourselves,
and dealing with the things that concern our-
selves in truth. Now, that this is to practise
righteousness, and that this is the true righteous-
ness, some also of our ancient philosophers have
asserted (expressing it as the personal action, I
think), and have afifirmed that this is more profit-
able for blessedness, both to the men themselves
and to those who are with them," if indeed it
belongs to this virtue to recompense according


S The text is, aAA' CTret aAij^eiav ri\x1vy ov KOfuJjscav eTrjjyyet'AaTO
6 Aoyo? avwdiv. The Latin rendering is, sed quia vcritatem nobis,
non pompam et ortiatuin protnisit oratio in exordia.

^ The text is, icaiTOt ye urmv kSiKiav eivai re aArjSe's. Bengel
takes the r< as pleonastic, or as an error for the article, t' aArjSe?. The
f irai in i04\(iiv flvai. he takes to be the use of the infinitive which
occurs in such phrases as T-qv npunrfv eirai, initio, tKiuv tivai, libcn-
ter, TO 6e viiv tij-ai, nunc vero, etc.; and, giving iOeXiMv the sense
of /ne'AAco;', makes the whole = And yet I shall speak truth.

' The text is, leai iJMas eTepous. The phrase may be, as it is
given above, a delicate expression of difference, or it may perhaps
be an elegant redundancy, like the French a nous autres. Others
read, xai rj/ua? /col erepous.

8 The reading in the text gives, ov Ao-yioi' c-yKpareis ica'i i-nKni]-
fj.ova^ Tiov Trept bp^xojv, Tuiv 6e opfxuiv auTtui' • ctti ja epya koX Adyov?
ayxMv, etc. Others would arrange the whole passage differently,
thus: Jrepl opp-Civ, twi' £e 6pp.(uv avTuv titX to. tpya xai Toi»s Aoyovs
dy\uiv. Ka'i, etc. Hence Sirmondus renders it, a mo/ibus ipsis ad
opera etiant sermones, reading also ayMv apparently. Rhodomanus
gives, itnpulsionutn ipsaruin ad opera et verba ignavi et 7iegli-
gentes, reading evidently a-pyinv, Bengel solves the difficulty by
taking the first clause as equivalent to oii Koyuiv ty/cpareis icai, emcr-
T^^oi'as . , . o.\nuiV TO)!' op^uc iynpaTel's Kal eTri(TT))/uiOfOS. We
have adopted this as the most evident sense. Thus ayxiov is re-
tained unchanged, and is taken as a parallel to the following partici-
ple enL(f>epuiv, and as bearing, therefore, a meaning something like
that of ayayKa^uiv. See Bengel's note in Migne.

9 Seitipitf,

'° Sia TJiv iSiorrpayiav t^? xpvxrj^, perhaps just " the private life."
" fauToiv Te Kal TOis TTpociOvmv,


ORATION AND PANEGYRIC ADDRESSED TO ORIGEN.


33


to desert, and to assign to each his own. For
what else could be supposed to be so proper to
the soul ? Or what could be so worthy of it, as
to exercise a care over itself, not gazing out-
wards, or busying itself with alien matters, or, to
speak shortly, doing the worst injustice to itself,
but turning its attention inwardly upon itself,
rendering its own due to itself, and acting there-
by righteously? ' To practise righteousness after
this fashion, therefore, he impressed upon us, if
I may so speak, by a sort of force. And he
educated us to prudence none the less, — teach-
ing to be at home with ourselves, and to desire
and endeavour to know ourselves, which indeed
is the most excellent achievement of philosophy,
the thing that is ascribed also to the most pro-
phetic of spirits ^ as the highest argument of
wisdom — the precept, Know thyself. And that
this is the genuine function of prudence, and
that such is the heavenly prudence, is affirmed
well by the ancients ; for in this there is one
virtue common to God and to man ; while the
soul is exercised in beholding itself as in a mir-
ror, and reflects the divine mind in itself, if it is
worthy of such a relation, and traces out a cer-
tain inexpressible method for the attaining of
a kind of apotheosis. And in correspondence
with this come also the virtues of temperance
and fortitude : temperance, indeed, in conserv-
ing this very prudence which must be in the soul
that knows itself, if that is ever its lot (for this
temperance, again, surely means just a sound
prudence) : ^ and fortitude, in keeping stedfastly
by all the duties ^ which have been spoken of,
without falling away from them, either voluntarily
or under any force, and in keeping and holding
by all that has been laid down. For he teaches
that this virtue acts also as a kind of preserver,
maintainer, and guardian.

ARGUMENT XII. GREGORY DISALLOWS ANY ATTAIN-
MENT OF THE VIRTUES ON HIS PART. PIETY IS
BOTH THE BEGINNING AND THE END, AND THUS
IT IS THE PARENT OF ALL THE VIRTUES.

It is true, indeed, that in consequence of our
dull and sluggish nature, he has not yet suc-
ceeded in making us righteous, and prudent,
and temperate, or manly, although he has laboured
zealously on us. For we are neither in real pos-
session of any virtue whatsoever, either human
or divine, nor have we ever made any near ap-
proach to it, but we are still far from it. And
these are very great and lofty virtues, and none
of them may be assumed by any common per-
son,5 but only by one whom God inspires with


• The text is, to Trpbs eauTtji' e'l'at. Migne proposes either to
read tavToi)?, or to supply rrji' y\i\ixr]v.

2 b 5t) Kat hankoviMV tuj /xarrtKujTaTa) a^'aTt'derat.

3 <na^(io<ivvy\v, cruiav Tcva 4>p6vTta^i,f, an etymological play.

* etrtT/)6cua6(Tiv.

S The text is, ovSe tw Tv^eif. Migne suggests ovSe tu> 0e/ji.i?
Tvxelv = nor is it legitimate for any one to attain them.


the power. We are also by no means so favour-
ably constituted for them by nature, neither do
we yet profess ourselves to be worthy of reaching
them ; for through our listlessness and feebleness
we have not done all these things which ought
to be done by those who aspire after what is
noblest, and aim at what is perfect. We are not
yet therefore either righteous or temperate, or
endowed with any of the other virtues. But this
admirable man, this friend and advocate of the
virtues, has long ago done for us perhaps all that
it lay in his power to do for us, in making us
lovers of virtue, who should love it with the most
ardent affection. And by his own virtue he cre-
ated in us a love at once for the beauty of right-
eousness, the golden face of which in truth was
shown to us by him ; and for prudence, which
is worthy of being sought by all ; and for the
true wisdom, which is most delectable ; and for
temperance, the heavenly virtue which forms
the sound constitution of the soul, and brings
peace to aU who possess it ; and for manliness,
that most admirable grace ; and for patience,
that virtue peculiarly ours ; ^ and, above all, for
piety, which men rightly designate when they
call it the mother of the virtues. For this is the
beginning and the end of all the virtues. And
beginning with this one, we shall find all the
other virtues grow upon us most readily : if,
while for ourselves we earnestly aspire after this
grace, which every man, be he only not abso-
lutely impious, or a mere pleasure-seeker, ought
to acquire for himself, in order to his being a
friend of God and a maintainer'' of His truth, and
while we diligently pursue this virtue, we also
give heed to the other virtues, in order that we
may not approach our God in unworthiness and
impurity, but with all virtue and wisdom as our
best conductors and most sagacious priests.
And the end of all I consider to be nothing but
this : By the pure mind make thyself like ^ to
God, that thou mayest draw near to Him, and
abide in Him.

ARGUMENT XIII. THE METHOD WHICH ORIGEN

USED IN HIS THEOLOGICAL AND METAPHYSICAL
INSTRUCTIONS. HE CO.MMENDS THE STUDY OF
ALL WRITERS, THE ATHEISTIC ALONE EXCEPTED.
THE MARVELLOUS POWER OF PERSUASION IN
SPEECH. THE FACILITY OF THE MIND IN GIVING
ITS ASSENT.

And besides all his other patient and laborious
efforts, how shall I in words give any account of

* The text is, vfl-ofioi'rjs fjulav, Vossius and others omit the
rffiiav. The Stuttgart editor gives this note: "It does not appear
that this should be connected by apposition with nySpeia^ (manli-
ness). But Gregory, after the four virtues which philosophers define
as cnrdinnl, adds two which are properly Christian, \\z., patience,
and that which is the hinge of all — piety,"

7 The word is TrpoTJ-yopov. It may be, as the Latin version puts
\\., familiar is, one in fellowship with God.

^ tJofioiiuSijTi 7rpoaeA9tii'. Others read -'fj/io"^^^''''ai'poo-e/V0«ii'.


34


ORATION AND PANEGYRIC ADDRESSED TO ORIGEN.


what he did for us, in instructing us in theology
and the devout character? and how shall I enter
into the real disposition of the man, and show
with what judiciousness and careful preparation
he would have us fauiiliarized with all discourse
about the Divinity, guarding sedulously against
our being in any peril with respect to what is the
most needful thing of all, namely, the knowledge
of the Cause of all things ? For he deemed it
right for us to study philosophy in such wise,
that we should read with utmost diligence all
that has been written, both by the philosophers
and by the poets of old, rejecting nothing,' and
repudiating nothing (for, indeed, we did not yet
possess the power of critical discernment), ex-
cept only the productions of the atheists, who,
in their conceits, lapse from the general intelli-
gence of man, and deny that there is either a
God or a providence. From these he would
have us abstain, because they are not worthy of
being read, and because it might chance that
the soul within us that is meant for piety might
be defiled by listening to words that are contrary
to the worship of God. For even those who
frequent the temples of piety, as they think them
to be, are careful not to touch anything that is
profane.^ He held, therefore, that the books of
such men did not merit to be taken at all into
the consideration of men who have assumed the
practice of piety. He thought, however, that
we should obtain and make ourselves familiar
with all other writings, neither preferring nor re-
pudiating any one kind, whether it be philoso-
phical discourse or not, whether Greek or foreign,
but hearing what all of them have to convey.
And it was with great wisdom and sagacity that
he acted on this principle, lest any single saying
given by the one class or the other should be
heard and valued above others as alone true,
even though it might not be true, and lest it
might thus enter our mind and deceive us, and,
in being lodged there by itself alone, might
make us its own, so that we should no more
have the power to withdraw from it, or wash our-
selves clear of 'it, as one washes out a little wool
that has got some colour ingrained in it. For
a mighty thing and an energetic is the discourse
of man, and subtle with its sophisms, and quick
to find its way into the ears, and mould the
mind, and impress us with what it conveys ; and
when once it has taken possession of us, it can
win us over to love it as truth ; and it holds its
place within us even though it be false and de-
ceitful, overmastering us like some enchanter,
and retaining as its champion the very man it
has deluded. And, on the other hand, the mind


' /xtjSei' eftTroiov/ne'vous. Casaubon marks this as a phrase taken
from law, and equivalent to, ni'hi'l aliemnii a noHs liucoites.

^ The text is, % otovrai. We render with Bengel. The Latin
interpreter makes it = Even those who frequent the temples do not
deem it consistent with religion to touch anything at all profane.


of man is withal a thing easily deceived by
speech, and very facile in yielding its assent ; and,
indeed, before it discriminates and inquires into
matters in any {Proper way, it is easily won over,
either through its own obtuseness and imbecility,
or through the subtlety of the discourse, to give
itself up, at random often, all weary of accurate
examination, to crafty reasonings and judgments,
which are erroneous themselves, and which lead
into error those who receive them. And not
only so ; but if another mode of discourse aims
at correcting it, it will neither give it admittance,
nor suffer itself to be altered in opinion, because
it is held fast by any notion which has previously
got possession of it, as though some inexorable
tyrant were lording over it.

ARGUMENT XIV. WHENCE THE CONTENTIONS OF

PHILOSOPHERS HAVE SPRUNG. AGAINST THOSE
WHO CATCH AT EVERYTHING THAT MEETS THEM,
AND GIVE IT CREDENCE, AND CLING TO IT.
ORIGEN WAS IN THE HABIT OF CAREFULLY
READING AND EXPLAINING THE BOOKS OF THE
HEATHEN TO HIS DISCIPLES.

Is it not thus that contradictory and opposing
tenets have been introduced, and all the conten-
tions of philosophers, while one party withstands
the opinions of another, and some hold by certain
positions, and others by others, and one school
attaches itself to one set of dogmas, and another
to another? And all, indeed, aim at philosophiz-
ing, and profess to have been doing so ever since
they were first roused to it, and declare that
they desire it not less now when they are well
versed in the discussions than when they began
them : yea, rather they allege that they have
even more love for philosophy now, after they
have had, so to speak, a little taste of it, and
have had the liberty of dwelling on its discus-
sions, than when at first, and without any pre-
vious experience of it, they were urged by a
sort of impulse to philosophize. That is what
they say ; and henceforth they give no heed to
any words of those who hold opposite opinions.
And accordingly, no one of the ancients has
ever induced any one of the moderns, or those
of the Peripatetic school, to turn to his way of
thinking, and adopt his method of philosophiz-
ing ; and, on the other hand, none of the mod-
erns has imposed his notions upon those of the
ancient school. Nor, in short, has any one done
so with any other.^ For it is not an easy thing
to induce one to give up his own opinions, and
accept those of others ; although these might,
perhaps, even be sentiments which, if he had
been led to credit them before he began to phi-
losophize, the man might at first have admired

3 [The ultimate subjugation of Latin theology by Aristotelian phi-
losophy, is a deplorable instance of what is here hinted at, and what
Hippolytus has worked out. Compare Col. ii. 8. J


ORATION AND PANEGYRIC ADDRESSED TO O^IGEN. 35


and accepted with all readiness : as, while the
mind was not yet preoccupied, he might have \
directed his attention to that set of opinions, and j
given them his approval, and on their behalf op- i
posed himself to those which he holds at present, j
Such, at least, has been the kind of philosophiz-
ing exhibited by our noble and most eloquent
and critical Greeks : for whatever any one of
these has lighted on at the outset, moved by j
some impulse or other, that alone he declares
to be truth, and holds that all else which is
maintained by other philosophers is simply delu-
sion and folly, though he himself does not more
satisfactorily establish his own positions by argu-
ment, than do all the others severally defend
their peculiar tenets ; the man's object being
simply to be under no obligation to give up and
alter his opinions, whether by constraint or by
persuasion, while he has (if one may speak truth)
nothing else but a kind of unreasoning impulse
towards these dogmas on the side of philosophy,
and possesses no other criterion of what he im-
agines to be true, than (let it not seem an
incredible assertion) undistinguishing chance.'
And as each one thus becomes attached to those
positions with which he has first fallen in, and is,
as it were, held in chains by them, he is no
longer capable of giving attention to others, if
he happens to have anything of his own to offer
on every subject with the demonstration of truth,
and if he has the aid of argument to show how
false the tenets of his adversaries are ; for, help-
lessly and thoughtlessly and as if he looked for
some happy contingency, he yields himself to
the reasonings that first take possession of him.^
And such reasonings mislead those who accept
them, not only in other matters, but above all,
in what is of greatest and most essential conse-
quence — in the knowledge of God and in piety.
And yet men become bound by them in such a
manner that no one can very easily release them.
For they are like men caught in a swamp stretch-
ing over some wide impassable plain, which,
when they have once fallen into it, allows them
neither to retrace their steps nor to cross it and
effect their safety, but keeps them down in its
soil until they meet their end ; or they may be
compared to men in a deep, dense, and majestic
forest, into which the wayfarer enters, with the
idea, perchance, of finding his road out of it
again forthwith, and of taking his course once

' The text is, ov< aW-qv Tiva. (et Sel t aArj^e; eirreii') i\tav 7J
r\\v TTpb? TJ^s <\nKo(jQ<^ia.^ evrt Ta^e Ta h6y\xa.Ta. akoyov opu^f • /cat
Koiaiv S>u olerai, aArjSwr (fir; napaBo^ov eiireif 17) ovk aWrju ij ttji/
aKpiTov Tvxriv. Vossius would read, Trprx; ttji/ (j)iAoo-0'f)iai' Kai ewi
Tafie Ta Soy/aara. Migne makes \\. = luilla ei erat alia sentcntia
(si ver7cm est dicendicni) nisi ccecits itle stimiilus quo ante fihilo-
sopliice studiutn in ista actus erat placita: neijiie aliiid Judicium
eoruii! ifHte 7iera putarct {ne minim sit dictu) nisi fort unce te-
tnerilas. Rengcl would read, irpo t^? (i)iAo(70(|)ia5.

^ The text is, errei /cat ct^OTj^i^TO?, eauTof ^apttrct/jtet'o? Kat e/cSe-
Xonefo? fLKr\ ujiTTrep 'ipixaiov, Tois 7rpoicaTaAa/3oC<rti' avirbv Aoyot?.
Bengel proposes iv&ex°f^^'">'' = • • epju.aioi', 3,% = lucrum inspera-
lum.


more on the open plain, -^ but is baffled in his
purpose by the extent and thickness of the
wood. And turning in a variety of directions,
and lighting on various continuous paths within
it, he pursues many a course, thinking that by
some of them he will surely find his way out :
but they only lead him farther in, and in no way
open up an exit for him, inasmuch as they are
all only paths within the forest itself; until at
last the traveller, utterly worn out and exhausted,
seeing that all the ways he had tried had proved
only forest still, and despairing of finding any
more his dwelling-place on earth, makes up his
mind to abide there, and establish his hearth, and
lay out for his use such free space as he can pre-
pare in the wood itself. Or again, we might take
the similitude of a labyrinth, which has but one
apparent entrance, so that one suspects nothing
artful from the outside, and goes within by the
single door that shows itself; and then, after
advancing to the farthest interior, and viewing
the cunning spectacle, and examining the con-
struction so skilfully contrived, and full of pas-
sages, and laid out with unending paths leading
inwards or outwards, he decides to go out again,
but finds himself unable, and sees his exit com-
pletely intercepted by that inner construction
which appeared such a triumph of cleverness.
But, after all, there is neither any labyrinth so
inextricable and intricate, nor any forest so dense
and devious, nor any plain or swamp so difficult
for those to get out of, who have once got within
it, as is discussion,-* at least as one may meet with
it in the case of certain of these philosophers. 5
Wherefore, to secure us against falling into the
unhappy experience of most, he did not intro-
duce us to any one exclusive school of philoso-
phy ; nor did he judge it proper for us to go
away with any single class of philosophical opin-
ions, but he introduced us to all, and determined
that we should be ignorant of no kind of Grecian
doctrine.*^ And he himself went on with us,
preparing the way before us, and leading us by
the hand, as on a journey, whenever anything
tortuous and unsound and delusive came in our
way. And he helped us like a skilled expert
who has had long familiarity with such subjects,
and is not strange or inexperienced in anything


3 (caSaptp — ep/cet. Sirmondus gives /7<?-o caw/o. Rhodomanus,
reading -ieot, gives puro aire. Bengel takes ep/cos, septum, as deriv-
atively = domits, fundus, regio sepiis munita.

* AriyoS.

5 The text is, ft Tt; elr) kixt aiiruiv riovSe Tiviov <f)tAocroi/>u)»',
Bengel suggests KaravTuiv,

6 [Beautiful testimony to the worth and character of Origen!
After St. Bernard, who thought he was scriptural, but was blinded
by the Decretals (no fault in him). Scripture and testimony (as de-
fined to be the rule of faith.by Tertuliian and Vincent) ceased to gov-
ern in the West; and by syllogisms (see vol. v. p. loo) the Scholastic
system was built up. This became the creed of a new church organi-
zation created at Trent, all the definitions of which are part of said
creed. Thus the " Roman-Catholic Church" (so called when cre-
ated) is a ne7u creation (of a.d. i554\ in doctrine ever intwvat-
ing, which has the least claim to antiquity of any Church pretendmg
to Apostolic origin.]


36 ORA'yON AND PANEGYRIC ADDRESSED TO ORIGEN.


of the kind, and who therefore may remain safe ,
in his own altitude, while he stretches forth his '
hand to others, and effects their security too, as
one drawing up the submerged. Thus did he
deal with us, selecting and setting before us all
that was useful and true in all the various phi-
losophers, and putting aside all that was false.
And this he did for us, both in other branches
of man's knowledge, and most especially in all
that concerns piety.

ARGUMENT XV. THE CASE OF DIVINE MATTERS.

ONLY GOD AND HIS PROPHETS ARE TO BE
HEARD IN THESE. THE PROPHETS AND THEIR
AUDITORS ARE ACTED ON BY THE SAME AFFLATUS.
ORIGEN'S EXCELLENCE IN THE INTERPRETATION
OF SCRIPTURE.

With respect to these human teachers, indeed,
he counselled us to attach ourselves to none of
them, not even though they were attested as
most wise by all men, but to devote ourselves to
God alone, and to the prophets. And he him-
self became the interpreter of the prophets ' to
us, and explained whatsoever was dark or enig-
matical in them. For there are many things of
that kind in the sacred words ; and whether it be
that God is pleased to hold communication with
men in such a way as that the divine word may
not enter all naked and uncovered into an un-
worthy soul, such as many are, or whether it be,
that while every divine oracle is in its own nature
most clear and perspicuous, it seems obscure
and dark to us, who have apostatized from God,
and have lost the faculty of hearing through
time and age, I cannot tell. But however the
case may stand, if it be that there are some
words really enigmatical, he explained all such,
and set them in the light, as being himself a
skilled and most discerning hearer of God ; or
if it be that none of them are really obscure in
their own nature, they were also not unintelligible
to him, who alone of all men of the present time
with whom I have myself been acquainted, or
of whom I have heard by the report of others,
has so deeply studied the clear and luminous
oracles of God, as to be able at once to receive
their meaning into his own mind, and to convey
it to others. For that Leader of all men, who
inspires ^ God's dear prophets, and suggests all
their prophecies and their mystic and heavenly
words, has honoured this man as He would a
friend, and has constituted him an expositor of
these same oracles ; and things of which He
only gave a hint by others, He made matters of
full instruction by this man's instrumentality ;
and in things which He, who is worthy of all
trust, either enjoined in regal fashion, or simply


2 VTTri\o>v,


enunciated, He imparted to this man the gift of
investigating and unfolding and explaining them :
so that, if there chanced to be any one of obtuse
and incredulous mind, or one again thirsting for
instruction, he might learn from this man, and
in some manner be constrained to understand
and to decide for belief, and to follow God.
These things, moreover, as I judge, he gives
forth only and truly by participation in the Di-
vine Spirit : for there is need of the same power
for those who prophesy and for those who hear
the prophets ; and no one can rightly hear a
prophet, unless the same Spirit who prophesies
bestows on him the capacity of apprehending His
words. And this principle is expressed indeed
in the Holy Scriptures themselves, when it is said
that only He who shutteth openeth, and no other
one whatever ; ^ and what is shut is opened when
the word of inspiration explains mysteries. Now
that greatest gift this man has received from God,
and that noblest of all endowments he has had
bestowed upon him from heaven, that he should
be an interpreter of the oracles of God to men,*
and that he might understand the words of God,
even as if God spake them to him, and that he
might recount them to men in such wise as that
they may hear them with intelligence. 5 There-
fore to us there was no forbidden subject of
speech ; ^ for there was no matter of knowledge
hidden or inaccessible to us, but we had it in
our power to learn every kind of discourse, both
foreign 7 and Greek, both spiritual and political,
both divine and human ; and we were permitted
with all freedom to go round the whole circle of
knowledge, and investigate it, and satisfy our-
selves with all kinds of doctrines, and enjoy the
sweets of intellect. And whether it was some
ancient system of truth, or whether it was some-
thing one might otherwise name that was before
us, we had in him an apparatus and a power at
once admirable and full of the most beautiful
views. And to speak in brief, he was truly a
paradise to us, after the similitude of the paradise
of God, wherein we were not set indeed to till
the soil beneath us, or to make ourselves gross
with bodily nurture,^ but only to increase the
acquisitions of mind with all gladness and enjoy-
ment, — planting, so to speak, some fair growths
ourselves, or having them planted in us by the
Author of all things.

ARGUMENT XVI. — GREGORY LAMENTS HIS DEPART-
URE UNDER A THREEFOLD COMPARISON ; LIKEN-
ING IT TO ADAM'S departure OUT OF PARADISE,


3 Isa. xxii. 22; Rev. iii 7. [All these citations of the Scriptures
should be noted, but specially those which prove the general reception
of the Apocalypse in the East.]

■* f A noble sentence. Eph. iii. 8, 9.]

s The te.\t gives lus oiKoocrwo-ii', with Voss. and Bengel. The
Paris editor gives aKovovci.i'.

*> appriTov.

7 Barbarian.

2 au>fii.aToTpo<f>eiv wa\vvoiJ.evov^,


ORATION AND PANEGYRIC ADDRESSED TO ORIGEN.


0/


TO THE PRODIGAL SOX's ABANDONMENT OF HIS
father's house, and TO THE DEPORTATION OF
THE JEWS INTO BABYLON.

Here, truly, is the paradise of comfort ; here
are true gladness and pleasure, as we have en-
joyed them during this period which is now at
its end — no short space indeed in itself, and
yet all too short if this is really to be its conclu-
sion, when we depart and leave this place behind
us. For I know not what has possessed me, or
what offence has been committed by me, that I
should now be going away — that I should now
be put away. I know not what I should say,
unless it be that I am like a second Adam and
have begun to talk, outside of paradise. How
excellent might my life be, were I but a listener
to the addresses of my teacher, and silent my-
self ! Would that even now I could have learned
to be mute and speechless, rather than to present
this new spectacle of making the teacher the
hearer ! For what concern had I with such a
harangue as this ? and what obligation was there
upon me to make such an address, when it be-
came me not to depart, but to cleave fast to the
place ? But these things seem like the transgres-
sions that sprung from the pristine deceit, and
the penalties of these primeval offences still await
me here. Do I not appear to myself to be dis-
obedient ' in daring thus to overpass the words
of God, when I ought to abide in them, and
hold by them ? And in that I withdraw, I flee
from this blessed life, even as the primeval man
fled from the face of God, and I return to the
soil from which I was taken. Therefore shall I
have to eat of the soil all the days of my life
there, and I shall have to till the soil — the very
soil which produces thorns and thistles for me,
tliat is to say, pains and reproachful anxieties —
set loose as I shall be from cares that are good
and noble. And what I left behind me before,
to that I now return — to the soil, as it were,
from which I came, and to my common relation-
ships here below, and to my father's house —
leaving the good soil, where of old I knew not
that the good fatherland lay; leaving also the
relations in whom at a later period I began to
recognise the true kinsmen of my soul, and the
house, too, of him who is in truth our father, in
which the father abides, and is piously honoured
and revered by the genuine sons, whose desire
it also is to abide therein. But I, destitute alike
of all piety and worthiness, am going forth from
the number of these, and am turning back to
what is behind, and am retracing my steps. It
is recorded that a certain son, receiving from his
father the portion of goods that fell to him pro-
portionately with the other heir, his brother, de-
parted, by his own determination, into a strange

I aTTei.edv. Bengel and Hoeschelius r/;ad ane^eelv, withdraw.


country far distant from his father ; and, living
there in riot, he scattered his ancestral sub-
stance, and utterly wasted it ; and at last, under
the pressure of want, he hired himself as a swine-
herd ; and being driven to extremity by hunger,
he longed to share the food given to the swine,
but could not touch it. Thus did he pay the
penalty of his dissolute hfe, when he had to ex-
change his father's table, which was a princely
one, for something he had not looked forward
to — the sustenance of swine and serfs. And we
also seem to have some such fortune before us,
now that we are departing, and that, too, with-
out the full portion that falls to us. For though
we have not received all that we ought, we are
nevertheless going away, leaving behind us what
is noble and dear with you and beside you, and
taking in exchange only what is inferior. For
all things melancholy will now meet us in suc-
cession,— tumult and confusion instead of peace,
and an unregulated life instead of one of tran-
quillity and harmony, and a hard bondage, and
the slavery of market-places, and lawsuits, and
crowds, instead of this freedom ; and neither
pleasure nor any sort of leisure shall remain to
us for the pursuit of nobler objects. Neither
shall we have to speak of the words of inspira-
tion, but we shall have to speak of the works of
men, — a thing which has been deemed simply a
bane by the prophet,^ — and in our case, indeed,
those of wicked men. And truly we shall have
night in place of day, and darkness in place of
the clear light, and grief instead of the festive
assembly ; and in place of a fatherland, a hostile
country will receive us, in which I shall have no
liberty to sing my sacred song,3 for how could
I sing it in a land strange to my soul, in which
the sojourners have no permission to approach
God? but only to weep and mourn, as I call
to mind the different state of things here, if in-
deed even that shall be in my power. We read +
that enemies once assailed a great and sacred
city, in which the worship of God was obser\-ed,
and dragged away its inhabitants, both singers
and prophets, 5 into their own country, which
was Babylon. And it is narrated that these cap-
tives, when they were detained in the land, re-
fused, even when asked by their conquerors, to
sing the divine song, or to play in a profane
country, and hung their harps on the willow-trees,
and wept by the rivers of Babylon. Like one
of these I verily seem to myself to be, as I am
cast forth from this city, and from this sacred


2 ottAoC? apd Tts eirai vev6fj.i.tTTai, avSpi 7rpo(|)»JTn. Migne refers
us to Ps. xvii.

3 Ps. cxxxvii.

* 2 Kings xxiv., xxv.

s ecoAoyoi's, used probably of ^\\e. profiJieis here — namely of Eze-
kiel, Daniel, and others carried into exile with the people. On this
usage, see Suicer's Thesaurus, under the word ffoAoyo?, where from
the pseudo-Areopagite Dionysius he cites the sentence, tuiv dioKoyuiv
eis, 6 Zaxapias, and again, eVepos -riiv Q^oKoyuiv 'U^eKujA.


38


ORATIOxN AND PANEGYRIC ADDRESSED TO ORIGEN.


fatherland of mine, where both by day and by
night the holy laws are declared, and hymns and
songs and spiritual words are heard ; where also
there is perpetual sunlight ; where by day in
waking vision ' we have access to the mysteries
of God, and by night in dreams ^ we are still oc-
cupied with what the soul has seen and handled
in the day ; and where, in short, the inspiration
of divine things prevails over all continually.
From this city, I say, I am cast forth, and borne
captive to a strange land, where I shall have no
power to pipe : ^ for, like these men of old, I
shall have to hang my instrument on the willows,
and the rivers shall be my place of sojourn, and
I shall have to work in mud, and shall have no
heart to sing hymns, even though I remember
them ; yea, it may be that, through constant oc-
cupation with other subjects, I shall forget even
them, like one spoiled of memory itself. And
would that, in going away, I only went away
against my will, as a captive is wont to do ; but
I go away also of my own will, and not by con-
straint of another ; and by my own act I am dis-
possessed of this city, when it is in my option
to remain in it. Perchance, too, in leaving this
place, I may be going to prosecute no safe jour-
ney, as it sometimes fares with one who quits
some safe and peaceful city ; and it is indeed
but too likely that, in journeying, I may fall into
the hands of robbers, and be taken prisoner, and
be stripped and wounded with many strokes, and
be cast forth to lie half-dead somewhere.

ARGUMENT XVII. GREGORY CONSOLES HIMSELF.

But why should I utter such lamentations ?
There lives still the Saviour of all men, even of
the half-dead and the despoiled, the Protector
and Physician for all, the Word, that sleepless
Keeper of all. We have also seeds of truth
which thou hast made us know as our posses-
sion, and all that we have received from thee, —
those noble deposits of instruction, with which
we take our course ; and though we weep, indeed,
as those who go forth from home, we yet carry
those seeds with us. It may be, then, that the
Keeper who presides over us will bear us in
safety through all that shall befall us ; and it
may be that we shall come yet again to thee,


1 The text is, xal <J)m'; to rjAtaKoi/ KaX to iirj^exe?, r/jnepas VTrep
Tjixoif TrpoaoixtAovvTtjjv Tot9 Oclos ixvaTr)f}LOLS Kal vvkt'oi; itiv kv ijfxepa.
elSe Te /cai €7rpa|er 7] ^vx'ri Tat? (i>avraaiai.i; KaT^\ofxeviov, Bengal
proposes vnap for vinp, so as to keep the antithesis between rj^tpa?
v—ap and vukto? (JiavTao-iai?; and taking ■qpiepa'; and vvktos as
temporal genitives, he renders the whole thus: C7t»i inierdiu,per
visa, divinis adfratmis sacra mcuiz's: et noctu earum rertint,
qnas Z'idernt de die atque egerat anitiia, imaginibus detinebamnr.

2 [" In dreams I still renew the rites," etc. — William Croswell.]

3 auAeii'. The Jews had the harp, and so the word i//aAAeii/ is
used of them in the preceding. But here, in speaking of himself,
Gregory adopts the term oOre aOAeu', ne tibia guidem canere. Ben-
gel supposes that the verb is changed in order to convey the idea,
that while the Jews only had to give up the use of instruments expres-
sive of joyful feeling, Gregory feared he would himself be unable to
play even on those of a mourii/iil tone, — for in ancient times the
pipe or flute was chiefly appropriated to strains of grief and sadness.


bringing with us the fruits and handfuls yielded
by these seeds, far from perfect truly, for how
could they be so ? but still such as a life spent
in civil business •♦ makes it possible for us to rear,
though marred indeed by a kind of faculty that
is either unapt to bear fruit altogether, or prone
to bear bad fruit, but which, I trust, is one not
destined to be further misused by us, if God
grants us grace. 5

ARGUMENT XVIII. PEROR.A.TION, AND APOLOGY FOR

THE ORATION.

Wherefore let me now have done with this
address, which I have had the boldness to deliver
in a presence wherein boldness least became me.
Yet this address is one which, I think, has aimed
heartily at signifying our thanks to the best of
our ability, — for though we have had nothing to
say worthy of the subject, we could not be alto-
gether silent, — and one, too, which has given
expression to our regrets, as those are wont to
do who go abroad in separation from friends.
And whether this speech of mine may not have
contained things puerile or bordering on flattery,
or things ofi"ending by excess of simplicity on
the one hand, or of elaboration on the other, I
know not. Of this, however, I am clearly con-
scious, that at least there is in it nothing unreal,
but all that is true and genuine, in sincerity of
opinion, and in purity and integrity of judgment.

ARGUMENT XIX. APOSTROPHE TO ORIGEN, AND

THEREWITH THE LEAVE-TAKING, AND THE URGENT
UTTERANCE OF PRAYER.

But, O dear soul, arise thou and offer prayer,
and now dismiss us ; and as by thy holy instruc-
tions thou hast been our rescuer when we enjoyed
thy fellowship, so save us still by thy prayers in
our separation. Commend us and set us con-
stantly ^ before thee in prayer. Or rather com-
mend us continually to that God who brought
us to thee, giving thanks for all that has been
granted us in the past, and imploring Him still
to lead us by the hand in the future, and to stand
ever by us, filling our mind with the understand-
ing of His precepts, inspiring us with the godly
fear of Himself, and vouchsafing us hencefor-
ward His choicest guidance. ^ For when we are
gone from thee, we shall not have the same lib-
erty for obeying Him as was ours when we were


■* [He was still proposing for himself a life of worldly occupation.
Here turn to Origen's counsel, — a sort of reply to this Oration, — vol.
iv. p. 393, and Cave's Lives, &ic., vol. i. p. 400.]

5 The text is, fitet^^ap/aeVa? p^kv rrj dvvdp,ei, t) aKapirut r] kcxko-
KapiTW Tti't, p.i} Kal TrpoaSLathOao'qG-op.^vr} 6e Trap' -qixuiv, etc, Bengel
reads m«V Tot for pev ttj, and takes fir; Kai as = utinam tie.

^ n-apa5t5ou Kail Trapart^tao.

7 ejLLjSaAAcrTa rj^ttv toi' O^Xov (^djSov avTOv, TratSaywyor apiaTOV
e(T6p.fvov. The Latin version makes the erropivoy refer to the (hofiov:
diz'inumrjue nobis timorcm sn/im, pptimjtm pisdagp^jun iiiniut-
tens, = and inspiring with the godly fear of Himself as our choicest
guide.


ELUCIDATION.


39


with thee.' Pray, therefore, that some encour-
agement may be conveyed to us from Him when


* oi) yap iv rrj ixera croG e\cvBepia Koi aTreASoi'Te? iiTraicoiicronei'
ovTii. Bengel paraphrases it thus: hac lihertate qua tecum est
carebo digressiis; quare vercor ut Deo postkac farcam, tii timore
saltern munitusfucro. [He may probably have been only a ca/^-
c/iumen at this period. This perorajion favours the suspicion.]


we lose thy presence, and that He may send us a
good conductor, some angel to be our comrade
on the way. And entreat Him also to turn our
course, for that is the one thing which above
all else will effectually comfort us, and bring us
back to thee again.


ELUCIDATION.

Neale, in his valuable work," does full justice to Dionysius, whose life is tivhined with Grego-
ry's ; but he seems to me most unaccountably to slight the truly great and commanding genius
of Gregory. I take opportunity, then, to direct attention to Neale's candid, and, on the whole,
favourable view of Origen; but it grieves me whenever I see in critics a manifest inability to ////
themselves back into the times of which they write, as I think is the case, not infrequently, even
with Dr. Neale. The figure of this grand ornament of the mighty patriarchate and school of
Alexandria is colossal.^ His genius is Titanic, and has left all Christendom profoundly his
debtor to this day, by the variety of his work and the versatility of his speech and pen. Doubt-
less the youthful Gregory's panegyric does contain, as he himself suggests, much that is " puerile
or bordering on flattery; " but, as he protests with transparent truthfulness, " there is nothing in it
unreal." It shines with " sincerity of thought and integrity of judgment." And as such, what a
portrait it presents us of the love and patient effort of this lifelong confessor ! Let me commend
this example to professors of theology generally. All can learn from it the power of sweetness
and love, united with holiness of purpose, to stamp the minds and the characters of youth with the
divine " image and superscription."

But, as to the sharpness of modern censures upon Origen's conspicuous faults, I must suggest
three important considerations, which should be applied to all the Ante-Nicene doctors : (i) How
could they who were working out the formulas of orthodoxy, be expected to use phrases with the
skill and precision which became necessary only after the great Synodical period had embodied
them in clear, dogmatic statements? (2) How could the active intellect of an Origen have
failed to make great mistakes in such an immensity of labours and such a variety of works? (3)
If, in our own day, we indulge speculative minds in large liberties so long as they never make
shipwreck of the faith, how much more should we deem them excusable who were unable to con-
sult libraries of well-digested thought, and to employ, as we do, the accumulated wealth of fifty
generations of believers, whenever we are called to the solemn responsibility of impressing our
convictions upon others ? The conclusion of Dr. Neale's review of Origen balances the praise
and blame accorded to him by those nearest to his times ; ^ but let us reflect upon the painful con-
flicts of those times, and upon the pressure undei^which, to justify their own positions, they were
often forced to object to any error glorified by even the apparent patronage of Origen.


' The Patriarchate of Alexandria, London, 1847.

' The ultimate influence of the school itself, Neale pronounces " an enigma " (vol. i. p. 38).


3 Vol. i. p. 33.


PART II.-Pl'BIOL'S OR SPURIOUS WRITINGS.


A SECTIONAL CONFESSION OF FAITH,


I.

Most hostile and alien to the Apostolic Con-
fession are those who speak of the Son as
assumed to Himself by the Father out of noth-
ing, and trom an emanational origin ; ^ and those
who hold the same sentiments with respect to
the Holy Spirit ; those who say that the Son is
constituted divine by gift and grace, and that
the Holy Spirit is made holy ; those who regard
the name of the Son as one common to sen-ants,
and assert that thus He is the tirst-bom of the
creature, as becoming, like the creature, existent
out of non-existence, and as being first made,
and who refuse to admit that He is the only-
begorten Son. — the only One that the Father
has. and that He has given Himself to be reck-
oned in the number of mortals, and is thus
reckoned tirst-bom : those who circumscribe the
generation of the Son by the Father with a
measured interval after the fashion of man, and
refuse to acknowledge that the ceon of the Be-
getter and that of the Begotten are without
beginning ; those who introduce three separate
and diverse SN^stems of dinne worship.^ whereas
there is but one form of legitimate ser\-ice which
we have received of old from the law and the
prophets, and which has been confirmed by the
Lonl and preached by the apostles. Xor less
alienated from the true confession are those who


' Edited in Latin by Geraidus Vossius, 0/#. Gre^. TkoMm.,
Paris, IPO.;, in fol.: given in Greek from the Codex Vaticaniis by
Caniinal Mai. 5.-'-/>/. JV^. vii. p. i;\d, Vossius has the foUovring
argument: This is a second Confession of Faith, and one widelv
different from the former, which this great Gregory ot ours recei%-ed
by revelation. This seems, howe^■e^. to be designated an =ct><:(ric rij^j
«ari iieao^ n;<rre«<, either because it records and expounds the mat-
ters of the fiiith only « /iir-f. or because the Creed is explained in it
fy _Atr:s. The Jesuit theologian Franc. Torrensis (the interpreter
and scholiast of this ecttso-is) has. ho>»'e%-er, rendered the phrase i
K«Ti ».«|>os r-iim?, bv the Latin kJ^s ictm tiKrzi-rSit mJ :it farii.
And here we ha\-e i nJes ttm utrrrrsa s^ in tarti, according to
him, — a creed not of all the dogmas of the Church, but only of some,
in opposition to the hereacs who deny them. [The better ^^ew.]

rnrnfTor Aryumff ni nirpt. [Note, Frr. •grr t»c— Artjng ]
40


hold not the doctrine of the Trinity according
to truth, as a relation consisting of three per-
sons, but impiously conceive it as implving a
triple being in a unity (Monad), fonned in the
way of s)Tithesis,-» and think that the Son is the
wisdom in God, in the same manner as the human
wisdom subsists in man whereb\" the man is wise,
and represent the Word as being simply like the
word which we utter or conceive, without any
hypostasis whatever.

n.

But the Church's Confession, and the Creed
that brings salvation to the world, is tlaat which
deals with the incarnation of the Word, and
bears that He gave Himself over to the flesh of
man which He acquired of Mar}-, while yet He
conser%-ed His o\\-n identit}-. and sustained no
divine transposition or mutation, but was brought
into conjunction with the flesh al'ter the simiU-
tude of man ; so that the flesh was made one
w-ith the divinit}-, the divinit}- having assumed
the capacity of receinng the flesh in the fulfill-
ing of the m)-ster}-. And after the dissolution
of death there remained to the holy flesh a per-
petual impassibilit}- and a changeless immor-
tality, man's original glor.- being taken up into it
again by the power of the divinity, and being
ministered then to all men by the appropriation
of faith.5

m.

If, then, there are any here, too. who falsify
the holy faith, either by attributing to the divinity
as its o\\-n what belongs to the humanit}- — pro-
gressions.* and passions, and a glon.- coming
w-ith accession ' — or by separating from the
divinit}- the progressive and passible body, as if
subsisted of itself apart, — these persons also are


* cr ^o>-a3t TO TfUvXovv ia^S^ jcara (jX'V^<Tiv,
S ir TTJ T-if'i no-r«aK o<««mi<7«i.


A SECTIONAL CONFESSION OF FAITH.


41


outside the confession of the Church and of
salvation. No one, therefore, can know God
unless he apprehends the Son ; for the Son is
the wisdom by whose instrumentality all things
have been created ; and these created objects
declare this wisdom, and God is recognised in
the wisdom. But the wisdom of God is not
anything similar to the wisdom which man pos-
sesses, but it is the perfect wisdom which pro-
ceeds from the perfect God, and abides for
ever, not like the thought of man, which passes
from him in the word that is spoken and (straight-
way) ceases to be. Wherefore it is not wisdom
only, but also God ; nor is it Word only, but
also Son. And whether, then, one discerns God
through creation, or is taught to know Him by
the Holy Scriptures, it is impossible either to
apprehend Him or to learn of Him apart from
His wisdom. And he who calls upon God
rightly, calls on Him through the Son ; and he
who approaches Him in a true fellowship, comes
to Him through Christ. Moreover, the Son
Himself cannot be approached apart from the
Spirit. For the Spirit is both the life and the
holy formation of all things ; ' and God send-
ing forth this Spirit through the Son makes the
creature ^ like Himself.

IV.

One therefore is God the Father, one the
Word, one the Spirit, the life, the sanctification
of all. And neither is there another God as
Father,' nor is there another Son as Word of
God, nor is there another Spirit as quickening
and sanctifying. Further, although the saints
are called both gods, and sons, and spirits, they
are neither filled with the Spirit, nor are made
like the Son and God. And if, then, any one
makes this affirmation, that the Son is God, sim-
ply as being Himself filled with divinity, and
not as being generated of divinity, he has belied
the Word, he has belied the Wisdom, he has
lost the knowledge of God ; he has fallen away
into tlie worship of the creature, he has taken
up the impiety of the Greeks, to that he has
gone back ; and he has become a follower of
the unbelief of the Jews, who, supposing the
Word of God to be but a human son, have re-
fused to accept Him as God, and have declined
to acknowledge Him as the Son of God. But
it is impious to think of the Word of God as
merely human, and to think of the works which
are done by Him as abiding, while He abides
not Himself And if any one says that the
Christ works all things only as commanded by
the Word, he will both make the Word of God


2 Tr\V KTitJlV.

3 ouT« ©eo! eVepos lus HaT^p.


idle,* and will change the Lord's order into ser-
vitude. For the slave is one altogether under
command, and the created is not competent to
create ; for to suppose that what is itself created
may in like manner create other things, would
imply that it has ceased to be like the creature. 5


Again, when one speaks of the Holy Spirit as
an object made holy,*" he will no longer be able
to apprehend all things as being sanctified in
(the) Spirit. For he who has sanctified one,
sanctifies all things. That man, consequently,
belies the fountain of sanctification, the Holy
Sjiirit, who denudes Him of the power of sanc-
tifying, and he will thus be precluded from num-
bering Him with the Father and the Son ; he
makes nought, too, of the holy (ordinance of)
baptism, and will no more be able to acknowl-
edge the holy and august Trinity. 7 For either
we must apprehend the perfect Trinity ^ in its
natural and genuine glory, or we shall be
under the necessity of speaking no more of a
Trinity, but only of a Unity ; ^ or else, not
numbering 9 created objects with the Creator,
nor the creatures with the Lord of all, we must
also not number what is sanctified with what
sanctifies; even as no object thatjs made can
be numbered with the Trinity, but in the name
of the Holy Trinity baptism and invocation and
worship are administered. For if there are three
several glories, there must also be three several
forms of cultus with those who impiously wor-
ship the creature ; for if there is a distinction in
the nature of the objects worshipped, there ought
to be also with these men a distinction in the
nature of the worship offered. What is recent '°
surely is not to be worshipped along with what
is eternal ; for the recent comprehends all that
has had a beginning, while mighty and measure-
less is He who is before the ages. He, there-
fore, who supposes some beginning of times in
the fife of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, there-
with also cuts off any possibility of numbering
the Son and the Spirit with the Father. For as
we acknowledge the glory to be one, so ought
we also to acknowledge the substance in the
Godhead to be one, and one also the eternity
of the Trinity.

VI.

Moreover, the capital element of our salvation
is the incarnation of the Word. We believe,


* aoyov.

5 This seems the idea in the sentence, oi -^ap e'|t(TM0-ei7aeTai tw
KTiVfiaTi aiiTO /car' ov&eva. rponov, iv' ws vn' exeCvov eicTtcTTai, oiixw
Kal auTO KTiffyj ra aAAa.

6 r)yLa(Tfxivoi' TToirma.

7 Trias. [See vol. ii. p. loi.]

8 Monas.

9 (Tvl^apt9fjL€li',
'° xa 7rpdcri/)aTO.


42


A SECTIONAL CONFESSION OF FAITH.


therefore, that it was without any change in the
Divinity that the incarnation of the Word took
place with a view to the renewal of humanity.
For there took place neither mutation nor trans-
position, nor any circumscription in will,' as re-
gards the holy energy ^ of God ; but while that
remained in itself the same, it also effected the
work of the incarnation with a view to the salva-
tion of the world : and the Word of God, living ^
on earth after man's fashion, maintained likewise
in all the divine presence, fulfilling all things, and
being -united •» properly and individually with
flesh ; and while the sensibilities proper to the
flesh were there, the divine energy maintained
the impassibility proper to itself. Impious, there-
fore, is the man who introduces the passibility s
into the energy. For the Lord of glory ap-
peared in fashion as a man when He undertook
the economy "^ upon the earth ; and He fulfilled
the law for men by His deeds, and by His suf-
ferings He did away with man's sufferings, and
by His death He abolished death, and by his
resurrection He brought life to light ; and now
we look for His appearing from heaven in glory
for the life and judgment of all, when the resur-
rection of the dead shall take place, to the end
that recompense may be made to all according
to their desert.

VII.

But some treat the Holy Trinity ^ in an awful
manner, when they confidently assert that there
are not three persons, and introduce (the idea
of) a person devoid of subsistence.* Where-
fore we clear ourselves of Sabellius, who says
that tlie Father and the Son are the same. For
he holds that the Father is He who speaks, and
that the Son is the Word that abides in the
Father, and becomes manifest at the time of
the creation,9 and thereafter reverts to God on
the fulfilling of all things. The same affirmation
he makes also of the Spirit. We forswear this,
because we believe that three persons — namely.
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit — are declared to
possess the one Godhead : for the one divinity
showing itself forth according to nature in the
Trinity '° establishes the oneness of the nature ;
and thus there is a (divinity that is the) property of
the Father, according to the word, "There is one
God the Father; " " and there is a divinity he-
reditary '^ m the Son, as it is written, " The Word


' 7repi)cAetcr/x6; iv vev/xaTi,
2 Svvatxiv.

4 (TuyKeKpajtxeVo?.

5 TO 7ra(?o?.

* Meaning here the whole work and Ijusiness of the incarnation,
and the redemption through the flesh. — MiGNE.

7 Trias.

2 ai'vn6(TTaToy,

9 Sr}ixiovpyia<;,

'° (|)uo-iKu)S ev TpidSi ixapTvpovnivr],
" I Cor. viii. 6.
'^ Trarp^ov,


was God ; " '3 and there is a divinity present ac-
cording to nature in the Spirit — to wit, what
subsists as the Spirit of God — according to
Paul's statement, " Ye are the temple of God,
and the Spirit of God dwelleth in you." ''*

VIII.

Now the person in each declares the inde-
pendent being and subsistence's IJut divinity is
the property of the Father ; and whenever the
divinity of these three is spoken of as one, testi-
mony is borne that the property "^ of the Father
belongs also to the Son and the Spirit : where-
fore, if the divinity may be spoken of as one in
three persons, the trinity is established, and the
unity is not dissevered ; and the oneness which
is naturally the Father's is also acknowledged to
be the Son's and the Spirit's. If one, however,
speaks of one person as he may speak of one
divinity, it cannot be that the two in the one are
as one. '7 For Paul addresses the Father as one
in respect of divinity, and speaks of the Son as
one in respect of lordship : " There is one God
the Father, of whom are all things, and we for
Him ; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are
all things, and we by Him." '^ Wherefore if
there is one God, and one Lord, and at the
same time one person as one divinity in one lord-
ship,'9 how can credit be given to (this distinc-
tion in) the words "of whom " and " by whom,"
as has been said before ? We speak, accordingly,
not as if we separated the lordship from the
divinity, nor as estranging the one from the other,
but as unifying them in the way warranted by
actual fact and truth ; and we call the Son God
with the property of the Father,^" as being His
image and offspring ; and we call the Father
Lord, addressing Him by the name of the One
Lord, as being His Origin and Begettor.


The same position we hold respecting the
Spirit, who has that unity with the Son which
the Son has with the Father. Wherefore let the
hypostasis of the Father be discriminated by
the appellation of God ; but let not the Son be
cut off from this appellation, for He is of God.
Again, let the person of the Son also be discrimi-
nated by the appellation of Lord ; only let not
God be dissociated from that, for He is Lord as
being the Father of the Lord. And as it is
proper to the Son to exercise lordship, for He


" John i. I.
■■• I Cor. iii. 6.

■S xb eivai avTO Kol v<f)€(TTa.vai firjAoi.

■6 By the iSiorrfTa toO naxpos is meant here the divinity belong-
ing to the Father. — Migne.

'7 ovK idTiv iu5 ev xd Svo if TuJ ivi,
'^ I Cor. viii. 5.

'9 Kad' 6 SeoTT)? fiias KuptOTijTOS,
20 TiZ iSitu/xaTt Tov Harpos.


A SECTIONAL CONFESSION OF FAITH.


43


it is that made (all things) by Himself, and now
rules the things that were made, while at the
same time the Father has a prior possession of
that property, inasmuch as He is the Father of
Him who is Lord ; so we speak of the Trinity
as One God, and yet not as if we made the one
by a synthesis of three : for the subsistence that
is constituted by synthesis is something altogether
partitive and imperfect.' But just as the desig-
nation Father is the expression of originality
and generation, so the designation Son is the
expression of the image and offspring of the
Father. Hence, if one were to ask how there
is but One God, if there is also a God of God,
we would reply that that is a term proper to the
idea of original causation,^ so far as the Father
is the ond First Cause.^ And if one were also
to put the question, how there is but One Lord,
if the Father also is Lord, we might answer that
again by saying that He is so in so far as He is
the Father of the Lord ; and this difficulty shall
meet us no longer.

X.

And again, if the impious say. How will there
not be three Gods and three Persons, on the
supposition that they have one and the same
divinity? — we shall reply: Just because God is
the Cause and Father of the Son ; and this Son
is the image and offspring of the Father, and not
His brother; and the Spirit in hke manner is
the Spirit of God, as it is written, " God is a
Spirit." 4 And in earlier times we have this dec-
laration from the prophet David : " By the word
of the Lord were the heavens stablished, and all
the power of them by the breath (spirit) of His
mouth." 5 And in the beginning of the book of
the creation ^ it is written thus :' " And the Spirit
of God moved upon the face of the waters." ^
And Paul in his Episde to the Romans says :
" But ye are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit,
if so be that the Spirit of God dwell in you." **
And again he says : " But if the Spirit of Him
that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you,
He that raised up Christ from the dead shall
also quicken your mortal bodies by His Spirit
that dwelleth in you." 9 And again : "As many
as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the
sons of God. For ye have not received the
spirit of bondage again to fear ; but ye have re-
ceived the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry,
Abba, Father." '° And again : " I say the truth
in Christ, I lie not, my conscience also bearing


I /otepos yap anav dreAes to iTVvQt<7iio<i v(j>i,<rTaix(vov.

* John iv. 24.
S Ps. xxxiii. 6.
^ Koff/i-OTTottas.
7 Gen. i. 2.

* Rom. viii. 9.
9 Rom. viii. 11.

■° Rom. viii. 14, 15.


me witness in the Holy Ghost." " And again:
" Now the God of hope fill you with all joy and
peace in believing, that ye may abound in hope,
by the power of the Holy Ghost." '^

XI.

And again, writing to those same Romans, he
says : " But I have written the more boldly
unto you in some sort, as putting you in mind,
because of the grace that is given to me of God,
that I should be the minister of Jesus Christ to
the Gentiles, ministering the Gospel of God,
that the offering up of the Gentiles might be
acceptable, being sanctified by the Holy Ghost.
I have therefore whereof I may glory through
Jesus Christ in those things which pertain to
God. For I dare not to speak of any of those
things which Christ hath not wrought by me,'^ to
make the Gentiles obedient, by word and deed,
through mighty signs and wonders, by the power
of the Holy Spirit." ■+ And again : " Now I
beseech you, brethren, for our Lord Jesus Christ's
sake, and by the love of the Spirit." '5 And
these things, indeed, are written in the Epistle
to the Romans.'^

XII.

Again, in the Epistle to the Corinthians he
says : " For my speech and my preaching was
not in the enticing words of man's wisdom, but
in demonstration of the Spirit and of power;
that your faith should not stand in the wisdom
of men, but in the power of God." '^ And
again he says : " As it is written, Eye hath not
seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into
the heart of man, the things which God hath
prepared for them that love Him. But God
hath revealed them unto us by His Spirit : for
the Spirit searcheth all things, yea, the deep
things of God. For what man knoweth the
things of a man, save the spirit of man which is
in him? Even so the things of God knoweth
no man, but the Spirit of God." '^ And again
he says : " But the natural man receiveth not the
things of the Spirit of God." '9

XIII.

Seest thou that all through Scripture the Spirit
is preached, and yet nowhere named a creature ?


" Rom. ix. I.

'2 Rom. XV. 13. .

13 [A reference to his canon, perhaps, recorded in 2 Cor. x. 13-
16. Compare Rom. xv. 20. The canonists erect the discrimination
between Orders and Mission upon these texts and (Acts xiii. 2, 3,
etc.) Gal. ii. 8, 9. See vol. i. p. 495, note 3 ]

••• Rom. XV 15-ig. [Concerning which remarkable passage, see
vol. V. p. 409, Elucidation I.]

'5 Rom. XV. 30.

16 [It is evident that St. Paul founded the Church at Rome. St.
Peter (see note 13, supra) could only have come to Rome to look after
the Jewish disciples there. Elucidation, p. 47, infra.]

'7 I Cor. ii. 4, 5.

'^ I Cor. ii. 9-11.

'9 I Cor. ii. 14.


44


A SECTIONAL CONFESSION OF FAITH.


And what can the impious have to say if the
Lord sends forth His disciples to baptize in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Spirit ? • Without contradiction, that
implies a communion and unity between them,
according to which there are neither three divini-
ties nor (three) lordships ; but, while there
remain truly and certainly the three persons, the
real unity of the three must be acknowledged.
And in this way proper credit will be given to
the sending and the being senf^ (in tlie God-
head), according to which the Father hath sent
forth the Son, and the Son in like manner sends
forth the Spirit. For one of the persons surely
could not (be said to) send Himself; and one
could not speak of the Father as incarnate.
For the articles of our faith will not concur with
the vicious tenets of the heresies ; and it is right
that our conceptions should follow the inspired
and apostolic doctrines, and not that our impo-
tent fancies should coerce the articles of our
divine faith.

xrv.

But if they say. How can there be three Per-
sons, and how but one Divinity? — we shall
make this reply : That there are indeed three
persons, inasmuch as there is one person of God
the Father, and one of the Lord the Son, and
one of the Holy Spirit ; and yet that there is but
one divinity, inasmuch as the Son is the Image
of God the Father, who is One, — that is, He is
God of God ; and in like manner the Spirit is
called the Spirit of God, and that, too, of nature
according to the very substance,^ and not accord-
ing to simple participation of God. And there
is one substance ■♦ in the Trinity, which does not
subsist also in the case of objects that are made ;
for there is not one substance in God and in the
things that are made, because none of these is
in substance God. Nor, indeed, is the Lord
one of these according to substance, but there
is one Lord the Son, and one Holy Spirit ; and
we speak also of one Divinity, and one Lord-
ship, and one Sanctity in the Trinity ; because
the Father is the Cause s of the Lord, having
begotten Him eternally, and the Lord is the
Prototype '^ of the Spirit. For thus the Father
is Lord, and the Son also is God ; and of God
it is said that " God is a Spirit." ^

XV.

We therefore acknowledge one true God, the
one First Cause, and one Son, very God of very


* Matt, xxviii. ig.

^ The text is, oi'xu) yap yra a-namiWov') Kal to d7ro<7TeAAo/u6^ov,
C61UJ9 av jTio-TeuoiTo, KaQ' 6, etc.

3 <t>V(rLKui<; k(xt' aiiTrjp Trjv ovtriav,

4 ovoia,

5 apXTn._

6 TrpuiTOTUTrOS.

7 John iv. 24.


God, possessing of nature the Father's divinity,
— that is to say, being the same in substance
with the Father ; ^ and one Holy Spirit, who by
nature and in truth sanctifies all, and makes di-
vine, as being of the substance of God.9 Those
who speak either of the Son or of the Holy
Spirit as a creature we anathematize. All other
things we hold to be objects made, and in sub-
jection,'" created by God through the Son, (and)
sanctified in the Holy Spirit. Further, we* ac-
knowledge that the Son of God was made a Son
of man, having taken to Himself the flesh from
the Virgin Mary, not in name, but in reality ;
and that He is both the perfect Son of God, and
the (perfect) Son of man, — that the Person is
but one, and that there is one worship ' ' for the
Word and the flesh that He assumed.* And we
anathematize those who constitute different wor-
ships, one for the divine and another for the
human, and who worship the man born of Marj'
as though He were another than the God of
God. For we know that " in the beginning was
the Word, and the Word was with God, and the
Word was God." '^ And we worship Him who
was made man on account of our salvation, not
indeed as made perfectly like in the like body,'^
but as the Lord who has taken to Himself the
form of the servant. We acknowledge the pas-
sion of the Lord in the flesh, the resurrection
in the power of His divinity, the ascension to
heaven, and His glorious appearing when He
comes for the judgment of the living and the
dead, and for the eternal life of the saints.

XVI.

And since some have given us trouble by at-
tempting to subvert our faith in our Lord Jesus
Christ, and by affirming of Him that He was
not God incarnated, but a man linked with God ;
for this reason we present our confession on the
subject of the afore-mentioned matters of faith,
and reject the faithless dogmas opposed thereto.
For God, having been incarnated in the flesh of
man, retains also His proper energy pure, pos-
sessing a mind unsubjected by the natural '^ and
fleshly affections, and holding the flesh and the
fleshly motions divinely and sinlessly, and not
only unmastered by the power of death, but
even destroying death. And it is the true God
unincarnate that has appeared incarnate, the per-
fect One with the genuine and divine perfection ;
and in Him there are not two persons. Nor do


* Note the phrase here, afterwards formulated, oixoova-iov tw
Warpi. [This phrase, with abundant other tokens, makes it apparent
that the work is not Gregory's. It is further evident from sectiori
xviii. I should be glad to think otherwise.]

9 Kai deoTToiov e/c t))? oixrias Tou Wtou VTrapxov,
'" SoOAa.
" vrpoo-KuVrjcrii'.
■- John i. I.
^^ Xtxov iv icro) y^v6p.ivov Toi aojfxaTt,

14 IpvXI-l^iill'.


A SECTIONAL CONFESSION OF FAITH.


45


we afifirm that there are four to worship, viz.,
God and the Son of God, and man and the
Holy Spirit. W^herefore we also anathematize
those who show their impiety in this, and who
thus give the man a place in the divine doxology.
For we hold that the Word of God was made
man on account of our salvation, in order that
we might receive the likeness of the heavenly,
and be made divine ' after the likeness of Him
who is the true Son of God by nature, and the
Son of man according to the flesh, our Lord
Jesus Christ.

XVII.

We believe therefore in one God, that is, in
one First Cause, the God of the law and of the
Gospel, the just and good ; and in one Lord
Jesus Christ, true God, that is, Lnage of the
true God, Maker of all things seen and unseen.
Son of God and only-begotten Offspring, and
Eternal Word, living and self-subsistent and ac-
tive,- always being with the Father ; and in one
Holy Spirit \ and in the glorious advent of the
Son of God, who of the Virgin Mary took
flesh, and endured sufferings and death in our
stead, and came to resurrection on the third
day, and was taken up to heaven ; and in His
glorious appearing yet to come ; and in one holy
Church, the forgiveness of sins, the resurrection
of the flesh, and life eternal.

XVIII.

We acknowledge that the Son and the Spirit
are consubstantial with the Father, and that the
substance of the Trinity is one, — that is, that
there is one divinity according to nature, the
Father remaining unbegotten, and the Son being
begotten of the Father in a true generation, and
not in a formation by will,^ and the Spirit being
sent forth eternally from the substance of the
Father through the Son, with power to sanctify
the whole creation. And we further acknowl-
edge that the Word was made flesh, and was
manifested in the flesh-movement ■* received of
a virgin, and did not simply energize in a man.
And those who have fellowship with men that re-
ject the consiibstantiality as a doctrine foreign to
the Scriptures, and speak of any of the persons in
the Trinity as created, and separate that person
from the one natural divinity, we hold as aliens,
and have fellowship with none such. 5 There is
one God the Father, and there is only one divin-
ity. But the Son also is God, as being the true
image of the one and only divinity, according to
generation and the nature which He has from


' 9f07rOt7)9u)(i6V,

2 efep-yov,

3 TToiijo'ei i< )3ouX)5<re<os.

* Kiv-r\(jf{.. [For the spiritual Kif^CTi?, vol. iii. note 6, p. 622.]
s [Evidently after the Nicene Council; ih& cpnsubstantiality,2S
a phrase and test of orthodoxy, belonging to the Nicene period.]


the Father. There is one Lord the Son ; but in
like manner there is the Spirit, who bears over^
the Son's lordship to the creature that is sancti-
fied. The Son sojourned in the world, having of
the Virgin received flesh, which He fiUed with
the Holy Spirit for the sanctification of us all ;
and having given up the flesh to death, He
destroyed death through the resurrection that
had in view the resurrection of us ah ; and He
ascended to heaven, exalting and glorifying men
in Himself; and He comes the second time to
bring us again eternal life.

XIX.

One is the Son, both before the incarnation
and after the incarnation. The same (Son) is
both man and God, both these together as
though one ; and the God the Word is not one
person, and the man Jesus another person, but
the same who subsisted as Son before was made
one with flesh by Mary, so constituting Himself
a perfect, and holy, and sinless man, and using
that economical position for the renewal of
mankind and the salvation of all the world.
God the Father, being Himself the perfect Per-
son, has thus the perfect Word begotten of Him
truly, not as a word that is spoken, nor yet again
as a son by adoption, in the sense in which
angels and men are called sons of God, but as a
Son who is in nature God. And there is also
the perfect Holy Spirit supplied'' of God through
the Son to the sons of adoption, living and Hfe-
giving, holy and imparting holiness to those
who partake of Him, — not like an unsubstantial
breath ^ breathed into them by man, but as the
living Breath proceeding from God. Wherefore
the Trinity is to be adored, to be glorified, to be
honoured, and to be reverenced ; the Father
being apprehended in the Son even as the Son
is of Him, and the Son being glorified in the
Father, inasm.uch as He is of the Father, and
being manifested in the Holy Spirit to the sanc-
tified.

XX.

And that the holy Trinity is to be worshipped
without either separation or alienation, is taught
us by Paul, who says in his Second Epistle to
the Corinthians : " The grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and the love of God, and the com-
munion of the Holy Ghost, be with you all." ^
And again, in that epistle he makes this expla-
nation : " Now He which stablisheth us with you
in Christ, and hath anointed us, is God, who
hath also sealed us, and given the earnest of the
Spirit in our hearts." '° And still more clearly


6 SiajrejiTToH'.
1 xopriyoviievov,

8 TTVOrjv,

9 2 Cor. xiii. 13.
'° 2 Cor. i. 21, 22.


46


A SECTIONAL CONFESSION OF FAITH.


he writes thus in the same epistle : " When
Moses is read, the veil is upon their heart.
Nevertheless when it shall turn to the Lord, the
veil shall be taken away. Now the Lord is that
Spirit ; and where the Spirit of the Lord is,
there is liberty. But we all with open face
beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord,
are changed into the same image, from glory to
glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord." '


And again Paul says: "That mortality might
be swallowed up of life. Now He that hath
wrought us for the selfsame thing is God, who
also hath given unto us the earnest of the
Spirit." - And again he says : " Approving our-
selves as the ministers of God, in much patience,
in afflictions, in necessities," ^ and so forth.
Then he adds these words : " By kindness, by
the Holy Ghost, by love unfeigned, by the word
of truth, by the power of God." ^ Behold here
again the saint has defined the . holy Trinity,
naming God, and the Word, and the Holy Ghost.
And again he says : " Know ye not that ye are
the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God
dwelleth in you? If any man defile the temple
of God, him shall God destroy." s And again :
" But ye are washed, but ye are justified in the
name of our Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our
God."^ And again : "What ! know ye not that
your bodies are the temple of the Holy Ghost
which is in you, which ye have of God?" 7
"And I think also that I have the Spirit of
God." 8

XXII.

And again, speaking also of the children of
Israel as baptized in the cloud and in the sea, he
says : " And they all drank of the same spiritual
drink : for they drank of that spiritual Rock that
followed them, and that Rock was Christ." ^
And again he says : " Wherefore I give you to
understand, that no man speaking by the Spirit
of God calleth Jesus accursed : and that no man
can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy
Ghost. Now there are diversities of gifts, but
the same Spirit. And there are differences of
administrations, but the same Lord. And there
are diversities of operations, but it is the same
God which worketh all in all. But the mani-
festation of the Spirit is given to every man to
profit withal. For to one is given by the Spirit


' 2 Cor. ill 15-18.

2 2 Cor. V. 4, 5.

3 2 Cor. vi. 4.

* 2 Cor. vi. 6, 7.

5 I Cor. iii. i6, 17.

6 I Cor. vi. II.

7 I Cor. vi. 19.

* I Cor. vii. 40.
9 I Cor. X. 4.


the word of wisdom ; to another the word of
knowledge by the same Spirit ; to another faith
by the same Spirit ; to another the gifts of heal-
ing by the same Spirit ; to another the working
of miracles ; to another prophecy ; to another
discerning of spirits ; to another divers kinds
of tongues ; to another the interpretation of
tongues : but all these worketh that- one and the
selfsame Spirit, dividing to every man severally as
He will. For as the body is one, and hath many
members, and all the members of that one body,
being many, are one body; so also is Christ.
For by one Spirit are we all baptized into one
body." ■" And again he says : " For if he who
comes preaches another Christ whom we have
not preached, or ye receive another spirit that
ye have received not, or another gospel which
ye have not obtained, ye will rightly be kept
back." "

XXIII.

Seest thou that the Spirit is inseparable from
the divinity? And no one with pious apprehen-
sions could fancy that He is a creature. More-
over, in the Episde to the Hebrews he writes
again thus : " How shall we escape, if we neglect
so great salvation ; which at the first began to
be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto
us by them that heard Him ; God also bearing
them witness, both with signs and wonders, and
with divers miracles, and gifts of the Holy
Ghost? " '^ And again he says in the same epis-
tle : " Wherefore, as the Holy Ghost saith, To-
day, if ye will hear His voice, harden not your
hearts, as in the provocation, in the day of temp-
tation in the wilderness ; when your fathers
tempted me, proved me, and saw my works
forty years. Wherefore I was grieved with that
generation, and said. They do always err in their
heart ; for '^ they have not known my ways : as I
sware in my wrath, that they should not enter
into my rest." '"* And there, too, they ought to
give ear to Paul, for he by no means separates
the Holy Spirit from the divinity of the Father
and the Son, but clearly sets forth the discourse
of the Holy Ghost as one from the person of
the Father, and thus as given expression to 's by
God, just as it has been represented in the be-
fore-mentioned sayings. Wherefore the holy
Trinity is believed to be one God, in accordance
with these testimonies of Holy Scripture ; albeit
all through the inspired Scriptures numberless
announcements are supplied us, all confirmatory
of the apostolic and ecclesiastical faith.


'° I Cor. xii. 3-13.

'- Heb. ii. 3, 4.

'* Heb. iii. 7-11.
*5 eipriiievf}v.


Referring perhaps to Gal. i.


8,9.


ELUCIDATION.


47


A FRAGMENT OF THE SAME DECLARATION
OF FAITH, ACCOMPANIED BY GLOSSES.'

FROM GREGORY THAUMATURGUS, AS THEY SAY, IN
HIS SECTIONAL CONFESSION OF FAITH.

To maintain two natures ^ in the one Christ,
makes a I'etrad of the Trinity, says he ; for he
expressed himself thus : "And it is the true God,
the unincarnate, that was manifested in the flesh,
perfect with the true and divine perfection, not
with two natures ; nor do we speak of worship-
ping four (persons), viz., God, and the Son of
God, and man, and the Holy Spirit." First,
however, this passage is misapprehended, and is
of very doubtful import. Nevertheless it bears
that we should not speak of two persons in
Christ, lest, by thus acknowledging Him as God,
and as in the perfect divinity, and yet speaking


' From the book against the Monophysites by Leontius of Jeru-
salem, in Mai, Script. 1/et., vol. vii. p. 147.

2 ^uaets.


of two persons, we should make a Tetrad of the
divine persons, counting that of God the Father
as one, and that of the Son of God as one, and
that of the man as one, and that of the Holy
Spirit as one. But, again, it bears also against
recognising two divine natures,^ and rather for
acknowledging Him to be perfect God in one
natural divine perfection, and not in two ; for
his object is to show that He became incarnate
without change, and that He retains the divin-
ity without duplication.-* Accordingly he says
shortly : " And while the affections of the flesh
spring, the energy s retains the impassibility
proper to it. He, therefore, who introduces the
(idea of) passion into the energy is impious ;
for it w^as the Lord of glory that appeared in
human form, having taken to Himself the
human economy."


3 ^va-ei<;,

4 a6t7rAao"ta<rTW9.


ELUCIDATION.


(The minister ... to the Gentiles, p. 43.)

If St. Peter had been at Rome, St. Paul would not have come there (2 Cor. x. 16). The two
apostles had each his jurisdiction, and they kept to their own "line of things" respectively. How,
then, came St. Peter to visit Rome ? The answer is clear : unless he came involuntarily, as a
prisoner, he came to look after the Church of the Ci/rnmcision,'^ which was " in his measure ; "
and doubtless St. Paul urged him to this, the Hebrew Christians there being so large a proportion
of the Church. St. Peter came " at the close of his life," doubtless attended by an apostolic
companion, as St. Paul was, and Barnabas also (Acts xv. 39, 40). Linus probably laboured
for St. Paul (in prison) among the Gentile Romans,^ and Cletus for St. Peter among Jewish Chris-
tians. St. Peter survived all his martyred associates, and left Clement in charge of the whole
Church. This most probable theory squares with all known facts, and reconciles all difficulties.
Clement, then, was first bishop of Rome (a.d. 65) ; and so says Tertullian, vol iii. p. 258, note 9,

That compendious but superficial little work. Smith's History of the First Ten Centuries,^
justly censures as " misleading " the usage, which it yet keeps up, of calling the early bishops of
Rome " Pppes." '' The same author utterly misunderstands Cyprian's references to Rome as " a
principal cathedra,'' " a root and matrix,'" etc. ; importing into the indefinite Latin a definite
article. Cyprian applies a similar principle, after his master Tertullian (vol. iii. p. 260, this series),
to all the Apostolic Sees, the tnatrices of Christian churches.

' Origan says so, expressly. See Cave, Lives, i. p. 230. 2 2 Tim. iv. 21. 3 The Student's Eccl. Hist., London, 1878.

* It accepts the statement that the earliest application of this term, by way of eminence, to the Bishop of Rome, is found in Evnodius
of Pavia, circa ad. 500. Robertson, vol. i. p. 560.


ON THE TRINITY.


FRAGMENT FROM THE DISCOURSE.'


Gregory Thaumaturgus, Bishop of Neo-Csesa-
reia in Pontus,^ near successor of the apostles,
in his discourse on the Trinity, speaks thus : —

I see in all three essentials — substance, genus,
name. We speak of man, servant, curator {cura-
toretti), — man, by reason of substance; ser-
vant, by reason of genus or condition ; curator,
by reason of denomination. We speak also of
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit : these, however,
are not names which have only supervened at
some after period, but they are subsistences.
Again, the denomination of ?naii is not in actual
fact a denomination, but a substance common to
men, and is the denomination proper to all men.
Moreover, names are such as these, — Adam,
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob : these, I say, are names.
But the Divine Persons are names indeed : and
the names are still the persons ; and the persons
then signify that which is and subsists, — which
is the essence of God. The name also of the
nature signifies subsistence ; ^ as if we should
speak of the man. All (the persons) are one
nature, one essence, one will, and are called the
Holy Trinity ; and these also are names sub-
sistent, one nature in three persons, and one
genus. But the person of the Son is compos-
ite in its oneness {imita ^i"/), being one made
up of two, that is, of divinity and humanity
together, which two constitute one. Yet the
divinity does not consequently receive any in-
crement, but the Trinity remains as it was. Nor
does anything new befall the persons even or
the names, but these are eternal and without
time. No one, however, was sufficient to know
these until the Son being made flesh manifested
them, saying : " Father, I have manifested Thy
name to men ; glorify Thou me also, that they
may know me as Thy Son."^ And on the
mount the Father spake, and said, " This is my
beloved Son." s And the same sent His Holy


' Mai, Spicil, Rom., vol. iii. p. 696, from the Arabic Codex, loi.

* The Arabic Codex reads falsely, Caesareae Cappadociae.

^ Or, the name signifies the subsistence of the nature — Nometi
quoque naiur-ce sigiiificat subsiitentiam.

* John xvii. 6.
i Matt. iii. 17.

48


Spirit at the Jordan. And thus it was declared
to us that there is an Eternal Trinity in equal
honour. Besides, the generation of the Son by
the Father is incomprehensible and ineffable ;
and because it is spiritual, its investigation be-
comes impracticable : for a spiritual object can
neither be understood nor traced by a corporeal
object, for that is far removed from human
nature. We men know indeed the generation
proper to us, as also that of other objects ; but
a spiritual matter is above human condition,
neither can it in any manner be understood by
the minds of men. Spiritual substance can
neither perish nor be dissolved ; ours, however,
as is easy to understand, perishes and is dis-
solved. How, indeed, could it be possible for
man, who is limited on six sides — by east, west,
south, north, deep, and sky — understand a mat-
ter which is above the skies, which is beneath
the deeps, which stretches beyond the north and
south, and which is present in every place, and
fills all vacuity? But if, indeed, we are able to
scrutinize spiritual substance, its excellence truly
would be undone. Let us consider what is done
in our body ; and, furthermore, let us see whether
it is in our power to ascertain in what manner
thoughts are born of the heart, and words of the
tongue, and the Hke. Now, if we can by no
means apprehend things that are done in our-
selves, how could it ever be that we should un-
derstand the mystery of the uncreated Creator,
which goes beyond every mind ? Assuredly, if
this mystery were one that could be penetrated
by man, the inspired John would by no means
have affirmed this : " No man hath seen God at
any time." ^ He, then, whom no man hath seen
at any time, — whom can we reckon Him to
resemble, so that thereby we should understand
His generation? And we, indeed, without am-
biguity apprehend that our soul dwells in us in
union with the body; but still, who has ever
seen his own soul? who has been able to dis-
cern its conjunction with his body? This one


6 John i. 18.


ELUCIDATION.


49


thing is all we know certainly, that there is a
soul within us conjoined with the body. Thus,
then, we reason and believe that the Word is
begotten by the Father, albeit we neither possess
nor know the clear rationale of the fact. The
Word Himself is before every creature — eter-
nal from the Eternal, like spring from spring,
and light from light. The vocable Word, in-
deed, belongs to those three genera of words
which are named in Scripture, and which are
not substantial, — namely, the word conceived,^
the word uttered,^ and the word articulated?
The word conceived, certainly, is not substantial.
The word uttered, again, is that voice which the
prophets hear from God, or the prophetic speech
itself; and even this is not substantial. And,
lastly, the word articulated is the speech of man
formed forth in air i^aere efformatus), composed
of terms, which also is not substantial.-* But
the Word of God is substantial, endowed with
an exalted and enduring nature, and is eternal
with Himself, and is inseparable from Him, and


* TO KttT i.vvoia.v,

2 TrpO(J)OpiK6;'.

* On these terms, consult the Greek Fathers in Petavius, de Trin.,
book vi. [See Elucidation below.]


can never fall away, but shall remain in an ever-
lasting union. This Word created heaven and
earth, and in Him were all things made. He is
the arm and the power of God, never to be
separated from the Father, in virtue of an indi-
visible nature, and, together with the Father, He
is without beginning. Tliis Word took our sub-
stance of the Virgin Mary ; and in so far as He
is spiritual indeed. He is indivisibly equal with
the Father ; but in so far as He is corporeal. He
is in like manner inseparably equal with us.
And, again, in so far as He is spiritual. He sup-
plies in the same equality {ccquiparat) the Holy
Spirit, inseparably and without limit. Neither
were there two natures, but only one nature of
the Holy Trinity before the incarnation of the
Word, the Son ; and the nature of the Trinity
remained one also after the incarnation of the
Son. But if any one, moreover, believes that
any increment has been given to the Trinity by
reason of the assumption of humanity by the
Word, he is an alien from us, and from the min-
istry of the Catholic and Apostolic Church. This
is the perfect, holy, Apostohc faith of the holy
God. Praise to the Holy Trinity for ever
through the ages of the ages. Amen.


ELUCIDATION.

Petavius, to whom the translator refers his readers, may be trusted in points where he has no
theory of his own to sustain, but must always be accepted with caution. The Greek Fathers in
this very series, from Justin ' onward, enable us to put the later terminology to the test of earlier
exposition (see examples in the notes to the Praxeas of TertuUian, and consult Dr. Holmes'
valuable note embodied in my elucidations).^ We may go back to Theophilus for the distinction
between the ivStdOeTO'; and the -rrpocjiopLKos, the immanent and the uttered Word.^ Compare Ter-
tuUian, also, against Marcion.+ Evidences, therefore, are abundant and archaic, indeed, to prove
that the Ante-Nicene Fathers, with those of the Nicene and the Post-Nicene periods, were of one
mind, and virtually of one voice.

' Vol. i. pp. 164, i56, 170, 178, 190-193, 263, 272; Irenaeus, Ibid., 468, 546, etc.

2 Vol. iii. p. 628. Compare (same volume) notes 15, p. 602, and i, p. 604.

3 Vol. ii. p. 98, notes i, 2; also p. 103, notes. * Vol. iii. p. 299, note 19.


TWELVE TOPICS ON THE FAITH.

WHEREIN IS GIVEN ALSO THE FORMULA OF EXCOMMUNICATION, AND AN EXPLI-
CATION IS SUBJOINED TO EACH.'


TOPIC I.

If any one says that the body of Christ is un-
created, and refuses to aclcnowledge that He,
being the uncreated Word (God) of God, took
the flesh of created humanity and appeared incar-
nate, even as it is written, let him be anathema.

EXPLICATION.

How could the body be said to be uncreated ?
For the uncreated is the passionless, invulnerable,
intangible. But Christ, on rising from the dead,
showed His disciples the print of the nails and
the wound made by the spear, and a body that
could be handled, although He also had entered
among them when the doors were shut, with the
view of showing them at once the energy of
the divinity and the reality of the body.

Yet, while being God, He was recognised as
man in a natural manner ; and while subsisting
truly as man. He was also manifested as God
by His works.2

TOPIC II.

If any one affirms that the flesh of Christ is
consubstantial with the divinity, and refuses to
acknowledge that He, subsisting Himself in the
form of God as God before all ages, emptied
Himself and took the form of a servant, even as
it is written, let him be anathema.

EXPLICATION.

How could the flesh, which is conditioned by
time, be said to be consubstantial 3 with the time-
less divinity ? For that is designated consubstan-
tial which is the same in nature and in eternal
duration without variableness.


TOPIC in.

If any one affirms that Christ, just like one of
the prophets, assumed the perfect man, and re-


' Works of Grester, vol. xv. p. 434, Ratisbon, 1741, in fol., from
a manuscript codex.

- This paragraph is wanting in a very ancient copy.
3 b/i-oouatos.

50


fuses to acknowledge that, being begotten in the
flesh of the Virgin,'^ He became man and was
born in Bethlehem, and was brought up in Naz-
areth, and advanced in age, and on complet-
ing the set number of years (appeared in public
and) was baptized in the Jordan, and received
this testimony from the Father, "This is my
beloved Son," ^ even as it is written, let him be
anathema.

EXPLICATION.

How could it be said that Christ (the Lord)
assumed the perfect man just like one of the
prophets, when He, being the Lord Himself, be-
came man by the incarnation effected through
the Virgin ? Wherefore it is written, that " the
first man was of the earth, earthy." ^ But whereas
he that was formed of the earth returned to the
earth. He that became the second man returned
to heaven. And so we read of the " first Adam
and the last Adam." ^ And as it is admitted
that the second came by the first according to
the flesh, for which reason also Christ is called
man and the Son of man ; so is the witness given
that the second is the Saviour of the first, for
whose sake He came down from heaven. And
as the Word came down from heaven, and was
made man, and ascended again to heaven, He is
on that account said to be the second Adam
from heaven.

TOPIC IV.

If any one affirms that Christ was bom of the
seed of man by the Virgin, in the same manner
as all men are born, and refuses to acknowledge
that He was made flesh by the Holy Spirit and
the holy Virgin Mary, and became man of the
seed of David, even as it is written, let him be
anathema.

EXPLICATION.

How could one say that Christ was bom of
the seed of man by the Virgin, when the holy


■* Reading ex -no
5 Matt. iii. 17.
'' I Cor. XV. 47.
' I Cor. XV. 45.


^ivov for €K 7ra96i'T05.


TWELVE TOPICS ON THE FAITH.


51


Gospel and the angel, in proclaiming the good
tidings, testify of Mary the Virgin that she said,
" How shall this be, seeing I know not a man?" '
Wherefore he says, " The Holy Ghost shall come
upon thee, and the power of the highest shall
overshadow thee : therefore also that holy thing
which shall be born of thee shall be called the
Son of the Highest." ^ And to Joseph he says,
" Fear not to take unto thee Mary thy wife : for
that which is conceived in her is of the Holy
Ghost. And she shall bring forth a son, and
they shall call His name Jesus : for He shall
save His people from their sins." ^


TOPIC V.

If any one affirms that the Son of God who
is before the ages is one, and He who has ap-
peared in these last times is another, and refuses
to acknowledge that He who is before the ages
is the same with Him who appeared in these
last times, even as it is written, let him be
anathema.

EXPLICATION.

How could it be said that the Son of God
who is before the ages, and He who has ap-
peared in these last times, are different, when
the Lord Himself says, " Before Abraham was,
I am ; " ■♦ and, " I came forth from God, and I
come, and again I go to my Father? " s


TOPIC vi.

If any one affirms that He who suffered is
one, and that He who suffered not is another,
and refuses to acknowledge that the Word, who
is Himself the impassible and unchangeable
God, suffered in the flesh which He had assumed
really, yet without mutation, even as it is written,
let him be anathema.


EXPLICATION,

How could it be said that He who suffered is
one, and He who suffered not another, when
the Lord Himself says, " The Son of man must
suffer many things, and be killed, and be raised
again the third day from the dead ; " ^ and again,
"When ye see the Son of man sitting on the
right hand of the Father ; " 7 and again, " When
the Son of man cometh in the glory of His
Father? "8


' Luke i. 34.

^ Luke i. 35.

3 Matt. i. 20, 21.

* John viii. 58.

S John xiii. and xvi.

*> Matt. xvi. 21.

^ ^L^tt. xxvi. 64; Mark xiv. 62.

' Matt. xvi. 27.


TOPIC vn.

If any one affirms that Christ is saved, and
refuses to acknowledge that He is the Saviour
of the world, and the Light of the world, even
as it is written,^ let him be anathema.

EXPLICATION.

How could one say that Christ is saved, when
the Lord Himself says, " I am the life ; " '° and,
" I am come that they might have life ; " " and,
" He that believeth on me shall not see death,
but he shall behold 'the life eternal? " "

TOPIC vin.

If any one affirms that Christ is perfect man
and also God the Word in the way of separation,'^
and refuses to acknowledge the one Lord Jesus
Christ, even as it is written, let him be anathema.

EXPLICATION,

How could one say that Christ is perfect man
and also God the Word in the way of separa-
tion, when the Lord Himself says, " Why seek
ye to kill me, a man that hath told you the
truth, which I have heard of God ? " '* For God
the Word did not give a man for us, but He
gave Himself for us, having been made man
for our sake. Wherefore He says : " Destroy
this temple, and in three days I will raise it up.
But He spake of the temple of His body." '5

TOPIC IX.

If any one says that Christ suffers change. or
alteration, and refuses to acknowledge that He
is unchangeable in the Spirit, though corrupti-
ble '^ in the flesh,'^ let him be anathema.

EXPLICATION.

How could one say that Christ suffers change
or alteration, when the Lord Himself says, " I
am, and I change not ; " '^ and again, " His soul
shall not be left in Hades, neither shall His flesh
see corruption? " "^

TOPIC X.

If any one affirms that Christ assumed the
man only in part, and refuses to acknowledge
that He was made in all things like us, apart
from sin, let him be anathema.


9 Isa. ix ; Matt, iv.; John i., iii., viii., ix., xii.
° John xi. 25, xiv. 6.
' John x. ID.

- John viii. 51.

3 SiaipfTw?.

* John viii. 40.

5 Or, and incorruptible.

^ John ii. 20, 21.

7 [Christ's flesh being incorruptible, transubstantiation cannot be

true: the holy food is digested in its material part.]

"8 Mai. iii. 6.

9 Ps. xvi. lo; Acts ii. 31.


52


TWELVE TOPICS ON THE FAITH.


EXPLICATION.

How could one say that Christ assumed the
man only in part, when the Lord Himself says,
" I lay down my life, that I might take it again,
for the sheep ; " ' and, " My flesh is meat indeed,
and my blood is drink indeed ; " ^ and, " He
that eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood,
hath eternal life ?" ^

TOPIC XI.

If any one affirms that the body of Christ is
void of soul and understancfing,-* and refuses to
acknowledge that He is perfect man, one and
the same in all things (with us), let him be
anathema.

EXPLICATION.

How could one say that the body of the
Lord (Christ) is void of soul and understand-
ing? For perturbation, and grief, and distress,
are not the properties either of a flesh void of
soul, or of a soul void of understanding; nor
are they the sign of the immutable Divinity, nor
the index of a mere phantasm, nor do they
mark the defect of human weakness ; but the
Word exhibited in Himself the exercise of the
affections and susceptibilities proper to us, hav-
ing endued Himself with our passibility, even as
It is written, that " He hath borne our griefs,
and carried our sorrows." 5 For perturbation,
and grief, and distress, are disorders of soul ;
and toil, and sleep, and the body's liability to
wounding, are infirmities of the flesh.

TOPIC XII.

If any one says that Christ was manifested in
the world only in semblance, and refuses to
acknowledge that He came actually in the flesh,
let him be anathema.

EXPLICATION.

How could one say that Christ was manifested
only in semblance in the world, born as He was
in Bethlehem, and made to submit to the cir-
cumcising of the flesh, and lifted up by Simeon,
and brought up on to His twelfth year (at
home), and made subject to His parents, and
baptized in Jordan, and nailed to the cross, and
raised again from the dead?

Wherefore, when it is said that He was
" troubled in spirit," ^ that " He was sorrowful
in soul," 7 that " He was wounded in body," ^
He places before us designations of suscepti-
bilities proper to our constitution, in order to

' John X. 17.
- John vi. 55.
3 John vi. 56.

* dthvxov (cai avoriTOV,
5 Isa. liii. 4.

* John xi. 33, xii. 27, xiii. 21.
7 Matt. xxvi. 38.

* lsa> liii. 5.


show that He was made man in the world, and
had His conversation with men,^ yet without
sin. For He was born in Bethlehem according
to the flesh, in a manner meet for Deity, the
angels of heaven recognising Him as their Lord,
and hymning as their God Him who was then
wrapped in swaddling-clothes in a manger, and
exclaiming, " Glory to God in the highest, and
on earth peace, good-will among men." '° He
was brought up in Nazareth ; but in divine fash-
ion He sat among the doctors, and astonished
them by a wisdom beyond His years, in respect
of the capacities of His bodily Hfe, as is recorded
in the Gospel narrative. He was baptized in
Jordan, not as receiving any sanctification for
Himself, but as gifting a participation in sanc-
tification to others. He was tempted in the
wilderness, not as giving way, however, to temp-
tation, but as putting our temptations before Him-
self on the challenge of the tempter, in order
to show the povverlessness of the tempter.

Wherefore He says, " Be of good cheer, I have
overcome the world." " And this He said, not
as holding before us any contest proper only
to a God, but as showing our own flesh in its
capacity to overcome suffering, and death, and
corruption, in order that, as sin entered into the
world by flesh, and death came to reign by sin
over all men, the sin in the flesh might also be
condemned through the selfsame flesh in the
likeness thereof; '^ and that that overseer of sin,
the tempter, might be overcome, and death be
cast down from its sovereignty, and the corrup-
tion in the burying of the body be done away,
and the first-fruits of the resurrection be shown,
and the principle of righteousness begin its
course in the world through faith, and the king-
dom of heaven be preached to men, and fellow-
ship be established between God and men.

In behalf of this grace let us glorify the Father,
who has given His only begotten Son for the life
of the world. Let us glorify the Holy Spirit that
worketh in us, and quickeneth us, and furnisheth
the gifts meet for the fellowship of God ; and let
us not intermeddle with the word of the Gospel
by lifeless disputations, scattering about endless
questionings and logomachies, and making a hard
thing of the gentle and simple word of faith ;
but rather let us work the work of faith, let us
love peace, let us exhibit concord, let us preserve
unity, let us cultivate love, with which God is
well pleased.

As it is not for us to know the times or the
seasons which the Father hath put in His own
power, '3 but only to believe that there will come
an end to time, and that there will be a manifes-


9 Baruch iii. 38.
'° Luke ii. 14.
" John xvi. 33.
'2 Rom. V. 12, viii. 3.
" Acts i. 7.


ELUCIDATION.


tation of a future world, and a revelation of judg-
ment, and an advent of the Son of God, and a
recompense of works, and an inheritance in the
kingdom of heaven, so it is not for us to know
how the Son of God became man ; for this is a
great mystery, as it is written, " Who shall declare
His generation? for His life is taken from the
earth." ' But it is for us to believe that the Son
of God became man, according to the Scriptures ;
and that He was seen on the earth, and had His
conversation with men, according to the Scrip-

' Isa. liii, 8.


tures, in their likeness, yet without sin ; and that
He died for us, and rose again from the dead,
as it is written ; and that He was taken up to
heaven, and sat down at the right hand of the
Father, whence He shall come to judge the
quick and the dead, as it is written ; lest, while
we war against each other with words, any should
be led to blaspheme the word of faith, and that
should come to pass which is written, " By reason
of you is my name ^ continually blasphemed
among the nations." ^


2 Or, the name of God.

3 Isa. lii. 5.


ELUCIDATION.


These " twelve anathemas," as they are called, do evidently refute the Nestorians and later
heretics. Evidently, therefore, we must assign this document to another author. And, as frequent
references are made to such tests, I subjoin a list of Oecumenical or Catholic Councils, properly
so called, as follows : —


1. Jerusalem,

2. NlC^A,

3. Constantinople (I.),

4. Ephesus,

5. Chalcedon,

6. Constantinople (II.),

7. Constantinople (III.),


against J^udaism,^ a.d. 50.

" Arianism (i)>^ a.d. 325.

" Semi- Arianism (2), a.d. 381.

" Nestorianism (3), a.d. 431.

" Eutychianism (4), a.d. 451.

" Monophysitism (5), a.d. 553.

" Monothclitism (6),3 a.d. 680.*


Th^se are all the undisputed councils. The Seventh Council, so called (a.d. 537), was not a
free council, and was rejected by a free council of the West, convened at Frankfort a.d. 794. Its
acceptance by the Roman pontiffs, subsequently, should have no logical force with the Easterns,
who do not recognise their supremacy even over the councils of the West ; and no free council
has ever been held under pontifical authority. The above list, therefore, is a complete list of all
the councils of the undivided Church as defined by Catholic canons. There has been no possi-
bility of a Catholic council since the division of East and West. The Council of Frankfort is the
pivot of subsequent history, and its fundamental importance has not been, sufficiently insisted
upon.

' As widely different from the other council."; as the Apostles from their successors, and part of its decisions were local and temporary.
For all that, it was the greatest of councils, and truly General,

2 These numbers indicate the ordinary reckoning of writers, and is correct ecclesiastically. The Coimcil of Jerusalem, however, is
the base of Christian orthodo.xy, and decided the great principles by which the " General Councils" were professedly ruled.

3 Theological students are often puzzled to recall the councils in order, and not less to recall the rejected heresies. I have found two
mnemonics useful, thus: (i) I'SC'E and {CCC) three kundreti ; (2) JAS. NEMM. Dulce est desi'pere, Mc.

* A.D. 325 to 680 is the Synodical Period. Gregory I. (Rome) placed ih^/irst/our councils next to the four Gospels.


ON THE SUBJECT OF THE SOUL.


You have instructed us, most excellent Tatian,^
to forward for your use a discourse upon the
soul, laying it out in effective demonstrations.
And this you have asked us to do without mak-
ing use of the testimonies of Scripture, — a
method which is opened to us, and which, to
those who seek the pious mind, proves a manner
of setting forth doctrine more convincing than
any reasoning of man.^ You have said, how-
ever, that you desire this, not with a view to
your own full assurance, taught as you already
have been to hold by the Holy Scriptures and
traditions, and to avoid being shaken in your
convictions by any subtleties of man's disputa-
tions, but with a view to the confuting of men
who have different sentiments, and who do not
admit that such credit is to be given to the
Scriptures, and who endeavour, by a kind of
cleverness of speech, to gain over those who are
unversed in such discussions. Wherefore we
were led to comply readily with this commission
of yours, not shrinking from the task on account
of inexperience in this method of disputation,
but taking encouragement from the knowledge
of your good-will toward us. For your kind and
friendly disposition towards us will make you un-
derstand how to put forward publicly whatever
you may approve of as rightly expressed by us,
and to pass by and conceal whatever statement
of ours you may judge to come short of what is
proper. Knowing this, therefore, I have betaken
myself with all confidence to the exposition.
And in my discourse I shall use a certain order
and consecution, such as those who are very ex-
pert in these matters employ towards those who
desire to investigate any subject intelligently.

First of all, then, I shall propose to inquire by
what criterion the soul can, according to its na-
ture, be apprehended ; then by what means it
can be proved to exist ; thereafter, whether it is
a substance or an accident ; '< then consequently
on these points, whether it is a body or is incor-

' A Topical Discourse by our holy father Gregory, surnamed
Thaumaturgus, bishop of Neo-Csesareia in Pontus, addressed to
Tatian.

2 [A person not known.]

3 [True to the universal testimony of the primitive Fathers as to
Holy Scripture.]

* [Aristotle, Physica. Elucidation I.]

54


poreal ; then, whether it is simple or compound ;
next, whether it is mortal or immortal ; and
finally, whether it is rational or irrational.

For these are the questions which are wont,
above all, to be discussed, in any inquiry about
the soul, as most important, and as best calcu-
lated to mark out its distinctive natifre. And
as demonstrations for the establishing of these
matters of investigation, we shall employ those
common modes of consideration 5 by which the
credibility of matters under hand is naturally
attested. But for the purpose of brevity and
utility, we shall at present make use only of
those modes of argumentation which are most
cogently demonstrative on the subject of our in-
quiry, in order that clear and intelligible^ notions
may impart to us some readiness for meeting the
gainsayers. With this, therefore, we shall com-
mence our discussion.

I. WHEREIN IS THE CRITERION FOR THE APPRE-
HENSION OF THE SOUL.

All things that exist are either known by sense ^
or ajjprehended by thought.^ And what falls
under sense has its adequate demonstration in
sense itself j for at once, with the application, it
creates in us the impression ^ of what underlies
it. But what is apprehended by thought is known
not by itself, but by its oj^erations.'" The soul,
consequently, being unknown by itself, shall be
known properly by its effects.

II. WHETHER THE SOUL EXISTS.

Our body, when it is put in action, is put in
action either from without or from within. And
that it is not put in action from without, is mani-
fest from the circumstance that it is put in action
neither by impulsion " nor by traction,'^ like soul-
less things. And again, if it is put in action from
within, it is not put in action according to nature,
like fire. For fire never loses its action as long


5 ei/i/otat?.

* evTTapaBeKTa,

'° evepyeiuiv,
" loSou/iiCrov.


ON THE SUBJECT OF THE SOUL.


55


as there is fire ; whereas the body, when it has
become dead, is a body void of action. Hence,
if it is put in action neither from without, hke
soulless things, nor according to nature, after the
fashion of fire, it is evident that it is put in action
by the soul, which also furnishes life to it. If,
then, the soul is shown to furnish the life to our
body, the soul will also be known for itself by its
operations.

III. WHETHER THE SOUL IS A SUBSTANCE.

That the soul is a substance,' is proved in the
following manner. In the first place, because
the definition given to the term substance suits
it very well. And that definition is to the effect,
that substance is that which, being ever idendcal,
and ever one in point of numeration with itself,
is yet capable of taking on contraries in succes-
sion.^ And that this soul, without passing the
limit of its own proper nature, takes on contra-
ries in succession, is, I fancy, clear to everybody.
For righteousness and unrighteousness, courage
and cowardice, temperance and intemperance,
are seen in it successively ; and these are con-
traries. If, then, it is the property of a substance
to be capable of taking on contraries in succes-
sion, and if the soul is shown to sustain the defi-
nition in these terms, it follows that the soul is
a substance. And in the second place, because
if the body is a substance, the soul must also be
a substance. For it cannot be, that what only
has life imparted should be a substance, and that
what imparts the life, should be no substance :
unless one should assert that the non-existent is
the cause of the existent ; or unless, again, one
were insane enough to allege that the dependent
object is itself the cause of, that very thing in
which it has its being, and without which it could
not subsist.^

IV. WHETHER THE SOUL IS INCORPOREAL.

That the soul is in our body, has been shown
above. We ought now, therefore, to ascertain
in what manner it is in the body. Now, if it is
in juxtaposition with it, as one pebble with
another, it follows that the soul will be a body,
and also that the whole body will not be ani-
mated with soul,'' inasmuch as with a certain
part it will only be in juxtaposition. But if,
again, it is mingled or fused with the body, the
soul will become multiplex,5 and not simple, and
will thus be despoiled of the rationale proper to
a soul. For what is multiplex is also divisible


2 Tuiy ivixvTLuiV Trapafxepoi eivai SeKTiKov. 7rapajxepo5, here ap-
parently = in turn, though usually = out of tum._^

3 The text has an apparent inversion: to ei- i Trjv iinap^Li/ exoy
Kal ov ai-eu etvat jlltj 6vl'a^J.evol^f atrtoi' cKeti'ou eti^at tou €v w etrrt.
There is also a variety of reading: icot 6 avev ToO elvai /irj Swd/j-e-

VOf.

5 TToAvjutepTJs.


and dissoluble ; and what is dissoluble, on the
other hand, is compound ; ^ and what is com-
pound is separable in a threefold manner. More-
over, body attached to body makes weight ; 7 but
the soul, subsisting in the body, does not make
weight, but rather imparts life. The soul, there-
fore, cannot be a body, but is incorporeal.

Again, if the soul is a body, it is put in action
either from without or from within. But it is
not put in action from without ; for it is moved
neither by impulsion nor by traction, like soul-
less things. Nor is it put in action from within,
like objects animated with soul ; for it is absurd
to talk of a soul of the soul : it cannot, therefore,
be a body, but it is mcorporeal.

And besides, if the soul is a body, it has sensi-
ble qualities, and is maintained by nurture. But
it is not thus nurtured. For if it is nurtured, it
is not nurtured corporeally, like the body, but
incorporeally ; for it is nurtured by reason. It
has not, therefore, sensible qualities : for neither
is righteousness, nor courage, nor any one of
these things, something that is seen ; yet these
are the qualities of the soul. It cannot, there-
fore, be a body, but is incorporeal.

Still further, as all corporeal substance is di-
vided into animate and inanimate, let those who
hold that the soul is a body tell us whether we
are to call it animate or inanimate.

Finally, if every body has colour, and quantity,
and figure, and if there is not one of these quali-
ties perceptible in the soul, it follows that the
soul is not a body.^

V. WHETHER THE SOUL IS SIMPLE OR COMPOUND.

We prove, then, that the soul is simple, best
of all, by those arguments by which its incor-
poreahty has been demonstrated. For if it is
not a body, while every body is compound, and
what is composite is made up of parts, and is
consequently multiplex, the soul, on the other
hand, being incorporeal, is simple ; since thus
it is both unco m pounded and indivisible into
parts.

VI. WHETHER OUR SOUL IS IMMORTAL.

It follows, in ray opinion, as a necessary conse-
quence, that what is simple is immortal. And
as to how that follows, hear my explanation :
Nothing that exists is its own corrupter,^ else it
could never have had any thorough consistency,
even from the beginning. For things that are
subject to corruption are corrupted by contra-
ries : wherefore everything that is corrupted is
subject to dissolution ; and what is subject to


6 <jvv9eTov,

7 oyKOV.

8 [These are Aristotle's accidents, of which, see Thomas Aqui-
nas and the schoolmen /«J«>«. J

9 (^f^apTiKOf.


56


ON THE SUBJECT OF THE SOUL.


dissolution is compound ; and what is compound
is of many parts ; and what is made up of parts
manifestly is made up of diverse parts ; and the
diverse is not the identical : consequently the
soul, being simple, and not being made up of
diverse parts, but being uncompound and indis-
soluble, must be, in virtue of that, incorruptible
and immortal.

Besides, everything that is put in action by
something else, and does not possess the princi-
ple of life in itself, but gets it from that which
puts it in action, endures just so long as it is
held by the power that operates in it ; and
whenever the operative power ceases, that also
comes to a stand which has its capacity of action
from it. But the soul, being self-acting, has no
cessation of its being. For it follows, that what
is self-acting is ever-acting ; and what is ever-
acting is unceasing ; and what is unceasing is
without end ; and what is without end is incor-
ruptible ; and what is incorruptible is immortal.
Consequently, if the soul is self-acting, as has
been shown above, it follows that it is incorrupti-
ble and immortal, in accordance with the mode
of reasoning already expressed.

And further, everything that is not corrupted
by the evil proper to itself, is incorruptible ; and
the evil is opposed to the good, and is conse-
quently its corrupter. For the evil of the body
is nothing else than suffering, and disease, and
death ; just as, on the other hand, its excellency
is beauty, life, health, and vigour. If, there-
fore, the soul is not corrupted by the evil proper
to itself, and the evil of the soul is cowardice,
intemperance, envy, and the like, and all these
things do not despoil it of its powers of life and
action, it follows that it is immortal.

VII. WHETHER OUR SOUL IS RATIONAL.

That our soul is rational, one might demon-
strate by many arguments. And first of all from
the fact that it has discovered the arts that are
for the service of our life. For no one could
say that these arts were introduced casually
and accidentally, as no one could prove them
to be idle, and of no utility for our hfe. If,
then, these arts contribute to what is profitable
for our life, and if the profitable is commendable,
and if the commendable is constituted by rea-


son, and if these things are the discovery of the
soul, it follows that our soul is rational.

Again, that our soul is rational, is also proved
by the fact that our senses are not sufficient for
the apprehension of things. For we are not
competent for the knowledge of things by the
simple application of the faculty of sensation.
But as we do not choose to rest in these without
inquiry,' that proves that the senses, apart from
reason, are felt to be incapable of discriminating
between things which are identical in form and
similar in colour, though quite distinct in their
natures. If, therefore, the senses, apart from
reason, give us a false conception of things, we
have to consider whether things that are can be
apprehended in reality or not. And if they can
be apprehended, then the power which enables
us to get at them is one different from, and supe-
rior to, the senses. And if they are not appre-
hended, it will not be possible for us at all to
apprehend things which are different in their
appearance from the reality. But that objects
are apprehensible by us, is clear from the fact
that we employ each in a way adaptable to
utility, and again turn them to what we please.
Consequently, if it has been shown that things
which are can be apprehended by us, and if the
senses, apart from reason, are an erroneous test
of objects, it follows that the intellect ^ is what
distinguishes all things in reason, and discerns
things as they are in their actuality. But the
intellect is just the rational portion of the soul,
and consequently the soul is rational.

Finally, because we do nothing without hav-
ing first marked it out for ourselves ; and as
that is nothing else than just the high preroga-
tive 3 of the soul, — for its knowlege of things
does not come to it from without, but it rather
sets out these things, as it were, with the adorn- »
ment of its own thoughts, and thus first pictures
forth the object in itself, and only thereafter car-
ries it out to actual fact, — and because the high
prerogative of the soul is nothing else than the
doing of all things with reason, in which respect
it also differs from the senses, the soul has there-
by been demonstrated to be rational.


3 a^iiafj-a, [Elucidation II.]


ELUCIDATIONS. 57


ELUCIDATIONS.
I.

[Suhsfaiice or accident, p. 54.)

This essay is "rather the work of a philosopher than a bishop," says Dupin. He assigns it to
an age when "Aristotle began to be in some repi/hi/ion," — a most important concession as to the
estimate of this philosopher among the early faithful. We need not wonder that such admissions,
honourable to his candour and to his orthodoxy, brought on him the hatred and persecutions of the
Jesuits. Even Bossuet thought he went too far, and wrote against him. But, the whole system of
Roman dogma being grounded in Aristotle's physics as well as in his metaphysics, Dupin was
not orthodox in the eyes of the society that framed Aristotle into a creed, and made it the
creed of the "Roman-Catholic Church." Note, e.g., " transubstantiation," which is not true if
Aristotle's theory of accidents, etc., is false.' It assumes an exploded science.


IT.

(Prerogative of the soul, p. 56.)

If this " Discourse " be worthy of study, it may be profitably contrasted, step by step, with
Tertullian's treatises on kindred subjects.^ That the early Christians should reason concerning the
Soul, the j\Iind, the immortal Spirit, was natural in itself. But it was also forced upon them by
the " philosophers " and the heretics, with whom they daily came into conflict. This is apparent
from the Anti-Marcion^ of the great Carthaginian. The annotations upon that treatise, and
those On the Soul's Testimony and On the Soul, may suffice as pointing out the best sources'* of
information on speculative points and their bearings on theology. Compare, however, Athenago-
ras 5 and the great Clement of x\lexandria.^

* See Bacon's apophthegm, No. 275, p. 172, Works, London, 1730.

* Vol. ill. pp. 175-235, this series.

3 Vol. iii. pp. 463, 474; also pp. 532, 537, 557, 570, and 587.

* Compare, also, Bishop Kaye"s TcrtuUian, p. 199, etc.

5 E.g., vol. ii. p. 157, etc.

6 Vol. ii. pp. 440, 584 (Fragment), and what he says of free-will.


FOUR HOMILIES.'


THE FIRST HOMILY.
ON THE ANNUNCIATION TO THE HOLY VIRGIN MARY.^

To-day are strains of praise sung joyfully by
the choir of angels, and the light of the advent
of Christ shines brightly upon the faithful. To-
day is the glad spring-time to us, and Christ the
Sun of righteousness has beamed with clear light
around us, and has illumined the minds of the
faithful. To-day is Adam made ane\v,3 and
moves in the choir of angels, having winged his
way to heaven. To-day is the whole circle of
the earth filled with joy, since the sojourn of the
Holy Spirit has been realized to men. To-day
the grace of God and the hope of the unseen
shine through all wonders transcending imagina-
tion, and make the mystery that was kept hid
from eternity plainly discernible to us. To-day
are woven the chaplets of never-fading virtue.
To-day, God, willing to crown the sacred heads
of those whose pleasure is to hearken to Him,
and who delight in His festivals, invites the lovers
of unswerving faith as His called and His heirs ;
and the heavenly kingdom is urgent to summon
those who mind celestial things to join the di-
vine service of the incorporeal choirs. To-day
is fulfilled the word of David, " Let the heavens
rejoice, and let the earth be glad. The fields
shall be joyful, and all the trees of the wood be-
fore the Lord, because He cometh." -^ David
thus made mention of the trees ; 5 and the Lord's
forerunner also spoke of them as trees ^ " that
should bring forth fruits meet for repentance," ''

' [This very homily has been cited to prove the antiquity of the
festival of the Annunciation, observed, in the West, March 25. But
even Pellicia objects that this is a spurious work. The feast of the
Nativity was introduced into the East by Chrysostom after the rec-
ords at Rome had been inspected, and the time of the taxing at
Bethlehem had been found. See his Sermon (a.d. 386), beautifully
translated by Dr. Jarvis in his hitroduciwn, etc., p. 541. Compare
Tertullian, vol. iii. p. 164, and Justin, vol. i. p. 174, this series. Now,
as the selection of the 25th of iSIarch is clearly based on this, we may
say no more of that day. Possibly some Sunday was associated with
the Annunciation. The four Sundays preceding Christmas are all
observed by the Nestorians m commemoration of the Annunciation.]

2 The secondary title is: The First Discourse of our holy father
Gregory, surnamed Thaumaturgus, bishop of Neo-Caesareia in Pontus,
on the Annunciation to the most holy Virgin Mary, mother of God.
Works of Gregory Thaumaturgus by Ger. Voss, p. 9.

3 avaK(Ktx.ivi.tjra.L; others ai'aKe<Ai}Tai, recovered.
■* Ps. xcvi. 11-13.

5 f OAa.

6 &evSpa.

"> Matt. iii. 8.

58


or rather for the coming of the Lord. But our
Lord Jesus Christ promises perpetual gladness
to all those who believe on Him. For He says,
" I will see you, and ye shall rejoice ; and your
joy no man taketh from you." ^ To-day is the
illustrious and ineffable mystery of Christians,
who have willingly 9 set their hope like a seal
upon Christ, plainly declared to us. To-day did
Gabriel, who stands by God, come to the pure
virgin, bearing to her the glad annunciation,
" Hail, thou that art highly favoured ! '° And she
cast in her mind what manner of salutation this
might be. And the angel immediately proceeded
to say. The Lord is with thee : fear not, Mary ;
for thou hast found favour with God. Behold,"
thou shalt conceive in thy womb, and bring forth
a son, and shalt call '^ His name Jesus. He shall
be great, and shall be called the Son of the High-
est j and the Lord God shall give unto Him the
throne of His father David, and He shall reign
over the house of Jacob for ever : and of His
kingdom there shall be no end. Then said
Mary unto the angel, How shall this be, seeing
I know not a man ? " '^ Shall I still remain a
virgin ? is the honour of virginity not then lost
by me ? And while she was yet in perplexity as
to these things, the angel placed shortly before
her the summary of his whole message, and said
to the pure virgin, " The Holy Ghost shall come
upon thee, and the power of the Higliest shall
overshadow thee ; therefore also that holy thing
which shall be born of thee shall be called the
Son of God." For what it is, that also shall it
be called by all means. Meekly, then, did grace
make election of the pure Mary alone out of all
generations. For she proved herself prudent
truly in all things ; neither has any woman been
born like her in all generations. She was not
like the primeval virgin Eve, who, keeping holi-
day "• alone in paradise, with thoughtless mind,
unguardedly hearkened to the word of the ser-
pent, the author of all evil, and thus became

8 John xvi. 22.

9 Others, oo-iw?, piously.
»o Luke i. 28.

" Or, 616, wherefore.

'- Or, Ka\e(Tovai, they shall call.

'3 Luke i. 29, etc.

'* \6pev(Ta.


FOUR HOMILIES.


59


depraved in the thoughts of her mind ; ' and

through hSr that deceiver, discharging his poison
and infusing death with it, brought it into the
whole world ; and in virtue of this has arisen all
the trouble of the saints. But in the holy Virgin
alone is the fall of that (first mother) repaired.
Yet was not this' holy one competent to receive
the gift until she had first learned who it was
that sent it, and what the gift was, and who
it was that conveyed it. While the holy one
pondered these things in perplexity with her-
self, she says to the angel, " Whence hast thou
brought to us the blessing in such wise? Out
of what treasure-stores is the pearl of the word
despatched to us ? Whence has the gift acquired
its purpose - toward us ? From heaven art thou
come, yet thou walkest upon earth ! Thou dost
exhibit the form of man, and (yet) thou art
glorious with dazzling light." ^ These things the
holy one considered with herself, and the arch-
angel solved the difficulty expressed in such rea-
sonings by saying to her : " The Holy Ghost
shall come upon thee, and the power of the
Highest shall overshadow thee. Therefore also
that holy thing which shall be born of thee shall
be called the Son of God. And fear not, Mary ;
for I am not come to overpower thee with fear,
but to repel the subject of fear. Fear not, Mary,
for thou hast found favour with God. Question
not grace by the standard of nature. For grace
does not endure to pass under the laws of nature.
Thou knowest, O Mary, things kept hid from the
patriarchs and prophets. Thou hast learned, O
virgin, things which were kept concealed till now
from the angels. Thou hast heard, O purest one,
things of which even the choir of inspired men"*
was never deemed worthy. Moses, and David,
and Isaiah, and Daniel, and all the prophets,
prophesied of Him ; but the manner they knew
not. Yet thou alone, O purest virgin, art now
made the recipient of things of which all these
were kept in ignorance, and thou dost learn 5
the origin of them. For where the Holy Spirit
is, there are all things readily ordered. Where
divine grace is present, all things are found pos-
sible with God. The Holy Ghost shall come
upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall
overshadow thee. Therefore also that holy thing
which shall be born of thee shall be called the
Son of God." And if He is the Son of God,
then is He also God, of one form with the
Father, and co-eternal ; in Him the Father pos-
sesses all manifestation ; ^ He is His image in the
person, and through His reflection the (Father's)
glory shines forth. And as from the ever-flowing


* Or, Tip T^! /capSias (Jpoi'^naTt, in the thoughts of her heart.
^ iinoBeaiv; others i/irocrjfeo-ii', the promise.

3 Kai Aa|U.7rd6a (f>u>Tbt anaaTpaiTTeit,

* 9eo(t>6piov,

s Or, vTToiexou Kai ij.dv9avt, and receive thou and learn,
6 (jiavepuicrLv,


fountain the streams proceed, so also from this
ever-flowing and ever-living fountain does the
light of the world proceed, the perennial and
the true, namely Christ our God. For it is
of this that the prophets have preached : " The
streams of the river make glad the city of God." 7
And not one city only, but all cities ; for even as
it makes glad one city, so does it also the whole
world. Appropriately, therefore, did the angel ^
say to Mary the holy virgin first of all, " Hail,
thou that art highly favoured, the Lord is with
thee ; " inasmuch as with her was laid up the full
treasure of grace. For of all generations she
alone has risen as a virgin pure in body and in
spirit ; and she alone bears Him who bears all
things on His word. Nor is it only the beauty
of this holy one in body that calls forth our
admiration, but also the innate virtue of her soul.
Wherefore also the angel ^ addressed her first
with the salutation, " Hail, thou that art highly
favoured,^ the Lord is with thee, and no spouse
of earth ; " He Himself is with thee who is the
Lord of sanctification, the Father of purity,
the Author of incorruption, and the Bestower
of liberty, the Curator of salvation, and the
Steward and Provider of the true peace, who
out of the virgin earth made man, and out of
man's side formed Eve in addition. Even this
Lord is with thee, and on the other hand also
is of thee. Come, therefore, beloved brethren,
and let us take up the angelic strain, and to the
utmost of our ability return the due meed of
praise, saying, " Hail,'° thou that art highly
favoured, the Lord is with thee ! " For it is
thine truly to rejoice, seeing that the grace of
God, as he knows, has chosen to dwell with
thee — the Lord of glory dwelling with the hand-
maiden ; " He that is fairer than the children of
men " " with the fair virgin ; He who sanctifies
all things with the undefiled. God is with thee,
and with thee also is the perfect man in whom
dwells the whole fulness of the Godhead. Hail,
thou that art highly favoured, the fountain of the
light that lightens all who believe upon Him !
Hail, thou that art highly favoured, the rising of
the rational Sun,'^ and the undefiled flower of
life ! Hail, thou that art highly favoured, the
mead '^ of sweet savour ! Hail, thou that art
highly favoured, the ever-blooming vine, that
makes glad the souls of those who honour thee ?
Hail, thou that art highly favoured ! — the soil
that, all untilled, bears bounteous fruit : for thou
hast brought forth in accordance with the law of
nature indeed, as it goes with us, and by the set


' Ps. xlvi. 4.

' Or, archangel.

9 Or, gifted with grace.
'° Or, rejoice.
" Ps. .xlv. 2.

'2 Toir vo-qrou r)\iov ^ avaToXTj; Others, r)Kiov T^! 5»caio<7-vfr)s,
the rising of the Sun of righteousness.


6o


FOUR HOMILIES.


time of practice,' and yet in a way beyond na-
ture, or rather above nature, by reason that God
the Word from above took His abode in thee,
and formed the new Adam in thy holy womb,
and inasmuch as the Holy Ghost gave the power
of conception to the holy virgin ; and the reality
of His body was assumed from her body. And
just as the pearl ^ comes of the two natures,
namely lightning and water, the occult signs of
the sea ; so also our Lord Jesus Christ proceeds,
without fusion and without mutation, from the
pure, and chaste, and undefiled, and holy Virgin
Mary ; perfect in divinity and perfect in human-
ity, in all things equal to the Father, and in all
things consubstantial with us, apart from sin.

Most of the holy fathers, and patriarchs, and
prophets desired to see Him, and to be eye-wit-
nesses of Him, but did not attaint hereto. And
some of them by visions beheld Him in type,
and darkly ; others, again, were privileged to
hear the divine voice through the medium of
the cloud, and were favoured with sights of holy
angels ; but to Mary the pure virgin alone did
the archangel Gabriel manifest himself lumi-
nously, bringing her the glad address, " Hail,
thou that art highly favoured ! " And thus she
received the word, and in the due time of the
fulfilment according to the body's course she
brought forth the priceless pearl. Come, then,
ye too, dearly beloved, and let us chant the
melody which has been taught us by the inspired
harp of David, and say, " Arise, O Lord, into
Thy rest ; Thou, and the ark of Thy sanctuary." 3
For the holy Virgin is in truth an ark, wrought
with gold both within and without, that has
received the whole treasury of the sanctuary.
"Arise, O Lord, into Thy rest." Arise, O Lord,
out of the bosom of the Father, in order that
Thou mayest raise up the fallen race of the first-
formed man. Setting these things forth,'* David
in prophecy said to the rod that was to spring
from himself, and to sprout into the flower of
that beauteous fruit, " Hearken, O daughter, and
see, and incline thine ear, and forget thine own
people and thy father's Jiouse ; so shall the
King greatly desire thy beauty : for He is the
Lord thy God, and thou shalt worship Him."5
Hearken, O daughter, to the things which were
prophesied beforetime of thee, in order that
thou mayest also behold the things themselves
with the eyes of understanding. Hearken to
me while I announce things beforehand to thee,
and hearken to the archangel who declares ex-
pressly to thee the perfect mysteries. Come
then, dearly beloved, and let us fall back on the

* (i(j-ic>)<reo)s; better icvTjo-f (OS, conception.

_ 2 There is a similar passage in Ephraem's discourse, De Marga-
rita Pretiosa, vol. iii.

3 ayiacT^iaTOs. Ps. cxxxii. 8.

* r^peo■^€u^Dl'.

5 Or, and they shall worship Him. Ps. xlv. lo, ii.


memory of what has gone before us ; and let us
glorify, and celebrate, and laud, and bless that
rod that has sprung so marvellously from Jesse.
For Luke, in the inspired Gospel narratives, de-
livers a testimony not to Joseph only, but also to
Mary the mother of God, and gives this account
with reference to the very family and house of
David : " For Joseph went up," says he, '•' from
Galilee, unto a city of Judea which is called
Bethlehem, to be taxed with Mary his espoused
wife, being great with child, because they were
of the house and family of David. And so it
was, that while they were there, the days were
accomplished that she should be delivered ; and
she brought forth her son, the first-born of the
whole creation,*^ and wrapped him in swaddling-
clothes, and laid him in a manger, because there
was no room for them in the inn." ^ She
wrapped in swaddHng-clothes Him who is cov-
ered with light as with a garment.** She wrapped
in swaddling-clothes Him who made every crea-
ture. She laid in a manger Him who sits above
the cherubim,9 and is praised by myriads of
angels. In the manger set apart for dumb
brutes did the Word of God repose, in order
that He might impart to men, who are really
irrational by free choice, the perceptions of true
reason. In the board from which cattle eat was
laid the heavenly Bread, '° in order that He might
provide participation in spiritual sustenance for
men who live like the beasts of the earth. Nor
was there even room for Him in the inn. He
found no place, who by His word established
heaven and earth ; " for though He was rich, for
our sakes He became poor," " and chose ex-
treme humiliation on behalf of the salvation of
our nature, in His inherent goodness toward us.
He who fulfilled the whole administration '^ of
unutterable mysteries of the economy '^ in heaven
in the bosom of the Father, and in the cave in
the arms of the mother, reposed in the manger.
Angelic choirs encircled Him, singing of glory
in heaven and of peace upon earth. In heaven
He was seated at the right hand of the Father ;
and in the manger He rested, as it were, upon
the cherubim. Even there was in truth His
cherubic throne ; there was His royal seat. Holy
of the holy, and alone glorious upon the earth,
and holier than the holy, was that wherein Christ
our God rested. To Him be glory, honour, and
power, together with the Father undefiled, and
the altogether holy and quickening Spirit, now
and ever, and unto the ages of the ages. Amen.


6 TTpwroTOKOv n-oaijs TJjs KrCatioi. [Or, i/ie heir, etc.]

' Luke ii. 4-7.

' Ps. civ. 2.

9 Ps. Ixxx. I.
10 Or, the Bread of life.
" 2 Cor. viii. 9.
'- Or, righteousness.

'3 Or, the whole administration of the economy in an unutterable
mystery.


FOUR HOMILIES.


6i


THE SECOND HOMILY.
ON THE ANNUNCUTION TO THE HOLY VIRGIN MARY.'


DISCOURSE SECOND.


It is our duty to present to God, like sacri-
fices, all the festivals and hymnal celebrations ;
and first of all, the annunciation to the holy
mother of God, to wit, the salutation made to
her by the angel, " Hail, thou that art highly
favoured ! " For first of all wisdom ^ and saving
doctrine in the New Testament was this saluta-
tion, " Hail, thou that art highly favoured ! "
conveyed to us from the Father of hghts. And
this address, " highly favoured," 3 embraced the
whole nature of men. " Hail, thou that art
highly favoured " 3 in the holy conception and in
the glorious pregnancy, " I bring you good tid-
ings of great joy, which shall be to all people."-*
And again the Lord, who. came for the purpose
of accomplishing a saving passion, said, " I will
see you, and ye shall rejoice ; and your joy no
man taketh from you." 5 And after His resur-
rection again, by the hand of the holy women.
He gave us first of all the salutation " Hail ! " ^
And again, the apostle made the announce-
ment in similar terms, saying, " Rejoice ever-
more : pray without ceasing : in everything give
thanks." ^ See, then, dearly beloved, how the
Lord has conferred upon us everywhere, and in-
divisibly, the joy that is beyond conception, and
perennial. For since the holy Virgin, in the life
of the flesh, was in possession of the incorrupti-
ble citizenship, and walked as such in all manner
of virtues, and lived a life more excellent than
man's common standard ; therefore the Word
that Cometh from God the Father thought it
meet to assume the flesh, and endue the perfect
man from her, in order that in the same flesh in
which sin entered into the world, and death by
sin, sin might be condemned in the flesh, and
that the tempter of sin might be overcome in
the burying ^ of the holy body, and that there-
with also the beginning of the resurrection might
be exhibited, and life eternal instituted in the
world, and fellowship established for men with
God the Father. And what shall we state, or
what shall we pass by here? or who shall ex-
plain what is incomprehensible in the mystery?
But for the present let us fall back upon our
subject. Gabriel was sent to the holy virgin ;
the incorporeal was despatched to her who in
the body pursued the incorruptible conversation.


' " The Encomium of the same holy Father Gregory, bishop of
Neo-Caesareia in Pontus, sumamed Thauraaturgus, on the Annun-
ciation to the all-holy Mary, mother of God, and ever- virgin."

^ Or, before all wisdom.

^ Or, gifted with grace.

* Luke ii. lo.

5 John xvi. 22.

* Matt, xxviii. 9.

^ I Thess. V. 16-18.

^ ev rfi Ta<j)ii; others, iv rrj a.<j>y — in the touch or union of the
holy body.


and lived in purity and in virtues. And when
he came to her, he first addressed her with the
salutation, " Hail, thou that art highly favoured !
the Lord is with thee." Hail, thou that art
highly favoured ! for thou doest what is worthy
of joy indeed, since thou hast put on the vesture
of purity, and art girt with the cincture of pru-
dence. Hail, thou that art highly favoured !
for to thy lot it has fallen to be the vehicle
of celestial joy. Hail, thou that art highly
favoured ! for through thee joy is decreed for
the whole creation, and the human race re-
ceives again by thee its pristine dignity. Hail,
thou that art highly favoured ! for in thy arms
the Creator of all things shall be carried. And
she was perplexed by this word ; for she was
inexperienced in all the addresses of men, and
welcomed quiet, as the mother of prudence and
purity ; (yet) being a pure, and immaculate,
and stainless image 9 herself, she shrank not fn
terror from the angelic apparition, like most of
the prophets, as indeed true virginity has a kind
of affinity and equality with the angels. For
the holy Virgin guarded carefully the torch of
virginity, and gave diligent heed that it should
not be extinguished or defiled. And as one who
is clad in a brilliant robe deems it a matter of
great moment that no impurity or filth be suf-
fered to touch it anywhere, so did the holy
Mary consider with herself, and said : Does this
act of attention imply any deep design or seduc-
tive purpose? Shall this word "Hail" prove
the cause of trouble to me, as of old the fair
promise of being made like God, which was
given her by the serpent-devil, proved to our
first mother Eve? Has the devil, who is the
author of all evil, become transformed again
into an angel of light ; and bearing a grudge
against my espoused husband for his admirable
temperance, and having assailed him with some
fair-seeming address, and ftnding himself power-
less to overcome a mind so firm, and to deceive
the man, has he turned his attack upon me, as
one endowed with a more susceptible mind ;
and is this word " Hail " (Grace be with thee)
spoken as the sign of gracelessness hereafter?
Is this benediction and salutation uttered in
irony? Is there not some poison concealed in
the honey? Is it not the address of one who
brings good tidings, while the end of the same
is to make me the designer's prey ? And how is it
that he can thus salute one whom he knows not ?
These things she pondered in perplexity with
herself, and expressed in words. Then again
the archangel addressed her with the announce-
ment of a joy which all may believe in, and
which shall not be taken away, and said to her,
" Fear not, Mary, for thou hast found favour


9 dyoAfia.


62


FOUR HOMILIES.


with God." Shortly hast thou the proof of what
has been said. For I not only give you to un-
derstand that there is nothing to fear, but I show
you the very key to the absence of all cause for
fear. For through me all the heavenly powers
hail thee, the holy virgin : yea rather, He Him-
self, who is Lord of all the heavenly powers and
of all creation, has selected thee as the holy
one and the wholly fair ; and through thy holy,
and chaste, and pure, and undefiled womb the
enlightening Pearl comes forth for the salvation
of all the world : since of all the race of man
thou art by birth the holy one, and the more
honourable, and the purer, and the more pious
than any other ; and thou hast a mind whiter
than the snow, and a body made purer than any
gold, however fine, and a womb such as the
object which Ezekiel saw, and which he has
described in these terms : " And the likeness of
the living creatures upon the head was as the
firmament, and as the appearance of the terrible
crystal, and the likeness of the throne above
them was as the appearance of a sapphire-stone :
and above the throne it was as the likeness of
a man, and as the appearance of amber ; and
within it there was, as it were, the likeness of
fire round about." ' Clearly, then, did the
prophet behold in type Him who was born of
the holy virgin, whom thou, O holy virgin,
wouldest have had no strength to bear, hadst thou
not beamed forth for that time ^ with all that is
glorious and virtuous. And with what words of
laudation, then, shall we describe her virgin-dig-
nity ? With what indications and proclamations
of praise shall we celebrate her stainless figure ?
With what spiritual song or word shall we honour
her who is most glorious among the angels ? She
is planted in the house of God like a fruitful
olive that the Holy Spirit overshadowed ; and by
her means are we called sons and heirs of the
kingdom of Christ. « She is the ever-blooming
paradise of incorruptibility, wherein is planted
the tree that giveth life, and that furnisheth to
all the fruits of immortality. She is the boast
and glory of virgins, and the exultation of
mothers. She is the sure support of the believ-
ing, and the succourer ^ of the pious. She is
the vesture of light, and the domicile of virtue.-*
She is the ever-flowing fountain, wherein the
water of fife sprang and produced the Lord's
incarnate manifestation. She is the monument
of righteousness ; and all who become lovers of
her, and set their affections on virgin-like ingenu-
ousness and purity, shall enjoy the grace of angels.
All who keep themselves from wine and intoxica-
tion, and from the wanton enjoyments of strong


' Ezek. i. 22, 26, 27.

2 Or, by His throne.

3 Or example, KaropOia/jLa,
* Or, truth.


drink, shall be made glad with the products of
the life-bearing plant. All who have preserved
the lamp of virginity unextinguished shall be
privileged to receive the amaranthine crown of
immortality. Al'. who have possessed themselves
of the stainless robe of temperance shall be re-
ceived into the mystical bride-chamber of right-
eousness. All who have come nearer the angelic
degree than others shall also enter into the more
real enjoyment of their Lord's beatitude. All
who have possessed the illuminating oil of un-
derstanding, and the pure incense of conscience,
shall inherit the promise of spiritual favour and
the spiritual adoption. All who worthily observe
the festival of the Annunciation of the Virgin
Mary, the mother of God, acquire as their meet
recompense the fuller interest in the message,
" Hail, thou that art highly favoured ! " It is our
duty, therefore, to keep this feast, seeing that it
has filled the whole world with joy and gladness.
And let us keep it with psalms, and hymns, and
spiritual songs. Of old did Israel also keep
their festival, but then it was with unleavened
bread and bitter herbs, of which the prophet
says : " I will turn their feasts into afflictions
and lamentation, and their joy into shame." 5
But our afflictions our Lord has assured us He
will turn into joy by the fruits of penitence.^
And again, the first covenant maintained the
righteous requirements ^ of a divine service, as
in the case of our forefather Abraham ; but these
stood in the inflictions of pain in the flesh by
circumcision, until the time of the fulfilment.
" The law was given to them through Moses "
for their discipline ; " but grace and truth " have
been given to us by Jesus Christ.^ The beginning
of all these blessings to us appeared in the an-
nunciation to Mary, the highly- favoured, in the
economy of the Saviour which is worthy of afl
praise, and in His divine and supramundane in-
struction. Thence rise the rays of the light of
understanding upon us. Thence spring for us
the fruits of wisdom and immortality, sending
forth the clear pure streams of piety. Thence
come to us the brilliant splendours of the treas-
ures of divine knowledge. " For this is life
eternal, that we may know the true God, and
Jesus Christ whom He hath sent." 9 And again,
" Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye
have eternal life." '° For on this account the
treasure of the knowledge of God is revealed to
them who search the divine oracles. That treas-
ure of the inspired Scriptures the Paraclete has
unfolded to us this day. And let the tongue of
prophecy and the doctrine of apostles be the


5 Amos viii. lo.
* Cf. Jer. xxxi.
^ Or, justifying observances, Si/caicu/xara.

8 Cf. John i.

9 John xvii 2.

'" Or, ye will find eternal life. John v. 39.


FOUR HOMILIES.


63


treasure of wisdom to us ; for without the law
and the prophets, or the evangehsts and the
apostles, it is not possible to have the certain
hope of salvation. For by the tongue of the
holy prophets and apostles our Lord speaks,
and God takes pleasure in the words of the
saints ; not that He requires the spoken address,
but that He delights in the good disposition ;
not that He receives any profit from men, but
that He finds a restful satisfaction in the rightly-
affected soul of the righteous. For it is not
that Christ is magnified by what we say ; but
as we receive benefits from Him, we proclaim
with grateful mind His beneficence to us ; not
that we can attain to what is worthy therein,
but that we give the meet return to the best of
our ability. And when the Gospels or the Epis-
tles, therefore, are read, let not your attention
centre on the book or on the reader, but on the
God who speaks to you from heaven. For the
book is but that which is seen, while Christ is
the divine subject spoken of. It brings us then
the glad tidings of that economy of the Saviour
which is worthy of all praise, to wit, that, though
He was God, He became man through kindness
toward man, and did not lay aside, indeed, the
dignity which was His from all eternity, but as-
sumed the economy that should work salvation.
It brings us the glad tidings of that economy
of the Saviour worthy of all praise, to wit, that
He sojourned with us as a physician for the sick,
who did not heal them with potions, but restored
them by the inclination of His philanthropy. It
brings us the glad tidings of this economy of
the Saviour altogether to be praised, to wit, that
to them who had wandered astray the way of
salvation was shown, and that to the despairing
the grace of salvation was made known, which
blesses all in different modes ; searching after
the erring, enlightening the blinded, giving life
to the dead, setting free the slaves, redeeming
the captives, and becoming all things to all of
us in order to be the true way of salvation to us :
and all this He does, not by reason of our good-
will toward Him, but in virtue of a benignity
that is proper to our Benefactor Himself. For
the Saviour did all, not in order that He might
acquire virtue Himself, but that He might put
us in possession of eternal life. He made man,
indeed, after the image of God, and appointed
him to live in a paradise of pleasure. But the
man being deceived by the devil, and having
become a transgressor of the divine command-
ment, was made subject to the doom of death.
Whence, also, those born of him were involved
in their father's liability in virtue of their suc-
cession, and had the reckoning of condemnation
required of them. " For death reigned from
Adam to Moses." ■ But the Lord, in His be-


nignity toward man, when He saw the creature
He Himself had formed now held by the power
of death, did not turn away finally from him
whom He had made in His own image, but
visited him in each generation, and forsook him
not ; and manifesting Himself first of all among
the patriarchs, and then proclaiming Himself in
the law, and presenting the likeness of Himself^
in the prophets, He presignified the economy of
salvation. When, moreover, the fulness of the
times came for His glorious appearing. He sent
beforehand the archangel Gabriel to bear the
glad tidings to the Virgin Mary. And he came
down from the ineffable powers above to the
holy Virgin, and addressed her first of all with
the salutation, " Hail, thou that art highly fa-
voured." And when this word, " Hail, thou that
art highly favoured," reached her, in the very
moment of her hearing it, the Holy Spirit en-
tered into the undefiled temple of the Virgin,
and her mind and her members were sanctified
together. And nature stood opposite, and
natural intercourse at a distance, beholding with
amazement the Lord of nature, in a manner
contrary to nature, or rather above nature, doing
a miraculous work in the body; and by the very
weapons by which the devil strove against us,
Christ also saved us, taking to Himself our pas-
sible body in order that He might impart the
greater grace 3 to the being who was defi-
cient in it. And " where sin abounded, grace
did much more abound." And appropriately
was grace sent to the holy Virgin. For this
word also is contained in the oracle of the
evangelic history : " And in the sixth month the
angel Gabriel was sent to a virgin espoused to a
man whose name was Joseph, of the house and
lineage of David ; and the virgin's name was
Mary ; " -* and so forth. And this was the first
month to the holy Virgin. Even as Scripture
says in the book of the law : "This month shall
be unto you the beginning of months : it shall
be the first month among the months of the
year to you." 5 " Keep ye the feast of the holy
passover to the Lord in all your generations."
It was also the sixth month to Zacharias. And
rightly, then, did the holy Virgin prove to be of
the family of David, and she had her home in
Bethlehem, and was betrothed rightfully to Jo-
seph, in accordance with the laws of relationship.
And her espoused husband was her guardian,
and possessor also of the untarnished incorrup-
tion which was hers. And the name given to
the holy Virgin was one that became her ex-
ceedingly. For she was called Mary, and that,
by interpretation, means illitmination. And
what shines more brightly that the light of


' Rom. V. 14.


- oaotoiifXti'OS.

3 Or, joy. _

* Luke i. 26, 27. [,1/(7rflA = bitterness, Exod. xv. 23.]
S Ex. xii. 2. [The name Mary is mismterpreted, itifra.^


64


FOUR HOMILIES.


virginity ? For this reason also the virtues are
called virgins by those who strive rightly to get
at their true nature. But if it is so great a
blessing to have a virgin heart, how great a
boon will it be to have the flesh that cherishes
virginity along with the soul ! Thus the holy
Virgin, while still in the flesh, maintained the
incorruptible life, and received in faith the
things which were announced by the archangel.
And thereafter she journeyed diligently to her
relation Elisabeth in the hill-country. "And
she entered into the house of Zacharias, and
saluted Elisabeth," ' in imitation of the angel.
" And it came to pass, that, when Elisabeth
heard the salutation of Mary, the babe leapt
with joy in her womb ; and Elisabeth was filled
with the Holy Ghost." ' Thus the voice of
Mary wrouglit with power, and filled Elisabeth
with the Holy Ghost. And by her tongue, as
from an ever-flowing fountain, she sent forth a
stream of gracious gifts in the way of prophecy
to her relation ; and while the feet of her child
were bound in the womb,^ she prepared to
dance and leap. And that was the sign of a
marvellous jubilation. For wherever she was
who was highly favoured, there she filled all
things with joy. " And Elisabeth spake out
with a loud voice, and said. Blessed art thou
among women, and blessed is the fruit of thy
womb. And whence is this to me, that the
mother of my Lord should come to me ? Blessed
art thou among women." ^ Por thou hast be-
come to women the beginning of the new crea-
tion.-t Thou hast given to us boldness of access
into paradise, and thou hast put to flight our
ancient woe. For after thee the race of woman
shall no more be made the subject of reproach.
No more do the successors of Eve fear the
ancient curse, or the pangs of childbirth. For
Christ, the Redeemer of our race, the Saviour
of all nature, the spiritual Adam who has healed
the hurt of the creature of earth, cometh forth
from thy holy womb. " Blessed art thou among
women, and blessed is the fruit of thy womb."
For He who bears all blessings for us is mani- j
fested as thy fruit. This we read in the clear
words of her who was barren ; but ' yet more
clearly did the holy Virgin herself express this
again when she presented to God the song re-
plete with thanksgiving, and acceptance, and
divine knowledge ; announcing ancient things
together with what was new ; proclaiming along
with things which were of old, things also which
belong to the consummation of the ages ; and
summing up in a short discourse the mysteries
of Christ. " And Mary said. My soul doth mag-


■ Luke i. 41.

^ Or, and with the bound feet of her child in the womb.
3 Luke i. 42, 43.
* Or, resurrection.


nify the Lord, and my spirit hath rejoiced in
God my Saviour," and so forth. " He hath
holpen His servant Israel in remembrance of
His mercy, and of the covenant which He estab-
lished with Abraham and with his seed for ever." 5
Thou seest how the holy Virgin has surpassed
even the perfection of the patriarchs, and how
she confirms the covenant which was made with
.Abraham by God, when He said, " This is the
covenant which I shall establish between me and
thee." ^ Wherefore He has come and confirmed
the covenant with Abraham, having received
mystically in Himself the sign of circumcision,
and having proved Himself the fulfilment of
the law and the prophets. This song of proph-
ecy, therefore, did the holy mother of God
render to God, saying, " My soul doth magnify
the Lord, and my spirit hath rejoiced in God
my Saviour : for He that is mighty hath done to
me great things, and holy is His name." For
having made me the mother of God, He has
also preserved me a virgin ; and by my womb
the fulness of all generations is headed up to-
gether for sanctification. For He hath blessed
every age, both men and women, both young
men and youths, and old men, " He hath made
strength with His arm," ^ on our behalf, against
death and against the devil, having torn the
handwriting of our sins. " He hath scattered
the proud in the imagination of their hearts ; "
yea. He hath scattered the devil himself, and all
the demons that serve under him. For he was
overweeniugly haughty in his heart, seeing that
he dared to say, " I will set my throne above the
clouds, and I will be like the Most High." ^
And now, how He scattered him the prophet has
indicated in what follows, where he says, " Yet
now thou shalt be brought down to hell," 9 and
all thy hosts with thee. For He has overthrown
everywhere his altars and the worship of vain
gods, and He has prepared for Himself a pecul-
iar people out of the heathen nations. " He
hath put down the mighty from their seats, and
exalted them of low degree." In these terms is.
intimated in brief the extrusion of the Jews and
the admission of the Gentiles. For the elders
of the Jews and the scribes in the law, and
those who were richly privileged with other pre-
rogatives, because they used their riches ill and
their power lawlessly, were cast down by Him
from ever}' seat, whether of prophecy or of
priesthood, whether of legislature or of doctrine,
and were stripped of aU their ancestral wealth,
and of their sacrifices and multitudinous festi-
vals, and of all the honourable privileges of the


5 Luke i. 46, etc.

'' Gen. xvii. ii; Rom. iv. ii.

7 Luke i. 51.

8 Isa. xiv. 14.

9 Isa. xiv. 15.


FOUR HOMILIES.


65


kingdom. Spoiled of all these boons, as naked
fugitives they were cast out into captivity. And
in their stead the humble were exalted, namely,
the Gentile peoples who hungered after right-
eousness. For, discovering their own lowliness,
and the hunger that pressed upon them for the
knowledge of God, they pleaded for the divine
word, though it were but for crumbs of the same,
like the woman of Canaan ; ' and for this reason
they were filled with the riches of the divine
mysteries. For the Christ who was born of the
Virgin, and who is our God, has given over the
whole inheritance of divine blessings to the Gen-
tiles. " He hath holpen His servant Israel." ^
Not any Israel in general, indeed, but His ser-
vant, who in very deed maintains the true no-
bility of Israel. And on this account also did
the mother of God call Him servant (Son) and
heir. For when He had found the same labour-
ing painfully in the letter and the law. He called
him by grace. It is such an Israel, therefore,
that He called and hath holpen in remembrance
of His mercy. " As He spake to our fathers,
to Abraham and to his seed for ever." In these
few words is comprehended the whole mystery
of the economy. For, with the purpose of
saving the race of men, and fulfilling the cove-
nant that was made with our fathers, Christ has
once " bowed the heavens and come down." ^
And thus He shows Himself to us as we are
capable of receiving Him, in order that we might
have power to see Him, and handle Him, and
hear Him when He speaketh. And on this
account did God the Word deem it meet to take
to Himself the flesh and the perfect humanity by
a woman, the holy Virgin ; and He was born a
man, in order that He might discharge our debt,
and fulfil even in Himself"* the ordinances of
the covenant made with Abraham, in its rite of
circumcision, and all the other legal appoint-
ments connected with it. And after she had
spoken these words the holy Virgin went to
Nazareth ; and from that a decree of Caesar led
her to come again to Bethlehem ; and so, as
proceeding herself from the royal house, she
was brought to the royal house of David along
with Joseph her espoused husband. And there
ensued there the mystery which transcends all
wonders, — the Virgin brought forth and bore
in her hand Him who bears the whole creation
by His word. " And there was no room for
them in the inn." 5 He found no room who
founded the whole earth by His word. She
nourished with her milk Him who imparts sus-
tenance and life to everything that hath breath.
She wrapped Him in swaddling-clothes who


' Matt. XV. 27.
^ Luke i. 54.
3 Ps. xviii. 9.
* jie'ifpi? iavTOV,
5 Luke ii. 7.


binds the whole creation fast with His word.
She laid Him in a manger who rides seated upon
the cherubim.^ A light from heaven shone round
about Him who lighteneth the whole creation.
The hosts of heaven attended Him with their
doxologies who is glorified in heaven from before
all ages. A star with its torch guided them who
had come from the distant parts of earth toward
Him who is the true Orient. From the East
came those who brought gifts to Him who for
our sakes became poor. And the holy mother
of God kept these words, and pondered them in
her heart, like one who was the receptacle of all
the mysteries. Thy praise, O most holy Virgin,
surpasses all laudation, by reason of the God
who received the flesh and was born man of
thee. To thee every creature, of things in
heaven, and things on earth, and things under
the earth, offers the meet offering of honour.
For thou hast been indeed set forth as the true
cherubic throne. Thou shinest as the very
brightness of light in the high places of the
kingdoms of intelligence ; 7 where the Father,
who is without beginning, and whose power thou
hadst overshadowing thee, is glorified ; where
also the Son is worshipped, whom thou didst
bear according to the flesh ; and where the Holy
Spirit is praised, who effected in thy womb the
generation of the mighty King. Through thee,
O thou that art highly favoured, is the holy
and consubstantial Trinity known in the world.
Together with thyself, deem us also worthy to
be made partakers of thy perfect grace in Jesus
Christ our Lord : with whom, and with the Holy
Spirit, be glory to the Father, now and ever, and
unto the ages of the ages. Amen.^

THE THIRD HOMILY.
ON THE ANNUNCIATION TO THE HOLY VIRGIN MARY .9

Again have we the glad tidings of joy, again
the announcements of liberty, again the restora-
tion, again the return, again the promise of glad-
ness, again the release from slavery. An angel
talks with the Virgin, in order that the serpent
may no more have converse with the woman. In
the sixth month, it is said, the angel Gabriel was
sent from God to a virgin espoused to a man.'°
Gabriel was sent to declare the world-wide sal-
vation ; Gabriel was sent to bear to Adam the
signature of his restoration ; Gabriel was sent to
a virgin, in order to transform the dishonour of
the female sex into honour ; Gabriel was sent to


'' Ps. Ixxx. I.

7 eV T019 dxpoi; Tuiv i'Otjtui' jBatriAeiwi'. Others read votov = in
the high places of the kingdoms of the south.

8 The close is otherwise given thus: To whom be the glory and
the power unto the ages of the ages. Amen.

9 " The Third Discourse by the same sainted Gregory, Bishop of
Neo-Csesareia, surnamed Thaumaturgus, on the Annunciation to the
all-holy Virgin Mary, mother of God."

■° Luke 1. 26, 27.


66


FOUR HOMILIES.


prepare the worthy chamber for the pure spouse ;
Gabriel was sent to wed the creature with the
Creator ; Gabriel was sent to the animate palace
of the King of the angels ; Gabriel was sent to a
virgin espoused to Joseph, but preserved for
Jesus the Son of God. The incorporeal servant
was sent to the virgin undefiled. One free from
sin was sent to one that admitted no corruption.
The light was sent that should announce the
Sun of righteousness. The dawn was sent that
should precede the light of the day. Gabriel
was sent to proclaim Him who is in the bosom
of the Father, and who yet was to be in the
arms of the mother. Gabriel was sent to declare
Him who is upon the throne, and yet also in the
cavern. The subaltern was sent to utter aloud
the mystery of the great King ; the mystery, I
mean, which is discerned by faith, and which
cannot be searched out by officious curiosity ;
the mystery which is to be adored, not weighed ;
the mystery which is to be taken as a thing
divine, and not measured. " In the sixth month
Gabriel was sent to a virgin." What is meant
by this sixth month? What? It is the sixth
month from the time when Elisabeth received
the glad tidings, from the time that she con-
ceived John. And how is this made plain?
The archangel himself gives us the interpreta-
tion, when he says to the virgin : " Behold, thy
relation Elisabeth, she hath also conceived a son
in her old age : and this is now the sixth month
with her, who was called barren." ' In the sixth
month — that is evidently, therefore, the sixth
month of the conception of John. For it was
meet that the subaltern should go before ; it
was meet that the attendant should precede ;
it was meet that the herald of the Lord's coming
should prepare the way for Him. In the sixth
month the angel Gabriel was sent to a virgin
espoused to a man ; espoused, not united ; es-
poused, yet kept intact. And for what purpose
was she espoused? In order that the spoiler
might not learn the mystery prematurely. For
that the King was to come by a virgin, was
a fact known to the wicked one. For he too
heard these words of Isaiah : " Behold, a virgin
shall conceive, and bear a son." ^ And on every
occasion, consequently, he kept watch upon the
virgin's words, in order that, wlienever this mys-
tery should be fulfilled, he might prepare her
dishonour. Wherefore the Lord came by an
espoused virgin, in order to elude the notice of
the wicked one ; for one who was espoused was
pledged in fine to be her husband's. " In the
sixth month the angel Gabriel was sent to a vir-
gin espoused to a man whose name was Joseph."
Hear what the prophet says about this man and
the virgin : " This book that is sealed shall be


' Luke i. 36.
' Isa. vii. 14.


delivered to a man that is learned." 3 What is
meant by this sealed book, but just the virgin un-
defiled? From whom is this to be given? F^rom
the priests evidently. And to whom? To the
artisan Joseph. As, then, the priests espoused
Mary to Joseph as to a prudent husband,
and committed her to his care in expectation
of the time of marriage, and as it behoved him
then on obtaining her to keep the virgin un-
touched, this was announced by the prophet
long before, when he said : " This book that is
sealed shall be delivered to a man that is
learned." And that man will say, I cannot read
it. But why canst thou not read it, O Joseph ?
I cannot read it, he says, because the book is
sealed. For whom, then, is it preserved ? It is
preserved as a place of sojourn for the Maker
of the universe. But let us return to our im-
mediate subject. In the sixth month Gabriel
was sent to a virgin — he who received, indeed,
such injunctions as these : " Come hither now,
archangel, and become the minister of a dread
mystery which has been kept hid, and be thou
the agent in the miracle. I am moved by my
compassions to descend to earth in order to
recover the lost Adam. Sin hath made him
decay who was made in my image, and hath
corrupted the work of my hands, and hath
obscured the beauty which I formed. The wolf
devours my nursling, the home of paradise is
desolate, the tree of life is guarded by the flam-
ing sword, the location of enjoyments is closed.
My pity is evoked for the object of this enmity,
and I desire to seize the enemy. Yet I wish to
keep this mystery, which I confide to thee alone,
still hid from all the powers of heaven. Go
thou, therefore, to the Virgin Mary. Pass thou
on to that animate city whereof the prophet spake
in these words : ' Glorious things were spoken
of thee, O city of God.' ■♦ Proceed, then, to my
rational paradise ; proceed to the gate of the
east ; proceed to the place of sojourn that is
worthy of my word ; proceed to that second
heaven on earth ; proceed to the light cloud,
and announce to it the shower of my coming ;
proceed to the sanctuary prepared for me ; pro-
ceed to the hall of the incarnation ; proceed to
the pure chamber of my generation after the
flesh. Speak in the ears of my rational ark, so
as to prepare for me the accesses of hearing.
But neither disturb nor vex the soul of the vir-
gin. Manifest thyself in a manner befitting that
sanctuary, and hail her first with the voice of
gladness. And address Mary with the saluta-
tion, ' Hail, thou that art highly favoured,' that I
may show compassion for Eve in her deprava-
tion." The archangel heard these things, and
considered them within himself, as was reason-


3 Isa. xxix. II.
•♦ Ps. Ixxxvii. 3.


FOUR HOMILIES.


67


able, and said: "Strange is this matter; pass-
ing comprehension is this thing that is spoken.
He who is the object of dread to the cheru-
bim, He who cannot be looked upon by the
seraphim. He who is incomprehensible to all
the heavenly ' powers, does He give the assur-
ance of His connection with a maiden? does
He announce His own personal coming? yea
more, does He hold out an access by hear-
ing? and is He who condemned Eve, urgent to
put such honour upon her daughter ? For He
says : ' So as to prepare for me the accesses of
hearing.' But can the womb contain Him who
cannot be contained in space? Truly this is a
dread mystery." While the angel is indulging
such reflections, the Lord says to Him : " Why
art thou troubled and " perplexed, O Gabriel ?
Hast thou not already been sent by me to Zach-
arias the priest? Hast thou not conveyed to
him the glad tidings of the nativity of John?
Didst thou not inflict upon the incredulous
priest the penalty of speechlessness? Didst
thou not punish the aged man with dumbness?
Didst thou not make thy declaration, and I con-
firmed it? And has not the actual fact followed
upon thy announcement of good ? Did not the
barren woman conceive? Did not the womb
obey the word ? Did not the malady of sterility
depart? Did not the inert disposition of nature
take to flight? Is not she now one that shows
fruitfulness, who before was never pregnant?
Can anything be impossible with me, the Cre-
ator of all? Wherefore, then, art thou tossed
with doubt?" What is the angel's answer to
this? "O Lord," he says, "to remedy the
defects of nature, to do away with the blast of
evils, to recall the dead members to the power
of life, to enjoin on nature the potency of gen-
eration, to remove barrenness in the case of
members that have passed the common limit,-
to change the old and withered stalk into the
appearance of verdant vigour, to set forth the
fruitless soil suddenly as the producer of sheaves
of corn, — to do all this is a work which, as it is
ever the case, demands Thy power. And Sarah
is a witness thereto, and along with her^ also
Rebecca, and again Anna, who all, though bound
by the dread ill of barrenness, were afterwards
gifted by Thee with deliverance from that malady.
But that a virgin should bring forth, without
knowledge of a man, is something that goes
beyond all the laws of nature ; and dost Thou
yet announce Thy coming to the maiden ? The
bounds of heaven and earth do not contain
Thee, and how shall the womb of a virgin con-
tain Thee?" And the Lord says: "How did


the tent of Abraham contain me?"+ And the
angel says : " As there were there the deeps of
hospitality, O Lord, Thou didst show Thyself
there to Abraham at the door of the tent, and
didst pass quickly by it, as He who filleth all
things. But how can Mary sustain the fire of
the divinity? Thy throne blazes with the illu-
mination of its splendour, and can the virgin
receive Thee without being consumed?" Then
the Lord says: "Yea surely, if the fire in the
wilderness injured the bush, my coming will
indeed also injure Mary; but if that fire which
served as the adumbration of the advent of
the fire of divinity from heaven fertilized the
bush, and did not burn it, what wilt thou say
of the Truth that descends not in a flame of fire,
but in the form of rain ? " 5 Thereupon the angel
set himself to carry out the commission given
him, and repaired to the Virgin, and addressed
her with a loud voice, saying : " Hail, thou that
are highly favoured ! the Lord is with thee. No
longer shalt the devil be against thee ; for where
of old that adversary inflicted the wound, there
now first of all does the Physician apply the
salve of deliverance. Where death came forth,
there has life now prepared its entrance. By a
woman came the flood of our ills, and by a
woman also our blessings have their spring.
Hail, thou that are highly favoured ! Be not
thou ashamed, as if thou wert the cause of our
condemnation. For thou art made the mother
of Him who is at once Judge and Redeemer.
Hail, thou stainless mother of the Bridegroom^
of a world bereft ! Hail, thou that hast sunk in
thy womb the death (that came) of the mother
(Eve) ! Hail, thou animate temple of God !
Hail, thou equal ? home of heaven and earth
ahke ! Hail, thou amplest receptacle of the
illimitable nature ! " But as these things are so,
through her has come for the sick the Physician ;
for them that sit in darkness, the Sun of right-
eousness ; for all that are tossed and tempest-
beaten, the Anchor and the Port undisturbed by
storm. For the servants in irreconcilable en-
mity has been born the Lord ; and One has
sojourned with us to be the bond of peace and
the Redeemer of those led captive, and to be
the peace for those involved in hostility. For
He is our peace ; * and of that peace may it be
granted that all we may receive the enjoyment,
by the grace and kindness of our Lord Jesus
Christ ; to whom be the glory, honour, and
power, now and ever, and unto all the ages of
the as:es. Amen.


'Or, angelic.

2 v-6popioi9 /xe'Aeffti/.

3 Or, and after her.


■* Gen xviii.

5 Ps. Ixxii. 6. [A siib-aIlus!on, in bad taste, to Semele.]

6 vv/jiitioTOKe. The Latin version gives it as = spotua, siiniil et
mater. [Apostrophe not worship.]

^ KToppoiroi'.
^ Eph. ii. 14.


6S


FOUR HOMILIES.


THE FOURTH HOMILY.
ON THE HOLY THEOPHANY, OR ON CHRIST'S BAPTISM.'

O ye who are the friends of Christ, and the
friends of the stranger, and the friends of the
brethren, receive in kindness my speech to-day,
and open your ears Hke the doors of hearing, and
admit within them my discourse, and accept
from me this saving proclamation of the baptism -
of Christ, which took place in the river Jordan,
in order that your loving desires may be quick-
ened after the Lord, who has done so much for
us in the way of condescension. For even
though the festival of the Epiphany of the
Saviour is past, the grace of the same yet abides
with us through all. Let us therefore enjoy it
with insatiable minds; for insatiate desire is a
good thing in the case of what pertains to salva-
tion — yea, it is a good thing. Come therefore,
all of us, from Galilee to Judea, and let us go
forth with Christ ; for blessed is he who journeys
in such company on the way of life. Come, and
with the feet of thought let us make for the Jor-
dan, and see John the Baptist as he baptizes One
who needs no baptism, and yet submits to the
rite in order that He may bestow freely upon us
the grace of baptism. Come, let us view the
image of our regeneration, as it is emblematically
pres'ented in these waters. " Then cometh Jesus
from Galilee to Jordan unto John, to be baptized
of him." 3 O how vast is the humility of the
Lord! O how vast His condescension! The
King of the heavens hastened to John, His own
forerunner, without setting in motion the camps -*
of His angels, without despatching beforehand
the incorporeal powers as His precursors; but
presenting Himself in utmost simplicity, in sol-
dier-like form,5 He comes up to His own sub-
altern. And He approached him as one of
the multitude, and humbled Himself among the
captives though He was the Redeemer, and
ranged Himself with those under judgment
though He was the Judge, and joined Himself
with the lost sheep though He was the Good
Shepherd who on account of the straying sheep
came down from heaven, and yet did not for-
sake His heavens, and was mingled with the
tares though He was that heavenly grain that
springs .unsown. And when the Baptist John
then saw Him, recognising Him whom before in
his mother's womb he had recognised and wor-
shipped, and discerning clearly that this was He
on whose account, in a manner surpassing the
natural time, he had leaped in the womb of his
mother, in violation of the limits of nature, he


1 " A Discourse by our sainted Father Gregory, Bishop of Neo-
Cssareia, surnamed Thaumaturgus, on the Holy Theophany, or, as
the title is also given, on the Holy Lights."

2 KaTo5vcre<09.

3 Matt. iii. 13.
■♦ Or, armies.

S Or subaltern, iv Tjj arpaTiuiTiKri ti.op(i>ii.


drew his right hand within his double cloak, and
bowing his head like a servant full of love to his
master, addressed Him in these words : I have
need to be baptized of Thee, and comest Thou
to me?^ What is this Thou doest, my Lord?
Why dost Tliou reverse the order of things?
Why seekest Thou along with the servants, at the
hand of Thy servant, the things that are proper
to servants ? Why dost Thou desire to receive
what Thou requires! not? W'hy dost Thou bur-
den me. Thy servitor, with Thy mighty conde-
scension ? I have need to be baptized of Thee,
but Thou hast no need to be baptized of me.
The less is blessed by the greater, and the greater
is not blessed and sanctified by the less. The
light is kindled by the sun, and the sun is not
made to shine by the rush-lamp. The clay is
wrought by the potter, and the potter is not
moulded by the clay. The creature is made
anew by the Creator, and the Creator is not re-
stored by the creature. The infirm is healed by
the physician, and the physician is not cured by
the infirm. The poor man receives contribu-
tions from the rich, and the rich borrow not from
the poor. I have need to be baptized of Thee,
and comest Thou to me? Can I be ignorant
who Thou art, and from what source Thou hast
Thy light, and whence Thou art come? Or,
because Thou hast been born even as I have
been,7 am I, then, to deny the greatness of Thy
divinity? Or, because Thou hast condescended
so far to me as to have approached my body,
and dost bear me wholly in Thyself in order to
effect the salvation of the whole man, am I, on
account of that body of Thine which is seen, to
overlook that divinity of Thine which is only
apprehended? Or, because on behalf of my
salvation Thou hast taken to Thyself the offering
of my first-fruits, am I to ignore the fact that
Thou " coverest Thyself with light as with a
garment ? " ^ Or, because Thou wearest the flesh
that is related to me, and dost show Thyself to
men as they are able to see Thee, am I to forget
the brightness of Thy glorious divinity ? Or, be-
cause I see my own form in Thee, am I to reason
against Thy divine substance, which is invisible
and incomprehensible ? I know Thee, O Lord ;
I know Thee cleariy. I know Thee, since I have
1 been taught by Thee ; for no one can recognise
jThee, unless He enjoys Thine illumination. I
1 know Thee, O Lord, clearly ; for I saw Thee
! spiritually before I beheld this light. When
1 Thou wert altogether in the incorporeal bosom
of the heavenly Father, Thou wert also altogether
in the womb of Thy handmaid and mother ; and
I, though held in the womb of Elisabeth by
nature as in a prison, and bound with the indis-


6 Matt iii. 14. , , , t i_ u

7 Or, because for my sake Thou hast been born as I have been.
^ Ps, civ. 2,


FOUR HOMILIES.


69


soluble bonds of the children unborn, leaped and |
celebrated Thy birth with anticipative rejoicings.
Shall I then, who gave intimation of Thy sojourn :
on earth before Thy birth, fail to apprehend Thy |
coming after Thy birth? Shall I, who in the
womb was a teacher of Thy coming, be now a
child in understanding in view of perfect knowl-
edge ? But I cannot but worship Thee, who art
adored by the whole creation ; I cannot but pro-
claim Thee, of whom heaven gave the indication
by the star, and for w-hom earth offered a kind
reception by the wise men, while the choirs of
angels also praised Thee in joy over Thy con-
descension to us, and the shepherds who kept
w^atch by night hymned Thee as the Chief Shep-
herd of the rational sheep. I cannot keep si-
lence while Thou art present, for I am a voice ;
yea, I am the voice, as it is said, of one crying
in the wilderness. Prepare ye the w-ay of the
Lord.' I have need to be baptized of Thee, and
comest Thou to me ? I was born, and thereby
removed the barrenness of the mother that bore
me ; and while still a babe I became the healer
of my father's speechlessness, having received
of Thee from my childhood the gift of the mirac-
ulous. But Thou, being born of the Virgin
Mary, as Thou didst will, and as Thou alone
dost know, didst not do away with her virginity ;
but Thou didst keep it, and didst simply gift her
with the name of mother : and neither did her
virginity preclude Thy birth, nor did Thy birth
injure her virginity. But these two things, so
utterly opposite — bearing and virginity — har-
monized with one intent ; for such a thing abides
possible with Thee, the Framer of nature. I am
but a man, and am a partaker of the divine
grace ; but Thou art God, and also man to the
same effect : for Thou art by nature man's friend.
I have need to be baptized of Thee, and comest
Thou to me? Thou w-ho wast in the beginning,
and wast with God, and wast God ; - Thou who
art the brightness of the Father's glory ; ^ Thou
who art the perfect image of the perfect Father ; ^
Thou who art the true light that lighteneth every
man that cometh into the world ; 5 Thou who
wast in the world, and didst come where Thou
wast ; Thou who wast made flesh, and yet wast
not changed into the flesh ; Thou who didst
dwell among us, and didst manifest Thyself to
Thy servants in the form of a servant ; Thou
who didst bridge earth and heaven together by
Thy holy name, — comest Thou to me ? One
so great to such a one as I am ? The King to
the forerunner? The Lord to the servant? But
though Thou wast not ashamed to be born in the
lowly measures of humanity, yet I have no ability

' Matt. iii. 3; Mark i. 3; Luke iii. 4; John i. 23.

2 John i. I.

3 Heb. i. 3.

■* Or, of the perfect Light; to wit, the Father.
S John i. 9.


to pass the measures of nature. I know how
great is the measure of difference between earth
and the Creator. I know how great is the dis-
tinction between the clay and the potter. I
know how vast is the superiority possessed by
Thee, who art the Sun of righteousness, over me
who am but the torch of Thy grace. Even
though Thou art compassed with the pure cloud
of the body, I can still recognise Thy lordship.
I acknowledge my own servitude, I proclaim
Thy glorious greatness, I recognise Thy perfect
lordship, I recognise my own perfect insignili-
cance, I am not worthy to unloose the latchets
of Thy shoes ;^ and how shall I dare to touch
Thy stainless head? How can I stretch out the
right hand upon Thee, who didst stretch out
the heavens like a curtain,^ and didst set the earth
above the waters?^ How shall I spread those
menial hands of mine upon Thy head? How-
shall I w^ash Thee, who art undefiled and sinless ?
How shall I enlighten the light ? What manner
of prayer shall I offer up over Thee, who dost
receive the prayers even of those who are igno-
rant of Thee ?

When I baptize others, I baptize into Thy
name, in order that they may believe on Thee,
who comest with glory ; but when I baptize Thee,
of whom shall I make mention? and into whose
name shall I baptize Thee? Into that of the
Father? But Thou hast the Father altogether in
Thyself, and Thou art altogether in the Father.
Or into that of the Son ? But beside Thee there
is no other Son of God by nature. Or into that
of the Holy Spirit? But He is ever together
with Thee, as being of one substance, and of
one will, and of one judgment, and of one power,
and of one honour with Thee ; and He receives,
along with Thee, the same adoration from all.
Wherefore, O Lord, baptize Thou me, if Thou
pleasest ; iDaptize me, the Baptist. Regenerate
one whom Thou didst cause to be generated.
Extend Thy dread right hand, which Thou hast
prepared for Thyself, and crown my head by
Thy touch, in order that I may run the course
before Thy kingdom, crowned like a forerunner,
and diligently announce the good tidings to the
sinners, addressing them with this earnest call :
" Behold the Lamb of God, that taketh away the
sin of the world ! "9 O river Jordan, accompany
me in the joyous choir, and leap with me, and
stir thy waters rhythmically, as in the movements
of the dance; for thy Maker stands by thee
in the body. Once of old didst thou see Israel
pass through thee, and thou didst divide thy
floods, and didst wait in expectation of the pas-
sage of the people ; but now divide thyself more


6 Luke iii. i6; John i. 27.

7 Ps. civ. 2.

^ Ps. cxxxvi. 6.
9 John i. 29.


■o


FOUR HOMILIES.


decidedly, and flow more easily, and embrace
the stainless limbs of Him who at that ancient
time did convey the Jews ' through thee. Ye
mountains and hills, ye valleys and torrents, ye
seas and rivers, bless the Lord, who has come
upon the river Jordan ; for through these streams
He transmits sanctification to all streams. And
Jesus answered and said to him : Suffer it to be
so now, for thus it becometh us to fulfil all
righteousness. 2 Suffer it to be so now ; grant
the favour of silence, O Baptist, to the season
of my economy. Learn to will whatever is my
will. Learn to minister to me in those things
on which I am bent, and do not pry curiously
into all that I wish to do. Suffer it to be so
now : do not yet proclaim my divinity ; do not
yet herald my kingdom with thy lips, in order
that the tyrant may not learn the fact and give
up the counsel he has formed with respect to
me. Permit the devil to come upon me, and
enter the conflict with me as though I were
but a common man, and receive thus his mortal
wound. Permit me to fulfil the object for
which I have come to earth. It is a mystery
that is being gone through this day in the
Jordan. My mysteries are for myself and my
own. There is a mystery here, not for the ful-
filling of my own need, but for the designing
of a remedy for those who have been wounded.
There is a mystery, which gives in these waters
the representation of the heavenly streams of
the regeneration of men. Suffer it to be so now :
when thou seest me doing what seemeth to me
good among the works of my hands, in a man-
ner befitting divinity, then attune thy praises to
the acts accomplished. When thou seest me
cleansing the lepers, then proclaim me as the
framer of nature. When thou seest me make
the lame ready runners, then with quickened pace
do thou also prepare thy tongue to praise me.
When thou seest me cast out demons, then hail
my kingdom with adoration. When thou seest
me raise the dead from their graves by my word,
then, in concert with those thus raised, glorify
me as the Prince of Life. When thou seest me
on the Father's right hand, then acknowledge
me to be divine, as the equal of the Father and
the Holy Spirit, on the throne, and in eternity,
and in honour. Suffer it to be so now ; for thus
it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness. I am
the Lawgiver, and the Son of the Lawgiver ; and
it becometh me first to pass through all that is
established, and then to set forth everywhere the
intimations of my free gift. It becometh me to
fulfil the law, and then to bestow grace. It be-
cometh me to adduce the shadow, and then the
reality. It becometh me to finish the old cove-
nant, and then to dictate the new, and to write


' Or, the Hebrews.
2 Matt. iii. 13.


it on the hearts of men, and to subscribe it with
my blood,3 and to seal it with my Spirit. It
becometh me to ascend the cross, and to be
pierced with its nails, and to suffer after the
manner of that nature which is capable of suf-
fering, and to heal sufferings by my suffering,
and by the tree to cure the wound that was
inflicted upon men by the medium of a tree.
It becometh me to descend even into the very
depths of the grave, on behalf of the dead
who are detained there. It becometh me, by
my three days' dissolution in the flesh, to de-
stroy the power of the ancient enemy, death. It
becometh me to kindle the torch of my body for
those who sit in darkness and in the shadow of
death. It becometh me to ascend in the flesh
to that place where I am in my divinity. It be-
cometh me to introduce to the Father the Adam
reigning in me. It becometh me to accomplish
these things, for on account of these things I
have taken my position with the works of my
hands. It becometh me to be baptized with this
baptism for the present, and afterwards to be-
stow the baptism of the consubstantial Trinity
upon all men. Lend me, therefore, O Baptist,
thy right hand for the present economy, even as
Mary lent her womb for my birth. Immerse me
in the streams of Jordan, even as she who bore
me wrapped me in children's swaddling-clothes.
Grant me thy baptism even as the Virgin granted
me her milk. Lay hold of this head of mine,
which the seraphim revere. With thy right hand
lay hold of this head, that is related to thyself in
kinship. Lay hold of this head, which nature
has made to be touched. Lay hold of this head,
which for this very purpose has been formed by
myself and my Father. Lay hold of this head
of mine, which, if one does lay hold of it in piety,
will save him from ever suffering shipwreck.
Baptize me, who am destined to baptize those
who believe on me with water, and with the
Spirit, and with fire : with water, capable of
washing away the defilement of sins ; with the
Spirit, capable of making the earthly spiritual ;
with fire, naturally fitted to consume the thorns
of transgressions. On hearing these words, the
Baprist directed his mind to the object of the
salvation,"* and comprehended the mystery which
he had received, and discharged the divine
command ; for he was at once pious and ready
to obey. And stretching forth slowly his right
hand, which seemed both to tremble and to
rejoice, he baptized the Lord. Then the Jews
who were present, with those in the vicinity and
those from a distance, reasoned together, and
spake thus with themselves and with each other :
Was it, then, without cause that we imagined
John to be superior to Jesus ? Was it without


3 Or, with my name.

* Or, to the Saviour's object.


ELUCIDATION.


71


cause that we considered the former to be
greater than the latter? Does not this very
baptism attest the Baptist's pre-eminence? Is
not he who baptizeth presented as the supe-
rior, and he who is baptized as the inferior?
But while they, in their ignorance of the mys-
tery of the economy, babbled in such wise with
each other. He who alone is Lord, and by
nature the Father of the Only-begotten, He
who alone knoweth perfectly Him whom He
alone in passionless fashion begat, to correct
the erroneous imaginations of the Jews, opened
the gates of the heavens, and sent down the
Holy Spirit in the form of a dove, lighting upon
the head of Jesus, pointing out thereby the
new Noah, yea the maker of Noah, and the good
pilot of the nature which is in shipwreck. And
He Himself calls with clear voice out of heaven,
and says: "This is my beloved Son,"' — the
Jesus there, namely, and not the John ; the one
baptized, and not the one baptizing ; He who
was begotten of me before all periods of time,
and not he who was begotten of Zacharias ; He
who was born of Mary after the flesh, and not he
who was brought forth by Elisabeth beyond all
expectation ; He who was the fruit of the vir-
ginity yet preserved intact, and not he who was
the shoot from a sterility removed ; He who has
had His conversation with you, and not he who
was brought up in the wilderness. This is my
beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased : my
Son, of the same substance with myself, and not


' Matt. iii. 17, xvii. 5; Mark i. 11; Luke ix. 35.


of a different ; of one substance with me accord-
ing to what is unseen, and of one substance with
you according to what is seen, yet without sin.
This is He who along with me made man. This
is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.
This Son of mine and this son of Mary are not
two distinct persons ; but this is my beloved
Son, — this one who is both seen with the eye
and apprehended with the mind. This is my
beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased ; hear
Him. If He shall say, I and my Father are one,^
hear Him. If He shall say. He that hath seen
me hath seen the Father,' hear Him. If He
shall say. He that hath sent me is greater than
I,'* adapt the voice to the economy. If He shall
say. Whom do men say that I the Son of man
am? 5 answer ye Him thus : Thou art the Christ,
the Son of the living God.^ By these words, as
they were sent from the Father out of heaven in
thunder-form, the race of men was enlightened :
they apprehended the difference between the
Creator and the creature, between the King and
the soldier (subject), between the Worker and
the work ; and being strengthened in faith, they
drew near through the baptism of John to Christ,
our true God, who baptizeth with the Spirit and
with fire. To Him be glory, and to the Father,
and to the most holy and quickening Spirit, now
and ever, and unto the ages of the ages. Amen.


2 John X. 30.

3 John xiv. 9.
* John xiv. 28.

5 Matt. xvi. 13.

6 Matt. xvi. 16.


ELUCIDATION.


I c.\N do no better than follow Dupin as to the authorship of these Homilies. He thinks the
style of Proclus (of Constantinople) may be detected in them, though the fourth is beyond him
for eloquence, and has even been thought worthy of St. Chrysostom. It was produced after Nicaea,
and probably after Ephesus, its somewhat exaggerated praises of the ^cotokos being unusual at an
earlier period. The titles of these Homilies are the work of much later editors ; and interpola-
tions probably occur frequently, by the same hands.


ON ALL THE SAINTS/


Grant thy blessing, Lord.

It was my desire to be silent, and not to make
a public - display of the rustic rudeness of my
tongue. For silence is a matter of great conse-
quence when one's speech is mean.^ And to
refrain from utterance is indeed an admirable
thing, where there is lack of training ; and verily
he is the highest philosopher who knows how to
cover his ignorance by abstinence from public
address. Knowing, therefore, the feebleness of
tongue proper to me, I should have preferred
such a course. Nevertheless the spectacle of the
onlookers impels me to speak. Since, then, this
solemnity is a glorious one among our festivals,
and the spectators form a crowded gathering,
and our assembly is one of elevated fervour in
the faith, I shall face the task of commencing an
address with confidence.* And this I may at-
tempt all the more boldly, since the Father s
requests me, and the Church is with me, and the
sainted martyrs with this object strengthen what
is weak in me. For these have inspired aged
men to accomplish with much love a long course,
and constrained them to support their failing
steps by the staff of the word ; ^ and they have
stimulated women to finish their course like the
young men, and have brought to this, too, those
of tender years, yea, even creeping children. In
this wise have the martyrs shown their power,
leaping with joy in the presence of death, laugh-
ing at the sword, making sport of the wrath of
princes, grasping at death as the producer of
deathlessness, making victory their own by their
fall, through the body taking their leap to heaven,
suffering their members to be scattered abroad
in order that they might hold 7 their souls, and,
bursting the bars of life, that they might open the
gates * of heaven. And if any one believes not


' A discourse of Gregory Thaumaturgus published by Joannes
Aloysius Mingarelli, Bologna, 1770.

2 The codex ^ives Sr^xoa-uvovaav, for which we read iijiuoo-ieveii/.

3 The codex gives areA^?, for which eOreAi)? is read by the editor.
* Reading Oappovvrui^ for OappoiivToi;.

5 This is supposed by the Latin annotator to refer to the bishop,
and perhaps to Phasdimus of Amasea, as in those times no one was
at liberty to make an address in the church when the bishop was
present, except by his request or with his permission.

6 Or, the Word.

^ Or, keys.

72


that death is abolished, that Hades is trodden
under foot, that the chains thereof are broken,
that the tyrant is bound, let him look on the
martyrs disporting themselves ^ in the presence
of death, and taking up the jubilant strain of
the victory of Christ. O the marvel ! Since the
hour when Christ despoiled Hades, men have
danced in triumph over death. " O death, where
is thy sting ! O grave, where is thy victory?'""
Hades and the devil have been despoiled, and
stripped of their ancient armour, and cast out
of their peculiar power. And even as Goliath
had his head cut off with his own sword, so also
is the devil, who has been the father of death,
put to rout through death ; and he finds that
the selfsame thing which he was wont to use
as the ready weapon of his deceit, has become
the mighty instrument of his own destruction.
Yea, if we may so speak, casting his hook at the
Godhead, and seizing the wonted enjoyment of
the baited pleasure, he is himself manifestly
caught while he deems himself the captor, and
discovers that in place of the man he has
touched the God. By reason thereof do the
martyrs leap upon the head of the dragon, and
despise every species of torment. For since
the second Adam has brought up the first Adam
out of the deeps of Hades, as Jonah was deliv-
ered out of the whale, and has set forth him
who was deceived as a citizen of heaven to the
shame of the deceiver, the gates of Hades have
been shut, and the gates of heaven have been
opened, so as to offer an unimpeded entrance
to those who rise thither in faith. In olden
time Jacob beheld a ladder erected reaching to
heaven, and the angels of God ascending and
descending upon it. But now, having been
made man for man's sake, He who is the Friend
of man has crushed with the foot of His divin-
ity him who is the enemy of man, and has borne
up the man with the hand of His Christhood,"
and has made the trackless ether to be trodden
by the feet of man. Then the angels were


9 Kv8l<7T01VTe^.

'° I Cor. XV. 55.

" Xoi(tt6tt7to<;, for which, however, >'pi7(rT6T7;Tos, beiitgnityf is
suggested. [Sometimes are intended ambiguity.]


ELUCIDATION.


73


ascending and descending ; but now the Angel
of the great counsel neither ascendeth nor de-
scendeth : for whence or where shall He change
His position, who is present everywhere, and
fiUeth all things, and holds in His hand the ends
of the worid? Once, indeed, He descended,
and once He ascended, — not, however, through
any change ' of nature, but only in the conde-
scension^ of His philanthropic Christhood ;3 and
He is seated as the Word with the Father, and
as the Word He dwells in the womb, and as the
Word He is found everywhere, and is never sep-
arated from the God of the universe. Afore-
time did the devil deride the nature of man
with great laughter, and he has had his joy over
the times of our calamity as his festal-days.
But the laughter is only a three days' pleasure,
while the wailing is eternal ; and his great laugh-
ter has prepared for him a greater wailing and


2 (TvyKaTa^dcrei.,
* Or, benignity.


ceaseless tears, and inconsolable weeping, and a
sword in his heart. This sword did our Leader
forge against the enemy with fire in the virgin
furnace, in such wise and after such fashion as
He willed, and gave it its point by the energy
of His invincible divinity, and dipped it in the
water of an undefiled baptism, and sharpened it
by sufferings without passion in them, and made
it blight by the mystical resurrection ; and here-
with by Himself He put to death the vengeful
adversary, together with his whole host. What
manner of word, therefore, will express our joy
or his misery? For he who was once an arch-
angel is now a devil ; he who once lived in
heaven is now seen crawling like a serpent upon
earth ; he who once was jubilant with the cher-
ubim, is now shut up in pain in the guard-house
of swine ; and him, too, in fine, shall we put to
rout if we mind those things which are contrary
to his choice, by the grace and kindness of our
Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be the glory and the
power unto the ages of the ages. Amen.


ELUCIDATION.


The feast of A// Saints is very ancient in the Oriental churches, and is assigned to the
Octave of Pentecost, the Anglican Trinity Sunday. See Neale, Eastern Church, vol. ii. pp. 734,
753. In the West it was instituted when Boniface HL (who accepted from the Emperor
Phocas the tide of "Universal Bishop," a.d. 607) turned the Pantheon into a church, and with
a sort of practical epigram called it the church of " All the Saints." It was a local festival until
the ninth century, when the Emperor Louis the Pious introduced it into France and Germany.
Thence it came to England. It falls on the ist of November.

The gates of the church at Rome are the same which once opened for the worship of " all
the gods." They are of massive bronze, and are among the most interesting of the antiquities of
the city.

The modern gates of St. Peter's, at Rome, are offensive copies of heathen mythology ; and
among the subjects there represented, is the shameful tale of Leda, — a symbol of the taste of
Leo X.


ON THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MATTHEW.'

(CHAPTER VI. 22, 23.)


" The light of the body is the eye : if therefore tliine eye be
single, thy whole body shall be full of light. But it thine
eye be evil, tliy whole body sliall be full of darkness. If
therefore the light that is in thee be darkness, how great is
that darkness ! ''

The single eye is the love unfeigned ; for when
the body is enlightened by it, it sets forth through
the medium of the outer members only things
which are perfectly correspondent with the inner
thoughts. But the evil eye is the pretended love,
which is also called hypocrisy, by which the
whole body of the man is made darkness. We
have to consider that deeds meet only for dark-
ness may be within the man, while through the
outer members he may-produce words that seem

* A fragment. (Gallandi, ye(. Pair. Biblioth., xiv. p. 119; from
a Catenaon Matthew, Cod. ms. 16S, Mitarelli.)


to be of the light : ^ for there are those who are
in reality wolves, though they may be covered
with sheep's clothing. Such are they who wash
only the outside of the cup and platter, and do
not understand that, unless the inside of these
things is cleansed, th^ outside itself cannot be
made pure. Wherefore, in manifest confutation
of such persons, the Saviour says : " If the light
that is in thee be darkness, how great is that
darkness ! " That is to say, if the love which
seems to thee to be light is really a work meet for
darkness, by reason of some hypocrisy concealed
in thee, what must be thy patent transgressions !


2 The text is apparently corrupt here: oi^ta fj.kv o-kotous irpdy-
fiara ivvooiiixevoy i<Tu>6iv Sia &e Tuiv (^ladev fxfpojv iJxuto? elvai.
SoKovvTa ■rrpo(j>epov prjuaja. Migne suggests evvoovfjifi' toi' and n-po-
tpepoi'Ta.


74


DIONYSIUS.

[TRANSLATED BY THE REV. S. D. F. SALMOND, M.A.]


I


INTRODUCTORY NOTICE

TO

DIONYSIUS. BISHOP OF ALEXANDRIA.


[a.d. 200-265.] The great Origen had twin children in Gregory and Dionysius. Their lives
ran in parallel lines, and are said to have ended on the same day ; and nobly did they sustain the
dignity and orthodoxy of the pre-eminent school which was soon to see its bright peculiar star in
Athanasius. Dionysius is supposed to have been a native of Alexandria, of heathen parentage,
and of a family possessed of wealth and honourable rank. Early in life he seems to have been
brought under the influence of certain presbyters ; and a voice seemed to speak to him in a vision '
encouraging him to " prove all things, and hold fast that which is good." We find him at the feet
of Origen a diligent pupil, and afterwards, as a presbyter, succeeding Heraclas (a.d. 232) as the
head of the school, sitting in Origen's seat. For about fifteen years he further illuminated this
illustrious chair ; and then, in ripe years, about a.d. 246, he succeeded Heraclas again as bishop
of Alexandria, at that time, beyond all comparison, the greatest and the most powerful See of
Christendom.

For a year or two he fed his flock in peace ; but then troubles broke in upon his people, even
under the kindly reign of Philip. Things grew worse, till under Decius the eighth persecution
was let loose throughout the empire. Like Cyprian, Dionysius retired for a season, upon like
considerations, but not until he had been arrested and providentially delivered from death in a
singular manner. On returning to his work, he found the Church greatly disturbed by the questions
concerning the lapsed, with which Cyprian's history has made us acquainted. In the letter to
Fabius will be found details of the earlier persecution, and in that against Germanus are interesting
facts of his own experience. The Episde to the Alexandrians contains very full particulars of the
pestilence which succeeded these calamities ; and it is especially noteworthy as contrasting the
humanity and benevolence of Christians with the cruel and cowardly indifference of the pagans
towards the dying and the dead. Seditions and tumults followed, on which we have our author's
reflections in the Epistle to Hierax, with not a few animated touches of description concerning the
condition of Alexandria after such desolations. In the affair of Cyprian with Stephen he stood
by the great Carthaginian doctor, and maintained the positions expressed in the letter of Firmilian.^
Wars, pestilences, and the irruptions of barbarians, make up the history of the residue of the
period, through which Dionysius was found a " burning and a shining light " to the Church ; his
great influence extending throughout the East, and to the West also. I may leave the residue of
his story to the introductory remarks of the translator, and to his valuable annotations, to which
it will not be necessary for me to add many of my own. But I must find room to express my
admiration for his character, which was never found wanting amid many terrible trials of character
and of faith itself. His pen was never idle ; his learning and knowledge of the Scriptures are
apparent, even in the fragments that have come down to us ; his fidelity to the traditions received
from Origen and Heraclas are not less conspicuous ; and in all his dealings with his brethren of
the East and West there reigns over his conduct that pure spirit of the Gospel which proves that

* Epistle to Philemon, infra. ^ Vol. v. p. 390, this series.

77


78 INTRODUCTORY NOTICE.

the virgin-age of the Church was not yet of the past. A beautiful moderation and breadth of
sympathy distinguish his episcopal utterances ; and, great as was his diocese, he seems equally
devoid of prelatic pride and of that wicked ambition which too soon after the martyr-ages proved
the bane of the Church's existence. The following is the

TIL^NSLATOR'S INTRODUCTORY NOTICE.

For our knowledge of the career of this illustrious disciple of Origen we are indebted chiefly
to Eusebius, in the sixth and seventh books of his Historia Ecclesiastica, and in the fourteenth
book of his Prceparatio Evangelica.'' He appears to have been the son of pagan parents ; but after
studying the doctrines of various of the schools of philosophy, and coming under the influence
of Origen, to whom he had attached himself as a pupil, he was led to embrace the Christian
faith. This step was taken at an early period, and, as he informs us, only after free examination
and careful inquiry into the great systems of heathen belief. He was made a presbyter in Alex-
andria after this decision ; and on the elevation of Heraclas to the bishopric of that city, Diony-
sius succeeded him in the presidency of the catechetical school there about a.d. 232. After
holding that position for some fifteen years Heraclas died, and Dionysius was again chosen to be
his successor; and ascending the episcopal throne of Alexandria about a.d. 247 or 248, he
retained that See till his death in the year 265. The period of his activity as bishop was a time
of great suffering and continuous anxiety ; and between the terrors of persecution on the one
hand, and the cares of controversy on the other, he found little repose in his office. During
the Decian persecution he was arrested and hurried off by the soldiers to a small town named
Taposiris, lying between Alexandria and Canopus. But he was rescued from the peril of that
seizure in a remarkably providential manner, by a sudden rising of the people of the rural district
through which he was carried. Again, however, he was called to suffer, and that more severely,
when the persecution under Valerian broke out in the year 257. On making open confession of
his faith on this occasion he was banished, at a time when he was seriously ill, to Cephro, a
wild and barren district in Libya ; and not until he had spent two or three years in exile there
was he enabled to return to Alexandria, in virtue of the edict of Gallienus. At various times he
had to cope, too, with the miseries of pestilence and famine and civil conflicts in the seat of his
bishopric. In the many ecclesiastical difficulties of his age he was also led to take a prominent
part. When the keen contest was waged on the subject of the rebaptism of recovered heretics
about the year 256, the matter in dispute was referred by both parties to his judgment, and
he composed several valuable writings on the question. Then he was induced to enter the lists
with the Sabellians, and in the course of a lengthened controversy did much good service against
their tenets. The uncompromising energy of his opposition to that sect carried him, however,
beyond the bounds of prudence, so that he himself gave expression to opinions not easily recon-
cilable with the common orthodox doctrine. For these he was called to account by Dionysius
bishop of Rome ; - and when a synod had been summoned to consider the case, he promptly and
humbly acknowledged the error into which his precipitate zeal had drawn him. Once more, he
was urged to give his help in the difficulty with Paul of Samosata. But as the burden of years
and infirmities made it impossible for him to attend the synod convened at Antioch in 265 to
deal with that troublesome heresiarch, he sent his opinion on the subject of discussion in a letter
to the council, and died soon after, towards the close of the same year. The responsible duties

• There are also passages, of larger or smaller extent, bearing upon his life and his literary activity, in Jerome {De vin's illiistr.,
ch. 69: and Pn^fatio ad Lib., xviii.. Comment, hi Esaiam), Athanasius {De Sentcntia Diottysii, and De Synodi Niccence Decretis),
Basil {De Spiritu Sancto, ch. 29; Epist. ad Amphiloch., and Epist. ad Maximum). Among modern authorities, we may refer
specially to the Dissertation on his life and writings by S. de Magistris, in the folio edition issued under his care in Greek and Latin at Rome
in 1796: to the account given by Basnage in the Histoire de VEglise, toinq i. livre ii. ch. v. p. 68; to the complete collection of his extant
works in Gallandi's Bibliotkeca Patrum, iii. p. 481, etc.; as well as to the accounts in Cave's Hist. Lit., i. p. 95, and elsewhere.

2 [Not, however, as an inferior, but as one bishop in those days remonstrated with another, and as he himself remonstrated with
Stephen. See in/ra.\


INTRODUCTORY NOTICE. 79

of his bishopric had been discharged with singular faithfulness and patience throughout the
seventeen eventful years during which he occupied the office. Among the ancients he was
held in the highest esteem both for personal worth and for literary usefulness ; and it is related
that there was a church dedicated to him in Alexandria. One feature that appears very promi-
nently in his character, is the spirit of independent investigation which possessed him. It was
only after candid examination of the current philosophies that he was induced to become a
Christian ; and after his adoption of the faith, he kept himself abreast of all the controversies
of the time, and perused with an impartial mind the works of the great heretics. He acted on
this principle through his whole course as a teacher, pronouncing against such writings only when
he had made himself familiar with their contents, and saw how to refute them. And we are
told in Eusebius,' that when a certain presbyter once remonstrated with him on this subject, and
warned him of the injury he might do to his own soul by habituating himself to the perusal of
these heterodox productions, Dionysius was confirmed in his purpose by a vision and a voice
which were sent him, as he thought, from heaven to relieve him of all such fear, and to encourage
him to read and prove all that might come into his hand, because that method had been from the
very first the cause of faith to him. The moderation of his character, again, is not less worthy
of notice. In the case of the Novatian schism, while he was from the first decidedly opposed
to the principles of the party, he strove by patient and affectionate argumentation to persuade
the leader to submit. So, too, in the disputes on baptism we find him urgently entreating the
Roman bishop Stephen not to press matters to extremity with the Eastern Church, nor destroy
the peace she had only lately begun to enjoy. Again, in the chiliastic difficulties excited by
Nepos, and kept up by Coracion, we see him assembling all the parochial clergy who held these
opinions, and inviting all the laymen of rhe diocese also to attend the conference, and discussing
the question for three whole days with all these ministers, considering their arguments, and meet-
ing all their objections patiently by Scripture testimony, until he persuades Coracion himself to
retract, and receives the thanks of the pastors, and restores unity of faith in his bishopric.
On these occasions his mildness, and benignity, and moderation stand out in bold relief ; and on
others we trace similar evidences of his broad sympathies and his large and liberal spirit. He
was possessed also of a remarkably fertile pen ; and the number of his theological writings, both
formal treatises and more familiar epistles, was very considerable. All these, however, have
perished, with the exception of what Eusebius and other early authors already referred to have
preserved. The most important of these compositions are the following: i. A Treatise on the
Frotnises, in two books, which was written against Nepos, and of which Eusebius has introduced
two pretty large extracts into the third and seventh books of his History. 2. A Book on Nature,
addressed to Timotheus, in opposition to the Epicureans, of which we have some sections in the
PrcBpar, Evangel, of Eusebius. 3. A Work against the Sahellians, addressed to Dionysius bishop
of Rome, in four books or letters, in which he deals with his own unguarded statements in the
controversy with Sabellius, and of which certain portions have come down to us in Athanasius
and Basil. In addition to these, we possess a number of his epistles in whole or part, and a
few exegetical fragments. There is a Scholium in the Codex Amerbachianus which may be
given here : — It should be known that this sainted Dionysius became a hearer of Origen in the
fourth year of the reign of Philip, who succeeded Gordian in the empire. On the death of
Heraclas, the thirteenth bishop of the church of Alexandria, he was put in possession of the
headship of that church ; and after a period of seventeen years, embracing the last three years
of the reign of Philip, and the one year of that of Decius, and the one year of Gallus and
Volusianus the son of Decius, and twelve years of the reigns of Valerian and his son Gallus
(Gallienus), he departed to the Lord. And Basilides was bishop of the parishes in the Pentapo-
lis of Libya, as Eusebius informs us in the sixth and seventh books of his Ecclesiastical History.

• Hist. Eccles., viii. 7.


THE WORKS OF DIONYSIUS.
.EXTANT FRAGMENTS.


PART I. — CONTAINING VARIOUS SECTIONS OF THE WORKS.


I. — FROM THE TWO BOOKS ON THE PROMISES.'

I. But as they produce a certain composition
by Nepos,^ on which they insist very strongly, as
if it demonstrated incontestably that there will
be a (temporal) reign of Christ upon the earth,
I have to say, that in many other respects I ac-
cept the opinion of Nepos, and love him at once
for his faith, and his laboriousness, and his pa-
tient study in the Scriptures, as also for his great
efforts in psalmody,^ by which even now many
of the brethren are delighted. I hold the man,
too, in deep respect still more, inasmuch as * he
has gone to his rest before us. Nevertheless the


' In opposition to Noetus, a bishop in Egypt. Eusebius, Hist.
EccL, vii 24 and 25. Eusebius introduces this extract in the following
terms: " There are also two books of his on the subject of the prom-
ises. The occasion of writing these was furnished him by a certain
Nepos, a bishop in Egypt, who taught that the promises which were
given to holy men in the sacred Scriptures were to be understood
according to the Jewish sense of the same; and affirmed that there
would be some kind of a millennial period, plenished with corporeal de-
lights, upon this earth. And as he thought that he could establish this
opinion of his by the Revelation of John, he had composed a book on
this question, entitled Refutation of the Allegorists. This, therefore,
is sharply attacked by Dionysius in his books on the Promises. And
in the first of these books he states his own opinion on the subject;
while in the second he gives us a discussion on the Revelation of
John, in the introduction to which he makes mention of Nepos." [Of
this Noetus, see the P/it/oso/>kuinc>in, vol. v., this series.]

2 As it is clear from this passage that this work by Dionysius was
written against Nepos, it is strange that, in his preface to the eigh-
teenth book of his Commentaries on Isaiah, Jerome should affirm it
to have been composed against Irenaeus of Lyons. Irena;us was cer-
tainly of the number of those who held millennial views, and who had
been persuaded to embrace such by Papias, as Jerome himself tells us
in the Catalogus, and as Eusebius explains towards the close of the
third book of his History. But that this book by Dionysius was
written not against Irenaeus, but against Nepos, is evident, not only
from this passage in Eusebius, but also from Jerome himself, in his
work On Ecclesiastical IVritcrs, where he speaks of Dionysius. —
Vales. [Compare (this series, infra) the comments of Victorinus
of Petau for a \Vestern view of the millennial subject.]

3 T^5 TToAA))! i//aA^w6ia5. Christophorsonus interprets this of
psalms and hymns composed by Nepos. It was certainly the practice
among the ancient Christians to compose psalms and hymns in honour
of Christ. Eusebius bears witness to this in the end of the fifth book
of his History. Mention is made of these psalms in the Epistle of
the Council of Antioch against Paul of Samosata, and in the penulti-
inate canon of the Council of Laodicea, where there is a clear pro-
hibition of the use of i//aA|u.oi iSiioTtKoi in the church, i.e., of psalms
composed by private individuals. For this custom had obtained great
prevalence, so that many persons composed psalms in honour of Christ,
and got them sung in the church. It is psalms of this kind, conse-
quently, that the Fathers of the Council of Laodicea forbid to be sung
thereafter in the church, designating them iSiojtikoi, i.e., composed
by unskilled men, and not dictated Ijy the Holy Spirit. Thus is the
matter e.vplained by .'Xgobardus in his book De ritu cancudi psalmos
in Ecclesia. — \ hix.s. [See vol. v., quotation from Pliny ]

* T1VTI7 naAAof ri Trpoa.veiTavaa.ro: it may mean, perhaps,yi7r Mf
way in which he has gone to his rest before us.


truth is to be prized and reverenced above all
things else. And while it is indeed proper to
praise and approve ungrudgingly anything that
is said aright, it is no less proper to examine and
correct anything which may appear to have been
written unsoundly. If he had been present then
himself, and had been stating his opinions orally,
it would have been sufficient to discuss the ques-
tion together without the use of writing, and to
endeavour to convince the opponents, and carry
them along by interrogation and reply. But the
work is published, and is, as it seems to some, of
a very persuasive character ; and there are un-
questionably some teachers, who hold that the
law and the prophets are of no importance, and
who decline to follow the Gospels, and who de-
preciate the epistles of the apostles, and who
have also made large promises 5 regarding the
doctrine of this composition, as though it were
some great and hidden mystery, and who, at the
same time, do not allow that our simpler breth-
ren have any sublime and elevated conceptions
either of our Lord's appearing in His glory and
His true divinity, or of our own resurrection from
the dead, and of our being gathered together to
Him, and assimilated to Him, but, on the con-
trary, endeavour to lead them to hope ^ for
things which are trivial and corruptible, and only
such as what we find at present in the kingdom
of God. And since this is the case, it becc^nes
necessary for us to discuss this subject with our
brother Nepos just as if he were present.

2. After certain other matters, he adds the fol-
lowing statement: — Being then in the Arsino-
itic ^ prefecture — where, as you are aware, this


5 Ka.TiTTayyf)\Xou.iviav, i.e., dill atite promittnnt quam tradunt
The metaphor is taken from the mysteries of the Greeks, who were
wont to promise great and marvellous discoveries to the initiated, and
then kept them on the rack by daily expectation, in order to confirm
their judgment and reverence by such suspense in the conveyance of
knowledge, as Tertullian says in his book Against the Valentinians,
— Vales. [Vol. iii. p. 503.]

'' Reading iKiriC^nv a.vaTTii.96vTuiv for eAiri^d/ieca 5ret9dvTiov, with
the Codex Mazarin.

7 f ■ ixiv ovv Ttf 'Apereuoeirj]. In the three codices here, as well
as in Nicephorus and Ptolemy, we find this scription, although it is
evident that the word should be written i\o(rc»'CciTj7, as the district
took Its name from Queen Arsinoe. — Vales.

81


82


WORKS OF DIONYSIUS. — EXTANT FRAGMENTS.


doctrine was current long ago, and caused such i
division, that schisms and apostasies took place
in whole churches — I called together the pres-
byters and the teachers among the brethren in :
the villages, and those of the brethren also who
wished to attend were present. I exhorted !
them to make an investigation into that dogma j
in public. Accordingly, when they had brought
this book before us, as though it were a kind of !
weapon or impregnable battlement, I sat with I
them for three days in succession, from morning
till evening, and attempted to set them right on !
the subjects propounded in the composition, j
Then, too, I was greatly gratified by observing '
the constancy of the brethren, and their love of I
the truth, and their docility and intelligence, as !
we proceeded, in an orderly method, and in a
spirit of moderation, to deal with questions, and
difficulties, and concessions. For we took care
not to press, in every way and with jealous ur-
genc}', opinions which had once been adopted,
even although they might appear to be correct.'
Neither did we evade objections alleged by
others ; but we endeavoured as far as possible to
keep by the subject in hand, and to establish the
positions pertinent to it. Nor, again, were we
ashamed to change our opinions, if reason con-
vinced us, and to acknowledge the fact ; but
rather with a good conscience, and in all sincer-
ity, and with open hearts ^ before God, we ac-
cepted all that could be established by the dem-
onstrations and teachings of the Holy Scriptures.
And at last the author and introducer of this
doctrine, whose name was Coracion, in the hear-
ing of all the brethren present, made acknowl-
edgment of his position, and engaged to us that
he would no longer hold by his opinion, nor dis-
cuss it, nor mention it, nor teach it, as he had
been completely convinced by the arguments of
those opposed to it. The rest of the brethren,
also, who were present, were delighted with the
conference, and with the conciliatory spirit and
the harmony exhibited by all.

3. T/ien, a little furtJier on, he speaks of the
Revelation of 'jpohn as folloius: — Now some
before our time have set aside this book, and
repiydiated it entirely, criticising it chapter by
chapter, and endeavouring to show it to be with-
out either sense or reason. They have alleged
also that its tide is false ; for they deny that


' ei Kixi ^a-ivoivTO. There is another reading, ei Ka\ \kr\ <hai.
voii'To, although they might not appear to be correct Chris-
tophorsonus renders it: ne illis qua: fuerant ante ab ipsis decreta, si
quidqiiam in eis veritati repugnare videretur, mordicus adhaererent
praecavebant.

2 7)n-Auj|ueVats Tat? (capitati;, Christophorsoniis renders h, pun's
erga Deiini ac simplicibus animi's; Musculus gives, cord/bus ad
Denm expansis; and ^wfvaws,, patefactis cordihus. [The picture
here given of a primitive synod searching the Scriptures under such
a presidency, and exhibiting such tokens of brotherly love, mutual
subordination (i Pet. v. 5), and a prevailing love of the truth, is to
me one of the most fascinating of patristic sketches. One cannot
but reflect upon the contrast presented in every respect by the late
Council of the Vatican ]


John is the author. Nay, further, they hold
that it can be no sort of revelation, because it is
covered with so gross and dense a veil of igno-
rance. They affirm, therefore, that none of the
apostles, nor indeed any of the saints, nor any
person belonging to the Church, could be its
author ; but that Cerinthus,^ and the heretical
sect founded by him, and named after him the
Cerinthian sect, being desirous of attaching the
authority of a great name to the fiction pro-
pounded by him,"prefixed that tide to the book.
For the doctrine inculcated by Cerinthus is this :
that there will be an earthly reign of Christ ;
and as he was himself a man devoted to the
pleasures of the body, and altogether carnal
in his dispositions, he fancied ■♦ that that king-
dom would consist in those kinds of gratifi-
cations on which his own heart was set, — to
wit, in the delights of the belly, and what comes
beneath the belly, that is to say, in eating and
drinking, and marrying, and in other things
under the guise of which he thought he could
indulge his appetites with a better grace, 5 such
as festivals, and sacrifices, and the slaying of
victims. But I, for my part, could not venture
to set this book aside, for there are many breth-
ren who value it highly. Yet, having formed an
idea of it as a composition exceeding my capa-
city of understanding, I regard it as containing
a kind of hidden and wonderful intelligence on
the several subjects which come under it. For
though I cannot comprehend it, I still suspect
that there is some deeper sense underlying the
words. And I do not measure and judge its
expressions by the standard of my own reason,
but, making more allowance for faith, I have
simply regarded them as too lofty for my com-
prehension ; and I do not forthwith reject what
I do not understand, but I am only the more
filled with wonder at it, in that I have not been
able to discern its import.^

4. After this, he examines the whole book of
the Revelation ; and having proved that it can-
not possibly be understood according to the bald,
literal sense, he proceeds thus : — When the
prophet now has completed, so to speak, the
whole prophecy, he pronounces those blessed
who should observe it, and names himself, too,
in the number of the same : " For blessed," says

3 This passage is given substantially by Eusebius also in book
iii. c. 28.

* The text gives oveip^oXeiv, for which oveipoiroXei or uivapo-
iroAei is to be read.

5 6i' lur tv<f>rin6Tepov ravra w'ljSi) jropieiaBai. The old reading
was evdi'fiorepov; but the present reading is given in the Mss., Cod.
Maz.,and Med., as also in Eusebius, iii. 28, and in Nicephorus, iii. 14.
So Rufinus renders it: et tit aliquid sacratins dicere Tidcrctur,
legates aiebnt/estivitates rursiiin celebratidas. [These gross views
of millennial perfection entailed upon subsequentTt^es a reactionary
neglect of the study of the Second Advent A Papal aphorism, pre-
served by Roscoe, embodies all this: "Sub umbilico nulla religio."
It was fully exemplified, even under Leo X.J

*> [The humility which moderates and subdues our author's pride
of intellect in this passage is, to me, most instructive as to the limits
prescribed to argument in what Coleridge calls " the faith of reason."]


WORKS OF DIONYSIUS. — EXTANT FRAGMENTS.


he, "is he that keepeth the words of the proph-
ecy of this book ; and I John loho saw and
heard these things." ' That this person was
called John, therefore, and that this was the
writing of a John, I do not deny. And I admit
further, that it was also the work of some holy
and inspired man. But I could not so easily
admit that this was the aposde, the son of Zebe-
dee, the brother of James, and the same person
with him who wrote the Gospel which bears the
title according to yohn, and the catholic epistle.
But from the character of both, and the forms of
expression, and the whole disposition and exe-
cution ^ of the book, 1 draw the conclusion that
the authorship is not his. For the evangelist
nowhere else subjoins his name, and he never
proclaims himself either in the Gospel or in the
epistle.

And a little further on he adds: — John,
moreover, nowhere gives us the name, whether
as of himself directly (in the first person), or as
of another (in the third person). But the writer
of the Revelation puts himself forward at once
in tlie very beginning, for he says : " The Reve-
lation of Jesus Christ, which He gave to him to
show to His servants quickly; and He sent and
signified it by His angel to His servant John,
who bare record of the Word of God, and of
his testimony, and of all things that he saw." ^
And then he writes also an epistle, in which he
says : " John to the seven churches which are
in Asia, grace be unto you, and peace." The
evangelist, on the other hand, has not prefixed
his name even to the catholic epistle ; but with-
out any circumlocution, he has commenced at
once with the mystery of the divine revelation
itself in these terms : "That which was from the
beginning, which we have heard, which we have
seen with our eyes." + And on the ground of
such a revelation as that the Lord pronounced
Peter blessed, when He said : " Blessed art thou,
Simon Bar-jona ; for flesh and blood hath not
revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in
heaven." 5 And again in the second epistle,
which is ascribed to John, the aposde, and in
the third, though they are indeed brief, John is
not set before us by name ; but we find simply
the anonymous writing, "The elder." This other
author, on the contrary, did not even deem it
sufficient to name himself once, and then to
proceed with his narrative ; but he takes up his
name again, and says : " I John, who also am
your brother and companion in tribulation, and
in the kingdom and patience of Jesus Christ,


' Rev xxii. 7, 8.

2 61 f iyuiyr)5 Ae-yofifVv)?, Musculus renders it /rnc^rt^KW Jihri;
Christophorsonus gives disciirsum; and Valesius takes it as equiv-
alent to nKovoikia-v , as h^i^^yaytlv is the same as iioixeii'.

3 Rev i. I, 2.
■♦ I lolin 1. I.

5 Matt. xvi. 17.


was in the isle that is called Patmos for the
Word of God, and for the testimony of Jesus
Christ." ^ And likewise toward the end he
speaks thus : " Blessed is he that keepeth the
sayings of the prophecy of this book ; and I
John who saw these things and heard them." '
That it is a John, then, that writes these things
we must believe, for he himself tells us.

5. What John this is, however, is uncertain.
For he has not said, as he often does in the Gos-
pel, that he is the disciple beloved by the Lord,
or the one that leaned on His bosom, or the
brother of James, or one that was privileged to
see and hear the Lord. And surely he would
have given us some of these indications if it had
been his purpose to make himself clearly known.
But of all this he offers us nothing ; and he only
calls himself our brother and companion, and
the witness of Jesus, and one blessed with the
seeing and hearing of these revelations. I am
also of opinion that there were many persons of
the same name with John the apostle, who by
their love for him, and their admiration and
emulation of him, and their desire to be loved
by the Lord as he was loved, were induced to
enibrace also the same designation, just as we
find many of the children of the faithful called by
the names of Paul and Peter.'' There is, besides,
another John mentioned in the Acts of the Apos-
tles, with the surname Mark, whom Barnabas and
Paul attached to themselves as companion, and of
whom again it is said : "And they had also John
to their minister."'^ But whether this is the one
who wrote the Revelation, I could not say. For
it is not written that he came with them into
Asia. But the writer says : " Now when Paul
and his company loosed from Paphos, they came
to Perga in Pamphylia : and John, departing
from them, returned to Jerusalem." 9 I think,
therefore, that it was some other one of those
who were in Asia. For it is said that there were
two monuments in Ephesus, and that each of
these bears the name of John.

6. And from the ideas, and the expressions,
and the collocation of the same, it may be very
reasonably conjectured that this one is distinct


* Rev. i. 9 '. . .

7 It is worth while to note this passao;e of Dionysiiis on the nncient
practice of the Christians, in Riving their children the nanit_-s of Peter
and Paul, which they did both in order to express the honour and
affection in which they held these saints, and to secure that their
children might be dear and acceptable to God, just as those saints
were. Hence it is that Chrysostom in his first volume, in his oration
on St. Meletius, says that the people of Antioch had such love and
esteem for Meletius, that the parents called their children by his
name, in order that they might have their homes adorned by his jires-
ence. And the same Chrysostom, in his twenty-first homily on Gene-
sis, exhorts his hearers not to call their children carelessly by the
names of their grandfathers, or great-grandfathers, or men of fame;
but rather by the names of saintly men, who have been shining pat-
terns of virtue, in order that the children might be fired with the de-
sire of virtue by their example — V.^Liis. [.^ chapter in the history
of civilization might here be given on the origin of Christian names
and on the motives which should influence Christians in the bestowal
of names. The subj«ct is treated, alter Plato, by Ue Maistre.J

* Acts xiii 5.
9 Acts xiii. 13.


84


WORKS OF DIONYSIUS.— EXTANT FRAGMENTS.


from that.' For the Gospel and the Epistle
agree with each other, and both commence in
the same way. For the one opens thus, " In the
beginning was the Word ; " while the other opens
thus, "That which, was from the beginning."
The one says : " And the Word was made flesh,
and dwelt among us ; and we beheld His glory,
the glory as of the Only-begotten of the Father."^
The other says the same things, with a slight
alteration : " That which we have heard, which
we have seen with our eyes, which we have
looked upon, and our hands have handled, of
the Word of life : and the life was manifested."^
For these things are introduced by way of prel-
ude, and in opposition, as he has shown in the
subsequent parts, to those who deny that the
Lord is come in the flesh. For which reason he
has also been careful to add these words : " And
that which we have seen we testify, and show unto
you that eternal life which was with the Father,
and was manifested unto us : that which we have
seen and heard declare we unto you."* Thus
he keeps to himself, and does not diverge incon-
sistently from his subjects, but goes through them
all under the same heads and in the same phrase-
ologies, some of which we shall briefly mention.
Thus the attentive reader will find the phrases,
"the life," "the light," occurring often in both;
and also such expressions as fleeing from dark-
ness, holding the truth, grace, joy, the flesh and
the Idood of the Lord, the jiidgmetit, the re/nissiofi
of sins, the love of God toward us, the comniand-
inent of love on oiir side totvard each other; as
also, that we ought to keep all the commandments,
the conviction of the luorld, of the devil, of Anti-
christ, the promise of the Holy Spirit, the adop-
tion of God, the faith required of us in all things,
t/ie Father and the Son, named as such every-
where. And altogether, through their whole
course, it will be evident that the Gospel and
the Epistle are distinguished by one and the
same character of writing. But the Revelation
is totally different, and altogether distinct from
this ; and I might almost say that it does not
even come near it, or border upon it. Neither
does it contain a syllable in common with these
other books. Nay more, the Epistle — for I say
nothing of the Gospel — does not make any men-


' This is the second argument by which Dionysius reasoned that
the Revelation and the Gospel of John are not by one author. For
the first argument which he used in proof of this is drawn from the
character and usage of the two writers; and this argument Dionysius
has prosecuted up to this point. Now, however, he adduces a second
argument, drawn from the words and ideas of the two writers, and
from the collocation of the expressions. For, with Cicero, I thus in-
terpret the word avvra^Lv. See the very elegant book of Dionysius
Hal. entitled Uept o'l/i'Tofeco! ovoixaTMV — On the Collocation of
Names, although in this passage (TiU'Tafiir appears to comprehend
the disposition of sentences as well as words. Further, from this
passage we can see what experience Dionysius had in criticism; for
it is the critic's part to examine the writings of the ancients, and dis-
tinguish what is genuine and authentic from what is spurious and
counterfeit. — Vales.

^ John 1. 14.

3 I John i. 1.2.

* I John i, 2, 3.


tion or evince any notion of the Revelation ; and
the Revelation, in like manner, gives no note of
the Epistle. Whereas Paul gives some indica-
tion of his revelations in his epistles ; which
revelations, however, he has not recorded in
writing by themselves.

7. And furthermore, on the ground of differ-
ence in diction, it is possible to prove a distinc-
tion between the Gospel and the Epistle on the
one hand, and the Revelation on the other. For
the former are written not only without actual
error as regards the Greek language, but also
with the greatest elegance, both in their expres-
sions and in their reasonings, and in the whole
structure of their style. They are very far indeed
from betraying any barbarism or solecism, or any
sort of vulgarism, in their diction. For, as might
be presumed, the writer possessed the gift of
both kinds of discourse, 5 the Lord having be-
stowed both these capacities upon him, viz., that
of knowledge and that of expression. That the
author of the latter, however, saw a revelation,
and received knowledge and prophecy, I do not
deny. Only I perceive that his dialect and lan-
guage are not of the exact Greek type, and that
he employs barbarous idioms, and in some places
also solecisms. These, however, we are under
no necessity of seeking out at present. And i
would not have any one suppose that I have said
these things in the spirit of ridicule ; for I have
done so only with the purpose of setting right
this matter of the dissimilarity subsisting between
these writings.''

II. — FROM THE BOOKS ON NATURE.^

I. IN OPPOSITION TO THOSE OF THE SCHOOL OF
EPICURUS WHO DENY THE EXISTENCE OF A PROVI-
DENCE, AND REFER THE CONSTITUTION OF THE
UNIVERSE TO ATOMIC BODIES.

Is the universe one coherent whole, as it seems
to be in our own judgment, as well as in that
of the wisest of the Greek philosophers, such as
Plato and Pythagoras, and the Stoics and Hera-
clitus ? or is it a duality, as some may possibly


5 The old reading was, tov Aoyof, rijv yvuimv. Valesius ex-
punges the T-qv yvuxjLv, as disturbing the sense, and as absent in
various codices. Instead also of the reading, toi' re ti';? o-o<f)ias, tov re
T)j? ■yi'ujcreu)?, the same editor adopts t6>' re rij? •yi'iucreu)?, rdi' re rrj;
(tpaffea)?, which is the reading of various manuscripts, and is accepted
in the translation. Valesius understands that by the exarepoi' Koyov
Dionysius means the Aoyo? ivCudOnTOi and the Ao-yos Trpoc/jopixos,
that is. the subjective discourse, or reason in the mind, and the objec-
tive discourse, or utterance of the same.

^ [The jealousy with which, while the canon of New Testament
Scripture was forming, every claim was sifted, is well illustrated in
this remarkable essay. Ob-serve its critical skill and the fidelity
with which he exposes the objections based on the style and classi-
cality of the Evangelist. The Alexandrian school was one of bold
and original investigation, always subject in spirit, however, to the
great canon of Prescription.]

7 Against the Epicureans. In^useh'm^,, Pm/iar. Evangel. ,hoo\!.
xiv. ch. 23-27. Eusebius introduces this extract in terms to the fol-
lowing effect: It may be well now to subjoin some few arguments out
of the many which are employed in his disputation against the Epicu-
reans by the bishop Dionysius, a man who professed a Christian phi-
losophy, as they are found in the work which he composed on Nature.
But peruse thou the writer's statements in his own terms.


WORKS OF DIONYSIUS. — EXTANT FRAGMENTS.


8=;


have conjectured? or is it indeed something
manifold and infinite, as has been the opinion
of certain others who, with a variety of mad
speculations and fanciful usages of terms, have
sought to divide and resolve the essential matter '
of the universe, and lay down the position that
it is infinite and unoriginated, and without the
sway of Providence ? ^ For there are those who,
giving the name of atoms to certain imperishable
and most minute bodies which are supposed to
be infinite in number, and positing also the ex-
istence of a certain vacant space of an unlimited
vastness, allege that these atoms, as they are
borne along casually in the void, and clash all
fortuitously against each other in an unregulated
whirl, and become commingled one with an-
other in a multitude of forms, enter into combi-
nation with each other, and thus gradually form
this world and all objects in it ; yea, more, that
they construct infinite worlds. This was the
opinion of Epicurus and Democritus ; only they
differed in one point, in so far as the former sup-
posed these atoms to be all most minute and
consequently imperceptible, while Democritus
held that there were also some among them of
a very large size. But they both hold that such
atoms do exist, and that they are so called on
account of their indissoluble consistency. There
are some, again, who give the name of atoms
to certain bodies which are indivisible into parts,
while they are themselves parts of the universe,
out of which in their undivided state all things
are made up, and into which they are dissolved
again. And the allegation is, that Diodorus was
the person who gave them their names as bodies
indivisible into parts.^ But it is also said that
Heraclides attached another name to them, and
called them " weights ; " * and from him the
physician Asclepiades also derived that name. 5

11. A REFUTATION OF THIS DOGMA ON THE GROUND
OF FAMILIAR HUMAN ANALOGIES.

How shall we bear with these men who assert
that all those wise, and consequently also noble,
constructions (in the universe) are only the works
of common chance? those objects, I mean, of
which each taken by itself as it is made, and the
whole system collectively, were seen to be good
by Him by whose command they came into ex-
istence. For, as it is said, " God saw everything
that He had made, and, behold, it was very
good." ^ But truly these men do not reflect on ?


^ OVtTLav,

3 rwif afji-epuif,

* oy/cou?.

5 cKATjpoi/d/ijjo-e TO ovofxa. Eusebius subjoins this remark: ravr'
eiTToji', i^q^ avaaKeva^ei to fio-y/xa 6ta noKKuiv^ arap be 6ta Touruji', =
having said thus much, he (Dionysius) proceeds to demolish this doc-
trine by many arguments, and among others by what follows. — Gall.

*■ Gen. i. 31.

^ The te.\t is, aAA' ovSe airo ruiv /xiKptov Twv avvridtov Kai napa
iroSas I'ovSeToui'Tioi', etc. We adopt Viger's suggestion, and read


the analogies even of small familiar things which
might come under their observation at any time,
and from which they might learn that no object
of any utility, and fitted to be serviceable, is
made without design or by mere chance, but is
wrought by skill of hand, and is contrived so as
to meet its proper use. And when the object
falls out of service and becomes useless, then it
also begins to break up indeterminately, and
to decompose and dissipate its materials in every
casual and unregulated way, just as the wisdom
by which it was skilfully constructed at first no
longer controls and maintains it. For a cloak,
for example, cannot be made without the weaver,
as if the warp could be set aright and the woof
could be entwined with it by their own sponta-
neous action ; while, on the other hand, if it is
once worn out, its tattered rags are flung aside.
Again, when a house or a city is built, it does
not take on its stones, as if some of them placed
themselves spontaneously upon the foundations,
and others lifted themselves up on the several
layers, but the builder carefully disposes the skil-
fully prepared stones in their proper positions ;
while if the structure happens once to give way,
the stones are separated and cast down and
scattered about. And so, too, when a ship is
built, the keel does not lay itself, neither does
the mast erect itself in the centre, nor do all the
other timbers take up their positions casually and
by their own motion. Nor, again, do the so-
called hundred beams in the wain fit themselves
spontaneously to the vacant spaces they severally
light on. But the carpenter in both cases puts
the materials together in the right way and at
the right time.^ And if the ship goes to sea
and is wrecked, or if the wain drives along on
land and is shattered, their timbers are broken
up and cast abroad anywhere, — those of the
former by the waves, and those of the latter by
the violence of the impetus. In like manner,
then, we might with all propriety say also to
these men, that those atoms of theirs, which re-
main idle and unmanipulated and useless, are
introduced vainly. Let them, accordingly, seek
for themselves to see into what is beyond the
reach of sight, and conceive what is beyond the
range of conception ; ^ unlike him who in these
terms confesses to Clod that things like these had
been shown him only by God Himself: "Mine


8 The text is, eicaTepo? (TvveKOfJUcre Kaipiov, for which Viger pro-
poses et? Toi/ €KaT€pa?, etc,

9 The text gives, opaTiutrai' yap to? aSedTov(; (Kelvoi, Ka'i to?
avoriTov; I'OeiTujcrai', ov\ o^lOHi3<; e/cet'i'w, etc. The passage seems
corrupt. Some supply <Jutrci? as the subject intended in the adearov^
and arojJTou?; but that leaves the connection still obscure. Viger
would read, with one MS., oflsTou? instead of aSaerovs, and makes
this then the sense: that those Epicureans are bidden study more
closely these unregulated and stolid (ai/ojjxov?) atoms, not looking at
them with a merely cursory and careless glance, as David acknowl-
edges was the case with him in the thoughts of his own imperfect na-
ture, in order that they may the more readily understand how out of
such confusion as that in which they are involved nothing orderly
and finished could possibly have origmated. [P. 86, note 2, i!//ni.]


86


WORKS OF DIONYSIUS. — EXTANT FRAGMENTS.


eyes did see Thy work, being till then imper-
fect." ' But when they assert now that all those
things of grace and beauty, which they declare to
be textures finely wrought out of atoms, are fab-
ricated spontaneously by these bodies without
either wisdom or perception in them, who can
endure to hear^ tliem talk in such terms of
those unregulated ^ atoms, than which even the
spider, that plies its proper craft of itself, is
gifted with more sagacity?

in. A REFUTATION ON THE GROUND OF THE CON-
STITUTION OF THE UNIVERSE.

Or who can bear to hear it maintained, that
this mighty habitation, which is constituted of
heaven and earth, and which is called " Cosmos "
on account of the magnitude and the plenitude
of the wisdom which has been brought to bear
upon it, has been established in all its order and
beauty by those atoms which hold their course
devoid of order and beauty, and that that same
state of disorder has grown into this true Cosmos,
Order? Or who can believe that those reg-
ular movements and courses are the products
of a certain unregulated impetus? Or who can
allow that the perfect concord subsisting among
the celestial bodies derives its harmony from
instruments destitute both of concord and har-
mony? Or, again, if there is but one and the
same substance + in all things, and if there is the
same incorruptible nature 5 in all, — the only
elements of difference being, as they aver, size
and figure, — how comes it that there are some
bodies divine and perfect,^ and eternal,'' as they
would phrase it, or lasting,^ as some one may pre-
fer to express it ; and among these some that
are visible and others that are invisible, — the
visible including such as sun, and moon, and
stars, and earth, and water ; and the invisible in-
cluding gods, and demons, and spirits? For
the existence of such they cannot possibly deny
however desirous to do so. And again, there
are other objects that are long-lived, both ani-
mals and plants. As to animals, there are, for
example, among birds, as they say, the eagle, the

' Ps. cxxxix. i6. The text gives, to aKarepyacTTov trov ISuicrav
oi b4>tlaAixoi ixov. This strange reading, instead of the usual rh
aKarepyaaTov ixov il^ov (or iov) oi o^OaAnoi aov, is found also in
the Alexandrine exemplar of the Septuagint, which gives, to aKixTep-
yuaiov aov eiOocrav oi oilSaK^oi. (iov, and in the Psalter of S. Ger-
manus in Calmet, which has, iinperfectutn tiintii videruiit ocjili
tnci. Vige- renders it thus: quod ex titis operibiis itnper/ectiiin
adhiic et itnpolttum videbatur, oculi tandem 7tiei perviderunt;
i.e., Thy works, which till now seemed imperfect and unfinished, my
eyes have at length discerned clearly; to wit, because being now
penetrated by greater light from Thee, they have ceased to be dim-
sighted. See Viger's note in Migne.

^ [The reproduction of all this outworn nonsense in our age
claims for itself the credit of progressive science. It has had its day,
and its destiny is to be speedily wiped out by the next school of
thinkers. Meanwhile let the believer's answer be found in Isa.
xxxvii. 22, 23. J

3 dpp L 9|Cjious.

^ oO<na?.

5 (^V(T€a>9,

^ a/cjjpaTtt,

^ aiuii-ia.

2 ju,aKpatu>ca,


raven, and the phoenix ; and among creatures
living on land, there are the stag, and the ele-
phant, and the dragon ; and among aquatic
creatures there are the whales, and such like
monsters of the deep. And as to trees, there
are the palm, and the oak, and the persea ; ^ and
among trees, too, there are some that are ever-
greens, of which kind fourteen have been reck-
oned up by some one ; and there are others that
only bloom for a certain season, and then shed
their leaves. And there are other objects, again
— which indeed constitute the vast mass of all
which either grow or are begotten — that have
an early death and a brief life. And among
these is man himself, as a certain holy scripture
says of him : " Man that is born of woman is of
few days." '° Well, but I suppose they will reply
that the varying conjunctions of the atoms ac-
count fully for differences " so great in the mat-
ter of duration. For it is maintained that there
are some things that are compressed together by
them, and firmly interlaced, so that they become
closely compacted bodies, and consequently ex-
ceedingly hard to break up ; while there are
others in which more or less the conjunction of
the atoms is of a looser and weaker nature, so
that either quickly or after some time they sepa-
rate themselves from their orderly constitution.
And, again, there are some bodies made up of
atoms of a definite kind and a certain common
figure, while there are others made up of diverse
atoms diversely disposed. But who, then, is the
sagacious discriminator,'^ that brings certain
atoms into collocation, and separates others ; and
marshals some in such wise as to form the sun,
and others in such a way as to originate the
moon, and adapts all in natural fitness, and in
accordance with the proper constitution of each
star? For surely neither would those solar
atoms, with their peculiar size and kind, and
with their special mode of collocation, ever have
reduced themselves so as to effect the produc-
tion of a moon ; nor, on the other hand, would
the conjunctions of these lunar atoms ever have
developed into a sun. And as certainly neither
would Arcturus, resplendent as he is, ever boast
his having the atoms possessed by Lucifer, nor
would the Pleiades glory in being constituted of
those of Orion. For well has Paul expressed
the distinction when he says : " There is one
glory of the sun, and another glory of the moon,
and another glory of the stars : for one star dif-
fereth from another star in glory." '^ And if the
coalition effected among them has been an unin-
telligent one, as is the case with soulless '•♦ objects,


9 Trepcrc'a, a sacred tree of Egypt and Persia, the fruit of which
grew from the stem.
'° Job xiv. I.
" The text gives 5ia<^6opa>, for which Viger suggests 6ia(^opas.

1- ff>tAOKpLI'U>t'.

'5 I Cor. XV. 41.
'•1 6.^vxujv.


I


WORKS OF DIONYSIUS. — EXTANT FRAGMENTS.


87


then they must needs have had some sagacious
artificer ; and if their union has been one with-
out the determination of will, and only of ne-
cessity, as is the case with irrational objects, then
some skilful leader ' must have brought them
together and taken them under his charge. And
if they have hnked themselves together sponta-
neously, for a spontaneous work, then some ad-
mirable architect must have apportioned their
work for them, and assumed the superintendence
among them ; or there must have been one to do
with them as the general does who loves order
and discipline, and who does not leave his army
in an irregular condition, or suffer all things to
go on confusedly, but marshals the cavalry in
their proper succession, and disposes the heavy-
armed infantry in their due array, and the javelin-
men by themselves, and the archers separately,
and the slmgers m like manner, and sets each
force in its appropriate position, in order that
all those equipped in the same way may engage
together. But if these teachers think that this
illustration is but a joke, because I institute a
comijarison between very large bodies and very
small, we may pass to the very smallest.

Tlien ive have wJiat follows : — But if neither
the word, nor the choice, nor the order of a ruler
is laid upon them, and if by their own act they
keep themselves right in the yast commotion of
the stream in which they move, and convey
themselves safely through the mighty uproar of
the collisions, and if like atoms meet and group
themselves with like, not as being brought to-
gether by God, according to the poet's fancy,
but rather as naturally recognising the affinities
subsisting between each other, then truly we have
here a most marvellous democracy of atoms,
wherein frends welcome and embrace friends,
and all are eager to sojourn together in one
domicile ; while some by their own determina-
tion have rounded themselves off into that mighty
luminary the sun, so as to make day ; and others
have formed themselves into many pyramids of
blazing stars, it may be, so as to crown also the
whole heavens ; and others have reduced them-
selves into the circular figure, so as to impart a
certain solidity to the ether, and arch it over,
and constitute it a vast graduated ascent of
luminaries, with this object also, that the various
conventions of the commoner atoms may select
settlements for themselves, and portion out the
sky among them for their habitations and stations.

TJien, after certain other matters, the discourse
proceeds thus : — But inconsiderate men do not
see even things that are apparent, and certainly
they are far from being cognisant of things that
are unapparent. For they do not seem even to
have any notion of those regulated risings and


' ayeAdpxi^-


settings of the heavenly bodies, — those of the
sun, with all their wondrous glory, no less than
those of the others ; nor do they appear to make
due application of the aids furnished through
these to men, such as the day that rises clear for
man's work, and the night that overshadows
earth for man's rest. " For man," it is said,
" goeth forth unto his work, and to his labour,
until the evening." ^ Neither do they consider
that other revolution, by which the sun makes
out for us determinate times, and convenient
seasons, and regular successions, directed by
those atoms of which it consists. But even
though men like these — and miserable men
they are, however they may believe themselves
to be righteous — may choose not to admit it,
there is a mighty Lord that made the sun, and
gave it the impetus ^ for its course by His words.
O ye blind ones, do these atoms of yours bring
you the winter season and the rains, in order
that the earth may yield food for you, and for
all creatures living on it? Do they introduce
summer-time, too, in order that ye may gather
their fruits from the trees for your enjoyment?
And why, then, do ye not worship these atoms,
and offer sacrifices to them as the guardians of
earth's fruits ?■♦ Thankless surely are ye, in not
setting solemnly apart for them even the most
scanty first-fruits of that abundant bounty which
ye receive from them.

After a short break he proceeds thus : — More-
over, those stars which form a community so
multitudinous and various, which these erratic
and ever self-dispersing atoms have constituted,
have marked off by a kind of covenant the
tracts for their several possessions, portioning
these out like colonies and governments, but
without the presidency of any founder or house-
master ; and with pledged fealty and in peace
they respect the laws of vicinity with their neigh-
bours, and abstain from passing beyond the
boundaries which they received at the outset,
just as if they enjoyed the legislative administra-
tion of true princes in the atoms. Nevertheless
these atoms exercise no rule. For how could
these, that are themselves nothing, do that?
But listen to the divine oracles : " The works of
the Lord are in judgment ; from the beginning,
and from His making of them. He disposed the
parts thereof. He garnished His works for ever,
and their principles 5 unto their generations." ^

Again, after a little, he proceeds thus: — Or
what phalanx ever traversed the plain in such
perfect order, no trooper outmarching the others,
or falling out of rank, or obstructing the course,


2 Ps. civ. 23.

3 [Our author touches with sagacity this c^-K^r of theory : whence
comes force, the origin and the perpetuation oi impetus ? Christian-
ity has thus anticipated the defects of " modern science."]

< TaiS eJTlKopjTOl?.
5 rioxn?.

' Ecclus. xvi. 26, 27,


88


WORKS OF DION YSIUS. — EXTANT FRAGMENTS.


or suffering himself to be distanced by his com-
rades in the array, as is the case with that steady
advance in regular file, as it were, and with close-
set shields, which is presented by this serried
and unbroken and undisturbed and unobstructed
progress of the hosts of the stars? Albeit by
side inclinations and flank movements certain of
their revolutions become less clear. Yet, how-
ever that may be, they assuredly always keep
their appointed periods, and again bear onward
determinately to the positions from which they
have severally risen, as if they made that their
deliberate study. Wherefore let these notable
anatomizers of atoms,' these dividers of the indi-
visible, these compounders of the uncompound-
able, these adepts in the apprehension of the
infinite, tell us whence comes this circular march
and course of the heavenly bodies, in which it
is not any single combination of atoms that
merely chances all unexpectedly to swing itself
round in this way ; ^ but it is one vast circular
choir that moves thus, ever equally and concord-
antly, and whirls in these orbits. And whence
comes it that this mighty multitude of fellow-
travellers, all unmarshalled by any captain, all
ungifted with any determination of will, and all
unendowed with any knowledge of each other,
have nevertheless held their course in perfect
harmony? Surely, well has the prophet ranked
this matter among things which are impossible
and undemonstrable, — namely, that two stran-
gers should walk together. For he says, " Shall
two come to the same lodging unless they know
each other?" ^

IV. A REFUTATION OF THE SAME ON THE GROUNDS
OF THE HUMAN CONSTITUTION.

Further, these men understand neither them-
selves nor what is proper to themselves. For
if any of the leaders in this impious doctrine
only considered what manner of person he is
himself, and whence he comes, he would surely
be led to a wise decision, like one who has ob-
tained understanding of himself, and would say,
not to these atoms, but to his Father and Maker,
"Thy hands have made me and fashioned me." ■♦
And he would take up, too, this wonderful ac-
count of his formation as it has been given by
one of old : " Hast Thou not poured me out as
milk, and curdled me as cheese? Thou hast
clothed me with skin and flesh, and hast fenced
me with bones and sinews. Thou hast granted
me life and favour, and Thy visitation hath pre-
served my spirit." 5 For of what quantity and


2 oTTw (r(^ei'6oi'it70ei'TO9.

3 This sentence, which is quoted as from the Scriptures, is found
nowhere there, at least verbatim et ad litteratn. [Amos iii. 3.]

■« Ps. cxix 73.

5 Job X. 10-12. [The milky element {sperma') marvellously
changed into flesh, and the embroidery of the human anatomy, are
here admirably brought out. Compare Ps. cxxxix. 12-16; also p. "'
note I, supra.\


of what origin were the atoms which the father
of Epicurus gave forth from himself when he
begat Epicurus? And how, when they were re-
ceived within his mother's womb, did they coa-
lesce, and take form and figure ? and how were
they put in motion and made to increase? And
how did that little seed of generation draw to-
gether the many atoms that were to constitute
Epicurus, and change some of them into skin and
flesh for a covering, and make bone of others for
erectness and strength, and form sinews of others
for compact contexture ? And how did it frame
and adapt the many other members and parts —
heart and bowels, and organs of sense, some
within and some without — by which the body
is made a thing of life ? For of all these things
there is not one either idle or useless : not even
the meanest of them — the hair, or the nails, or
such like — is so ; but all have their ser\-ice to
do, and all their contribution to make, some of
them to the soundness of bodily constitution,
and others of them to beauty of appearance.
For Providence cares not only for the useful,
but also for the seasonable and beautiful.^ Thus
the hair is a kind of protection and covering for
the whole head, and the beard is a seemly orna-
ment for the philosopher. It was Providence,
then, that formed the constitution of the whole
body of man, in all its necessary parts, and im-
posed on all its members their due connection
with each other, and measured out for them
their liberal supplies from the universal resources.
And the most prominent of these show clearly,
even to the uninstructed, by the proof of personal
experience, the value and service attaching to
them : the head, for example, in the position of
supremacy, and the senses set like a guard about
the brain, as the ruler in the citadel ; and the
advancing eyes, and the reporting ears ; and the
taste which, as it were, is the tribute-gatherer ; ^
and the smell, which tracks and searches out its
objects ; and the touch, which manipulates all
put under it.

Hence we shall only run over in a summary
way, at present, some few of the works of an
all-wise Providence ; and after a litde we shall,
if God grant it, go over them more minutely,
when we direct our discourse toward one who
has the repute of greater learning. So, then, we
have the ministry of the hands, by which all
kinds of works are wTought, and all skilful pro-
fessions practised, and which have all their vari-
ous faculties furnished them, with a view to the
discharge of one common function ; and we
have the shoulders, with their capacity for bear-
ing burdens ; and the fingers, with their power


* [Eccles. iii. 11. Note the force of the word Cosmos. Col-
eridge's Aids to Reflection, p. 251, ed. New York, 1840. Also,
Coleridge's fancy about the to koXov quasi koXoxiv J\

7 €uu>6>] uxTTTcp <^opoAoYoOaa.


WORKS OF DIONYSIUS. — EXTANT FRAGMENTS.


89


of grasping ; and the elbows, with their faculty
of bending, by which they can turn inwardly
upon the body, or take an outward inclination,
so as to be able either to draw objects toward
the body, or to thrust them away from it. We
have also the service of the feet, by which the
whole terrestrial creation is made to come under
our power, the earth itself is traversed thereby,
the sea is made navigable, the rivers are crossed,
and intercourse is established for all with all
things. The belly, too, is the storehouse of
meats, with all its parts arranged in their proper
collocations, so that it apportions for itself the
right measure of aliment, and ejects what is over
and above that. And so is it with all the other
things by which manifestly the due administra-
tion of the constitution of man is wisely secured."
Of all these, the intelligent and the unintelligent
alike enjoy the same use ; but they have not the
same comprehension of them.^ For there are
some who refer this whole economy to a power
which they conceive to be a true divinity,^ and
which they apprehend as at once the highest
intelligence in all things, and the best benefactor
to themselves, believing that this economy is all
the work of a wisdom and a might which are
superior to every other, and in themselves truly
divine. And there are others who aimlessly at-
tribute this whole structure of most marvellous
beauty to chance and fortuitous coincidence.
And in addition to these, there are also certain
physicians, who, having made a more effective
examination into all these things, and having in-
vestigated with utmost accuracy the disposition
of the inward parts in especial, have been struck
with astonishment at the results of their inquiry,
and have been led to deify nature itself. The
notions of these men we shall review afterwards,
as far as we may be able, though we may only
touch the surface of the subject.-* Meantime,
to deal with this matter generally and summarily,
let me ask who constructed this whole tabernacle
of ours, so lofty, erect, graceful, sensitive, mo-
bile, active, and apt for all things ? Was it, as
they say, the irrational multitude of atoms?
Nay, these, by their conjunctions, could not

^ The text is, Kal to. aWa 6t* o<Ttoi/ e^ftai'oj? 17 5totK7)(Tt? t^9
offlpwn^eiou ft.t>ir/>(ai'7)Tai fiiavo^iJ)?. Viger proposes Siaij.ovr)<; for
iiacon^!, and renders the whole thus: " ac caetera quorum vi hu-
manje firmitatis et conservationis ratio continetur."

^ Ihe text is, uiv oixonoi; rot? a(/)pocrti/ fxovre'; ot o"o</>ot ryjv
Kpiaiv, ovK icrxoufft rrji/ yyuxriv. We adopt Viger's suggestion, and
read xp»)<rii' for Koiiriv.

3 We read, with Viger, BeoT-qra for aSeoTTjTa. The text gives ot
liiv yap 61? ijc ar oi.ridujaii' a^«OT>)To, etc., which might possibly
mean something like this: There are some who refer the whole econ-
omy to a power which these (others) may deem to be no divinity,
(but which is) the highest intelligence in all things, and the best bene-
factor, etc. Or the sense might be = There are some who reter this
most inte ligent and beneficent economy to a power which they deem
to be no divinity, though they believe the same economy to be the
work of a wisdom, etc.

* The text is, ij^ci? 5e vurepov w? av oloi re yeviuiJ.€0a, Kav
eTTiTroAijs, avaOiuipricrotJ.ev. Viger renders it thus: " Nos earn postea,
jejune fortassis et exiliter, ut pro facuUate nostra, prosequemur." He
proposes, however, to read ctti ttoAAoi? {sc. pii/j-aat or Aoyois) for
c7rijroA^5,


mould even an image of clay, neither could they
hew and polish a statue of stone ; nor could
they cast and finish an idol of silver or gold ;
but arts and handicrafts calculated for such
operations have been discovered by men who
fabricate these objects. s And if, even in these,
representations and models cannot be made
without the aid of wisdom, how can the genuine
and original patterns of these copies have come
into existence spontaneously ? And wh^ence have
come the soul, and the intelligence, and the rea-
son, which are born with the philosopher? Has
he gathered these from those atoms which are
destitute alike of soul, and intelligence, and
reason? and has each of these atoms inspired
him with some appropriate conception and no-
tion? And are we to suppose that the wisdom
of man was made up by these atoms, as the
myth of Hesiod tells us that Pandora was fash-
ioned by the gods ? Then shall the Greeks have
to give up speaking of the various species of
poetry, and music, and astronomy, and geom-
etry, and all the other arts and sciences, as the
inventions and instructions of the gods, and shall
have to allow that these atoms are the only
muses with skill and wisdom for all subjects.
For this theogony, constructed of atoms by Epi-
curus, is indeed something extraneous to the
infinite worlds of order, "^ and finds its refuge
in the infinite disorder. 7

V. TH.-^T TO WORK IS NOT A MATTER OF PAIN AND
WEARINESS TO GOD.

Now to work, and administer, and do good,
and exercise care, and such like actions, may
perhaps be hard tasks for the idle, and silly, and
weak, and wicked ; in whose number truly Epi-
curus reckons himself, when he propounds such
notions about the gods. But to the earnest, and
powerful, and intelligent, and prudent, such as
philosophers ought to be — and how much more
so, therefore, the gods ! — these things are not
only not disagreeable and irksome, but ever the
most delightful, and by far the most welcome of
all. To persons of this character, negligence
and procrastination in the doing of what is good
are a reproach, as the poet admonishes them in
these words of counsel : —

" Delay not aught till the morrow." ^

And then he adds this further sentence of threat-
ening : —

" The lazy procrastinator is ever wrestling with mis-
eries." 9


5 The text is, \ei,povpyiaL rovrujv utt' ai'dputtrioi' €vpy}vTai aoj/u.a-
Tovpyioy, Viger propo.ses auifJLaTovpyoi, " handicrafts for the COn*
struction of such bodies have been discovered by men."

b Ko<Tti.u>u, [See note 6, p. 88, supra.]

^ aKo<Tp.iav,

8 Hesiod's Works and Days, v. 408.

9 Ibid., V. 411.


90


WORKS OF DIONYSIUS. — EXTANT FRAGMENTS.


And the prophet teaches us the same lesson in a
more solemn fashion, and declares that deeds
done according to the standard of virtue are
truly worthy of God,' and that the man who gives
no heed to these is accursed : " For cursed be
he that doeth the works of the Lord carelessly." ^
Moreover, those who are unversed in any art,
and unable to prosecute it perfectly, feel it to be
wearisome when they make their first attempts
in it, just by reason of the novelty ^ of their ex-
perience, and their want of practice in the works.
But those, on the other hand, who have made
some advance, and much more those who are
perfectly trained in the art, accomplish easily
and successfully the objects of their labours, and
have great pleasure in the work, and would
choose rather thus, in the discharge of the pur-
suits to which they are accustomed, to finish and
carry perfecdy out what their efforts aim at, than
to be made masters of all those things which are
reckoned advantageous among men. Yea, De-
mocritus himself, as it is reported, averred that
he would prefer the discovery of one true cause
to being put in possession of the kingdom of
Persia. And that was the declaration of a man
who had only a vain and groundless conception
of the causes of things,-* inasmuch as he' started
with an unfounded principle, and an erroneous
hypothesis, and did not discern the real root and
the common law of necessity in the constitution
of natural things, and held as the greatest wis-
dom the apprehension of things that come about
smiply in an unintelligent and random way, and
set up chance 5 as the mistress and queen of
things universal, and even things divine, and en-
deavoured to demonstrate that all things happen
by the determination of the same, although at
the same time he kept it outside the sphere of
the life of men, and convicted those of sense-
lessness who worshipped it. At any rate, at the
very beginnmg of his Precepts ^ he speaks thus :
" Men have made an image ^ of cliance, as a
cover ^ for their own lack of knowledge. For
intellect and chance are in their very nature an-
tagonistic to each other.'' And men have main-
tained that this greatest adversary to intelligence
is its sovereign. Yea, rather, they completely
subvert and do away with the one, while they
establish the other in its place. For they do
not celebrate intelligence as the fortunate,'" but


1 fleoTrpeTT^,

^ a«cAu)9. Jer. xlvlii. lo.

3 The text gives, (5ia to ^r^<i Treipo; aArjflfs. We adopt Viger's
emendation, uijyt?.

■* [" Felix qui potuit rerum cognoscere caiisas." But see Hif<-
polytus (vol. v.), and compare Clement, vol. ii. pp. 565-567, this
series.]

5 lyx-r\v. _

^ irp6(^a(Tti/,

9 (tuo-ci Y(ip yvunxr[ Tux/j v-^-X^'^"-'- Viger refers to the parallel in
TuUius, /ro Marcello, sec. 7: " Nunquam temeritas cum sapientia
commiscetur, nee ad consilium casus admittitur."
1° (.in\)\i\.


they laud chance" as the most intelligent."'^
Moreover, those who attend to things condu-
cing to the good of life, take special pleasure
in what serves the interests of those of the same
race with themselves, and seek the recompense
of praise and glory in return for labours under-
taken in behalf of the general good ; while
some exert themselves as purveyors of ways and
means, '3 others as magistrates, others as j^hysi-
cians, others as statesmen ; and even philosophers
pride themselves greatly in their efforts after the
education of men. Will, then, Epicurus or De-
mocritus be bold enough to assert that in the
exertion of philosophizing they only cause dis-
tress to themselves? Nay, rather they will
reckon this a pleasure of mind second to none.
For even though they maintain the opinion that
the good is pleasure, they will be ashamed to
deny that philosophizing is the greater plea.sure
to them.'^ But as to the gods, of whom the
poets among them sing that they are the " be-
stowers of good gifts," '5 these philosophers scof-
fingly celebrate them in strains like these : " The
gods are neither the bestowers nor the sharers
in any good thing." And in what manner, for-
sooth, can they demonstrate that there are gods
at all, when they neither perceive their presence,
nor discern them as the doers of aught, wherein,
indeed, they resemble those who, in their admi-
ration and wonder at the sun and the moon and
the stars, have held these to have been named
gods,^^ from their rmiiiifig^^ such courses : when,
further, they do not attribute to them any func-
tion or power of operation,'^ so as to hold them
gods '9 from their constituting^'^ that is, from their
maJdng objects,^' for thereby in all truth the one
maker and operator of all things must be God :
and when, in fine, they do not set forth any ad-
ministration, or judgment, or beneficence of
theirs in relation to men, so that we might be
bound either by fear or by reverence to worship
them? Has Epicurus then been able, forsooth,
to see beyond this world, and to overpass the
precincts of heaven? or has he gone forth by
some secret gates known to himself alone, and
thus obtained sight of the gods in the void ? "
and, deeming them blessed in their full felicity,
and then becoming himself a passionate aspirant
after such pleasure, and an ardent scholar in that
life which they pursue in the void, does he now


" Fortune, 7vxr\v.

^- <:/A</>p0t't(7TaTyj»',

'^ The text gives, r[hv ov ovtoIs e'vai ro <l>i.\o(ro(j>elv. Viger sug-
gests rfbtov for q6v dv.

'5 SuiTijpa? iauiv. See Homer, Odyssey, viii. 325 and 335.

16 9tOK9.

" Sua TO Bteiv,

•^ SrjuiOvpyLav auTOis rj Karocnceviii'.

*9 BconoirttTuxTty,

20 €K Tov Ofivai.


22 The text gives, oi)s iv T<p KiviZ KarelSe Ofovi,
Tous for oils.


Viger proposes


WORKS OF DIONYSIUS. — EXTANT FRAGMENTS.


91


call upon all to participate in this felicity, and
urge them thus to make themselves like the
gods, preparing ' as their true symposium of
blessedness neither heaven nor Olympus, as the
poets feign, but the sheer void, and setting be-
fore them the ambrosia of atoms/ and pledging
them in ^ nectar made of the same ? However,
in matters which have no relation to us, he intro-
duces into his books a myriad oaths and solemn
asseverations, swearing constantly both nega-
tively and affirmatively by Jove, and making
those whom he meets, and with whom he dis-
cusses his doctrines, swear also by the gods, not
certainly that he fears them himself, or has any
dread of perjury, but that he pronounces all this
to be vain, and false, and idle, and unintelligible,
and uses it simply as a kind of accompaniment
to his words, just as he might also clear his throat,
or spit, or twist his face, or move his hand. So
completely senseless and empty a pretence was
this whole matter of the naming of the gods, in
his estimation. But this is also a very patent
fact, that, being in fear of the Athenians after
(the warnhig of) the death of Socrates, and
being desirous of preventing his being taken for
what he really was — an atheist — the subtle
charlatan invented for them certain empty shad-
ows of unsubstantial gods. But never surely did
he look up to heaven with eyes of true intelli-
gence, so as to hear the clear voice from above,
which another attentive spectator did hear, and
of which he testified when he said, " The heav-
ens declare the glory of God, and the firmament
showeth His handiwork." ■+ And never surely
did he look down upon the world's surface with
due reflection ; for then would he have learned
that " the earth is full of the goodness of the
Lord," 5 and that " the earth is the Lord's, and
.the fulness thereof;"^ and that, as we also read,
*' After this the Lord looked upon the earth, and
filled it with His blessings. With all manner of
living things hath He covered the face thereof" 7
And if these men are not hopelessly blinded,
let them but survey the vast wealth and variety
of living creatures, land animals, and winged
creatures, and aquatic ; and let them understand
then that the declaration made by the Lord on
the occasion of His judgment of all things^ is
true : " And all things, in accordance with His
command, appeared good." ^


' (TuyKpoTOJl'.

'^ Foi o.t6\xu>v Viger suggests dT/u.cii', " of vapours."
^ Or, giving them to drink.

■* Ps. XIX, 1.

- Ps. xxxiii. 5.

'' Ps. xxiv. 1.

' Ecclus. xvi. 29, 30.

1 he text is, k-i rr/ nivTuiv KpC<Tii. Viger suggests Kriud," a.t
the creation of all things."

9 The quotation runs thus: <cac navra Kara Trjr auToO npoaTa^iv
weiinji/t Ka\d. Eusebius adds the remark here: "These passages
have been culled by me out of a very large number composed against
Epicurus by Dionysius, a bishop of our own time." [Among the
many excellent works which have appeared against the " hopelessly


III. — FROM THE BOOKS AGAINST SABELLIUS.'o
ON THE NOTION THAT MATTER IS UNGENERATED."

These certainly are not to be deemed pious
who hold that matter is ungenerated, while they
allow, indeed, that it is brought under the hand
of God so far as its arrangement and regulation
are concerned ; for they do admit that, being
naturally passive '^ and pliable, it yields readily to
the alterations impressed upon it by God. It is
for them, however, to show us plainly how it can
possibly be that the like and the unlike should
be predicated as subsisting together in God and
matter. For it becomes necessary thus to think
of one as a superior to either, and that is a thought
which cannot legitimately be entertained with re-
gard to God. For if there is this defect of gen-
eration which is said to be the thing like in both,
and if there is this point of difference which is
conceived of besides in the two, whence has this
arisen in them .'' If, indeed, God is the ungen-
erated, and if this defect of generation is, as we
may say, His very essence, then matter cannot
be ungenerated ; for God and matter are not one
and the same. But if each subsists properly and
independently — namely, God and matter — and
if the defect of generation also belongs to both,
then it is evident that there is something differ-
ent from each, and older and higher than both.
But the difference of their contrasted constitu-
tions is completely subversive of the idea that
these can subsist on an equality together, and
more, that this one of the two — namely, matter
— can subsist of itself For then they will have
to furnish an explanation of the fact that, though
both are supposed to be ungenerated, God is
nevertheless impassible, immutable, imperturba-
ble, energetic ; while matter is the opposite, im-
pressible, mutable, variable, alterable. And now,
how can these properties harmoniously co-exist
and unite ? Is it that God has adapted Himself
to the nature of the matter, and thus has skilfully
wrought it ? But it would be absurd to suppose
that God works in gold, as men are wont to do,
or hews or polishes stone, or puts His hand to
any of the other arts by which different kinds
of matter are made capable of receiving form
and figure. But if, on the other hand, He has
fashioned matter according to His own will, and
after the dictates of His own wisdom, impressing
upon it the rich and manifold forms produced
by His own operation, then is this account of
ours one both good and true, and still further

blinded " Epicureans of this age, let me note Dnr^viiiism tested by
Language, by E. Bateman, M.D. London, Rivmgtons, 1877.]

■° In Eusebius, Prcepar. Evangel ., book vii. ch. 19.

" Eusebius mtroduces this extract thus: '' And I shall adduce the
words of those who have most thoroughly examined the dogma before
us, and first of all Dionysius indeed, who, in the first book of his
Exercitations against Sabctliiis, writes in these terms on the sub-
ject in hand." [Note the primary position of our author in the
refutation of Sabellianism, and see (vol. v.) the story of Callistus. ]

^- TrayijTiji/.


92


WORKS OF DIONYSIUS.— EXTANT FRAGMENTS.


one that establishes the position that the ungen-
eratecl God is the hypostasis (the Hfe and foun-
dation) of all things in the universe. For with
this fact of the defect of generation it conjoins
the proper mode of His being. Much, indeed,
might be said in confutation of these teachers,
but that is not what is before us at present.
And if they are put alongside the most impious
polytheists,' these will seem the more pious in
their speech.

IV. — EPISTLE TO DIONYSIUS BISHOP OF ROME.^
FROM THE FIRST BOOK.

1. There certainly was not a time when God
was not the Father.^

2. Neither, indeed, as though He had not
brouglit forth these things, did God afterwards
beget the Son, but because the Son has existence
not fiom Himself, but from the P'ather.

And after a few words he says of the Son
Himself: —

3. Being the brightness of the eternal Light,
He Himself also is absolutely eternal. For since
light is always in existence, it is manifest that
its brightness also exists, because light is per-
ceived to exist from the fact that it shines, and
it is impossible that light should not shine. And
let us once more come to illustrations. If the
sun exists, there is also day ; if nothing of this
be manifest, it is impossible that the sun should
be there. If then the sun were eternal, the day
would never end ; but now, for such is not really
the state of the case, the day begins with the be-
ginning of the sun, and ends with its ending.
But God is the eternal Light, which has neither
had a beginnmg, nor shall ever fail. Therefore
the eternal brightness shines forth before Him,
and co-exists with Him, in that, existing without
a beginning, and always begotten, He always
shines before Him ; and He is that Wisdom
which says, " I was that wherein He delighted,
and I was daily His delight before His face at
all times." ^

And a little after he thus pursues his discourse
from the same point : —

4. Since, therefore, the Father is eternal, the
Son also is eternal, Light of Light. For where
there is the begetter, there is also the offspring.
And if there is no offspring, how and of what
can He be the begetter? But both are, and
always are. Since, then, God is the Light, Christ
is the Brightness. And since He is a Spirit —
for says He, " God is a Spirit " s — fittingly again

' TTob? Tous a9c(uTaTOU5 TToAvSe'ov?.

2 Fragments of a second epistle of Dionysius, Bishop of Alexan-
dria, or of the treatise which was inscribed the " Elenchus et Apolo-
gia." [A former epistle was written when Dionysius (of Rome) was
a presbyter ]

3 And in what follows (says Athanasius) he professes that Christ
« always, as being the Word, and the Wisdom, and the Power.

* Prov. viii. 30.
5 John iv. 24.


is Christ called Breath ; for " He," ^ saith He,
" is the breath of God's power." 7
And again he says : —

5. Moreover, the Son alone, always co-existing
with the Father, and filled with Him who is, Him-
self also is, since He is of the Father.

FROM THE SAME FIRST BOOK.

6. But when I spoke of things created, and
certain works to be considered, I hastily put for-
ward illustrations of such things, as it were little
appropriate, when I said neither is the plant the
same as the husbandman, nor the boat the same
as the boatbuilder.^ But then I lingered rather
upon things suitable and more adapted to the
nature of the thing, and I unfolded in many
words, by various carefully considered arguments,
what things were more true ; which things, more-
over, I have set forth to you in another letter.
And in, these things I have also proved the false-
hood of the charge which they bring against me
— to wit, that I do not maintain that Christ is
consubstantial with God. For although I say
that I have never either found or read this word
in the sacred Scriptures, yet other reasonings,
which I immediately subjoined, are in no wise
discrepant from this view, because I brouglit for-
ward as an illustration human offspring, which
assuredly is of the same kind as the begetter ;
and I said that parents are absolutely distin-
guished from their children by the fact alone that
they themselves are not their children, or that it
would assuredly be a matter of necessity that
there would neither be parents nor children.
But, as I said before, I have not the letter in my
possession, on account of the present condition
of affairs ; otherwise I would have sent you the
very words that I then wrote, yea, and a copy
of the whole letter, and I will send it if at any
time I shall have the opportunity. I remember,
further, that I added many similitudes from
things kindred to one another. For I said that
the plant, whether it grows up from seed or from
a root, is different from that whence it sprouted,
although it is absolutely of the same nature ; and
similarly, that a river flowing from a spring takes
another form and name : for that neither is the
spring called the river, nor the river the spring,
but that these are two things, and that the spring
indeed is, as it were, the father, while the river
is the water from the spring. But they feign that
they do not see these things and the like to them
which are written, as if they were blind ; but
they endeavour to assail me from a distance with
expressions too carelessly used, as if they were
stones, not observing that on things of which


*> Sn'/. Wisdom.

7 Wisd. vii. 25.

8 From Athan., £/!. de dccret. Nic. Syn., 4. 18. [See remarks on
iiievitah'e discrepancies of language and figurative illustrations at

I this formative period, vol. iv. p. 223.]


I


WORKS OF DIONYSIUS. — EXTANT FRAGMENTS.


93


:hey are ignorant, and which require interpre-
:ation to be understood, illustrations that are not
Dnly remote, but even contrary, will often throw
ight.

FROM THE SAME FIRST BOOK.

7. It was said above that God is the spring of
ill good things, but the Son was called the river
lowing from Him ; because the word is an ema-
lation of the mind, and — to speak after human
"ashion — is emitted from the heart by the mouth.
But the mind which springs forth by the tongue
s different from the word which exists in the
leart. P'or this latter, after it has emitted the
brmer, remains and is what it was before ; but
;he mind sent forth flies away, and is carried
everywhere around, and thus each is in each
ilthough one is from the other, and they are one
ilthough they are two. x\nd it is thus that the
i^ather and the Son are said to be one, and to
)e in one another.

FROM THE SECOND BOOK.

8. The individual names uttered by me can
leither be separated from one another, nor
)arted.' I spoke of the Father, and before I
nade mention of the Son I already signified
-lim in the Father. I added the Son ; and the
"ather, even although I had not previously named
riim, had already been absolutely comprehended
n the Son. I added the Holy Spirit ; but, at
he same time, I conveyed under the name
vhence and by whom He proceeded. But they
ire ignorant that neither the Father, in that He
s Father, can be separated from the Son, for
hat name is the evident ground of coherence
ind conjunction ; nor can the Son be separated
rom the Father, for this word Father indicates
Lssociation betcveen them. And there is, more-
)ver, evident a Spirit who can neither be dis-
joined from Him who sends, nor from Him who
)rings Him. How, then, should I who use such
lames think that these are absolutely divided
md separated the one from the other?

After a few words he adds : —

9. Thus, indeed, we expand the indivisible
Jnity into a Trinity ; and again we contract the
rrinity, which cannot be diminished, into a
Jnity.

FROM THE SAME SECOND BOOK.

10. But if any quibbler, from the fact that I
aid that God is the Maker and Creator of all
hings, thinks that I said that He is also Creator
)f Christ, let him observe that I first called Him
^ather, in which word the Son also is at the
ame time expressed.^" For after I called the
:''ather the Creator, I added. Neither is He
he Father of those things whereof He is Crea-


> Ex Athan., Ep. de decret. Nic. Syn., 4. 17.
^ Ibid., 4. 20.


tor, if He who begot is properly understood to
be a Father (for we will consider the latitude of
this word Father in what follows). Nor is a
maker a father, if it is only a framer who is
called a maker. For among the Greeks, they
who are wise are said to be makers of their
books. The apostle also says, " a doer {scit.
maker) of the law." 3 Moreover, of matters
of the heart, of which kind are virtue and vice,
men are called doers {scit. makers) ; after which
manner God said, " I expected that it should
make judgment, but it made iniquity." *

11. That neither must this saying be thus
blamed ; 5 for he says that he used the name of
Maker on account of the flesh which the Word
had assumed, and which certainly was made.
But if any one should suspect that that had been
said of the Word, even this also was to be heard
without contentiousness. For as I do not think
that the Word was a thing made, so I do not say
that God was its Maker, but its Father. Yet
still, if at any time, discoursing of the Son, I
may have casually said that God was His Maker,
even this mode of speaking would not be without
defence. For the wise men among the Greeks
call themselves the makers of their books, al-
though the same are fathers of their books.
Moreover, divine Scripture calls us makers of
those motions which proceed from the heart,
when it calls us doers of the law of judgment
and of justice.

FROM THE SAME SECOND BOOK.

12. In the beginning taas the IVord.^ But
that was not the Word which produced the
Word.7 For " the Word was with God." <^ The
Lord is Wisdom ; it was not therefore Wisdom
that produced Wisdom ; for " I was that," says
He, " wherein He delighted." ^ Christ is truth ;
but "blessed," says He, " is the God of truth."

FROM THE THIRD BOOK.

13. Life is begotten of life in the same way
as the river has flowed forth from the spring, and
the brilliant light is ignited from the inextin-
guishable light.9

FROM THE FOURTH BOOK.

14. Even as our mind emits from itself a
word, 7 — as says the prophet, " My heart hath
uttered forth a good word," '° — and each of the
two is distinct the one from the other, and main-
taining a peculiar place, and one that is distin-


3 Rom. ii. 13; Jas. iv. 12. The Greek word TroijjT))? meaning
either maker or doer, causes the ambiguity here and below.

■* Isa. V. 7.

5 Athanasius adds {tit supra, 4. 21), that Dionysius gave various
replies to those that blamed him for saying that God is the Maker of
Christ, whereby he cleared himself.

'^ John i. I. [For iir)iia, see vol. ii. p. 15, this series.]

' E.x Athan., Ep. de decret. Nic. Syn., 4. 25. [P. 94, notes i, 2,
infra.\

8 Prov. viii. 30.

9 Ex Athan., Ep. de decret. Nic. Syn., 4. 18.
'o Ps. xlv. I.


94


WORKS OF DIOxNYSIUS. — EXTANT FRAGMENTS.


guished from the other ; since the former indeed
abides and is stirred in the heart, while the latter
has its place in the tongue and in the mouth.
And yet they are not apart from one another,
nor deprived of one another ; neither is the
mind without the word, nor is the word without
the mind ; but the mind makes the word and
appears in the word, and the word exhibits the
mind wherein it was made. And the mind in-
deed is, as it were, the word immanent, while
the word is the mind breaking forth.' The mind
passes into the word, and the word transmits the
mind to the surrounding hearers ; and thus the
mind by means of the word takes its place in
the souls of the hearers, entering in at the same
time as the word. And indeed the mind is, as
it were, the father of the word, existing in itself;
but the word is as the son of the mind, and
cannot be made before it nor without it, but
exists with it, whence it has taken its seed and
origin. In the same manner, also, the Almighty
Father and Universal Mind has before all things
the Son, the Word, and the discourse,- as the
interpreter and messenger of Himself.

ABOUT THE MIDDLE OF THE TREATISE.

15. If, from the fact that there are three hypos-
tases, they say that they are divided, there are
three whether they like it or no, or else let them
get rid of the divine Trinity altogether.^

AND AGAIN :

For on this account after the Unity there is
also the most divine Trinity.^

THE CONCLUSION OF THE ENTIRE TRE.-\TISE.

16. In accordance with all these things, the
form, moreover, and rule being received from the
elders who have lived before us, we also, with a
voice in accordance with them, will both acquit
ourselves of thanks to you, and of the letter
which we are now writing. And to God the
Father, and His Son our Lord Jesus Christ, with
the Holy Spirit, be glory and dominion for ever
and ever. Araen.5

v. — THE EPISTLE TO BISHOP BASILIDES.*
CANON I.

Dionysius to Basilides, my beloved son, and
my brother, a fellow-minister with me in holy


' Eiiianant. [P. 49, supra, and vol. iii. p. 299, this series.]

2 Sermonem [So TertuUian, Scrmo, vol lii. p. 299, note 19.]

3 Ex Basilio, lib. de Sfn'r. Sattcto, chap. 29.
* Ibid. cap. penult., p. 61.

5 Of the work itself Athanasius thus speaks: Finally, Dionysius
complains that his accusers do not quote his opinions in their integrity,
but mutilated, and that they do not speak out of a good conscience,
but for evil inclination; and he says that they are like those who
cavilled at the epistles of the blessed apostle. Certainly he meets
the individual words of his accusers, and gives a solution to all their
arguments; and as in those earlier writings of his he confuted Sabel-
lius most evidently, so in these later ones he entirely declares his own
pious faith. [Conf. Hcrmas,\o\. iii. p. 15, note 7, with note 2, j?</^rt.]

•> Containing explanations which were given as answers to ques-
tions propo.sed by that bishop on various topics, and which have been
received as canons. [The Scholium, p. 79, is transposed from here.]


things, and an obedient ser\'ant of God, in the
Lord greeting.

You have sent to me, most faithful and accom-
plished son, in order to inquire what is the proper
hour for bringing the fast to a close ^ on the day
of Pentecost.'^ For you say that there are some
of the brethren who hold that that should be
done at cockcrow, and others who hold that it
should be at nightfall.9 For the brethren in
Rome, as they say, wait for the cock ; whereas,
regarding those here, you told us that they would
have it earlier.'" And it is your anxious desire,
accordingly, to have the hour presented accu-
rately, and determined with perfect exactness,"
which indeed is a matter of difficulty and un-
certainty. However, it will be acknowledged
cordially by all, that from the date of the resur-
rection of our Lord, those who up to that time
have been humbling their souls with fastings,
ought at once to begin their festal joy and glad-
ness. But in what you have written to me you
have made out very clearly, and with an intelli-
gent understanding of the Holy Scriptures, that
no very exact account seems to be offered in them
of the hour at which He rose. For the evangel-
ists have given different descriptions of the parties
who came to the sepulchre one after another,'^
and all have declared that they found the Lord
risen already. It was " in the end of the Sab-
bath," as Matthew has said ; '^ it was " early, when
it was yet dark," as John writes ; "* it was " very
early in the morning," as Luke puts it ; and it
was " very early in the morning, at the rising of
the sun," as Mark tells us. Thus no one has
shown us clearly the exact time when He rose.
It is admitted, however, that those who came to
the sepulchre in the end of the Sabbath, as it
began to dawn toward the first day of the week,'5
found Him no longer lying in it. And let us not
suppose that the evangelists disagree or contra-
dict each other. But even although there may


7 aTTOVTqtniiecrSaL 8(7. Gentianus Hervetus renders this by jeju-
nandits sit dies Paschcs ; and thus he translates the word by
jcjunare, "to fast," wherever It occurs, whereas it rather means
a\v/ays,, jeju>iiuvt solvere, " to have done fasting." In this .sense
the word is used in the Apostolic Constitiitio>is repeatedly: see book
v. chap. 12, 18, etc. It occurs in the same sense in the 89th Canon
of the Concilium Trullanum. The usage must evidently be the same
here: so that it does not mean, What is the proper hour for fasting
on the day of Pentecost? but. What is the hour at which the ante-
paschal fast ought to be terminated — whether on the evening preced-
ing the paschal festival Itself, or at cockcrowing, or at another time?
— "Gall. See also the very full article in Suicer, s.v.

^ I give the beginning of this epistle of Dionysius of Alexandria
also as it is found in not a few manuscripts, viz., e'7re<TTeiAos fioi . . .
rfi Toil natrxa 7repiAi;<r«i, — the common reading being, Triv tov 7rao-x<«
rifj.epai\ And the TrepiAvcrt? tou -rrdcrxa denotes the close of the
paschal fast, as Eusebius [Hist. Eccles., v. 23) uses the phrase to?
Tiui/ aaniuiv e'lriADtrtis, — the verbs n-epiAutii', aTroAiifti', tiriAueii',
(coTaAiffir, being often used in this sense. — COTELERIUS on the
Apostolic Constitutious, v. 15.

9 arf)' eern-epas.

'° [Note this, and the Nicene decision which made the Alexandrian
bishop the authority concerning the paschal annually, vol. ii. Elucida-
tion II. p. 343.]

" TTttMU ;li€jaeTpi7HC>'T)l'.

'- Kaia Kaipovi ffrjAAoy/ieVou?.
" Matt, xxviii. i.
'* John XX. I.


WORKS OF DIONYSIUS.— EXTANT FRAGMENTS.


95


seem to be some small difficulty as to the subject !
of our inciuiry, if they all agree that the light of
the world, our Lord, rose on that one night, while
they differ with respect to the hour, we may well
seek with wise and faithful mind to harmonize
their statements. The narrative by Matthew,
then, runs thus : " In the end of the Sabbath,
as it began to dawn toward the first day of the
week,' came Mary Magdalene, and the other
Mary, to see the sepulchre. And, behold, there
was a great earthquake : for the angel of the
Lord descended from heaven, and came and
rolled back the stone, and sat upon it. And his
countenance was like lightning, and his raiment
white as snow : and for fear of him the keepers
did shake, and became as dead men. And the
angel answered and said unto the women, Fear
not ye : for I know that ye seek Jesus, which was
crucified. He is not here ; for He is risen, as
He said." ^ Now this phrase " in the end " will
be thought by some to signify, according to the
common use ^ of the word, the evening of the
Sabbath ; while others, with a better perception
of the fact, will say that it does not indicate that,
but a Lite hour in the night,* as the phrase " in
the end " s denotes slowness and length of time.
Also because he speaks of night, and not of even-
ing, he has added the words, " as it began to
dawn toward the first day of the week." And
the parties here did not come yet, as the others
say, " bearing spices," but " to see the sepul-
chre ; " and they discovered the occurrence of
the earthquake, and the angel sitting upon the
stone, and heard from him the declaration, " He
is not here. He is risen." And to the same effect
is the testimony of John. " The first day of the
week," says he, " came Mary Magdalene early,
when it was yet dark, unto the sepulchre, and
seeth the stone taken away from the sepulchre." ^
Only, according to this " when it was yet dark,"
she had come in advance.'' And Luke says :
" They rested the Sabbath-day, according to the
commandment. Now, upon the first day of the
week, very early in the morning, they came unto
the sepulchre, bringing the spices which they had
prepared ; and they found the stone rolled away
from the sepulchre." ^ This phrase " very early
in the morning "9 probably indicates the early
dawn '° of the first day of the week ; and thus,
when the Sabbath itself was wholly past, and also
the whole night succeeding it, and when another
day had begun, they came, bringing spices and
myrrh, and then it became apparent that He had

^ Matt, xxviii. 1-6.

3 KOlfOTTfTa.

* vvKTa ^adiiav.
5 oite, late.

* John XX. I.


already risen long before. And Mark follows
this, and says : " They had bought sweet spices,
in order that they might come and anoint Him.
And very early (in the morning), the first day
of the week, they come unto the sepulchre at
the rising of the sun." " For this evangelist also
has used the term " very early," which is just
the same as the "very early in the morning"
employed by the former ; and he has added,
" at the rising of the sun." Thus they set out,
and took their way first when it was " very early
in the morning," or (as Mark says) when ft was
" very early ; " but on the road, and by their stay
at the sepulchre, they spent the time till it was
sunrise. And then the young man clad in white
said to them, " He is risen. He is not here."
As the case stands thus, we make the following
statement and explanation to those who seek an
exact account of the specific hour, or half-hour,
or quarter of an hour, at which it is proper to
begin their rejoicing over our Lord's rising from
the dead. Those who are too hasty, and give
up even before midnight,'^ we reprehend as re-
miss and intemperate, and as almost breaking
off from their course in their precipitation, '3 for it
is a wise man's word, " That is not little in life
which is within a little." And those who hold
out and continue for a very long time, and perse-
vere even on to the fourth watch, which is also
the time at which our Saviour manifested Him-
self walking upon the sea to those who were then
on the deep, we receive as noble and laborious
disciples. On those, again, who pause and re-
fresh themselves in the course as they are moved
or as they are able, let us not press very hard : '*
for all do not carry out the six days of fasting '5
either equally or alike ; but some pass even all
the days as a fast, remaining without food through
the whole ; while others take but two, and others
three, and others four, and others not even one.
And to those who have laboured painfully through
these protracted fasts, and have thereafter become
exhausted and well-nigh undone, pardon ought
to be extended if they are somewhat precipitate
in taking food. But if there are any who not
only decline such protracted fasting, but refuse
at the first to fast at all, and rather indulge them-
selves luxuriously during the first four days, and
then when they reach the last two days — viz ,
the preparation and the Sabbath — fast w^ith due
rigour during these, and these alone, and think
that they do something grand and brilliant if
they hold out till the morning, I cannot think
that they have gone through the time on equal


TTapa TOUTO


irpoeAT)Xudci.


' Luke xxiii. 56, xxiv. i, 2.
9 bpOpov PaSeo?.


" Mark xvi. 1,2.

'2 n-pb yvKTOi cyyus i)6rj /xt<rovcn)S avieVra?.

'3 uj? Trap' okiyov TrpoKaraAuoi'Ta? rbv hpo^ov,

'* fi Tim. iv. 8. Mark the moderation of our author in contrast
with superstition. But in our days the peril is one of an opposite
kind. Contrast St. Paul, 2 Cor. xi. 27.]

15 That is, as Balsamon explains, the six days of the week of our
Lord's passion.


96


WORKS OF DIONYSIUS.— EXTANT FRAGMENTS.


terms with those who have been practising the
same during several days before. This is the
counsel which, in accordance with my apprehen-
sion of the question, I have offered you in writ-
ing on these matters.'

CANON II.

The question touching women in the time of
their separation, whether it is proper for them
when in such a condition to enter the house of
God, I consider a superfluous inquiry. For I do
not think that, if they are believing and pious
women, they will themselves be rash enough in
such a condition either to approach the holy
table or to touch the body and blood of the
Lord. Certainly the woman who had the issue
of blood of twelve years' standing did not touch
the Lord Himself, but only the hem of His gar-
ment, with a view to her cure.^ For to pray,
however a person may be situated, and to re-
member the Lord, in whatever condition a per-
son may be, and to offer up petitions for the
obtaining of help, are exercises altogether blame-
less. But the individual who is not perfectly
pure both in soul and in body, shall be inter-
dicted from approaching the holy of holies.

CANON III.

Moreover, those who are competent, and who
are advanced in years, ought to be judges of
themselves m these matters. For that it is proper
to abstain from each other by consent, in order
that they may be free for a season to give them-

■ To these canons are appended the comments of Balsamon and
Zonaras, which it is not necessary to give here.
2 Matt. ix. zo; Luke viii. 43.


selves to prayer, and then come together again,
they have heard from Paul in his epistle.^

CANON IV.

As to those who are overtaken by an involun-
tary flux in the night-time, let such follow the
testimony of their own conscience, and consider
themselves as to whether they are doubtfully
minded ■♦ in this matter or not. And he that
doubteth in the matter of meats, the apostle tells
us, " is damned if he eat." 5 In these things,
therefore, let every one who approaches God be
of a good conscience, and of a proper confidence,
so far as his own judgment is concerned. And,
indeed, it is in order to show your regard for us
(for you are not ignorant, beloved,) that you
have proposed these questions to us, making us
of one mind, as indeed we are, and of one spirit
with yourself. And I, for my part, have thus set
forth my opinions in public, not as a teacher,
but only as it becomes us with all simplicity to
confer with each other. And wlien you have
examined this opinion of mine, my most intelli-
gent son, you will write back to me your notion
of these matters, and let me know whatever may
seem to you to be just and preferable, and whether
you approve of my judgment in these things.^
That it may fare well with you, my beloved son,
as you minister to the Lord in peace, is my
prayer.


3 Referring to the relations of marriage, deah with in i Cor. vii.
5, etc.

* 6ta*fptVoi'Tat.

s Rom. XIV. 23. [Gr. KaraK^KpiTai = Is condemned = self-con-
demned. Wordsworth cites Cicero, £>e Officiis, i. 30. j

^ [The entire absence of despotic authority in these episcopal
teachings is to be noted. 2 Cor. 1. 24. ]


PART II. — CONTAINING EPISTLES, OR FRAGMENTS OF EPISTLES.


EPISTLE L-TO DOMITIUS AND DIDYMUS.'

I . But it would be a superfluous task for me
to mention by name our (martyr) friends, who
are numerous and at the same time unknown to
you. Only understand that they include men
.and women, both young men and old, both maid-
ens and aged matrons, both soldiers and private
citizens, — every class and every age, of whom
some have suffered by stripes and fire, and some
by the sword, and have won the victory and
received their crowns. In the case of others,
however, even a very long lifetime has not proved
sufficient to secure their appearance as men ac-
ceptable to the Lord ; as indeed in my own case
too, that sufficient time has not shown itself up

' Eusebius, Hist. Eccles., vii. 11.


to the present. Wherefore He has preserved
me for another convenient season, of which He
knows Himself, as He says : " In an acceptable
time have I heard thee, and in a day of salvation
have I helped thee."^

2. Since, however, you have been inquiring ^
about what has befallen us, and wish to be in-
formed as to how we have fared, you have got a
full report of our fortunes ; how when we — that
is to say. Gains, and myself, and Faustus, and
Peter, and Paul — were led off as prisoners by
the centurion and the magistrates,-* and the sol-


2 Isa. xlix. 8. . . , ,

3 Reading CTreiSi) Tniv66.vf(j6i, for which some codices give tveX
TTVvBdvetrdaL. _ .

4 (TTpaTYiySiv, Christophorsonus would read <rTparr)yov, m the
sense of commander. But the word is used here of the duumviri,
or magistrates of Alexandria. And that the word o-TpaTijyos was used


WORKS OF DIONYSIUS. — EXTANT FRAGMENTS.


97


diers and other attendants accompanying them,
there came upon us certain parties from Mare-
otis, who dragged us with them against our
will, and though we were disinclined to follow
them, and carried us away by force ; ' and how
Gains and Peter and myself have been separated
from our other brethren, and shut up alone in a
desert and sterile place in Libya, at a distance
of three days' journey from Parastonium.

3. And a little further on, he proceeds thus :
— And they concealed themselves in the city,
and secretly visited the brethren. I refer to the
presbyters Maximus, Dioscorus, Demetrius, and
Lucius. For Faustinus and Aquila, who are
persons of greater prominence in the world, are
wandering about in Egypt. I specify also the
deacons who survived those who died in the sick-
ness,^ viz., Faustus, Eusebius, and Chasremon.
And of Eusebius I speak as one whom the Lord
strengthened from the beginning, and qualified
for the task of discharging energetically the ser-
vices due to the confessors who are in prison,
and of executing the perilous office of dressing
out and burying ^ the bodies of those perfected
and blessed martyrs. For even up to the pres-
ent day the governor does not cease to put to
death, in a cruel manner, as I have already said,
some of those who are brought before him ;
while he wears others out by torture, and wastes
others away with imprisonment and bonds, com-
manding also that no one shall approach them,


in this ciz'i7 acceptation, as well as in the common iizilitary applica-
tion, we see by many examples in Athanasius, Ammianus Marcellinus,
and others. Thus, as Valesius remarks, the soldiers (TTpaTtuTio;')
here will be the band with the centurion, and the attendants (vtti)p(-
Tuif) will be the civil followers of the magistrates.

' This happened in the first persecution under Decius, when
Dionysius was carried off by the decision of the prefect Sabinus to
Taposiris, as he informs us in his epistle to Germanus. Certainly
any one who compares that epistle of Dionysius to Germanus with
this one to Domitius, will have no doubt that he speaks of one and j
the same event in both. Hence Eusebius is in error in thinking that
in this epistle of Dionysius to Domitius we have a narrative of the
events relating to the persecution of Valerian, — a position which may
easily be reluted from Dionysius himself. For in the persecution under
Valerian, Dionysius was "not carried off into exile under military cus-
tody, nor were there any men from Mareotis, who came and drove off
the soldiers, and bore him away unwillingly, and set him at liberty
again: nor had Dionysius on that occasion the presbyters Gains and
Faustus, and Peter and Paul, with him. All these things happened
to Dionysius in that persecution which began a little before Decius
obtained the empire, as he testifies himself in his epistle to Germanus.
But in the persecution under Valerian, Dionysius was accompanied
in exile by the presbyter Maximus, and the deacons Faustus, and
Eusebius, and Chseremon, and a certain Roman cleric, as he tells us
in the epistle to Germanus. — Valesiijs.

2 ev tt) voiTu). Rufinus reads I'jo'w, and renders it, " But of the
deacons, some died in the island after the pains of confession." But
Dionysius refers to the pestilence which traversed the whole Roman
world in the times of Gallus and Volusianus, as Eusebius in his
Chronicon and others record. .See Aurelius Victor. Dionysius
makes mention of this sickness again in the paschal epistle to the
Alexandrians, where he also speaks of the deacons who were cut off
by that plague. — Vales.

3 JTfpio-ToAa? eKTeAeiv. Christophorsonus renders it: "to pre-
pare the linen cloths in which the bodies of the blessed martyrs who
departed this life might be wrapped." In this Valesius thinks he errs
by looking at the modern method of burial, whereas among the ancient
Christians the custom was somewhat different, the bodies being dressed
out in full attire, and that often at great cost, as Eusebius shows us in
the case of Astyrius, in the Hist. Eciles., vii. 16. Yet Athanasius,
in his Life of Antonius, has this sentence: "The Egyptians are
accustomed to attend piously to the funerals of the bodies of the dead,
and especially those of the holy martyrs, and to wrap them in linen
cloths: they are not wont, however, to consign them to the earth, but
to place them on couches, and keep them in private apartments."


and making strict scrutiny lest any one should
be seen to do so. And nevertheless God im-
parts relief to the oppressed by the tender kind-
ness and earnestness of the brethren.


EPISTLE II. -TO NOVATUS.*

Dionysius to Novatus 5 his brother, greeting.

If you were carried on against your will, as
you say, you will show that such has been the
case by your voluntary retirement. For it would
have been but dutiful to have suffered any kind
of ill, so as to avoid rending the Church of God.
And a martyrdom borne for the sake of pre-
venting a division of the Church, would not have
been more inglorious than one endured for re-
fusing to worship idols ; ^ nay, in my opinion at
least, the former would have been a nobler thing
than the latter. For in the one case a person
gives such a testimony simply for his own indi-
vidual soul, whereas in the other case he is a
witness for the whole Church. And now, if you
can persuade or constrain the brethren to come
to be of one mind again, your uprightness will
be superior to your error ; and the latter will not
be charged against you, while the former will be
commended in you. But if you cannot prevail
so far with your recusant brethren, see to it that
you save your own soul. My wish is, that in the
Lord you may fare well as you study peace.

EPISTLE IIL — TO FABIUS 7 BISHOP OF ANTIOCH.

I. The persecution with us did not commence
with the imperial edict, but preceded it by a
whole year. And a certain prophet and poet,
an enemy to this city,^ whatever else he was, had
previously roused and exasperated against us the
masses of the heathen, inflaming them anew with
the fires of their native superstition. Excited
by him, and finding full liberty for the perpetra-
tion of wickedness, they reckoned this the only


■* Eusebius, Hist. Eccles., vi. 45.

•5 Jerome, in his Catalogiis, where he adduces the beginning of
this epistle, gives Novatianus for Novatus. So in the Clironicon of
Georgius Syncellus we have Aioi-iiaio? Nauariai/uj. Rufinus' account
appears to be that there were two such epistles, — one to Novatus, and
another to Novatianus. The confounding of these two forms seems,
however, to have been frequent among the Greeks. [See Lardner,
Credib. , snh voce Novat. \Vord.sworth thinks the Greeks shortened
the name, on the grounds which Horace notes ad vocem " Equotuti-
cum." Satires, I. v. 87.]

^ We read, with Gallandi, xai ^i* ou/c aSofoTe'pa t^? ecexei' toO
/LtTj tfiwAoAaTpeuaat f^sic^ 7ii'0/u.€i'Tj?, rj kvtK^v tou \i.\\ (j\i(ja.\. flap-
Tvpi'a. This is substantially the reading of three Venetian codices, as
al.so of Sophronius on Jerome's De z'ir. illustr.. ch. 69, and Georgius
Syncellus in the Chrotiogr., p. ,374, and Nicephorus Callist., Hist.
Eccles., vi. 4. Pearson, in the Annales Cyprian., Num. x. p. 31,
proposes 9iJo-ai for cr;(t(Tai. Rufinus renders it: " et erat non infe-
rior glorLa sustinere martyrium ne scindatur ecclesia quam est ilia ne
idolis immoletur."

' Eusebius, Hist. Eccles., vi. 41, 42, 44. Certain codices read
Fabianus for Fabius, and that form is adopted also by Rufinus.
Eusebius introduces this epistle thus: " The same author, in an
epistle written to Fabius bishop of Antioch, gives the following ac-
count of the confiicls of those who suffered martyrdom at Alexandria."

8 (cai (jtOaaoL^ 6 KaKuiy, etc. Pearson, Annales Cyprian, ad
ann., 249, § i, renders it rather thus: " et prseverlens malorum huic
urbi vates et auctor, quisquis ille fuit, commovit," etc.


98


WORKS OF DIONYSIUS.— EXTANT FRAGMENTS.


piety and service to their demons,' namely, our
slaughter.

2, First, then, they seized an old man of the
name of Metras, and commanded him to utter
words of impiety ; and as he refused, they beat
his body with clubs, and lacerated his face and
eyes with sharp reeds, and then dragged him off
to the suburbs and stoned him there. Next they
carried off a woman named Quinta, who was a
believer, to an idol temple, and compelled her
to worship the idol ; and when she turned away
from it, and showed how she detested it, they
bound her feet and dragged her through the
whole city along the rough stone-paved streets,
knocking her at the same time against the mill-
stones, and scourging her, until they brought her
to the same place, and stoned her also there.
Then with one impulse they all rushed upon the
houses of the God-fearing, and whatever pious
persons any of them knew individually as neigh-
bours, after these they hurried and bore them
with them, and robbed and plundered them, set-
ting aside the more valuable portions of their
property for themselves, and scattering about the
commoner articles, and such as were made of
wood, and burning them on the roads, so that
they made these parts present the spectacle of
a city taken by the enemy. The brethren, how-
ever, simply gave way and withdrew, and, like
those to whom Paul bears witness,^ they took the
spoiling of their goods with joy. And I know
not that any of them — except possibly some
solitary individual who may have chanced to fall
into their hands — thus far has denied the Lord.

3. But they also seized that most admirable
virgin Apollonia, then in advanced life, and
knocked out all her teeth,^ and cut her jaws ;
and then kindling a fire before the city, they
threatened to burn her alive unless she would
repeat along with them their expressions of im-
piety .'^ And although she seemed to deprecate s
her fate for a little, on being let go, she leaped
eagerly into the fire and was consumed. They
also laid hold of a certain Serapion in his own
house ; ^ and after torturing him with severe
cruelties, and breaking all his limbs, they dashed
him headlong from an upper storey to the ground.
And there was no road, no thoroughfare, no lane

I (v<Td^ei.av T-qv Op-qcrxeiav SaL/iovuii'. Valesius thinks the last
three words in the text ( = service to their demons) an interpolation
by some scholiast, [Note 6f>r)(TKei.av = cultus, Jas. i. 27.]

^ Heb X. 30.

3 [To this day St. Apollonia is invoked all over Europe; and
votive offerings are to be seen hung up at her shrines, in the form of
teeth, by those afflicted with toothache.]

* Ta T>)? ocf /Jeias /ojpuyjxaTo. What these precisely were, it is not
easy to say. Dionysius speaks of them also as &va(\>Ti]iia. prifiara in
this epistle, and as oiStoi <j)ioi'ai in that to Germanus. Gallandi thinks
the reference is to the practice, of which we read also in the Acts of
Polycarp, ch. 9, where the proconsul addresses the martyr with the
order: \oL&6p-q(Tov tov \pi.<Tr6v — Revile Christ. And that the test
usually put to reputed Christians by the early persecutors was this
cursing of Christ, we learn from Pliny, book x. epist. 97. [Vol. i.
p. 41.T

5 Or, shrink from.

6 iij>taTioi', for which Nicephorus reads badly, 'E4ii<nov.


even, where we could walk, whether by night or
by day ; for at all times and in every place they
all kept crying out, that if any one should refuse
to repeat their blasphemous expressions, he must
be at once dragged off and burnt. These in-
flictions were carried rigorously on for a consid-
erable time 7 in this manner. But when the
insurrection and the civil war in due time over-
took these wretched people,** that diverted their
savage cruelty from us, and turned it against
themselves. And we enjoyed a little breathing
time, as long as leisure failed them for exercising
their fury against us.'

4. But speedily was the change from that
more kindly reign '° announced to us ; and great
was the terror of threatening that was now made
to reach us. Already, indeed, the edict had
arrived ; and it was of such a tenor as almost
perfectly to correspond with what was intimated
to us beforetime by our Lord, setting before us
the most dreadful horrors, so as, if that were
possible, to cause the very elect to stumble."
All verily were greatly alarmed, and of the more
notable there were some, and these a large num-
ber, who speedily accommodated themselves to
the decree in fear ; '^ others, who were engaged
in the public service, were drawn into compli-
ance by the very necessities of their official
duties ; '^ others were dragged on to it by their
friends, and on being called by name approached


8 riSAious. But Pearson suggests a9Aou<r, = " when insurrection
and civil war took the place of these persecutions." This would agree
better with the common usage of 6Labi)^o)xaL.

9 a<r;(oAiai' tou Trpos i)Ma? Su/uoO l^afiovTuiv, The Latin version
gives, " dum illorum cessaret furor." W. Lowth renders, " dum non
vacaret ipsis furoreni suum in nos exercere."

'° This refers to the death of the Emperor Philip, who showed a
very righteous and kindly disposition toward the Christians. Ac-
cordingly the matters here recounted by Dionysius took place in the
last year of the Emperor Philip. This is also indicated by Dionysius
in the beginning of this epistle, where he says that the persecution
began at Alexandria a whole year before the edict of the Emperor
Decuis. But Chrislophorsonus, not observing this, interprets the
utra/SoAjji' T^S )3a<TiAeias as signifying a change in ///<■ eiiif'eror's
mind toward the Christians, in which error he is followed by Baro-
nius, ch. 102. — Vales.

" In this sentence the Codex Regius reads, to tt poppr]d'ev vir'o toO
Kvpc'ov riixiav Ttapo.^pa\v to <J)of>tpu>TaTo>', etc., = " the one intimated
beforetime by our Lord, very nearly the most terrible one." In
Georgius Syncellus it is given as >) inxpix Ppaxv. But the reading in
the text, T.i70(t>alvov, "setting forth," is found in the Codices Maz.,
Med., P\ik., and Savilii; and it seems the best, the idea being that
this edict of Llecius was so terrible as in a certain measure to repre-
sent the most fearful of all times, viz., those of Antichrist. — Vales.

'3 oi 6k Srino<Tievoi>Tei; iin'o Tuiv irpa^iuiv r]yovTo. This is rendered
by Christophorsonus, "alii ex privatis aedibus in publicum raptati ad
delubra ducuntur a magistratibus " But 6T]fjioai.tvov7is is the same
as Ta &rip.6aia TrpaTToi'Tn, i.e., decurions and magistrates. For when
the edict of Decius was conveyed to them, commanding all to sacri-
fice to the immortal gods, these officials had to convene themselves in
the court-house as usual, and stand and listen while the decree was
there publicly recited. Thus they were in a position officially which
led them to be the first to sacrifice. The word npa^m; occurs often
in the sense of the acts and administration ol magistrates: thus, in
Eusebius, viii. 11; in Aristides, in the funeral oration on Alexander,
Ta 6" ei5 jrpafeis re /cai TroAiTtia;, etc. There are similar passages
also in Plutarch's noAiTtKo na.pa.yyi\naTo, and in Severianus's sixth
oration on the Hexameron. So Chrysostom, in his eighty-third
homily on Matthew, calls the decurions tov<; to TroAiTiicii TrpaTTocTas,
The word iij/iOtrieiiovTes, however, may also be explained of those
employed in the departments of law or finance; so that the clause
might be rendered, with Valesius: " alii, qui in publico versabantur,
rebus ipsis et reliquorum exempio, ad sacrificandum ducebantur."
See the note in Migne.


I


WORKS OF DIONYSIUS. — EXTANT FRAGMENTS.


99


the impure and unholy sacrifices ; others yielded
pale and trembling, as if they were not to offer
sacrifice, but to be themselves the sacrifices and
victims for the idols, so that they were jeered
by the large multitude surrounding the scene,
and made it plain to all that they were too cow-
ardly either to face death or to offer the sacri-
fices. But there were others who hurried up to
the altars with greater alacrity, stoutly asserting '
that they had never been Christians at all before ;
of whom our Lord's prophetic declaration holds
most true, that it will be hard for such to be
saved. Of the rest, some followed one or other
of these parties already mentioned ; and some
fled, and some were seized. And of these, some
went as far in keeping their faith as bonds and
imprisonment ; and certain persons among them
endured imprisonment even for several days, and
then after all abjured the faith before coming
into the court of justice ; while others, after
holding out against the torture for a time, sank
before the prospect of further sufferings.^

5. But there were also others, stedfast and
blessed pillars of the Lord, who, receiving strength
from Himself, and obtaining power and vigour
worthy of and commensurate with the force of the
faith that was in themselves, have proved admi-
rable witnesses for His kingdom. And of these
the first was Julianus, a man suffering from gout,
and able neither to stand nor to walk, who was
arranged along with two other men who carried
him. Of these two persons, the one immediately
denied Christ ; but the other, a person named
Cronion, and surnamed Eunus, and together with
him the aged Julianus himself, confessed the
Lord, and were carried on camels through the
whole city, which is, as you know, a very large
one, and were scourged in that elevated position,
and finally were consumed in a tremendous fire,
while the whole populace surrounded them. And
a certain soldier who stood by them when they
were .led away to execution, and who opposed
the wanton insolence of the people, was pursued
by the outcries they raised against him ; and this
most courageous soldier of God, Besas by name,
was arranged ; and after bearing himself most
nobly in that mighty conflict on behalf of piety,
he was beheaded. And another individual, who
was by birth a Libyan, and who at once in name
and in real blessedness was also a true Macar,^
although much was tried by the judge to per-
suade him to make a denial, did not yield, and
was consequently burned alive. And these were
succeeded by Epimachus and Alexander, who,
after a long time + spent in chains, and after suf-


' \.(jXvfn^6y.ivoi. here for ^lio-xvpi^oMevoi. — Vales.

* -npot; TO f f rj? a-Ki\-nov. It may also mean, " renounced the faith
in the prospect of what was before them."

■5 A blessed one. Alluding to Matt. v. 10, 12.

* fitTa TToAuM. But Codices Med., Maz., Fuk., and Savilii, as
well as Georgius Syncellus, read m«t' ou jtoAui/, " after a short time."


fering countless agonies and inflictions of the
scraper 5 and the scourge, were also burnt to
ashes in an immense fire.

6. And along with these there were four women.
Among them was Ammonarium, a pious virgin,
who was tortured for a very long time by the
judge in a most relentless manner, because she
declared plainly from the first that she would
utter none of the things which he commanded
her to repeat ; and after she had made good her
profession she was led off to execution. The
others were the most venerable and aged Mer-
curia, and Dionysia, who had been the mother of
many children, and yet did not love her offspring
better than her Lord.^ These, when the gov-
ernor was ashamed to subject them any further
to profitless torments, and thus to see himself
beaten by women, died by the sword, without
more experience of tortures. For truly their
champion Ammonarium had received tortures
for them all.

7. Heron also, and Ater,^ and Isidorus,^ who
were Egyptians, and along with them Dioscorus,
a boy of about fifteen years of age, were deliv-
ered up. And though at first he, the judge, tried
to deceive the youth with fair speeches, thinking
he could easily seduce him, and then attempted
also to compel him by force of tortures, fancying
he might be made to yield without much diffi-
culty in that way, Dioscorus neither submitted to
his persuasions nor gave way to his terrors. And
the rest, after their bodies had been lacerated
in a most savage manner, and their stedfastness
had nevertheless been maintained, he consigned
also to the flames. But Dioscorus he dismissed,
wondering at the distinguished appearance he
had made in public, and at the extreme wisdom
of the answers he gave to his interrogations, and
declaring that, on account of his age, he granted
him further time for repentance. And this most
godly Dioscorus is with us at present, tarrying
for a greater conflict and a more lengthened
contest. A certain person of the name of Neme-
sion, too, who was also an Egyptian, was falsely
accused of being a companion of robbers ; and
after he had cleared himself of this charge before
the centurion, and proved it to be a most un-
natural calumny, he was informed against as a
Christian, and had to come as a prisoner before
the governor. And that most unrighteous magis-
trate inflicted on him a punishment twice as


5 |iJO-Tijpa?.

6 Here Valesiu.s adds from Rufinus the words tal 'Anjiwrapiov
cTepa, " and a second Ammonarium," as there are four women men-
tioned.

7 In Georgius .'Syncellus and Nicephorus it is gciven as /ij/^r. Rufi-
nus makes the name Arsinus. And in the old Roman martyrology,
taken largely from Rufinus, we find the form Arsenius. — Vales.

^ In his Bihliotheca, cod. cxix., Photius states that Isidorus was
full brother to Pierius, the celebrated head of the Alexandrian school,
and his colleague in martyrdom. He also intimates, however, that
although some have reported that Pierius ended his career by martyr-
dom, others say that he spent the closing period of his life in Rome
after the persecution abated. — RuiNART.


lOO


WORKS OF DIONYSIUS. — EXTANT FRAGMENTS.


severe as that to which the robbers were sub-
jected, making him suffer both tortures and
scourgings, and then consigning him to the fire
between the robbers. Thus the blessed martyr
was honoured after the pattern of Christ.

8. There was also a body of soldiers,' including
Ammon, and Zeno, and Ptolemy, and Ingenuus,
and along with them an old man, Theophilus,
who had taken up their position in a mass in
front of the tribunal ; and when a certain person
was standing his trial as a Christian, and was
already inclining to make a denial, these stood
round about and ground their teeth, and made
signs with their faces, and stretched out their
hands, and made all manner of gestures with
their bodies. And while the attention of all was
directed to them, before any could lay hold of
them, they ran quickly up to the bench of judg-
ment^ and declared themselves to be Christians,
and made such an impression that the governor
and his associates were filled with fear ; and
those who were under trial seemed to be most
courageous in the prospect of what they were to
suffer, while the judges themselves trembled.
These, then, went with a high spirit from the
tribunals, and exulted in their testimony, God
Himself causing them to triumph gloriously. ^

9. Moreover, others in large numbers were
torn asunder by the heathen throughout the cities
and villages. Of one of these I shall give some
account, as an example. Ischyrion served one
of the rulers in the capacity of steward for stated
wages. His employer ordered this man to offer
sacrifice ; and on his refusal to do so, he abused
him. When he persisted in his non-compliance,
his master treated him with contumely ; and
when he still held out, he took a huge stick and
thrust it through his bowels and heart, and slew
him. Why should I mention the multitudes of
those who had to wander about in desert places
and upon the mountains, and who were cut off
by hunger, and thirst, and cold, and sickness,
and robbers, and wild beasts? The survivors of
such are the witnesses of their election and their
victory. One circumstance, however, I shall
subjoin as an illustration of these things. There
was a certain very aged person of the name
of Ch^eremon, bishop of the place called the
city of the Nile.* He fled along with his partner


to the Arabian mountain, 5 and never returned.
The brethren, too, were unable to discover any-
thing of them, although they made frequent
search ; and they never could find either the
men themselves, or their bodies. Many were
also carried off as slaves by the barbarous Sara-
cens^ to that same Arabian mount. Some of
these were ransomed with difficulty, and only by
paying a great sum of money ; others of them
have not been ransomed to this day. And these
facts I have related, brother, not without a pur-
pose, but in order that you may know how many
and how terrible are the ills that have befallen
us ; which troubles also will be best understood
by those who have had most experience of them,
10. Those sainted martyrs, accordingly, who
were once with us, and who now are seated with
Christ/ and are sharers in His kingdom, and
partakers with Him in His judgment,^ and who
act as His judicial assessors,^ received there cer-
tain of the brethren who had fallen away, and
who had become chargeable with sacrificing to
the idols. And as they saw that the conversion
and repentance of such might be acceptable to
Him who desires not at all the death of the sin-
ner,'° but rather his repentance, they proved their
sincerity, and received them, and brought them
together again, and assembled with them, and
had fellowship with them in their prayers and at
their festivals." What advice then, brethren, do
you give us as regards these ? What should we
do? Are we to stand forth and act with the
decision and judgment which those (martyrs)
formed, and to observe the same graciousness
with them, and to deal so kindly with those
toward whom they showed such compassion? or
are w^e to treat their decision as an unrighteous
one,'^ and to constitute ourselves judges of their


1 a-vvTayti-a a-TpariioTLKov. Rufinus and Christophorsonus make
it turmatn mih'ium. Valesius prefers maiiipuhim or contiiber-
nium. These may have been the apparitors or officers of the firie-
fectus A Hgustalts. Valesius thinks rather that they were legionaries,
from the legion which had to guard the city of Alexandria, and which
was under the authority of the pne/ectiis Augusialis. For at that
time the pne/ecius Aiigustalis had charge of military affairs as well
as civil.

2 jidOpov. Valesius supposes that what is intended is the seat on
which the accused sat when under interrogation by the judge.

3 BpiafifiivovTO^ aiPTous. Rufinus makes it, " God thus triumph-
ing in them; " from which it would seem that he had read i5i' aiiTous.
But 6pi.ap.^eveLv is probably put here for Opiafi^eiieii' iroieii', as
PacriAeucip is also used by Gregory Nazianzenus.

* That is, Nilopolis or Niloupolis. Eusebius, bishop of the same
seat, subscribed the Council of Ephesus. — Reading.


5 TO 'Apafiiov opo?. There is a Mo}is Arabic lis mentioned by
Herodotus (ii. 8), which Ptolemy and others call Mons Tro'icus. —
Vales.

'' This passage is notable from the fact that it makes mention of
the Saracens. For of the writers whose works have come down to us
there is none more ancient than Dionysius of Ale.\andria that has
named the Saracens. Ammianus Marcellinus, however, writes in his
fourteenth book that he has made mention of the Saracens in the Acts
of Marcus Spartianus also mentions the Saracens in his Niger,
and says that the Roman soldiers were beaten by them. — V.^les,
I " The barbarous Saracens:" what a nomitiis umbra projected by
" coming events," in this blissfully ignorant reference of our author!
Compare Robertson, Researches, on the conquest of Jerusalem.]

7 As to the martyrs' immediate departure to the Lord, and their
abode with Him, see Tertullian, 0>i the Resurrectioti of the Flesh,
ch. xliii., and On the Soul, v. 55. [Vol. iii. p. 576; lb ,y. 231,]

8 That the martyrs were to be Christ's assessors, judging the
world with Him, was a common opinion among the fathers. So, after
Dionysius, Eulogius, bishop of Alexandria, in his fifth book. Against
the Novatians. Photius, in his Bibliotheca, following Chrysostom,
objects to this, and explains Paul's words in i Cor. vi. 2 as having
the same intention as Christ's words touching the men of Nineveh
and the queen of the south who should rise up in the judgment and
condemn that generation.

9 cri'i'Sixa^'oyres. See a noble passage in Bossuet, Pre/ace sur
l'Apocal.,% 28. _

■° Ezek. xxxiii. 11.

" Dionysius is dealing here not with public communion, such as
was the bishop's prerogative to confer anew on the penitent, but with
private fellowship among Christian people. — V.ales.

'= dSiKov jToiTjcruJue^a is the reading of Codices Maz., Med.,Fuk.,
and Savil., and also of Georgius Syncellus. Others read doexTov
JTOiTjcToneya, " we shall treat it as inadmissible."


WORKS OF DIONYSIUS. — EXTANT FRAGMENTS.


lOI


opinion on such subjects, and to throw clemency
into tears, and to overturn the estabhshed order?'
II. But I shall give a more particular account
of one case here which occurred among us : ^
There was with us a certain Serapion, an aged
believer. He had spent his long life blamelessly,
but had fallen in the time of trial (the persecu-
tion). Often did this man pray (for absolution),
and no one gave heed to him ; ^ for he had sac-
rificed to the idols. Falling sick, he continued
three successive days dumb and senseless. Re-
covering a little on the fourth day, he called to
him his grandchild, and said, " My son, how
long do you detain me ? Hasten, I entreat you,
and absolve me quickly. Summon one of the
presbyters to me." And when he had said this,
he became speechless again. The boy ran for
the presbyter ; but it was night, and the man
was sick, and was consequently unable to come.
But as an injunction had been issued by me,"*
that persons at the point of death, if they re-
quested it then, and especially if they had ear-
nestly sought it before, should be absolved,' in
order that they might depart this life in cheer-
ful hope, he gave the boy a small portion of the
Eucharist,^ telling him to steep it in water,'' and
drop it into the old man's mouth. The boy re-
turned bearing the portion ; and as he came
near, and before he had yet entered, Serapion
again recovered, and said, " You have come, my
child, and the presbyter was unable to come ;


' The words ital r'ov ©ebv napo^vvofifv, " and provoke God,"
are sometimes added here; but they are wanting in Codices Maz.,
Med., Fiik., Savil., and in Georgius Syncellus.

2 Eusebius introduces this m words to the following effect: " Writ-
ing to this same Fabius, who seemed to incline somewhat to this
schism, Dionysius of Alexandria, after setting forth in his letter many
other matters which bore on repentance, and after describing the con-
flicts of the martyrs who had recently suffered in Alexandria, relates
among other things one specially wonderful fact, which 1 have deemed
proper for insertion in this history, and which is as follows."

3 That is, none either of the clergy or of the people were moved
by his prayers to consider him a proper subject for absolution : for the
people's suffrages were also necessary for the reception into the Church
of any who had lapsed, and been on that account cut off from it.
And sometimes the bishop himself asked the people to allow absolu-
tion to be given to the suppliant, as we see in Cyprian's Epistle 53,
to Cornelius [vol. v. p. 336, this series], and in Tertullian, 0>i Mod-
esty, ch. xiii. [vol. iv. p. 86, this series]. Oftener, however, the
people themselves made intercession with the bishop for the admis-
sion of penitents; of which we have a notable instance in the Epistle
of Cornelius to Fabius of Antioch about that bishop who had ordained
Novalianiis. See also Cyprian, Epistle 59 [vol. v. p. 355]. — Vales.

■♦ In the African Synod, which met about the time that Dionysius
wrote, it was decreed that absolution should be granted to lapsed per-
sons who were near their end, provided that they had sought it ear-
nestly before their illness. See Cyprian in the Epistle to Antonianus
[vol. V. p. 327, this series]. — Vales.

s a<|)ieo-Wai. There is a longer reading in Codices Fuk. and
Savil., viz.: tuiv Seiioc Siopioi' ttjs nfraSocrfio; afioutrSai xai oi'Tco?
afftieo-Sai, "be deemed worthy of the imparting of the divine gifts,
and thus be absolved."

^ Valesius thinks that this custom prevailed for a long time, and
cites a synodical letter of Ratherius, bishop of Verona (which has
also been ascribed to Udalricus by Gretserus, who has published it
along with his Life of Gregory VII.), in which the practice is ex-
pressly forbidden in these terms: "And let no one presume to
give the communion to a laic or a woman, for the purpose of convey-
ing it to an infirm person."

7 a7^o^pl:|at. Rufinus renders it by infundere. References to
this custom are found in Adamanus, in the second book of the Mira-
cles of St. Colnmba, ch. 6; in Bede, Life of St. Cutkbert, ch. 31,
and in the poem on the life of the same; in Theodorus Campidunen-
s\s. Life of St. Magnus, ch. 22; in Paulus Bernriedensis, Life of
Gregory I'll., p. 113.


but do quickly what you were instructed to do,
and so let me depart." The boy steeped the
morsel in water, and at once dropped it into the
(old man's) mouth ; and after he had swallowed
a little of it, he forthwith gave up the ghost.
Was he not then manifestly preserved ? and did
he not continue in life just until he could be
absolved, and until through the wiping away
of his sins he could be acknowledged ^ for the
many good acts he had done ?

EPISTLE IV. — TO CORNELIUS THE ROMAN
BISH0P.9

In addition to all these, he writes likewise to
Cornelius at Rome, after receiving his Epistle
against Novatus. And in that letter he also
shows that he had been invited by Helenus,
bishop in Tarsus of Cilicia, and by the others
who were with him — namely, Firmilian, bishop
in Cappadocia, and Theoctistus in Palestine —
to meet them at the Council of Antioch, where
certain persons were attempting to establish the
schism of Novatus. In addition to this, he
writes that it was reported to him that Fabius
was dead, and that Demetrianus was appointed
his successor in the bishopric of the church at
Antioch. He writes also respecting the bishop
in Jerusalem, expressing himself in these very
words : " And the blessed Alexander, having
been cast into prison, went to his rest in bless-
edness."

EPISTLE v., WHICH IS THE FIRST ON THE SUB-
JECT OF BAPTISM ADDRESSED TO STEPHEN,
BISHOP OF ROME.>°

Understand, however, my brother," that all the
churches located in the east, and also in remoter
districts," that were formerly in a state of division,
are now made one again ; '^ and all those at the
head of the churches everywhere are of one mind,
and rejoice exceedingly at the peace which has
been restored beyond all expectation. I may


8 oiuoAoyrjSrji'ai. Langus, Wolfius, and Musculus render it con-
fieri, "confess." Christophorsonus makes it in nuineruin con/es-

S07'!ttn referri, "reckoned in the number of confessors;" which
may be allowed, if it is understood to be a reckoning by Christ.^ For
Dionysius alludes to those words of Christ in the Gospel: " Whoso-
ever shall confess me before men, him will I confess also before my
Father" — Vales.

9 Eusebius, Hist. Eccles., vi. 46.

1° In the second chapter of the seventh book of his Ecclesiastical
History, Eusebius says: " To this Stephen, Eusebius wrote the first
of his epistles on the matter of baptism." And he calls this the first,
laecause Dionysius also wrote other four epistles to Xystus and Diony-
sius, two of the successors of Stephen, and to Philemon, on the same
subject of the baptizing of heretics. — Gallandl

" Eusebius introduces the letter thus: "When he had addressed
many reasonings on this subject to him (Stephen) by letter, Diony-
sius at last showed him that, as the persecution had abated, the
churches in all parts opposed to the innovations of Novatus were at
peace among themselves." [See vol. v. p. 275.]

'- (cai €Ti 7rpo(7iuTepa). These words are omitted in Codices Fulk.
and Savil., as also by Christophorsonus; but are given in Codices
Reg., Maz., and Med , and by Syncellus and Nicephorus.

•3 Baronius infers from this epistle that at this date, about 259 A. p.,
the Oriental bishops had given up their "error," and fallen in with
Stephen's opinion, that heretics did not require to be rebaptized, — an
inference, however, which Valesius deems false. [Undoubtedly so. ]


I02


WORKS OF DIONYSIUS. — EXTANT FRAGMENTS.


mention Demetrianus in Antioch ; Theoctistus
in Ccesareia ; Mazabanes in ALWa.,' the successor
of tlie deceased Alexander ; ' Marinus in Tyre ;
Heliodorus in Laodicea, the successor of the
deceased Thelymidres ; Helenus in Tarsus, and
with him all the churches of Cilicia ; and Fir-
milian and all Cappadocia. For I have named
only the more illustrious of the bishops, so as
neither to make my epistle too long, nor to ren-
der my discourse too heavy for you. All the
districts of Syria, however, and of Arabia, to the
brethren in which you from time to time have
been forwarding supplies ^ and at present have
sent letters, and Mesopotamia too, and Pontus,
and Syria, and, to speak in brief, all parties, are
everywhere rejoicing at the unanimity and broth-
erly love now established, and are glorifying God
for the same.

THE SAME, OTHERWISE RENDERED.'*

But know, my brother, that all the churches
throughout the East, and those that are placed
beyond, which formerly were separated, are now
at length returned to unity; and all the presi-
dents 5 q/ the churches everywhere think one and
the same thing, and rejoice with incredible joy
on account of the unlooked-for return of peace :
to wit, Demetrianus in Antioch ; Theoctistus in
CKsarea; Mazabenes in /Elia, after the death
of Alexander ; Marinus in Tyre ; Heliodorus in
Laodicea, after the death of Thelymidres ; Hele-
nus in Tarsus, and all the churches of Cilicia ;
Firmilianus, with all Cappadocia. And I have
named only the more illustrious bishops, lest by
chance my letter should be made too prolix, and
my address too wearisome. The whole of the
Syrias, indeed, and Arabia, to which you now
and then send help, and to which you have now
written letters ; Mesopotamia also, and Pontus,
and Bithynia ; and, to comprise all in one word,
all the lands everywhere, are rejoicing, praising
God on account of this concord and brotherly
charity.


EPISTLE VI. — TO SIXTUS, BISHOP.*"

1. Previously, indeed, (Stephen) had written
letters about Helanus and Firmilianus, and about
all who were established throughout Cilicia and
Cappadocia, and all the neighbouring provinces,
giving them to understand that for that same
reason he would depart from their communion,
because they rebaptized heretics. And consider
the seriousness of the matter. For, indeed, in
the most considerable councils of the bishops,
as I hear, it has been decreed that they who
come from heresy should first be trained in Cath-
olic doctrine, and then should be cleansed by
baptism from the filth of the old and impure
leaven. Asking and calling him to witness on
all these matters, I sent letters.

And a little after Dionysius proceeds : —

2. And, moreover, to our beloved co-presby-
ters Dionysius and Philemon, who before agreed
with Stephen, and had written to me about the
same matters, I wrote previously in few words,
but now I have written again more at length.

In the same letter, says Eusebius,^ he informs
Xystus ^ of the Sabellian heretics, that they
were gaining ground at that time, in these
words : —

3. For since of the doctrine, which lately has
been set on foot at Ptolemais, a city of Pentap-
olis, impious and full of blasphemy against Al-
mighty God and the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ ; full of unbelief and perfidy towards His
only begotten Son and the first-born of every
creature, the Word made man, and which takes
away the perception of the Holy Spirit, — on
either side both letters were brought to me, and
brethren had come to discuss it, setting forth
more plainly as much as by God's gift I was
able, — I wrote certain letters, copies of which
I have sent to thee.


1 The name assigned by the pagans to Jerusalem was /Elia. It
was so called even in Constantine's time, as we see in the Tabula
Peutingerorum and the Itinerariuvi Antonini, written after Con-
stantine's reign. In the seventh canon of the Nicene Council we also
find the name iElia. [Given by Hadrian A. D. 135 ]

2 The words <at.\i.-rfit.vTO<i "AAtloii'Spou are given in the text m
connection with the clause Mapti-o? kv Tupw. They must be trans-
posed, however, as in the translation; for Mazabanes had succeeded
Alexander the bishop of ^tlia, as Dionysius Informs us in his Epistle
to Cornelius. So Rufinus puts it also in his Latin version. — Vales.

3 Alluding to the generous practice of the church at Rome in old
times in relieving the wants of the other churches, and in sending
money and clothes to the brethren who were in captivity, and to those
who toiled in the mines. To this effect we have the statement of
Dionysius, bishop of Corinth, in his Epistle to Soter, which Eusebius
cites in his fourth book. In the same passage, Eusebius also remarks
that this commendable custom had been continued in the Roman
church up to his own time: and with that object collections were
made there, of which Leo Magnus writes in his Scrmones. — y K\JS.s.
[Note this to the eternal honour of this See in its early purity.]

*■ [In vol. v., to illustrate the history of Cyprian, reference is made
to this letter: and in the Clark edition another rendering is there given
(a preferable one, I think) of this same letter, which I have thought
better to reserve for this place. It belongs here, and I have there
noted its appearance in this volume.]

5 [77po€<7Tu)Tf9. See Euseb., Hist. Eccles., book vni. capp. 2, 3,
and 4; also vol v., this series, as above mentioned.]


EPISTLE VII. — TO PHILEMON, A PRESBYTER.9

I indeed gave attention to reading the books
and carefully studying the traditions of heretics,
to the extent indeed of corrupting my soul with
their execrable opinions ; yet receiving from
them this advantage, that I could refute them in
my own mind, and detested them more heartily
than ever. And when a certain brother of the
order of presbyters sought to deter me, and
feared lest I should be involved in the same
wicked filthiness, because he said that my mind
would be contaminated, and indeed with truth,
as I myself perceived, I was strengthened by a
vision that was sent me from God. And a word


6 Dionysius mentions letters that had been written by him as well
to the Presbyters Dionysius and Philemon as to Stephen, on the bap-
tism of heretics and on the Sabellian heresy.

7 Lib. vii. ch. 6.

8 [ie., SixtusIL]

9 Of Sixtus, bishop of Rome. [a.d. 257].


WORKS OF DIONYSIUS. — EXTANT FRAGMENTS.


lO'


spoken to me, expressly commanded me, say-
ing, Read everything which shall come into thy
hands, for thou art fit to do so, who correctest
and provest each one ; and from them to thee
first of all has appeared the cause and the occa-
sion of believing. I received this vision as be-
ing what was in accordance with the apostolic
word, which thus urges all who are endowed with
greater virtue, "Be ye skilful money-changers." '

Then, says Eusebius, he subjoins some things
parenthetically about all heresies : —

This rule and form I have received from our
blessed Father Heraclus : For thou, who came
from heresies, even if they had fallen away from
the Church, much rather if they had not fallen
away, but when they were seen to frequent the
assemblies of the faithful, were charged with go-
ing to hear the teachers of perverse doctrine, and
ejected from the Church, he did not admit after
many prayers, before they had openly and pub-
licly narrated whatever things they had ' heard
from their adversaries. Then he received them
at length to the assemblies of the faithful, by no
means asking of them to receive baptism anew.
Because they had already previously received
the Holy Spirit from that very baptism.

Once more, this question being thoroughly
ventilated, he adds : —

I learned this besides, that this custom is not
now first of all imported among the Africans^
alone ; but moreover, long before, in the times of
former bishops, among most populous churches,
and that when Synods of the brethren of Iconium
and Synades were held, it also pleased as many
as possible, I should be unwilling, by overturning
their judgments, to throw them into strifes and
contentions. For it is written, " Thou shalt not
remove thy neighbour's landmark, which thy fa-
thers have placed." ^

EPISTLE VIII. — TO DIONYSIUS.*

For we rightly repulse Novatian, who has rent
the Church, and has drawn away some of the
brethren to impiety and blasphemies ; who has
brought into the world a most impious doctrine
concerning God, and calumniates our most mer-
ciful Lord Jesus Christ as if He were unmerciful ;
and besides all these things, holds the sacred
laver as of no effect, and rejects it, and over-
turns faith and confession, which are put before


' I Thess. V. 21. [Euseb., vi. 7. The apostle is supposed to re-
fer to one of the reputed sayings of our Lord, yu'ecr^e fibictfiot rpa.-
■trtC,'iTai. = exa>iiiHatores, i.e , of coins, rejecting the base, and laying
up in store the precious. Compare Jer. xv. 19.]

* [I find that it is necessary to say that the " Africans" of Egypt
and Carthage were no more negroes than we " Americans " are red-
men. The Carthaginians were Canaanites, and the Alexandrians
Greeks. I have seen Cyprian's portrait representing him as a Moor.]

^ Deut xix. 14.

■♦ At that time presbyter of Xystus, and afterwards his successor.
He teaches that Novatian is deservedly to be opposed on account of
his schism, on account of his impious doctrine, on account of the
repetition of baptism to those who came to him.


baptism, and utterly drives away the Holy Spirit
from them, even if any hope subsists either that
He would abide in them, or that He should re-
turn to them.

EPISTLE IX. — TO SIXTUS II.s

For truly, brother, I have need of advice, and
I crave your judgment, lest perchance I should
be mistaken upon the matters which in such
wise happen to me. One of the brethren who
come together to the church, who for some time
has been esteemed as a believer, and who before
my ordination, and, if I am not deceived, before
even the episcopate of Heraclas himself, had
been a partaker of the assembly of the faithful,
when he had been concerned in the baptism of
those who were lately baptized, and had heard
the interrogatories and their answers, came to
me in tears, and bewailing his lot. And throw-
ing himself at my feet, he began to confess and
to protest that this baptism by which he had
been initiated among heretics was not of this
kind, nor had it anything whatever in common
with this of ours, because that it was full of
blasphemy and impiety. And he said that his
soul was pierced with a very bitter sense of sor-
row, and that he did not dare even to lift up his
eyes to God, because he had been initiated by
those wicked words and things. Wherefore he
besought that, by this purest laver, he might
be endowed with adoption and grace. And I,
indeed, have not dared to do this ; but I have
said that the long course of communion had
been sufficient for this. For I should not dare
to renew afresh, after all, one who had heard the
giving of thanks, and who had answered with
others Amen ; who had stood at the holy table,
and had stretched forth his hands ^ to receive
the blessed food, and had received it, and for a
very long time had been a partaker of the body
and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ. Hence-
forth I bade him be of good courage, and ap-
proach to the sacred elements with a firm faith
and a good conscience, and become a partaker
of them. But he makes no end of his wailing,
and shrinks from approaching to the table ; and
scarcely, when entreated, can he bear to be pres-
ent at the prayers.

EPISTLE X —AGAINST BISHOP GERMANUS.^

I. Now I speak also before God, and He
knoweth that I lie not : it was not by my own
choice,^ neither was it without divine instruction,


5 Of a man who sought to be introduced to the Church by baptism,
although he said that he had received baptism, with other words and
matters among the heretics.

6 [Vol. v. See a reference to Cyril's Catechetical Lectures.]

7 Eusebius, Hist. Eccles., vi. 40, vii. 11.

8 oOfiefxiai' «!!■' k\i.(x\no\i ^aAAo/iei'os. In Codex Fuk. and in the
Chronicoii of Syncellus it is stt' enavru. In Codices Maz. and Med.
it is eir' ejiauTor. Herodotus employs the phrase in the genitive form
— SaAAd/jei'O! €>(>' iavTov Tren-pij^e. I.e., seipsum in consilium aeihi-
beus, sua sponte et propria motu fecit.


I04


WORKS OF DIONYSIUS. — EXTANT FRAGMENTS.


that I took to flight. But at an earlier period,'
indeed, when the edict for the persecution under
Decius was determined upon, Sabinus at that
very hour sent a certain Frumentarius^ to make
search for me. And I remained in the house for
four days, expecting the arrival of this Frumen-
tarius. But he went about examining all other
places, the roads, the rivers, the fields, where he
suspected that I should either conceal myself or
travel. And he was smitten with a kind of blind-
ness, and never lighted on the house ; for he
never supposed that I should tarry at home when
under pursuit. Then, barely after the lapse of
four days, God giving me instruction to remove,
and opening the way for me in a manner beyond
all expectation, my domestics ^ and I, and a con-
siderable number of the brethren, eflected an
exit together. And that this was brought about
by the providence of God, was made plain by
what followed : in which also we have been per-
haps of some service to certain parties.

2. Then, after a certar/i break, he narrates the
events ivhich befell him after his flight, subjoining
the following statement: — Now about sunset I
was seized, along with those who were with me,
by the soldiers, and was carried off to Taposiris.
But by the providence of God, it happened that
Timotheus was not present with me then, nor
indeed had he been apprehended at all. Reach-
ing the place later, he found the house deserted,
and officials keeping guard over it, and ourselves
borne into slavery.

3. And after some other tnatters, he proceeds
this : — And what was the method of this mar-
vellous disposition of Providence in his case?
For the real facts shall be related. When Timo-
theus was fleeing in great perturbation, he was
met ■♦ by a man from the country.^ This person
asked the reason for his haste, and he told him
the truth plainly. Then the man (he was on his
way at the time to take part in certain marriage
festivities ; for it is their custom to spend the
whole night in such gatherings), on hearing the
fact, held on his course to the scene of the re-


' aXka Ka'i. -npoTtpov. Christophorsoniis and others join the jrooTe-
poi' with the Siwy/ioii, making it mean, " before the persecution."
This is contrary to pure Greek idiom, and is also inconsistent with
what follows; for by the aiJTTJ; wpas is meant the very hour at which
the edict was decreed, Siwyjuo? here having much the sense of" edict
for the persecution." — Vales.

2 There was a body of men csWeA/ruvientarzt unities, employed
under the emperors as secret spies, and sent through the provinces to
look after accused persons, and collect floating rumours. They were
abolished at length by Constantine, as Aurelius Victor writes. They
were subordinate to the judges or governors of the provinces. Thus
this Frumentarius mentioned here by Dionysius was deputed in obe-
dience to Sabinus, \.\\e prcp/ectiis Augustalis. — Vales.

3 ot Traiies. Musculus and Christophorsonus make it "chil-
dren." Valesius prefers " domestics."

"1 rkTTrjvTiTo T4? Toll/ ;^(op(.Ta)i'. In Codices Maz., Med., Fuk., and
Savil., airiii/Ta IS written; in Georgius Syncellus it is dTrrjcTaTo.

5 xuifiLiuiv is rendered indigenarum by Chrystophorsonus, and
?'hcc/(I7-k«/, " inhabitants," by the interpreter of .Syncellus; but it
means rather " rustics." Thus in the Greek Councils the tmv ^lupwi'
■npt<j^\nipoi,presbyteri fiagorutn, are named. Instead of xiopiTwi',
Codices Maz., Med., and Fuk. read \Mfi\.Kuiv\ for thus the Alexan-
drians named the country people, as we see in the tractate of Sophro-
nius against Dioscorus, and the Chronicon of Theophanes, p. 139.


joicings, and went in and narrated the circum-
stances to chose who were seated at the feast ;
and with a single impulse, as if it had been at a
given watchword, they all started up, and came
on all in a rush, and with the utmost speed.
Hurrying up to us, they raised a shout ; and as
the soldiers who were guarding us took at once
to flight, they came upon us, stretched as we
were upon the bare couches.^ For my part, as
God knows, I took them at first to be robbers
who had come to plunder and pillage us ; and
remaining on the bedstead on which I was lying
naked, save only that I had on my linen under-
clothing, I offered them the rest of my dress as
it lay beside me. But they bade me get up and
take my departure as quickly as I could. Then
I understood the purpose of their coming, and
cried, entreated, and implored them to go away
and leave us alone ; and I begged that, if they
wished to do us any good, they might anticipate
those who led me captive, and strike off my head.
And wbile I was uttering such vociferations, as
those who were my comrades and partners in all
these things know, they began to lift me up by
force. And I threw myself down on my back
upon the ground ; but they seized me by the
hands and feet, and dragged me away, and bore
me forth. And those who were witnesses of all
these things followed me, — namely, Caius, Faus-
tus, Peter, and Paul. These men also took me
up, and hurried me off'' out of the little town,
and set me on an ass without saddle, and in that
fashion carried me away.

4. I fear that I run the risk of being charged
with great folly and senselessness, placed as I am
under the necessity of giving a narrative of the
wonderful dispensation of God's providence in
our case. Since, however, as one says, it is good
to keep close the secret of a king, but it is hon-
ourable to reveal the works of God,*^ I shall come
to close quarters with the violence of Germanus.
I came to ^milianus not alone ; for there ac-
companied me also my co-presbyter Maximus,
and the deacons Faustus and Eusebius and
Chaeremon ; and one of the brethren who had
come from Rome went also with us. ^milianus,
then, did not lead off by saying to me, " Hold
no assemblies." That was indeed a thing super-
fluous for him to do, and the last thing which
one would do who meant to go back to what
was first and of prime importance : ^ for his con-
cern was not about our gathering others together
in assembly, but about our not being Christians
ourselves. From this, therefore, he commanded


7 {jyopaS-qv e|rjyoYOi'. The (l>opa.Sr)v may mean, as Valesius puts
it, til sella, " on a stool or litter."

8 Tobit xii. -j.

9 TO TeAcuTaioi' eiri to irpSiTov avoTpe'yoi'Ti, i.e., to begin by inter-
dicting him from holding Christian assemblies, while the great ques-
tion was whether he was a Christian at all, would have been to place
first what was last in order and consequence.


WORKS OF DIONYSIUS. — EXTANT FRAGMENTS.


105


me to desist, thinking, doubtless, that if I my-
self should recant, the others would also follow
me in that. But I answered him neither unrea-
sonably nor in many words, " We must obey God
rather than men." ' Moreover, I testified openly
that I worshipped the only true God and none
other, and that I could neither alter that position
nor ever cease to be a Christian. Thereupon
he ordered us to go away to a village near the
desert, called Cephro.

5. Hear also the words which were uttered by
both of us as they have been put on record.-
When Dionysius, and Faustus, and Maximus,
and Marcellus, and Chgeremon had been placed
at the bar, yEmilianus, as prefect, said : " I have
reasoned with you verily in free speech, ^ on the
clemency of our sovereigns, as they have su^ered
you to experience it ; for they have given you
power to save yourselves, if you are disposed
to turn to what is accordant with nature, and to
worship the gods who also maintain them in their
kingdom, and to forget those things which are
repugnant to nature. What say ye then to these
things? for I by no means expect that you will
be ungrateful to them for their clemency, since
indeed what they aim at is to bring you over
to better courses." Dionysius made reply thus :
" All men do not worship all the gods, but differ-
ent men worship different objects that they sup-
pose to be true gods. Now we worship the one
God, who is the Creator of all things, and the
very Deity who has committed the sovereignty
to the hands of their most sacred majesties Vale-
rian and Gallienus. Him we both reverence and
worship ; and to Him we pray continually on be-
half of the sovereignty of these princes, that it
may abide unshaken." ^milianus, as prefect,
said to them : " But who hinders you from wor-
shipping this god too, if indeed he is a god, along
with those who are gods by nature ? for you have
been commanded to worship the gods, and those
gods whom all know as such." Dionysius re-
plied : " We worship no other one." ^milianus,
as prefect, said to them : " I perceive that you
are at once ungrateful to and insensible of the
clemency of our princes. Wherefore you shall
not remain in this city ; but you shall be de-
spatched to the parts of Libya, and settled in
a place called Cephro : for of this place I have
made choice in accordance with the command
of our princes. It shall not in any wise be law-
ful for you or for any others, either to hold
assemblies or to enter those places which are
called cemeteries. And if any one is seen not
to have betaken himself to this place whither
I have ordered him to repair, or if he be dis-
covered in any assembly, he will prepare peril


' Acts V. 29,
3 aypaf^wf.


for himself; for the requisite punishment will
not fail. Be off, therefore, to the place whither
you have been commanded to go." So he forced
me away, sick as I was ; nor did he grant me the
delay even of a single day. What opportunity,
then, had I to think either of holding assemblies,
or of not holding them ? •*

6. Then after some other matters he says : —
Moreover, we did not withdraw from the visible
assembling of ourselves together, with the Lord's
presence. 5 But those in the city I tried to
gather together with all the greater zeal, as if I
were present with tnem ; for 1 was absent indeed
in the body, as I said,'' but present in the spirit.
And in Cephro indeed a considerable church
sojourned with us, composed partly of the breth-
ren who followed us from the city, and partly of
those who joined us from Egypt. There, too,
did God open to us a door 7 for the word. And
at first we were persecuted, we were stoned ;
but after a period some few of the heathen for-
sook their idols, and turned to God. For by
our means the word was then sown among them
for the first time, and before that they had never
received it. And as if to show that this had
been the very purpose of God in conducting us
to them, when we had fulfilled this ministry. He
led us away again. For ^milianus was minded
to remove us to rougher parts, as it seemed,
and to more Libyan-like districts ; and he gave
orders to draw all in every direction into the
Mareotic territory, and assigned villages to each
party throughout the country. But he issued
instructions that we should be located specially
by the public way, so that we might also be the
first to be apprehended ; * for he evidently made
his arrangements and plans with a view to an
easy seizure of all of us whenever he should
make up his mind to lay hold of us.

7. Now when I received the command to
depart to Cephro, I had no idea of the situation
of the place, and had scarcely even heard its
name before ; yet for all that, I went away
courageously and calmly. But when word was
brought me that I had to remove to the parts
of Colluthion,9 those present know how I was
affected ; for here I shall be my own accuser.


^ Germanus had accused Dionysius of neglecting to hold the
assemlDlies of the brethren before the persecution broke out, and of
rather providing for his own safety by flight. For when persecution
burst on them, the bishops were wont first to convene the people, in
order to exhort them to hold fast the faith of Christ; then infants and
catechumens were baptized, to provide against their departing this life
without baptism, and the F^ucharist was given to the faithful. — Vales.

5 aiVSr/T^! fieri ToO Kupiou (rui'aYioyrjs.

*> tti9 c'ttoi'. Codices Maz. and Med. give i'lirtl.v, " so to speak; "
Fuk. and Savil. give <os tlmv o ottocttoAos, " as the apostle said."
See on i Cor. v. 3.

7 [Acts xiv. 27; Rev. iii. 8. If the author here quotes the Apoc-
alypse, it is noteworthy. Elucidation, p. no. J

8 r)/aa; 6e ^aAAoi' iv 66iu Ka'i TrpuiTous KaTa\ri<f>6ri<TOiJ.ivov<; eTa|ef.

9 TO. KoK\ov6!(ovo<;, supplying fJiipv, as Dionysius has already
used the phrase tol fiepi) t^s Ai^Jrj!. This was a district in the Mar-
eotic prefecture. Thus we have mention made also of to. BovkoAov,
a certain tract in Egypt, deriving its name from the old masters of
the soil. Nicephorus writes KokoiiSiov, which is probably more cor-
rect; for KoAAou0iiu»' is a derivative from Colutho, which was a com-


io6


WORKS OF DIONYSIUS. —EXTANT FRAGMENTS.


At first, indeed, I was greatly vexed, and took it
very ill ; for though these places happened to be
better known and more familiar to us, yet peo-
ple declared that the region was one destitute of
brethren, and even of men of character, and one
exposed to the annoyances of travellers and to
the raids of robbers. I found comfort, however,
when tlie brethren reminded me that it was
nearer the city ; and while Cephro brought us
large intercourse with brethren of all sorts who
came from Egypt, so that we were able to hold
our sacred assemblies on a more extensive scale,
yet there, on the other hand, as the city was in
the nearer vicinity, we could enjoy more fre-
quently the sight of those who were the really
beloved, and in closest relationship with us, and
dearest to us : for these would come and take
their rest among us, and, as in the more remote
suburbs, there would be distinct and special
meetings.' And thus it turned out.

8. Then, after some other matters, he gives
again tlic following account of what befell him :
— Germanus, indeed, boasts himself of many
professions of faith. He, forsooth, is able to
speak of many adverse things which have hap-
pened to him ! Can he then reckon up in his
own case as many condemnatory sentences ^ as
we can number in ours, and confiscations too,
and proscriptions, and spoilings of goods, and
losses of dignities,^ and despisings of worldly
honour, and contemnings of the laudations of
governors and councillors, and patient subjec-
tions to the threatenings of the adversaries,'* and
to outcries, and perils, and persecutions, and a
wandering life, and the pressure of difficulties,
and all kinds of trouble, such as befell me in the
time of Decius and Sabinus,^ and such also as I


mon name in Egypt. Thus a certain poet of note in the times of
Anastasius, belonging to the Thebaid, was so named, as Suidas in-
forms us. There was a)so a Coluthus, a certain schismatic, in Egypt,
ill the times of Athanasius, who is mentioned often in the Apologia;
and Gregory of Nyssa names him Acoluthus in his Contra Euno-
miiim, book u. — Vales.

• Kara ixipo<; avvayuiyixi. When the suburbs were somewhat dis-
tant from the city, the brethren resident in them were not compelled
to attend the meetings of the larger church, but had meetings of their
own in a basilica, or some building suitable for the purpose. The
Greeks, too, gave the name npoa.(mi.ov to places at some considera-
ble distance from the city, as well as to suburbs immediately connected
with it. Thus Athanasius calls Canopus a irpoao-reioi'; and so
Daphne is spoken of as the rrpoao-Teioi' of Antioch, Achyrona as that
of Nicomedia, and Seplimum as that of Constantinople, though these
places were distant some miles from the cities. From this place it is
also inferred that m the days of Dionysius there was still but one
church in Alexandria, where all the brethren met for devotions. But
in the time of Athanasius, when several churches had been built by
the various bishops, the Alexandrians met in different places, xard
>i€po? (cai &ir)fiT\y.ivti>i, as Athanasius says in his first Apology to Con-
stantius; only that on the great festivals, as at the paschal season and
at Pentecost, the brethren did not meet separately, but all in the larger
church, as Athanasius also shows us. — Vales.

2 a7ro(f)d(Tfct9,

3 Maximus, in the scholia to the book of Dionysius the Areopa-
gite, De ccelcsti hierarchia, ch. 5, states that Dionysius was by pro-
fession a rhetor before his conversion: 6 yo\iv fiiyai ^wvvcrLOi
6 'Wi^avSpiuif e7rt(7K07ro?, 6 an^o prjTopioi/, etc. — ValES.

^ ToiV cuavTLCxiV aTret\(ov,

5 This Sabinus had been prefect of Egypt in the time of Decius;
it is of him that Dionysius writes in his Epistle to Fabius, which is
given above. The itmilianus, prefect of Egypt, who is mentioned
here, afterwards' seized the imperial power, as Pollio writes in his
Thirty Tyrants, who, however, calls him general {ducetn), and not
prefect of Egypt. — Vales.


have been suffering under the present severities
of yEmilianus ? But where in the world did Ger-
manus make his appearance ? And what men-
tion is made of him? But I retire from this
huge act of folly into which I am suffering
myself to fall on account of Germanus ; and
accordingly I forbear giving to the brethren,
who already have full knowledge of these things,
a particular and detailed narrative of all that
happened.

EPISTLE XI. — TO HERMAMMON.6

1. But Gallus did not understand the wicked-
ness of Decius, nor did he note beforehand what
it was that wrought his ruin. But he stumbled
at the very stone which was lying before his eyes ;
for when his sovereignty was in a prosperous
position, and when affairs were turning out ac-
cording to his wish, 7 he oppressed those holy
men who interceded with God on behalf of his
peace and his welfare. And consequently, per-
secuting them, he persecuted also the prayers
offered in his own behalf.

2. And to John a revelation is made in like
manner : ^ " And there was given unto him," he
says, " a mouth speaking great things, and blas-
phemy ; and power was given unto him, and
forty and two months." 9 And one finds both
things to wonder at in Valerian's case ; and most
especially has one to 'consider how different it
was with him before these events,"" — how mild
and well-disposed he was towards the men of
God. For among the emperors who preceded
him, there was not one who exhibited so kindly
and favourable a disposition toward them as he
did ; yea, even those who were said to have be-
come Christians openly" did not receive them
with that extreme friendliness and graciousness
with which he received them at the beginning


6 Eusebius, Hist. Ecclcs., vii. i, lo, 23. Eusebius introduces
this extract thus: " In an epistle to Hermammon, Dionysius makes
the following remarks upon Gallus " the Emperor.

^ Kara vovv is the reading in the Codices Maz., Med., Fuk., and
Savil., and adopted by Rufinus and others. But Robertus Stephanus,
from the Codex Regius, gives ko-to. poxiv, " according to the stream,"
i.e., favourably.

8 Eusebius prefaces this extract thus: " Gallus had not held the
government two full years when he was removed, and Valerian, to-
gether with his son Gallienus, succeeded him. And what Dionysius
has said of him may be learned from his Epistle to Hermammon, in
which he makes the following statement."

9 f|oio-ia Kai juiji'cs TKraapaKOfiaSvo, Rev. xiii. 5. Baronius
expounds the numbers as referring to the period during which the
persecution under Valerian continued: see him, under the year 257
A.D., ch. 7. [See Introductory Note, p. 78, supra. Here is a quota-
tion from the Apocalypse, to be noted in view of our author's ques-
tionings, part i., i. 5, p. 83, supra.l

'° The text is, icai rovTuiv [xo-Kicto. to. nph avTov <us outw? f^xe
(rvvvoflv • €u»s r;n-io9, etc. Gallandi emends the sentence thus: <tat
avTOV TO. jLtdAiara Trpb toutwc, a>5 oif^ oi^rtus ecrxe, avvvocit^, ecoy
fi7rio<;, etc. Codex Regius gives iu5 f-iv rJTrioir. But Codices Maz.
and Med. give eio? ijino?, while Fuk. and Savil. give ew? yap iJTrios.

" He means the Emperor Philip, who, as many of the ancients
have recorded, was the first of the Roman emperors to profess the
Christian religion. But as Dionysius speaks in the plural number, to
Philip may be added Alexander Severus, who had an image of Christ
in the chapel of his Lares, as Lampridius testifies, and who favoured
and sustained the Christians during the whole period of his empire.
It is to be noted further, that Dionysius says of these emperors only
that they were said and thought to be Christians, not that they were
so in reality. — Gallanui.


WORKS OF DIONYSIUS. — EXTANT FRAGMENTS.


107


of his reign ; and his whole house was filled then
with the pious, and it was itself a very church
of God. But the master and president ' of the
Magi of Egypt ^ prevailed on him to abandon
that course, urging him to slay and persecute
those pure and holy men as adversaries and ob-
stacles to their accursed and abominable incanta-
tions. For there are, indeed, and there were men
who, by their simple presence, and by merely
showing themselves, and by simply breathing and
uttering some words, have been able to dissipate
the artifices of wicked demons. But he put it
into his mind to practise the impure rites of
initiation, and detestable juggleries, and execra-
ble sacrifices, and to slay miserable children, and
to make oblations of the offspring of unhappy
fathers, and to divide the bowels of the newly-
born, and to mutilate and cut up the creatures
made by God, as if by such means they ^ would
attain to blessedness.

3. Afterwards he subjoins the following: —
Splendid surely were the thank-offerings, then,
which Macrianus brought them ■♦ for that empire
which was the object of his hopes ; who, while for-
merly reputed as the sovereign's faithful public
treasurer,? had yet no mind for anything which
was either reasonable in itself or conducive to the
public good,^ but subjected himself to that curse
of prophecy which says, "Woe unto those who
prophesy from their own heart, and see not the
public good ! " ^ For he did not discern that
providence which regulates all things ; nor did
he think of the judgment of Him who is before
all, and through all, and over all. Wherefore he
also became an enemy to His Catholic Church ;
and besides that, he alienated and estranged
himself from the mercy of God, and fled to the
utmost possible distance from His salvation.^
And in this indeed he demonstrated the reality
of the peculiar significance of his name.9


2 Baronius thinks that this was that Magus who, a httle while
before the empire of Decius, had incited the Alexandrians to persecute
the Christians, and of whom Dionysius speaks in his Epistle to Fabius.
What follows here, however, shows that Macrianus is probably the
person alluded to.

3 ivhcxi\i.ovi)i7ovTa.%. So Codices Maz., Med., Fuk., and Savil.
read: others give fuSai/joi'ijTai'raf. It wonld seem to require €u6ai-
fioi'<jc7oiTa, " as if he would attain;" for the reference is evidently
to Valerian himself.

_•♦ By the aiJTois some understand toi? /SacriAeOcri; others better,
Tois Sainoai. According to Valesius, the sense is this: that Macrianus
having, by the help and presages of the demons, attained his hope of
empire, made a due return to them, by setting Valerian in arms
against the Christians.

i iimuiv Ka6aKov Koyiav, The Greeks gave this name to those offi-
cials whom the Latins called rationales, ox procuratores suniinie rei.
Under what emperor Macrianus was procurator, is left uncertain here.

^ ovb(.v (.iiKoyov ovSi KadoAiKov e^poi'rjcrsi'. There is a play here
on the two senses of the word xaeoAt/cd?, as seen in the official title ctti
Tiav KaOoAov A07101/, and in the note of character in ovoi KadoAiKov.
But it can scarcely be reproduced in the English.

' ouat TOi? npoij>rjTevov<Tiv airb KapSia; avrCiv Koi to Ka06\ov /^>)
iSAeTrouo-ti/. The quotation is probably from Ezek. xiii. 3, of which
Jerome gives this interpretation: Fae his qui prophctatit ex corde
suo et omnino non vident.

Robertus Stephanus edits t^? eauTou e(C(cA»)<Tia?, " from his
Church," following the Codex Medicaeus. But the best manuscripts
give (ra)T>7pia5.

ij ' A play upon the name Macrianus, as connected with naxpav,
' at a distance." [This playfulness runs through the section.]


4. And again, after some other matters, he pro-
ceeds thus : — For Valerian was instigated to these
acts by this man, and was thereby exposed to
contumely and reproach, according to the word
spoken by the Lord to Isaiah : " Yea, they have
chosen their own ways, and their own abomina-
nations in which their souls delighted ; I also
will choose their mockeries, '° and will recompense
their sin." " But this man '- (Macrianus), being
maddened with his passion for the empire, all
unworthy of it as he was, and at the same time
having no capacity for assuming the insignia of
imperial government,'^ by reason of his crippled '•*
body,'5 put forward his two sons as the bearers,
so to speak, of their father's off"ences. For un-
mistakeably apparent in their case was the truth
of that declaration made by God, when He said,
" Visiting the iniquities of the fathers upon the
children, unto the third and fourth generation
of them that hate me." For he heaped his own
wicked passions, for which he had failed in secur-
ing satisfaction,'^ upon the heads of his sons, and
thus wiped off '7 upon them his own wickedness,
and transferred to them, too, the hatred he him-
self had shown toward God.

5.'^ That man, "5 then, after he had betrayed the
one and made war upon the other of the empe-
rors preceding him, speedily perished, with his
whole family, root and branch. And Gallienus
was proclaimed, and acknowledged by all. And
he was at once an old emperor and a new ; for
he was prior to those, and he also survived them.
To this effect indeed is the word spoken by the
Lord to Isaiah : " Behold, the things which were
from the beginning have come to pass ; and there
are new things which shall now arise." ^° For as
a cloud which intercepts the sun's rays, and over-
shadows it for a little, obscures it, and appears it-
self in its place, but again, when the cloud has
passed by or melted away, the sun, which had
risen before, comes forth again and shows itself:
so did this Macrianus put himself forward,^' and
achieve access ^^ for himself even to the very

^^ eaTraty^ara.

" Isa. l.wi. 3, 4.

'2 Christophorsonus refers this to Valerian. But evidently the
oJro? 6e introduces a difterent subject in iSIacrianus; and besides.
Valerian could not be said to have been originally unworthy of the
power which he aspired to.

'J Toi' /SaaiAeioi' VTioh\iva.{. KOCTfiov,

■4 iraTr.jpu).

'5 Joannes Zonaras, in his Annals, states that Macrianus was
lame.

'6 utv i7Tiixei. So Codex Regius reads. But Codices Maz., Med.,
and Fuk. give rjiiTxixei, " in which he succeeded."

'7 e^(tilx6p^aTo,

'' Eusebius introduces the extract thus: He (Diony«ius) addressed
also an epistle to Hermammon and the brethren in Egypt; and after
giving an account of the wickedness of Decius and his successors, he
states many other circumstances, and also mentions the peace of Gal-
lienus. And it is best to hear his own relation as follows.

'9 This is rightly understood of Macrianus, by whose treacherj'
Valerian came under the power of the Persians. Aurelius Victor,
Syncellus. and others, testify that Valerian was overtaken by that
calamity through the treachery of his generals.

2° Isa. xlii. 9.

2' TTpoo-Toi?. But Valesius would read n-poo'O'Ta?, adstnns.

22 TrpoCTTreAdo-a? is the reading of three of the codices and of
Nicephorus; others give Trpon-eAacras.


loS


WORKS OF DIONYSIUS. — EXTANT FRAGMENTS.


empire of Gallienus now established ; but now
he is that no more, because indeed he never was
it, while this other, i.e., Gallienus, is just as he
was. And his empire, as if it had cast off old
age, and had purged itself of the wickedness
formerly attaching to it, is at present in a more
vigorous and flourishing condition, and is now
seen and heard of at greater distances, and
stretches abroad in every direction.

6. Then he further indicates the exact time at
which he wrote this account, as folloivs : — And
it occurs to me again to review the days of the
imperial years. For I see that those most im-
pious men, whose names may have been once
so famous, have in a short space become name-
less. But our more pious and godly prince ' has
passed his septennium, and is now in his ninth
year, in which we are to celebrate the festival.^


EPISTLE XII. — TO THE ALEXANDRIANS.^

I. To other men, indeed, the present state of
matters would not appear to offer a fit season for
a festival : and this certainly is no festal time to
them ; nor, in sooth, is any other that to them.
And I say this, not only of occasions manifestly
sorrowful,^ but even of all occasions whatsoever
which people might consider to be most joyous. 5
And now certainly all things are turned to mourn-
ing, and all men are in grief, and lamentations
resound through the city, by reason of the multi-
tude of the dead and of those who are dying


' [Rom xiii. 4, 6. St. Paul's strong expressions in this place
must explain these expressions. A prmce was, quoad hoc, compara-
tively speakmg, godly and pious, as he " attended continually to this
very thing." So, " most religious," in the Anglican Liturgy.]

2 Who ever expressed himself thus, — that one after his seven
years was passing his ninth year? This septennium ^c7TT<ieT>)pt5)
must designate something peculiar, and different from the time follow-
ing it. It IS therefore the septennium of imperial power which he had
held along with his father. In the eighth year of that empire, Macria-
nus possessed himself of the imperial honour specially in Egypt. After
his assumption of the purple, however, Gallienus had still much au-
thority in Egypt. At length, in the ninth year of Gallienus, that is,
in 261, Macnanus the father and the two sons being slain, the sov-
ereignty of Gallienus was recogni.sed also among the Egyptians. And
then Gallienus gave a rescript to Dionysius, Pinna, and Demetrius,
bishops of Egypt, to re-establish the sacred places, — a boon which
he had granted in the former year. The ninth year of Gallienus,
moreover, began about the midsummer of this year: and the time at
which this letter was written by Dionysius, as Eusebius observes,
may be gathered from that, and falls consequently before the Paschal
season of 262 a d. — Pearso.-'J, p. 72. Gall.

3 Eusebius, Hist. Ecctes , vii. 22 Eusebius prefaces the 21 st
chapter of his seventh book thus: "When peace had scarcely yet
been established, he (Dionysius) returned to Alexandria. But when
sedition and war again broke out, and made it impossible for him to
have access to all the brethren in that city, divided as they then were
into different parties, he addressed them again by an epistle at the
passover, as if he were still an exile from Alexandria." Then he in-
serts the epistle to Hierax; and thereafter, in ch. xxii., introduces the
present excerpt thus: " After these events, the pestilence succeeding
the war, and the festival being now at hand, he again addressed the
brethren by letters, in which he gave the following description of the
great troubles connected with that calamity."

^ ov\ oTrw; tmv emAvTroji' is the leading of Codices Maz., Med.,
and Savil.; others give, less correctly, en-iAoin-wi'.

5 The text gives, 0.K1C o05' ei tis irepixaprj? av oirfSelev /uaAKTTa,
which is put probably for the mere regular construction, hv oIoivto
av ixaKiara Trspii^api), Nicephorus reads, ei tis n(pi.\a.pr)<; ujv oirjOfitj.
The idea is, that the heathen could have no real festal time. All sea-
sons, those apparently most joyous, no less than those evidently sor-
rowful, must be times void of all real rejoicing to them, until they
learn the grace of God.


day by d.^y. For as it is written in the case of
the first-born of the Egyptians, so now too a
great cry has arisen. " For there is not a house
in which there is not one dead." ^ And would
that even this were all !

2. Many terrible calamities, it is true, have
also befallen us before this. For first they drove
us away ; and though we were quite alone, and
pursued by all, and in the way of being slain,
we kept our festival, even at such a time. And
every place that had been the scene of some of
the successive sufferings which befell any of us,
became a seat for our solemn assemblies, — the
field, the desert, the ship, the inn, the prison, —
all alike. The most gladsome festival of all,
however, has been celebrated by those perfect
martyrs who have sat down at the feast in heaven.
And after these things war and famine surprised
us. These were calamities which we shared, in-
deed, with the heathen. But we had also to
bear by ourselves alone those ills with which they
outraged us, and we had at the same time to sus-
tain our part in those things which they either
did to each other or suffered at each other's
hands ; while again we rejoiced deeply in that
peace of Christ which He imparted to us alone.

3. And after we and they together had en-
joyed a very brief season of rest, this pestilence
next assailed us, — a calamity truly more dread-
ful to them than all other objects of dread, and
more intolerable than any other kind of trouble
whatsoever ; ^ and a misfortune which, as a cer-
tain writer of their own declares, alone prevails
over all hope. To us, however, it was not so ;
but in no less measure than other ills it proved an
instrument for our training and probation. For
it by no means kept aloof from us, although it
spread with greatest violence among the heathen.

4. To these statements he in due succession
fnakcs this addition : — Certainly very many of
our brethren, while, in their exceeding love and
brotherly-kindness, they did not spare themselves,
but kept by each other, and visited the sick with-
out thought of their own peril, and ministered to
them assiduously, and treated them for their heal-
ing in Christ, died from time to time most joyfully
along with them, lading themselves with pains
deri\-ed from others, and drawing upon them-
selves their neighbours' diseases, and willingly tak-
ing over to their own persons the burden of the
sufferings of those around them.^ And many who


6 Ex. xii. 30.

7 Dionysius is giving a sort of summary of all the calamities which
befell the Alexandrian church from the commencement of his episco-
pal rule: namely, first, persecution, referring to that which be^an
in the la.-^t year of the reign of Philip; then war, meaning the civil
war of which he speaks in his Epistle to Fabius; then pestilence, allud-
ing to the sickness which began in the time of Decius, and traversed
the land under Gallus and Volusianus. — Vales.

8 avaiJia(T(T6ix(voi, rd? a\yq&6i'a<;. Some make this equivalent to
mitigantes. It means properly to " wipe off," and so to become
" responsible " for. Here it is used apparently to express much the
same idea as the two preceding clauses.


WORKS OF DIONYSIUS. — EXTANT FRAGMENTS.


109


had thus cured others of their sicknesses, and
restored them to strength, died themselves, hav-
ing transferred to their own bodies the death
that lay upon these. And that common saying,
which else seemed always to be only a polite
form of address,' they expressed in actual fact
then, as they departed this life, like the " off-
scourings of all.^ Yea, the very best of our
brethren have departed this life in this manner,
including some presbyters and some deacons,
and among the people those who were in high-
est reputation : so that this very form of death,
in virtue of the distinguished piety and the
stedfast faith which were exhibited in it, ap-
peared to come in nothing beneath martyrdom
itself.

5 . And they took the bodies of the saints on
their upturned hands,^ and on their bosoms, and
closed ■* their eyes, and shut their mouths. And
carrying them in company,5 and laying them out
decently, they clung to them, and embraced
them, and prepared them duly with washing and
with attire. And then in a little while after they
had the same services done for themselves, as
those who survived were ever following those who
departed before them. But among the heathen
all was the very reverse. For they thrust aside any
who began to be sick, and kept aloof even from
their dearest friends, and cast the sufferers out
upon the public roads half dead, and left them
unburied, and treated them with utter contempt
when they died, steadily avoiding any kind
of communication and intercourse with death ;
which, however, it was not easy for them alto-
gether to escape, in spite of the many precau-
tions they employed.^

EPISTLE XIII. — TO HIERAX, A BISHOP IN EGYPT.''

I. But what wonder should there be if I find
it difficult to communicate by letter with those
who are settled in remote districts, when it seems
beyond my power even to reason with myself,
and to take counsel with ^ my own soul ? For
surely epistolary communications are very requi-
site for me with those who are, as it were,
my own bowels, my closest associates, and my
brethren — one in soul with myself, and mem-
bers, too, of the same Church. And yet no way


1 r/oi'T); i^i\o<\ipO'TVV-<\% execrSai.

^ The phrase Trepii/irj/ia ndvTiov refers to i Cor. iv. 13. Valesius
supposes that among the Alexandrians it may have been a humble and
complimentary form of salutation, eyui ei|ai 7repii/(r)|u.a crou; or that
the expression 7repii//r)/xa ttolvtwi/ had come to be habitually applied to
the Christians by the heathen.

3 uTTTiai? x^P"''-- [See Introductory Note, p. 77.]

* Ka9aipovuT€^,

5 ouo(f)opoui'Te5,

' [Compare Defoe, Plague in London.^

' Eusebius, Hist. Eccles., vii. 21. The preface to this extract in
Eusebius is as follows: " After this he (Dionysius) wrote also another
Paschal epistle to Hierax, a bishop in Egypt, in which he makes the
following statement about the sedition then prevailing at Alexandria."

8 Or, for.


opens up by which I can transmit such addresses.
Easier, indeed, v/ould it be for one, I do not
say merely to pass beyond the limits of the
pro\'ince, but to cross from east to west, than to
travel from this ^me Alexandria to Alexandria.
For the most central pathway in this city 9 is
vaster '° and more impassable even than that ex-
tensive and untrodden desert which Israel only
traversed in two generations ; and our smooth
and waveless harbours have become an image
of that sea through which the people drove, at
the time when it divided itself and stood up like
walls on either side, and in whose thoroughfare
the Egyptians were drowned. For often they
have appeared like the Red Sea, in consequence
of the slaughter perpetrated in them. The river,
too, which flows by the city, has sometimes ap-
peared drier than the waterless desert, and more
parched than that wilderness in which Israel was
so overcome with thirst on their journey, that
they kept crying out against Moses, and the water
was made to stream for them from the precipi-
tous " rock by the power of Him who alone doeth
wondrous things. And sometimes, again, it has
risen in such flood-tide, that it has overflowed all
the country round about, and the roads, and the
fields, as if it threatened to bring upon us once
more that deluge of waters which occurred in the
days of Noah.

2. But now it always flows onward, polluted
with blood and slaughters and the drowning
struggles of men, just as it did of old, when on
Pharaoh's account it was changed by Moses into
blood, and made putrid. And what other liquid
could cleanse water, which itself cleanses all
things? How could that ocean, so vast and
impassable for men, though poured out on it,
ever purge this bitter sea? Or how could even
that great river which streams forth from Eden,'^
though it were to discharge the four heads into
which it is divided into the one channel of the
Gihon,'^ wash away these pollutions? Or when
will this air, befouled as it is by noxious exhala-
tions which rise in every direction, become pure
again? For there are such vapours sent forth
from the earth, and such blasts from the sea,
and breezes from the rivers, and reeking mists
from the harbours, that for dew we might sup-
pose ourselves to have the impure fluids '■♦ of the
corpses which are rotting in all the underlying
elements. And yet, after all this, men are
amazed, and are at a loss to understand whence


9 fXicraLTOLTT) ttj? 7rdAew5. Codex Regius gives twi' n6\ewv. The
sedition referred to as thus dividing Alexandria is probably that which
broke out when yEmilianus seized the sovereignty in Alexandria.
See PoUio's Thirty Tyrants.

'° ciTreipos. But Codices Fuk. and Savil. give aTropo?, " impracti-
cable."

" a/tpoTo/iou, It may perhaps mean " smitten " here.

12 'ESeVx.

'3 Written r-ijioi' in Codex Alexandrinus, but Teai^ in Codex Vati-
canus.

14 i;^iipas.


I lO


ELUCIDATION.


come tliese constant pestilences, whence these
terrible diseases, whence these many kinds of
fatal inflictions, whence all that large and multi-
form destruction of human life, and what reason
there is why this mighty city no longer contains
within it as great a number of inhabitants, tak-
ing all parties into account, from tender children
up to those far advanced in old age, as once it
maintained of those alone whom it called hale
old men.' But those from forty years of age up
to seventy were so much more numerous then,
that their number cannot be made up now even
when those from fourteen to eighty years of age
have been added to the roll and register of per-
sons who are recipients of the public allowances
of grain. And those who are youngest in ap-
pearance have now become, as it were, equals
in age with those who of old were the most
aged. And yet, although they thus see the
human race constantly diminishing and wasting
away upon the earth, they have no trepidation
in the midst of this increasing and advancing
consumption and annihilation of their own
number.

' uPfioyepoj'Tas.


EPISTLE XIV. — FROM HIS FOURTH FESTIVAL
EPISTLE.2

Love is altogether and for ever on the alert,
and casts about to do some good even to one
who is unwilling to receive it. And many a time
the man who shrinks from it under a feeling
of shame, and who declines to accept services of
kindness on the ground of unwillingness to be-
come troublesome to others, and who chooses
rather to bear the burden of his own grievances
than cause annoyance and anxiety to any one, is
importuned by the man who is full of love to
bear with his aids, and to suffer himself to be
helped by another, though it might be as one
sustaining a wrong, and thus to do a very great
service, not to himself, but to another, in per-
mitting that other to be the agent in putting an
end to the ill in which he has been involved.


2 (K rij? S' eopTao-TiKJ}? eTrterToAij^, From the Sacred Parallels
of John of Datnasciis, Works, ii. p. 753 C, edit. Paris, 1712. In
his Ecclesiastical History, book vii. ch. 20, Eusebius says : " In
addition to these epistles, the same Dionysius also composed others
about this time, designated his Festival Epistles, and in these he
says much in commendation of the Paschal feast. One of these he
addressed to Flavins, and another to Domitius and Didymus, in which
he gives the canon for eight years, and shows that the Paschal fea.st
ought not to be kept until the passing of the vernal equinox. And
besides these, he wrote another epistle to his co-presbyiers at Alex-
andria."


ELUCIDATION.

(Apocalypse, note 7, p. 105, and note 9, p. 106.)

The moderation of Dionysius is hardly less conspicuous than his fearlessness of inquiry in the
questions he raises about the Apocalypse.' He utterly refuses to reject it.^ He testifies to
the value set upon it by his fellow-Christians. Only, he doubts as to {fhe John) the "inspired
person " who was its author, and with critical skill exposes the inferiority of the Greek of the
Apocalypse to that of the Gospel and Epistles of St. John. Obviously he accepts it as part of
the canon, only doubting as to the author. Modestly he owns that it passes his understanding.
So Calvin forbore to comment upon it, and owned to " headache " when he came to it.


' p. 84, note 6.


2 P. 82, note 6.


THE WORKS OF DIONYSIUS.
EXEGETICAL FRAGMENTS.^


I. — A COMMENTARY ON THE BEGINNING OF
ECCLESIASTES.2


CHAP. I.


Ver.


I. " 77/,? words of the son of David,
king of Israel in Jerusalem."
In like manner also Matthew calls the Lord
the son of David.^

3. " What profit hath a man of all his labour

which he taketh under the sun ? "
For what man is there who, although he may
have become rich by toiling after the objects of
this earth, has been able to make himself three
cubits in stature, if he is naturally only of two
cubits in stature? Or who, if blind, has by
these means recovered his sight ? Therefore we
ought to direct our toils to a goal beyond the
sun : for thither, too, do the exertions of the
virtues reach.

4. " One generation passeth away, and an-

other generation cometh : but the earth
abideth for ever" (unto the age).
Yes, unto the age,-* but not unto the ages.s

16. "I communed with mine own heart, say-

ing, Lo, I am come to great estate, and
have gotten more wisdom than all they
that have been before me in Jerusa-
lem ; yea, my heart had great experi-
ence of wisdom and knowledge.

1 7. I knew parables and science : that this in-

deed is also the spirit's choice.^

18. For in multitude of wisdom is multitude

of knowledge : and he that increaseth

knowledge increaseth grief."

I was vainly puffed up, and increased wisdom ;

not the wisdom which God has given, but that

wisdom of which Paul says, "The wisdom of

this world is foolishness with God." 7 For in


See, in the Bibliotheca Vetcmm Patruni of Gallandi, the Ap-
pendix to vol. xiv., added from the manuscripts, after the editor's
death, by an anonymous scholar.

^ [Compare the Mctaflirase, p. g, supra. Query, are not these
twin specimens of exegelical exercises in the school at Alexandria'
^ Matt. i. I.

5 el? ToO? aiuivas.
* irpoaipetrw.
' I Cor. iii. 19.


this Solomon had also an experience surpassing
prudence, and above the measure of all the an-
cients. Consequently he shows the vanity of it,
as what follows in like manner demonstrates :
" And my heart uttered ^ many things : I knew
wisdom, and knowledge, and parables, and sci-
ences." But this was not the genuine wisdom
or knowledge, but that which, as Paul says, puffeth
up. He spake, moreover, as it is written,'--' three
thousand parables. But these were not parables
of a spiritual kind, but only such as fit the com-
mon polity of men ; as, for instance, utterances
about animals or medicines. For which reason
he has added in a tone of raillery, •' I knew that
this also is the spirit's choice." He speaks also
of the multitude of knowledge, not the knowl-
edge of the Holy Spirit, but that which the
prince of this world works, and which he con-
veys to men in order to overreach their souls,
with officious questions as to the measures of
heaven, the position of earth, the bounds of the
sea. But he says also, " He that increaseth
knowledge increaseth sorrow." For they search
even into things deeper than these, — inquiring,
for example, what necessity there is for fire to
go upward, and for water to go downward ; and
when they have learned that it is because the
one is light and the other heavy, they do but
increase sorrow : for the question still remains,
Why might it not be the very reverse ?

CHAP. II.

Ver. I. "I said in mine heart. Go to now,
make trial as in mirth, and behold
in good. And this, too, is vanity."
For it was for the sake of trial, and in accord-
ance with what comes by the loftier and the
severe life, that he entered into pleasure. And
he makes mention of the mirth, which men call
so. And he says, " in good," referring to what
men call good things, which are not capable of
giving life to their possessor, and which make


* f I'Tf , for which eiSe, " discerned," is suggested.
9 I Kings IV. 32.


112 WORKS OF DIONYSIUS. — EXEGETICAL FRAGMENTS.


the man who engages in them vain hke them-
selves.

2. " I said of laughter, It is mad ; ' and of

mirth, What doest thou? "
Laughter has a twofold madness ; because
madness begets laughter, and does not allow the
sorrowing for sins ; and also because a man of
that sort is possessed with madness,^ in the con-
fusing of seasons, and places, and persons. For
he flees from those who sorrow. " And to mirth.
What doest thou?" Why dost thou repair to
those who are not at liberty to be merry? Why
to the drunken, and the avaricious, and the rapa-
cious ? And why this phrase, " as wine ? " •* Be-
cause wine makes the heart merry ; and it acts
upon the poor in spirit. The flesh, however, also
makes the heart merry, when it acts in a regular
and moderate fashion.

3. " And my heart directed me in wisdom, and

to overcome in mirth, until I should
know what is that good thing to the sons
of men which they shall do under the sun
for the number of the days of their life."
Being directed, he says, by wisdom, I over-
came pleasures in mirth. Moreover, for me the
aim of knowledge was to occupy myself with
nothing vain, but to find the good ; for if a per-
son finds that, he does not miss the discernment
also of the profitable. The sufficient is also the
opportune,-* and is commensurate with the length
of life.

4. " I made me great works ; I builded me

houses ; I planted me vineyards.

5. I made me gardens and orchards.

6. I made me pools of water, that by these I

might rear woods producing trees.

7. I got me servants and maidens, and had

servants born in my house ; also I had
large possessions of great and small cattle
above all that were in Jerusalem before
me.

8. I gathered me also silver and gold, and the

peculiar treasure of kings and of the
provinces. I gat me men-singers and
women-singers, and the delights of the
sons of men, as cups and the cupbearer.

9. And I was great, and increased more than

all that were before me in Jerusalem :
also my wisdom remained with me.

10. And whatsoever mine eyes desired, I kept

not from them ; I withheld not my heart

from any pleasure."

You see how he reckons up a multitude of

houses and fields, and the other things which he

mentions, and then finds nothing profitable in

them. For neither was he any better in soul by


* Trepi<i>opdv.

2 TrepitfcepeTai.

* Or, temporary.


reason of these things, nor by their means did
he gain friendship with God. Necessarily he is
led to speak also of the tjue riches and the
abiding property. Being minded, therefore, to
show what kinds of possessions remain with the
possessor, and continue steadily and maintain
themselves for him, he adds : " Also my wisdom
remained with me." For this alone remains,
and all these other things, which he has already
reckoned up, flee away and depart. Wisdom,
therefore, remained with me, and I remained in
virtue of it. For those other things fall, and
also cause the fall of the very persons who run
after them. But, with the intention of instituting
a comparison between wisdom and those things
which are held to be good among men, he adds
these words, " And whatsoever mine eyes desired,
I kept not from them," and so forth ; whereby
he describes as evil, not only those toils which
they endure who toil in gratifying themselves
with pleasures, but those, too, which by necessity
and constraint men have to sustain for their main-
tenance day by day, labouring at their difi'erent
occupations in the sweat of their faces. For
the labour, he says, is great ; but the art 5 by the
labour is temporary, adding ^ nothing serviceable
among things that please. Wherefore there is
no profit. For where there is no excellence
there is no profit. With reason, therefore, are
the objects of such solicitude but vanity, and the
spirit's choice. Now this name of " spirit " he
gives to the " soul." For choice is a quality,
not a motion.7 And David says : " Into Thy
hands I commit my spirit." * And in good truth
" did my wisdom remain with me," for it made
me know and understand, so as to enable me to
speak of all that is not advantageous ^ under
the sun. If, therefore, we desire the righteously
profitable, if we seek the truly advantageous, if
it is our aim to be incorruptible, let us engage
in those labours which reach beyond the sun.
For in these there is no vanity, and there is not
the choice of a spirit at once inane and hurried
hither and thither to no purpose.

12. "And I turned myself to behold wisdom,

and madness, and folly : for what man

is there that shall come after counsel in

all those things which it has done? " '°

He means the wisdom which comes from God,

and which also remained with him. And by

madness and folly he designates all the labours

of men, and the vain and silly pleasure they have

in them. Distinguishing these, therefore, and

their measure, and blessing the true wisdom, he

has added : " For what man is there that shall


S rixvri.

* Reading npocmSeiaa for TrporcSeicra.

7 Troiov oil KivTjcrts,

8 Ps. xxxi. 5.

9 TrepKjffet'a,

^^ OS eA.ei;(T€Tat OTTto'tu Tijs ^ouAijs av/xTravTa ocra e7rot^<re;' aurrj/


WORKS OF DIONYSIUS. — EXEGETICAL FRAGMENTS.


1 1


come after counsel ? " For this counsel instructs
us in the wisdom that is such indeed, and gifts
us with deliverance from madness and folly.

13. "Then I saw that wisdom excelleth folly,

as much as light excelleth darkness."
He does not say this in the way of comparison.
For things which are contrary to each other, and
mutually destructive, cannot be compared. But
his decision was, that the one is to be chosen,
and the other avoided. To like effect is the
saying, "Men loved darkness rather than light."'
For the term "rather" in that passage expresses
the choice of the person loving, and not the
comparison of the objects themselves.

14. " The wise man's eyes are in his head, but

the fool walketh in darkness."
That man always inclines earthward, he means,
and has the ruling faculty ^ darkened. It is true,
indeed, that we men have all of us our eyes in
our head, if we speak of the mere disposition of
the body. But he speaks here of the eyes of the
mind. For as the eyes of the swine do not turn
naturally up towards heaven, just because it is
made by nature to have an inclination toward the
belly ; so the mind of the man who has once
been enervated by pleasures is not easily diverted
from the tendency thus assumed, because he has
not " respect unto all the commandments of the
Lord." 3 Again: "Christ is the head of the
Church." 4 And they, therefore, are the wise
who walk in His way ; for He Himself has said,
" I am the way." s On this account, then, it be-
comes the wise man always to keep the eyes of
his mind directed toward Christ Himself, in order
that he may do nothing out of measure, neither
being lifted up in heart in the time of prosperity,
nor becoming negligent in^the day of adversity :
" for His judgments are a great deep," ^ as you
will learn more exactly from what is to follow.

14. "And I perceived myself also that one

event happeneth to them all.

15. Then said I in my heart, As it happeneth

to the fool, so it happeneth even to me ;
and why was I then more wise?"
The run of the discourse in what follows deals
with those who are of a mean spirit as regards
this present Hfe, and in whose judgment the arti-
cle of death and all the anomalous pains of the
body are a kind of dreaded evil, and who on
this account hold that there is no profit in a life
of virtue, because there is no difference made
in ills like these between the wise man and the
fool. He speaks consequently of these as the
words of a madness inclining to utter senseless-
ness ; whence he also adds this sentence, " For


' John ill. ig.

2 TO iiy(fjiovi.K6v.

3 Ps. cxix. 6.
* Eph. V. 23.
5 John xiv. 6.
' Ps. xxxvi. 6.


the fool talks over-much ; " ^ and by the " fool "
here he means himself, and every one who rea-
sons in that way. Accordingly he condemns
this absurd way of thinking. And for the same
reason he has given utterance to such sentiments
in the fears of his heart ; and dreading the
righteous condemnation of those who are to be
heard, he solves the difficulty in its pressure by
his own reflections. For this word, " Why was
I then wise?" was the word of a man in doubt
and difficulty whether what is expended on wis-
dom is done well or to no purpose ; and whether
there is no difference between the wise man and
the fool in point of advantage, seeing that the
former is involved equally with the latter in the
same Sufferings which happen in this present
world. And for this reason he says, " I spake
over-largely ^ in my heart," in thinking that there
is no difference between the wise marf and the
fool.

16. "For there is no remembrance of the
wise equally with the fool for ever."

For the events that happen in this life are all
transitory, be they even the painful incidents, of
which he says, " As all things now are consigned
to oblivion." ^ For after a short space has passed
by, all the things that befall men in this life per-
ish in forgetfulness. Yea, the very persons to
whom these things have happened are not re-
membered all in like manner, even although they
may have gone through like chances in life. For
they are not remembered for these, but only for
what they may have evinced of wisdom or folly,
virtue or vice. The memories of such are not
extinguished (equally) among men in conse-
quence of the changes of lot befalling them.
Wherefore he has added this : " And how shall
the wise man die along with the fool ? The death
of sinners, indeed, is evil : yet the memory of
the just is blessed, but the name of the wicked
is extinguished." '°

22. " For that falls to man in all his labour."

In truth, to those who occupy their minds with
the distractions of hfe, life becomes a painful
thing, which, as it were, wounds the heart with
its goads, that is, with the lustful desires of in-
crease. And sorrowful also is the solicitude con-
nected with covetousness : it does not so much
gratify those who are successful in it, as it pains
those who are unsuccessful ; while the day is
spent in laborious anxieties, and the night puts
sleep to flight from the eyes, with the cares of
making gain. Vain, therefore, is the zeal of the
man who looks to these things.

24. " And there is nothing good for a man,
but what he eats and drinks, and what


' €K 7r€pl<T<T€VfJ.aT0S*

8 n€pl<T(T6v,

9 /cafloTt fiSrj Ta nivTa t7r€A>j(76)j.
'" Prov. X. 7.


114 WORKS OF DIONYSIUS. — EXEGETICAL FRAGMENTS.


will show to his soul good in his labour.

This also I saw, that it is from the hand

of God.
25. For who eats and drinks from his own

resources? " '
That the discourse does not deal now with
material meats, he will show by what follows ;
namely, " It is better to go to the house of
mourning than to go to the house of feasting." ^
And so in the present passage he proceeds to
add : "And (what) will show to his soul good in
its labour." And surely mere material meats and
drinks are not the soul's good. For the flesh,
when luxuriously nurtured, wars against the soul, 1
and rises in revolt against the spirit. And how j
should not intemperate eatings and drinkings also |
be contrary to God?^ He speaks, therefore,
of things mystical. For no one shall partake of
the spiritual table, but one who is called by
Him, and who has listened to the wisdom which
says, '■' Take and eat." ■*

CHAP. III.

Ver. 3. "There is a time to kill, and a time

to heal."
To " kill," in the case of him who perpetrates
unpardonable transgression ; and to " heal," in
the case of him who can show a wound that will
bear remedy.

4. "A time to weep, and a time to laugh."
A time to weep, when it is the time of suffer-
ing ; as when the Lord also says, " Verily I say
unto you, that ye shall weep and lament." 5 But
to laugh, as concerns the resurrection : " For your
sorrow," He says, "shall be turned into joy."^
4. "A time to mourn, and a time to dance."
When one thinks of the death which the trans-
gression of Adam brought on us, it is a time to
mourn ; but it is a time to hold festal gatherings
when we call to mind the resurrection from the
dead which we expect through the new Adam. 7

6. "A time to keep, and a time to cast away."
A time to keep the Scripture against the un-
worthy, and a time to put it forth for the worthy.
Or, again : Before the incarnation it was a time
to keep the letter of the law ; but it was a time
to cast it away when the truth came in its flower.

7. "A time to keep silence, and a time to

speak."
A time to speak, when there are hearers who
receive the word ; but a time to keep silence,
when the hearers pervert the word ; as Paul


1 nap' aiiTOV,

2 Eccles. vii. 2.

3 The text gives, ttw? ie Kal oiiK napkx ©eou ao'iuTiav PpwfJLOiTuii'
Kai w-e^rj.

^ Prov. ix. 5.

i Luke vi. 25; John xvi. 20.

^ John xvi. 20.

' [The fast of the Paschal week, and the feast that follows, are here
referred to. Of course the religious saltation of the Hebrews (2 Sam
vi. 14) is the thought of Kolieleth, and figuratively it is here adopted
for holy mirth, j


says : " A man that is an heretic, after the first
and second admonition, reject." ^

10. "I have seen, then, the travail which God

hath given to the sons of men to be
exercised in it.

11. Everything that He hath made is beautiful

in its time : and He hath set the whole
world in their heart ; so that no man
can find out the work that God maketh
from the beginning and to the end."
And this is true. For no one is able to com-
prehend the works of God altogether. More-
over, the world is the work of God. No one,
then, can find out as to this world what is its
space from the beginning and unto the end, that
is to say, the period appointed for it, and the
limits before determined unto it ; forasmuch as
God has set the whole world as a realm ^igno-
rance in our hearts. And thus one says : " De-
clare to me the shortness of my days." 9 In this
manner, and for our profit, the end of this world
(age) — that is to say, this present life — is a
thing of which we are ignorant.

II. — THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE.

AN INTERPRETATION. — CHAP. XXII. 42-48.

Ver. 42. " Father, if Thou be willing to re-
move '° this cup from me : never-
theless not my will, but Thine, be
done."
But let these things be enough to say on the
subject of the will. This word, however, " Let
the cup pass," does not mean, Let it not come
near me, or approach me." For what can " pass
from Him," certainly must first come nigh Him ;
and what does pass thus from Him, must be by
Him. For if it does not reach Him, it cannot
pass from Him. For He takes to Himself the
person of man, as having been made man.
Wherefore also on this occasion He deprecates
the doing of the inferior, which is His own, and
begs that the superior should be done, which is
His Father's, to wit, the divine will; which
again, however, in respect of the divinity, is one
and the same will in Himself and in the Father.
For it was the Father's will that He should
pass through every trial (temptation) ; and the
Father Himself in a marvellous manner brought
Him on this course, not indeed with the trial
itself as His goal, nor in order simply that He
might enter into that, but in order that He might
prove Himself to be above the trial, and also
beyond it.'^ And surely it is the fact, that the
Saviour asks neither what is impossible, nor what

8 Tit. iii. 10.

9 Ps. cii. 24, T7)f oAiyoTTjTa ^i^v rjnepiiv nov avdyyei^ov /not.
'° TTapevfyK^ii',

I' ovK ecTTi. Migne suggests ov/ce'ri: " Let it no more come near
me."

'2 ^er' aiiTov. May it be, " and next to Himself" (the Father) ">.


WORKS OF DIONYSIUS. — EXEGETICAL FRAGMENTS.


115


is impracticable, nor what is contrary to the will
of the Father. It is something possible ; for
Mark makes mention of His saying, " Abba,
Father, all things are possible unto Thee." '
And they are possible if He wills them ; for
Luke tells us that He said, " Father, if Thou be
willing, remove- this cup from me." The Holy
Spirit, therefore, apportioned among the evan-
gelists, makes up the full account of our Sav-
iour's whole disposition by the expressions of
these several narrators together. He does not,
then, ask of the Father what the Father wills
not. For the words, " If Thou be willing,"
were demonstrative of subjection and docility,^
not of ignorance or hesitancy. For this reason,
the other scripture says, " All things are possible
unto Thee." And Matthew again admirably
describes the submission and humility * when he
says, " If it be possible." For unless I adapt
the sense in this way,5 some will perhaps assign
an impious signification to this expression, " If
it be possible ; " as if there were anything impos-
sible for God to do, except that only which He
does not will to do. But . . . being straight-
way strengthened in His humanity by His an-
cestral ^ divinity, he urges the safer petition, and
desires no longer that that should be the case,
but that it might be accomplished in accord-
ance with the Father's good pleasure, in glory,
in constancy, and in fulness. For John, who
has given us the record of the sublimest and
divinest of the Saviour's words and deeds, heard
Him speak thus: "And the cup which my
Father hath given me, shall I not drink it?"^
Now, to drink the cup was to discharge the
ministry and the whole economy of trial with
fortitude, to follow and fulfil the Father's deter-
mination, and to surmount all apprehensions.
And the exclamation, " Why hast Thou forsaken
me?" was in due accordance with the requests
He had previously made : Why is it that death
has been in conjunction with me all along up
till now, and that I bear not yet the cup ? This
I judge to have been the Saviour's meaning in
this concise utterance.

And He certainly spake truth then. Never-
theless He was not forsaken. But He drank
out the cup at once, as His plea had implied,
and then passed away.^ And the vinegar which
was handed to Him seems to nie to have been
a symbolical thing. For the turned wine ^ indi-
cated very well the quick turning '° and change


' Mark xiv. 36.
^ napeviyK€.

* The text gives xav tovto rraAtf to (Iktikov, etc. Migne pro-
poses, Kav TouTu) n-ciAcf to ivKTiKov = and Matthew again describes
the supplicatory and docile in Him.

5 Reading oi/Tius for oOts.

* irarpiKj)?.

' John xviii. 11.

* TTapeAijAuSe.

9 gKTpoTrtav olyos,
^ TpoTrrji/.


which He sustained, when He passed from His
passion to impassibility, and from death to death-
lessness, and from the position of one judged
to that of one judging, and from subjection
under the despot's power to the exercise of
kingly dominion. And the sponge, as I think,
signified the complete transfusion" of the Holy
Spirit that was realized in Him. And the reed
symbolized the royal sceptre and the divine law.
And the hyssop expressed that quickening and
saving resurrection of His, by which He has also
brought health to us.'^

43. " And there appeared an angel unto Him

from heaven, strengthening Him.

44. And being in an agony, He prayed more

earnestly ; and His sweat was as it were
great drops of blood falling down to the
ground."
The phrase, " a sweat of blood," is a current
parabolic expression used of persons in intense
pain and distress ; as also of one in bitter grief
people say that the man " weeps tears of blood."
For in using the expression, " as it were great
drops of blood," he does not declare the drops
of sweat to have been actually drops of blood. '^
For he would not then have said that these drops
of sweat were like blood. For such is the force
of the expression, " as it were great drops."
But rather with the object of making it plain
that the Lord's body was not bedewed with any
kind of subtle moisture which had only the show
and appearance of actuality, but that it was really
suffused all over with sweat in the shape of large
thick drops, he has taken the great drops of
blood as an illustration of what was the case with
Him. And accordingly, as by the intensity of
the supplication and the severe agony, so also
by the dense and excessive sweat, he made the
facts patent, that the Saviour was man by nature
and in reality, and not in mere semblance and
appearance, and that He was subject to all the
innocent sensibilities natural to men. Never-
theless the words, " I have power to lay down
my life, and I have power to take it again," '•♦
show that His passion was a voluntary thing ;
and besides that, they indicate that the life which
is laid down and taken again is one thing, and
the divinity which lays that down and takes it
again is another.

He says, " one thing and another," not as
making a partition into two persons, but as show-
ing the distinction between the two natures. '5

And as, by voluntarily enduring the death in
the flesh, He implanted incorruptibility in it ; so


•' avaKpaiTiv.

'- The text is, ^fiay i/yio tSei^ev. Migne proposes vyiacrev.

'3 [Note this somewhat modern "explaining away." It proves
the freedom of our author from any predisposition to exegetical ex-
aggeration, if nothing more.]

■■i John X. i8.

'5 This sentence is supposed to be an interpolation by the con-
structor of the Catena,


ii6 WORKS OF DIONYSIUS. — EXEGETICAL FRAGMENTS.


also, by taking to Himself of His own free-will
the passion of our servitude,' He set in it the
seeds of constancy and courage, whereby He
has nerved those who believe on Him for the
mighty conflicts belonging to their witness-bear-
ing. Thus, also, those drops of sweat flowed
from Him in a marvellous way like great drops
of blood, in order that He might, as it were,
drain off^ and empty the fountain of the fear
which is proper to our nature. For unless this
had been done with a mystical import, He cer-
tainly would not, even had He been ^ the most
timorous and ignoble of men, have been bedewed
in this unnatural way with drops of sweat like
drops of blood under the mere force of His
agony.

Of like import is also the sentence in the nar-
rative which tells us that an angel stood by the
Saviour and strengthened Him. For this, too,
bore also on the economy entered into on our
behalf. For those who are appointed to engage
in the sacred exertions of conflicts on account
of piety, have the angels from heaven to assist
them. And the prayer, " Father, remove the
cup," He uttered probably not as if He feared
the death itself, but with the view of challenging
the devil by these words to erect the cross for
Him. With words of deceit that personality de-
luded Adam ; with the words of divinity, then, let
the deceiver himself now be deluded. Howbeit
assuredly the will of the Son is not one thing,
and the will of the Father another.^ For He
who wifls what the Father wills, is found to have
the Father's will. It is in a figure, therefore, that
He says, " not my will, but Thine." For it is
not that He wishes the cup to be removed, but
that He refers to the Father's will the right issue
of His passion, and honours thereby the Father
as the First.5 For if the fathers '" style one's dis-
position gnome,'^ and if such disposition relates
also to what is in consideration hidden as if by
settled purpose, how say some that the Lord, who
is above all these things, bears a gnomic will ? ^
Manifestly that can be only by defect of reason.

45. " And when He rose from prayer, and was

come to His disciples, He found them
sleeping for sorrow ;

46. And said unto them. Why sleep ye? Rise

and pray, lest ye enter into temptation."
For in the most general sense it holds good

' The text is, rrj; SouXci'as. Migne suggests, t^s SeiAia? = " the
feelina of our fear."

3 The text is, ovSi i) <r<j>6Bpa SetAdraTO!, etc. We read, with
Migne. ft instead of i).

"* [Note the following sentence, without which, as explanatory, this
might be quoted as a Alonothelite statement. Garbling is a conven-
ient resource for those who claim the Fathers for other false systems.]

* [This seems to be a quotation from the Alexandrian Fathers
showing how early such questions began to be agitated. Settled in
the Sixth Council, a.d. 681, the last " General Council."]

7 yi'ui^n), gnome.


that it is apparently not possible for any man 9
to remain altogether without experience of ill.
For, as one says, " the whole world lieth in wick-
edness ; " '° and again, " The most of the days
of man are labour and trouble." " But you will
perhaps say. What difference is there between
being tempted, and falling or entering into
temptation? Well, if one is overcome of evil
— and he will be overcome unless he struggles
against it himself, and unless God protects him
with His shield — that man has -entered into
temptation, and is in it, and is brought under it
like one that is led captive. But if one with-
stands and endures, that man is indeed tempted ;
but he has not entered into temptation, or fallen
into it. Thus Jesus was led up of the Spirit, not
indeed to enter into temptation, but to be tempted
of the devil. '^ And Abraham, again, did not enter
into temptation, neither did God lead him into
temptation, but He tempted (tried) him; yet
He did not drive him into temptation. The
Lord Himself, moreover, tempted (tried) the
disciples. Thus the wicked one, when he tempts
us, draws us into the temptations, as dealing
himself with the temptations of evil. But God,
when He tempts (tries), adduces the tempta-
tions (trials) as one untempted of evil. For
God, it is said, " cannot be tempted of evil." '^
The devil, therefore, drives us on by violence,
drawing us to destruction ; but God leads us by
the hand, training us for our salvation.

47. " x\nd while He yet spake, behold a mul-

titude, and he that was called Judas,
one of the twelve, went before them,
and drew near unto Jesus, and kissed
Him.

48. But Jesus said unto him, Judas, betrayest

thou the Son of man with a kiss? "
How wonderful this endurance of evil by the
Lord, who even kissed the traitor, and spake
words softer even than the kiss ! For He did
not say, O thou abominable, yea, utterly abom-
inable traitor, is this the return you make to us
for so great kindness? But, somehow. He says
simply "Judas," using the proper name, which
was the address that would be used by one who
commiserated a person, or who w'ished to call
him back, rather than of one in anger. And
He did not say, " thy Master, the Lord, thy
benefactor ; " but He said simply, " the Son of
man," that is, the tender and meek one : as if
He meant to say. Even supposing that I was not
your Master, or Lord, or benefactor, dost thou
still betray one so guilelessly and so tenderly
affected towards thee, as even to kiss thee in
the hour of thy treachery, and that, too, when


9 (iidAto-Ta i(T<os TravTi dvBpiuTTui,
'° I John V. 19,
" Ps. xc. 10.
'- Matt. iv. I,
'3 Jas. i. 13.


WORKS OF DIONYSIUS. — EXEGETICAL FRAGMENTS.


117


the kiss was the signal for thy treachery? Blessed
art Thou, O Lord ! How great is this example
of the endurance of evil that Thou hast shown
us in Thine own person ! how great, too, the
pattern of lowliness ! Howbeit, the Lord has
given us this example, to show us that we ought
not to give up offering our good counsel to our
brethren, even should nothing remarkable be
effected by our words.

For as incurable wounds are wounds which
cannot be remedied either by severe applications,
or by those which may act more pleasandy upon
them ; ' so == the soul, when it is once carried
captive, and gives itself up to any kind of^ wick-
edness, and refuses to consider what is really
profitable for it, although ■ a myriad counsels
should echo in it, takes no good to itself. But
just as if the sense of hearing were dead within
it, it receives no benefit from exhortations ad-
dressed to it ; not because it cannot, but only
because it will not. This was what happened
in the case of Judas. And yet Christ, although
He knew all these things beforehand, did not at
any time, from the beginning on to the end, omit
to do all in the way of counsel that depended
on Him. And inasmuch as we know that such
was His practice, we ought also unceasingly to
endeavour to set those right ■• who prove careless,
even although no actual good may seem to be
effected by that counsel.

III. — ON LUKE XXII. 42, ETC.5

But let these things be enough to say on the
subject of the will. This word, however, " Let
the cup pass," does not mean. Let it not come
near me, or approach me. For what can pass
from Him must certainly first come nigh Him,
and what does thus pass from Him must be by
Him. For if it does not reach Him, it cannot
pass from Him. Accordingly, as if He now felt
it to be present, He began to be in pain, and to
be troubled, and to be sore amazed, and to be in
an agony. And as if it was at hand and placed
before Him, He does not merely say " the cup,"
but He indicates it by the word " this." There-
fore, as what passes from one is something which
neither has no approach nor is permanently set-
tled with one, so the Saviour's first request is
that the temptation which has come softly and
plainly upon Him, and associated itself lightly
with Him, may be turned aside. And this is
the first form of that freedom from falling into


' Some such clause as ladrjvai. ixjuarai. requires to be supplied
here.

^ Reading ovtm for ouTe.

^ Reading oJTii'ioi/;' for otiouv.

5 Another fragment from the Vatican Codex, 1611, fol. 291. See
also Mai, Hihliotheca iVo^n, vi. i. 165. This is given here m a lon-
ger and fuller form than m the Greek of Gallandi m his Bibliothcca,
xiv,, Appendix, p. 115, as we have had it presented above, and than
in the Latin of Corderius in his Catena on Luke xxii. 42, etc. This
text IS taken from a complete codex.


temptation, which He also counsels the weaker
disciples to make the subject of their prayers ;
that, namely, which concerns the approach of
temptation : for it must needs be that offences
come, but yet those to whom they come ought not
to fall into the temptation. But the most perfect
mode in which this freedom from entering into
temptation is exhibited, is what He expresses in
His second request, when He says not merely,
" Not as I will," but also, " but as Thou wilt."
For with God there is no temptation in evil ; but
He wills to give us good exceeding abundantly
above what we ask or think. That His will,
therefore, is the perfect will, the Beloved Him-
self knew ; and often does He say that He has
come to do that will, and not His own will, —
that is to say, the will of men. For He takes
to Himself the person of men, as having been
made man. ^^'herefore also on this occasion
He deprecates the doing of the inferior, which
is His own, and begs that the superior should
be done, which is His Father's, to wit, the divine
will, which again, however, in respect of the
divinity, is one and the same will in Himself and
in His Father. For it was the Father's will that
He should pass through every trial (temptation),
and the Father Himself in a marvellous manner
brought Him on this course ; not, indeed, with
the trial itself as His goal, nor in order simply
that He might enter into that, but in order that
He might prove Himself to be above the trial,
and also beyond it. And surely it is the fact
that the Saviour asks neither what is impossible,
nor what is impracticable, nor what is contrary
to the will of the Father. It is something possi-
ble, for Mark makes mention of His saying,
" Abba, Father, all things are possible unto
Thee ; " and they are possible if He wills them,
for Luke tells us that He said, " Father, if Thou
be willing, remove this cup from me." The Holy
Spirit therefore, apportioned among the evangel-
ists, makes up the full account of our Saviour's
whole disposition by the expressions of these
several narrators together. He does not then
ask of the Father what the Father wills not.
For the words, " if Thou be willing," were de-
monstrative of subjection and docility, not of
ignorance or hesitancy. And just as when we
make any request that may be accordant with
his judgment, at the hand of father or ruler or
any one of those whom we respect, we are accus-
tomed to use the address, though not certainly
as if we were in doubt about it, " if you please ; "
so the Saviour also said, " if Thou be willing : "
not that He thought that He willed something
different, and thereafter learned the fact, but that
He understood exactly God's willingness to re-
move the cup from Him, and as doing so also
apprehended justly that what He wills is also
possible unto Him. For this reason the other


ii8


WORKS OF DIONYSIUS. — EXEGETICAL FRAGMENTS.


scripture says, " All things are possible unto
Thee." And Matthew again admirably describes
the submission and the humility, when he says,
"if it be possible." For unless we adapt the
sense in this way, some will perhaps assign an
impious signification to this expression " if it be
possible," as if there were anything impossible
for God to do, except that only which He does
not will to do. Therefore the request which He
made was nothing independent, nor one which
pleased Himself only, or opposed His Father's
will, but one also in conformity with the mind
of God. And yet some one may say that Fie
is overborne and changes His mind, and asks
presently something different from what He
asked before, and holds no longer by His own
will, but introduces His Father's will. Well, such
truly is the case. Nevertheless He does not by
any means make any change from one side to
another ; but He embraces another way, and a
different method of carrying out one and the
same transaction, which is also a thing agreeable
to both ; choosing, to wit, in place of the mode
which is the inferior, and which appears unsatis-
fying also to Himself, the superior and more
admirable mode marked out by the Father, For
no doubt He did pray that the cup might pass
from Him ; but He says also, " Nevertheless,
not as I will, but as Thou wilt." He longs pain-
fully, on the one hand, for its passing from Him,
but (He knows that) it is better as the Father
wills. For He does not utter a petition for its
not passing away now, instead of one for its re-
moval ; but when its withdrawal is now before
His view. He chooses rather that this should be
ordered as the Father wills. For there 's a two-
fold kind ' of withdrawal : there is one in the
instance of an object that has shown itself and
reached another, and is gone at once on being
followed by it or on outrunning it, as is the case
with racers when they graze each other in pass-
ing • and there is another in the instance of an
object that has sojourned and tarried with another,
and sat down by it, as in the case of a marauding
band or a camp, and that after a time withdraws
on being conquered, and on gaining the opposite
of a, success. For if they prevail they do not
retire, but carry off with them those whom they
have reduced ; but if they prove unable to win
the mastery, they withdraw themselves in dis-
grace. Now it was after the former similitude
that He wished that the cup might come into
His hands, and promptly pass from Him again
very readily and quickly ; but as soon as He
spake thus, being at once strengthened in His
humanity by the Father's divinity. He urges the
safer petition, and desires no longer that that
should be the case, but that it might be accom-
plished in accordance with the Father's good


pleasure, in glory, in constancy, and in fulness.
For John, who has given us the record of the
sublimest and divinest of the Saviour's words
and deeds, heard Him speak thus : " And the
cup which my Father hath given me, shall I not
drink it?" Now, to drink the cup was to dis-
charge the ministry and the whole economy of
trial with fortitude, to follow and fulfil the Father's
determination, and to surmount all apprehen-
sions ; and, indeed, in the very prayer which
He uttered He showed that He was leaving
these (apprehensions) behind Him. For of two
objects, either may be said to be removed from
the other : the object that remains may be said
to be removed from the one that goes away, and
the one that goes away may be said to be removed
from the one that remains. Besides, Matthew
has indicated most clearly that He did indeed
pray that the cup might pass from Him, but yet
that His request was that this should take place
not as He willed, but as the Father willed it.
The words given by Mark and Luke, again, ought
to be introduced in their proper connection.
For Mark says, " Nevertheless not what I will,
but what Thou wilt ; " and Luke says, " Never-
theless not my will, but Thine be done." He
did then express Himself to that effect, and He
did desire that His passion might abate and reach
its end speedily. But it was the Father's will at
the same time that He should carry out His con-
flict in a manner demanding sustained effort,^
and in sufficient measure. Accordingly He (the
Father) adduced all that assailed Him. But of
the missiles that were hurled against Him, some
were shivered m pieces, and others were dashed
back as with invulnerable arms of steel, or rather
as from the stern and immoveable rock. Blows,
spittings, scourgings, death, and the lifting up in
that death,3 all came upon Him ; and when all
these were gone through. He became silent and
endured in patience unto the end, as if He suf-
fered nothing, or was already dead. But when
His death vvas being prolonged, and when it was
now overmastering Him, if we may so speak,
beyond His utmost strength. He cried out to
His Father, "Why hast Thou forsaken me?"
And this exclamation was in due accordance
with the requests He had previously made : AMiy
is it that death has been in such close conjunc-
tion with me all along up till now, and Thou dost
not yet bear the cup past me?'* Have I not
drunk it already, and drained it? But if not,
my dread is that I may be utterly consumed by
its continuous pressure ; 5 and that is what would
befall me, wert Thou to forsake me : then would
the fulfilment abide, but I would pass away, and


2 At77apu>9.

3 Tov Oai'aTOV TO ifypojfxa,
* 7rapa<^fpei«.

5 €t 6c oitK CTTtoi' avTO Y}8r} Kai avrj^uiaa' aAAd 5e'os M'? ^^ avTOV


WORKS OF DIONYSIUS. — EXEGETICAL FRAGMENTS.


119


be made of none effect.' Now, then, I entreat
Thee, let my baptism be finished, for indeed I
have been straitened greatly until it should be
accomplished. — This I judge to have been the
Saviour's meaning in this concise utterance. And
He certainly spake truth then. Nevertheless He
was not forsaken. Albeit He drank out the cup
at once, as His plea had implied, and then passed
away. And the vinegar which was handed to
Him seems to me to have been a symbolical
thing. For the turned wine indicated very well
the quick turning and change which He sustained
when He passed from His passion to impassi-
bility, and from death to deathlessness, and from
the position of one judged to that of one judging,
and from subjection under the despot's power to
the exercise of kingly dominion. And the sponge,
as I think, signified the complete transfusion of
the Holy Spirit that was realized in Him. And
the reed symbolized the royal sceptre and the
divine law. And the hyssop expressed that quick-
ening and saving resurrection of His by which He
has also brought health to us.^ But we have gone
through these matters in sufficient detail on Mat-
thew and John. With the permission of God,
we shall speak also of the account given by Mark.
But at present we shall keep to what follows in
our passage.

IV. — AN EXPOSITION OF LUKE XXII. 46, ETC.3

This prayer He also offered up Himself, fall-
ing repeatedly on His face ; and on both occa-
sions He urged His request for not entering into
temptation : both when He prayed, " If it be
possible, let this cup pass from me ; " and when
He said, " Nevertheless not as I will, but as
Thou wilt." For He spoke of not entering into
temptation, and He made that His prayer ; but
He did not ask that He should have no trial
whatsoever in these circumstances, or-* that no
manner of hardship should ever befall Him.
For in the most general application it holds
good, that it does not appear to be possible for
any man to remain altogether without experience
of ill : for, as one says, " The whole world lieth
in wickedness ; " s and again, " The most of the
days of man are labour and trouble," ^ as men
themselves also admit. Short is our life, and
full of sorrow. Howbeit it was not meet that
He should bid them pray direcdy that that curse
might not be fulfilled, which is expressed thus :
" Cursed is the ground in thy works : in sorrow
Shalt thou eat of it all the days of thy life ; " 7


• /c€Kev(0(U.eVo9,

^ [In these allegorical interpretations we see the pupil of Origen.]

3 Aiiother fragment, connected with the preceding on Christ's
prayer in Gethsemane. Edited in a mutilated form, as given by
Gallandi, in his Bihliotheca, xiv. p. 117, and here presented in its
completeness, as found in the Vatican Codex 1611, f. 292,^.

^ Reading 17 for i^v,

5 I John V. 19.

^ Ps. xc. 10.

' Gen. iii. 17.


or thus, " Earth thou art, and unto earth shalt
thou return." ^ For which reason the Holy Scrip-
tures, that indicate in many various ways the dire
distressfulness of life, designate it as a valley of
weeping. And most of all indeed is this world
a scene of pain to the saints, to whom He ad-
dresses this word, and He cannot lie in uttering
it : " In the world ye shall have tribulation." 9
And to the same effect also He says by the
prophet, " Many are the afflictions of the right-
eous." '° But I suppose that He refers to this
entering not into temptation, when He speaks in
the prophet's words of being delivered out of the
afflictions. For He adds, " The Lord will de-
liver him out of them all." And this is just in
accordance with the Saviour's word, whereby He
promises that they will overcome their afflictions,
and that they will participate in that victory
which He has won for them. For after saying,
" In the world ye shall have tribulation," He
added, " But be of good cheer, I have overcome
the world." And again, He taught them to pray
that they might not fall into temptation, when He
said, " And lead us not into temptation ; " which
means, " Suffer us not to fall into temptation."
And to show that this did not imply they should
not be tempted, but really that they should be
delivered from the evil, He added, " But deliver
us from evil." But perhaps you will say, What
difference is there between being tempted, and
falling or entering into temptation ? Well, if one
is overcome of evil — and he will be overcome
unless he struggles against it himself, and unless
God protects him with His shield — that man
has entered into temptation, and is in it, and is
broughtwunder it like one that is led captive.
But if one withstands and endures, that man is
indeed tempted ; but he has not entered into
temptation, or fallen under it. Thus Jesus was
led up of the Spirit, not indeed to enter into
temptation, but "to be tempted of the devil." "
And Abraham, again, did not enter into tempta-
tion, neither did God lead him into temptation,
but He tempted (tried) him ; yet He did not
drive him into temptation. The Lord Himself,
moreover, tempted (tried) the disciples. And
thus the wicked one, when he tempts us, draws
us into the temptations, as dealing himself with
the temptations of evil ; but God, when He
tempts (tries), adduces the temptations as one
untempted of evil. For God, it is said, " can-
not be tempted of evil." '^ The devil, therefore,
drives us on by violence, drawing us to destruc-
tion ; but God leads us by the hand, training us
for our salvation.


^ Gen. iii. 19.

9 John xvi. 33.
'" Ps. xxxiv. ig.
" Matt. iv. I.
'- Jas. i. 13.


I20 WORKS OF DIONYSIUS. — EXEGETICAL FRAGMENTS.


v.— ON JOHN VIII. 12.'

Now this word " I am " expresses His eternal
subsistence. For if He is the reflection of the
eternal light, He must also be eternal Himself.
For if the light subsists for ever, it is evident
that the reflection also subsists for ever. And
that this light subsists, is known only by its shin-
ing ; neither can there be a light that does not
give light. We come back, therefore, to our
illustrations. If there is day, there is light ;
and if there is no such thing, the sun certainly
cannot be present.^ If, therefore, the sun had
been eternal, there would also have been endless
day. Now, however, as it is not so, the day
begins when the sun rises, and it ends when the
sun sets. But God is eternal light, having neither
beginning nor end. And along with Him there
is the reflection, also without beginning, and ever-
lasting. The Father, then, being eternal, the
Son is also eternal, being light of light ; and if
God is the light, Christ is the reflection ; and
if God is also a Spirit, as it is written, " God is a
Spirit," Christ, again, is called analogously Spirit.^

VI. — OF THE ONE SUBSTANCE.*

The plant that springs from the root is some-
thing distinct from that whence it grows up ; and
yet it is of one nature with it. And the river
which flows from the fountain is something dis-
tinct from the fountain. For we cannot call
either the river a fountain, or the fountain a
river. Nevertheless we allow that they are both
one according to nature, and also one in sub-
stance ; and we admit that the fountain may be

' A fragment. Edited from the Vatican Codex 1996, f. 78, belong-
ing to a date somewhere about the tenth century. M

2 Reading iroAAoO y( 6ei. The text gives ttoAu ye Sn.

3 aTfit;. If this strange reading aT/nis is correct, there is appar-
ently a play intended on the two words nvdixa and dTM.i?, = if God
is a TTvevixa, which word literally signifies Wind or Air, Christ, on
that analogy, may be called ar/iiis, that is to say, the Vapour or
Breath of that Wind.

■» That the Son is not different from the Father in nature, but con-
natural and consubstantial with Him. From the J'aiiopiia of Euthy-
mius Zigabenus in the Cod. xix. Nauiance Biblioth.


conceived of as father, and that the river is what
is begotten of the fountain. 5

VII.— ON THE RECEPTION OF THE LAPSED
TO PENITENCE.^-

But now we are doing the opposite. For
whereas Christ, who is the good Shepherd, goes
in quest of one who wanders, lost among the
mountains, and calls him back when he flees
from Him, and is at pains to take him up on
His shoulders when He has found him, we, on
the contrary, harshly spurn such a one even
when He approaches us. Yet let us not consult
so miserably for ourselves, and let us not in this
way be driving the sword against ourselves. For
when people set themselves either to do evil or
to do good to others, what they do is certainly
not confined to the carrying out of their will on
those others ; but just as they attach themselves
to iniquity or to goodness, they will themselves
become possessed either by divine virtues or by
unbridled passions. And the former will become
the followers and comrades of the good angels ;
and both in this world and in the other, with the
enjoyment of perfect peace and immunity from
all ills, they will fulfil the most blessed destinies
unto all eternity, and in God's fellowship they
will be for ever (in possession of) the supremest
good. But these latter will fall away at once
from the peace of God and from peace with
themselves, and both in this world and after
death they will abide with the spirits of blood-
guiltiness. ^ Wherefore let us not thrust from
us those who seek a penitent reTurn ; but let us
receive them gladly, and number them once
more with the stedfast, and make up again what
is defective in them.


5 [See his explanations in the epistle to Dionysius, p. 92, j?c/ra. j

* A fragment, probably by the Alexandrian Dionysius. This

seems to be an excerpt from his works On Peiiiieiice, three of which

are mentioned by Jerome in his De Script, EccL, ch. 69. See Mai,

Classici Auciorcs, x. 484. It is edited here from the Vatican Codex.

1 Tois rraAa/iij'aiois 6ai.fi.ocri.. Or, with the demons of vengeance.


NOTE BY THE AMERICAN EDITOR.

Frequent references to Gallaiidi, whose collection I have been unable to inspect, the cost of
the best edition being about two hundred dollars, makes it worth while to insert here, from a
London book-catalogue, the following useful memoranda : " GaUandii, Cong. Orat. (Andr.)
Bibliotheca Veterum Patrum Antiquorumque Scriptorum Ecclesiasticorum Graeco-Latina ; Opera
silicet eorundum minora ac rariora usque ad xiii. Speculum complexa, quorum clxxx. et amplius
nee in Veteri Parisiensi, neque in postrema Lugdunensi edita sunt. Venet., 1765.

"The contents are given in Darling, col. 298-306. Of the three hundred and eighty-nine
writers enumerated, it appears that nearly two hundred are not in the earlier collections.

" The contents of these great collections are, not the works of the Great Fathers, of whose
writings separate editions have been published, but the works, often extensive and important, of
those numerous Ecclesiastical writers whose works go, with the Greater Fathers referred to, to
make up the sum of Church Patristic literature."


JULIUS AFRICANUS.


INTRODUCTORY NOTICE

TO

JULIUS AFRICANUS.


[a.d. 200-232-245.] In a fomier volume, strengthened by a word from Archbishop Usher,' I
have not hesitated to claim for Theophilus of Antioch a primary place among Christian chronolo-
gists. It is no detraction from the fame of our author to admit this, and truth requires it. But
the great Alexandrian school must again come into view when we speak of any considerable
achievements, among early Christian writers, in this important element of all biblical, in fact, all
historical, science. Africanus was a pupil of Heraclas, and we must therefore date his pupilage in
Alexandria before a.d. 232, when Dionysius succeeded Heraclas in the presidency of that school.
It appears that in a.d. 226 he was performing some duty in behalf of Emmaus (Nicopolis) in
Palestine; but Heraclas, who had acted subordinately as Origen's assistant as early as a.d. 218,
could not have become the head of the school, even provisionally, till after Origen's unhappy
ordination.^ Let us assume the period of our author's attending the school under Heraclas to be
between a.d. 228 and a.d. 232, however. We may then venture to reckon his birth as circa a.d.
200. And, if he became " bishop of Emmaus," it could hardly have been before the year 240,
when he was of ripe age and experience. He adds additional lustre to the age of Gregory Thau-
maturgus and Dionysius, as well as to that of their common mother in letters and theology, the
already ancient academy of Pantsenus and of Clement. His reviving credit in modern times has
been largely due to the learned criticism of Dr. Routh, to whose edition of these Fragments the
student must necessarily apply. Their chief interest arises from the important specimen which
treats of the difficult question of the genealogies of our Lord contained in the evangelists. For
a succinct statement of the points invoh^ed, and for a candid concession that they were not pre-
served to meet what modern curiosity would prefer to see established, I know of nothing more
satisfactory than the commentary of Wordsworth,^ from which I have borrowed almost wholly one
of my elucidations.

The reader will remember the specimen of our author's critical judgment which is given with
the works of Origen.* He differed with that great author, and the Church Catholic has sustained
his judgment as just. I regret that the Edinburgh editors thought it necessary to make the Letter
to Origen concerning the Apocryphal Book of Susannah a mere preface to Origen's answer. It
might have been quoted there as a preface ; but it is too important not to be included here, with
the other fragments of his noble contributions to primitive Christian literature.

It does not clearly appear, from the Edinburgh edition, who the translator is ; but here follows
the

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTORY NOTICE.

The principal facts known to us in the life of Africanus are derived from himself and the
Chronicon of Eusebius. He says of himself that he went to Alexandria on account of the fame

' Vol. ii. p. 87, this series. 2 Vol. iv. p. 227. 3 On St. Matt. i. 1-17. * Vol. iv. p. 385.


124 INTRODUCTORY NOTICE.

of Heraclas. In the Chronicon, under the year 226, it is stated that " NicopoHs in Palestine,
which formerly bore the name of Emmaus, was built, Africanus, the author of the Chronologv,
acting as ambassador on behalf of it,^ and having the charge of it." Dionysius Bar-Salibi speaks
of Africanus as bishop of Emmaus.

Eusebius describes Africanus as being the author of a work called /cecrrot.' Suidas says tnat
this book detailed various kinds of cures, consisting of charms and written forms, and such like.
Some have supposed that such a work is not likely to have been written by a Christian writer :
they appeal also to the fact that no notice is taken of the Kccrrot by Jerome in his notice of Afri-
canus, nor by Rufinus in his translation of Eusebius. They therefore deem the clause in Eusebius
an interpolation, and they suppose that two bore the name of Africanus, — one the author of the
K€<TTOL, the other the Christian writer. Suidas identifies them, says that he was surnamed Sextus,
and that he was a Libyan philosopher.

The works ascribed to Africanus, beside the Cesti, are the following : —

1. Five Books of Chronology. Photius^ says of this work, that it was concise, but omitted
nothing of importance. It began with the cosmogony of Moses, and went down to the advent of
Christ. It summarized also the events from the time of Christ to the reign of the Emperor
Macrinus.

2. A very famous letter to Aristides, in which he endeavoured to reconcile the apparent dis-
crepancies in the genealogies of Christ given by Matthew and Luke.

3. A letter to Origen, in which he endeavoured to prove that the story of Susanna in Daniel
was a forgery. A translation of this letter has been given with the Works of Origefi.

The Acts of Symphorosa and her Seven Sons are attributed in the MSS. to Africanus ; but no
ancient writer speaks of him as the author of this work.

' Hist. EccL, vi. 31. ^ Cod. 34.


THE EXTANT WRITINGS OF JULIUS AFRICANUS.


I. — THE EPISTLE TO ARISTIDES.


[Africanus on the Genealogy in the Holy
Gospels.' — Some indeed incorrectly allege that
this discrepant enumeration and mixing of the
names both of priestly men, as they think, and
royal, was made properly,^ in order that Christ
might be shown rightfully to be both Priest and
King ; as if any one disbelieved this, or had any
other hope than this, that Christ is the High
Priest of His Father, who presents our prayers
to Him, and a supramundane King, who rules
by the Spirit those whom He has delivered, a
co-operator in the government of all things.
And this is announced to us not by the cata-
logue of the tribes, nor by the mixing of the
registered generations, but by the patriarchs and
prophets. Let us not therefore descend to such
religious trifling as to establish the kingship and
priesthood of Christ by the interchanges of the
names. For the priestly tribe of Levi, too, was
allied with the kingly tribe of Juda, through the
circumstance that Aaron married Elizabeth the
sister of Naasson,3 and that Eleazar again mar-
ried the daughter of Phatiel,* and begat chil-
dren. The evangelists, therefore, would thus
have spoken falsely, affirming what was not truth,
but a fictitious commendation. And for this
reason the one traced the pedigree of Jacob the
father of Joseph from David through Solomon ;
the other traced that of Heli also, though in a
different way, the father of Joseph, from Nathan
the son of David. And they ought not indeed
to have been ignorant that both orders of the
ancestors enumerated are the generation of Da-
vid, the royal tribe of Juda.s For if Nathan
was a prophet, so also was Solomon, and so too


• :.„ 7%' "^""',•''^1"'^;? ^y^"^*'^'"*''^ acephalous. A large por-
tion of It IS supplied by Cardinal Angelo Mai in the BibUotheta nn<a
i" ,"'"'■ ™- 'r- PP- 23' and 273. We enclose in brackets the parts
panting in Gallandi, who copied Eusehiuf. {/y!si. £cc/., i. 7). On
this celebrated letter of Africanus to Aristides, consult especially
Eusebius {//:si. EccL, .. 7); also Jerome, comm. on Matt. i. 16;
te'","h'^'7''"K'-"- 7; Photius,cod. xxxiv. p. 22: and in addi-
tion to these, Zachanas Chrysopol. in Bibl. P. P. Lugd., vol. xix.

^ Ex. vi. 23.
* Ex vi. 25.
5 [Heb. vii. 14.]


[the father of both of them; and there were
prophets belonging to many of the tribes, but
priests belonging to none of the tribes, save the
Levites only. To no purpose, then, is this fab-
rication of theirs. Nor shall an assertion of
this kind prevail in the Church of Christ against
the exact truth, so as that a lie should be con-
trived for the praise and glory of Christ. For
who does not know that most holy word of the
apostle also, who, when he was preaching and
proclaiming the resurrection of our Saviour, and
confidently affirming the truth, said with great
fear, " If any say that Christ is not risen, and we
assert and have believed this, and both hope for
and preach that very thing, we are false witnesses
of God, in alleging that He raised up Christ,
whom He raised not up?"^ And if he who
glorifies God the Father is thus afraid lest he
should seem a false witness in narrating a mar-
vellous fact, how should not he be justly afraid,
who tries to establish the truth by a false state-
ment, preparing an untrue opinion? For if the
generations are different, and trace down no
genuine seed to Joseph, and if all has been
stated only with the view of establishing the
position of Him who was to be born — to con-
firm the truth, namely, that He who was to be
would be king and priest, there being at the
same time no proof given, but the dignity of
the words being brought down to a feeble hymn,
— it is evident that no praise accrues to God
from that, since it is a falsehood, but rather
judgment returns on him who asserts it, because
he vaunts an unreality as though it were reality.
Therefore, that we may expose the ignorance
also of him who speaks thus, and prevent any
one from stumbling at this folly, I shall set forth
the true history of these matters.]


For 7 whereas in Israel the names of their gen-
erations were enumerated either according to
nature or according to law, — according to nature,


^ I Cor. XV. 12, etc.

' Here what is given in Eusebius begins.
125


126


THE EXTANT WRITINGS OF JULIUS AFRICANUS.


indeed, by the succession of legitimate offspring,
and according to law whenever another raised
up children to the name of a brother dying
childless ; for because no clear hope of resur-
rection was yet given them, they had a repre-
sentation of the future promise in a kind of
mortal resurrection, with the view of perpetu-
ating the name of one deceased ; — whereas,
then, of those entered in this genealogy, some
succeeded by legitimate descent as son to father,
while others begotten in one family were intro-
duced to another in name, mention is therefore
made of both — of those who were progenitors
in fact, and of those who were so only in name.
Thus neither of the evangelists is in error, as
the one reckons by nature and the other by law.
For the several generations, viz., those descend-
ing from Solomon and those from Nathan, were
so .intermingled ' by the raising up of children
to the childless,^ and by second marriages, and
the raising up of seed, that the same persons
are quite justly reckoned to belong at one time
to the one, and at another to the other, i.e., to
their reputed or to their actual fathers. And
hence it is that both these accounts are true, and
come down to Joseph, with considerable in-
tricacy indeed, but yet quite accurately.

III.

But in order that what I have said may be
made evident, I shall explain the interchange ^
of the generations. If we reckon the genera-
tions from David through Solomon, Matthan is
found to be the third from the end, who begat
Jacob the father of Joseph. But if, with Luke,
we reckon them from Nathan the son of David,
in hke manner the third from the end is Melchi,
whose son was Heli the father of Joseph. For
Joseph was the son of Heli, the son of Melchi.'*
As Joseph, therefore, is the object proposed to us,
we have to show how it is that each is represented
as his father, both Jacob as descending from Solo-
mon, and Heli as descending from Nathan : first,
how these two, Jacob and Heli, were brothers ;
and then also how the fathers of these, Matthan
and Melchi, being of different families, are shown
to be the grandfathers of Joseph. Well, then,
Matthan and Melchi, having taken the same
woman to wife in succession, begat children who
were uterine brothers, as the law did not prevent a
widow,5 whether such by divorce or by the death


* Reading ^TweTreirXaK-n. Migne would make it equivalent to
" superimplexum est." Rufinus renders it, " Reconjunctum namque
est sibi invicem genus, et illud per Salomonem et illud quod per
Nathan deducitur," etc.

2 ava(TTd(T):<Tiy uTiKi'iov, Rufinus and Damascenus omit these
words in their versions of the passage.

3 The reading of the Codex Regius is nKoXovS'av, i.e., succession;
the other leading mss. give e7T<j\,\ayrii',i.e., interchange or confusion,

■< But in our text in Luke iii. 23, 24, and so, too, in the Vulgate,
Matthat and Levi are inserted between Heli and Melchi. It may be
that these two names were not found in the copy used by Africanus.

S Here Africanus applies the term " widow" (x')p«i'ou<rat') to one
divorced as well as to one bereaved.


of her husband, from marrying another. By
Estha, then — for such is her name according
to tradition — Matthan first, the descendant of
Solomon, begets Jacob ; and on Matthan's death,
Melchi, who traces his descent back to Nathan,
being of the same tribe but of another family,
having married her, as has been already said, had
a son Heli. Thus, then, we shall find Jacob and
Heli uterine brothers, though of different fami-
lies. And of these, the one Jacob having taken
the wife of his brother Heli, who died childless,
begat by her the third, Joseph — his son by na-
ture and by account.^ Whence also it is written,
" And Jacob begat Joseph." But according to
law he was the son of Heli, for Jacob his brother
raised up seed to him. Wherefore also the gen-
ealogy deduced through him will not be made
void, which the Evangelist Matthew in his enu-
meration gives thus : " And Jacob begat Joseph."
But Luke, on the other hand, says, " Who was
the son, as was supposed ^ (for this, too, he
adds), of Joseph, the son of Heli, the son of
Melchi." For it was not possible more distinctly
to state the generation according to law ; and
thus in this mode of generation he has entirely
omitted the word " begat " to the very end, car-
rying back the genealogy by way of conclusion
to Adam and to God.^

IV.

Nor indeed is this incapable of proof, neither
is it a rash conjecture. For the kinsmen of
the Saviour after the flesh, whether to magnify
their own origin or simply to state the fact, but
at all events speaking truth, have also handed
down the following account : Some Idumean rob-
bers attacking Ascalon, a city of Palestine, be-
sides other spoils which they took from a temple
of Apollo, which was built near the walls, carried
off captive one Antipater, son of a certain Herod,
a servant of the temple. And as the priest 9 was
not able to pay the ransom for his son, x^ntipater
was brought up in the customs of the Idumeans,
and afterwards enjoyed the friendship of Hyrca-
nus, the high priest of Judea. And being sent on
an embassy to Pompey on behalf of Hyrcanus,
and having restored to him the kingdom which
was being wasted by Aristobulus his brother, he
was so fortunate as to obtain the title of pro-


6 Kara Adyoi'.

7 Two things maybe remarked here : first, that Africanus refers
the phrase " as was supposed " not only to the words " son of Joseph,"
but also to those that follow, " the son of Heli; " so that Christ would
be the son of Joseph by legal adoption, just in the same way as
Joseph was the son of Heli, which would lead to the absurd and im-
pious conclusion that Christ was the son of Mary and a brother of
Joseph married by her after the death of the latter. And second, that
in the genealogy here assigned to Luke, Melchi holds the third
place; whence it would seem either that Africanus's memory had
failed him, or that as Bede conjectures in his copy of the Gospel
Melchi stood in place of Matthat (Migne). [A probable solution.]

8 Other MSS. read, " Adam the son of God."

9 The word " priest " is used here perhaps improperly for " ser-
vant of the temple," i.e., Upeus for Up66oi;Aos.


THE EXTANT WRITINGS OF JULIUS AFRICANUS.


127


curator of Palestine.' And when Antipater was
treacherously slain through envy of his great good
fortune, his son Herod succeeded him, who was
afterwards appointed king of Judea under Antony
and Augustus by a decree of the senate. His
sons were Herod and the other tetrarchs. These
accounts are given also in the histories of the
Greeks.2

V.

But as up to that time the genealogies of
the Hebrews had been registered in the public
archives, and those, too, which were traced back
to the proselytes 3 — as, for example, to Achior
the Ammanite, and Ruth the Moabitess, and
those who left Egj^pt along with the Israelites,
and intermarried with them — Herod, knowing
that the lineage of the Israelites contributed
nothing to him, and goaded by the consciousness
of his ignoble birth, burned the registers of their
families. This he did, thinking that he would
appear to be of noble birth, if no one else could
trace back his descent by the public register to
the patriarchs or proselytes, and to that mixed
race called geoi'ce.'^ A few, however, of the stu-
dious, having private records of their own, either
by remembering the names or by getting at them


' So Josephus styles him "procurator of Judea, and viceroy"
(e7ri/ii€Ar)Tr)5 TJj^ lowbaJa;, and eirirpOTros) .

2 This whole story about Antipater is fictitious. Antipater's
father was not Herod, a servant in the temple of Apollo, but Antipa-
ter an Idumean, as we learn from Josephus (xiv. 2). This Antipater
■was made prefect of Idumea by Alexander king of the Jews, and laid
the foundation of the power to which his descendants rose. He ac-
quired great wealth, and was on terms of friendship with Ascalon,
Gaza, and the Arabians.

3 Several mss. read apxi-n f>OTr\\\nii>v (oraxpL irpo(TriXvTtav, whence
some conjecture that the correct reading should be a\pt. tmv apxiirpo-
tTTjAuTwr, i.e., back to the " chief proselytes," — these being, as it
were, patriarchs among the proselytes, like Achior, and those who
joined the Israelites on their flight from Egypt.

* This word occurs in the Septuagint version of Ex. xii. ig, and
refers to the strangers w\io left Egypt along with the Israelites. For
Israel was accompanied by a mixed body, consisting on the one hand
of native Egyptians, who are named auroxOoi'es in that passage of
Exodus, and by the resident aliens, who are called yeiuipai. Justin
Martyr has the form yy\6pav in Dialogue with Trypho, ch. cxxii.
The root of the term is evidently the Hebrew "1J, " stranger."


in some other way from the archives, pride them-
selves in preserving the memory of their noble
descent ; and among these happen to be those
already mentioned, called desposyni,"^ on account
of their connection with the family of the Saviour.
And these coming from Nazara and Cochaba,
Judean villages, to other parts of the country,
set forth the above-named genealogy^ as ac-
curately as possible from the Book of Days.?
Whether, then, the case stand thus or not, no
one could discover a more obvious explanation,
according to my own opinion and that of any
sound judge. And let this suffice us for the
matter, although it is not supported by testimony,
because we have nothing more satisfactory or
true to allege upon it. The Gospel, however, in
any case states the truth.

VI.

Matthan, descended from Solomon, begat
Jacob. Matthan dying, Melchi, descended from
Nathan, begat Heli by the same wife. There-
fore Heli and Jacob are uterine brothers. Heli
dying childless, Jacob raised up seed to him and
begat Joseph, his own son by nature, but the
son of Heli by law. Thus Joseph was the son
of both.^


5 The word Secrjrdcruvot was employed to indicate the Lord's
relatives, as being His according to the flesh. The term means liter-
ally, " those who belong to a master," and thence it was used also to
signify " one's heirs."

6 TTpoei,pr)fi.ivT]v, Nicephorus reads npoKeiixev-qv.

7 ix T( T^s /Si^Aov Ttov ijfxepMv. By this " Book of Days" Afri-
canus understands those " day-books" which he has named, a little
before this, iStioTiKas a.TToypa<t>di;. For among the Jews, most per-
sons setting a high value on their lineage were in the habit of keeping
by them private records of their descent copied from the public ar-
chives, as we see it done also by nobles among ourselves. Besides,
by the insertion of the particle t(, which is found in all our codices,
and also in Nicephorus, it appears that something is wanting in this
passage. Wherefore it seems necessary to supply these words, Kai
aTf'o fj.vrip.r]'; e5 bcro;/ i^LKvoiivTO, " and from memory," etc. Thus at
least Rufinus seems to have read the passage, for he renders it: Or-
dinem supradictae generationis partim memoriter, partim etiam ex
dierum libris, in quantum erat possibile, perdocebant (Migne).

s [Elucidation I.]


II. — NARRATIVE OF EVENTS HAPPENING IN PERSIA ON THE BIRTH OF

CHRIST.'

The best introduction to this production will be the following preface, as given in Migne : —
Many men of learning thus far have been of opinion that the narrative by Africanus of events
happening in Persia on Christ's birth,^ is a fragment of that famous work which Sextus Julius
Africanus, a Christian author of the third century after Christ, composed on the history of the
world in the chronological order of events up to the reign of Macrinus, and presented in five
books to Alexander, son of Mammaea, with the view of obtaining the restoration of his native
town Emmaus. With the same expectation which I see incited Lambecius and his compendiator
Nesselius, I, too, set myself with the greatest eagerness to go over the codices of our Electoral
Library. . . . But, as the common proverb goes, I found coals instead of treasure. This narra-
tive, so far from its being to be ascribed to a writer well reputed by the common voice of

' Edited from two Munich codices by J. Chr. von. Aretin, in his Beitrage zur Geschichte und Liieratur, anno 1804, p. ii. p. 49.
[I place this apocryphal fragment here as a mere appendix to the Genealogical Argument. An absurd appendix, indeed.]

^ Which is extant in two mss. in the Electoral Library of Munich, and in one belonging to the Imperial Library of Vienna.


128


THE EXTANT WRITINGS OF JULIUS AFRICANUS.


antiquity, does not contain anything worthy of the genius of the chronographer Africanus.
Wherefore,, since by the unanimous testimony of the ancients he was a man of consummate
learning and sharpest judgment, while the author of the Cesti, which also puts forward the name
of Africanus, has been long marked by critics with the character either of anile creduHty, or of a
marvellous propensity to superstitious fancies, I can readily fall in with the opinion of those who
think that he is a different person from the chronographer, and would ascribe this wretched pro-
duction also to him. But, dear reader, on perusing these pages, if your indignation is not stirred
against the man's rashness, you will at least join with me in laughing at his prodigious follies, and
will learn, at the same time, that the testimonies of men most distinguished for learning are not
to be rated so highly as to supersede personal examination when opportunity permits.


EVENTS IN PERSU :

ON THE INCARNATION OF OUR LORD AND GOD AND
SAVIOUR JBSUS CHRIST.

Christ first of all became known from Persia.
For nothing escapes the learned jurists of that
country, who investigate all things with the ut-
most care. The facts,' therefore, which are
inscribed upon the golden plates,- and laid up
in the royal temples, I shall record ; for it is
from the temples there, and the priests con-
nected with them, that the name of Christ has
been heard of. Now there is a temple there to
Juno, surpassing even the royal palace, which
temple Cyrus, that prince instructed in all piety,
built, and in which he dedicated in honour of
the gods golden and silver statues, and adorned
them with precious stones, — that I may not
waste words in a profuse description of that
ornamentation. Now about that time (as the
records on the plates testify), the king having
entered the temple, with the view of getting an
interpretation of certain dreams, was addressed
by the priest Prupupius thus : I congratulate
thee, master : Juno has conceived. And the
king, smiling, said to him. Has she who is dead
conceived? And he said. Yes, she who was
dead has come to life again, and begets life.
And the king said, What is this? explain it to
me. And he replied. In truth, master, the time
for these things is at hand. For during the
whole night the images, both of gods and god-
desses, continued beating the ground, saying to
each other, Come, let us congratulate Juno.
And they say to me, Prophet, come forward ;
congratulate Juno, for she has been embraced.
And I said, How can she be embraced who no
longer exists? To which they reply. She has
come to life again, and is no longer called Juno,^
but Urania. For the mighty Sol has embraced
her. Then the goddesses say to the gods, mak-


' The MSS. read vdp, for. i

^ The term in the original (aAicAopiai?) is one altogether foreign
to Greek, and seems to be of Arabic origin. The sense, however, is
evident from the use of synonymous terms in the context.

■3 There is a play upon the words, perhaps, in the original. The
Greek term for Juno ('Hpa) may be derived from ipa^, terra, so that
the antithesis intended is, " She is no longer called Earthly, but
Heavenly."


ing the matter plainer, Pege '• is she who is em-
braced ; fordid not Juno espouse an artificer?
And the gods say. That she is rightly called
Pt'ge, we admit. Her name, moreover, is Myria;
for she bears in her womb, as in the deep, a
vessel of a myriad talents' burden. And as to
this title Pege, let it be understood thus : This
stream of water sends forth the perennial stream
of spirit, — a stream containing but a single
fish, 5 taken with the hook of Divinity, and sus-
taining the whole world with its flesh as though
it were in the sea. You have well said, She has
an artificer [in espousal] ; but by that espousal
she does not bear an artificer on an equality with
herself. For this artificer who is born, the son
of the chief artificer, framed by his excellent
skill the roof of the third heavens, and estab-
lished by his word this lower world, with its
threefold sphere ^ of habitation.

Thus, then, the statues disputed with each
other concerning Juno and Pege, and [at length]
with one voice they said : When the day is fin-
ished, we all, gods and goddesses, shall know
the matter clearly. Now, therefore, master, tarry
for the rest of the day. For the matter shall
certainly come to pass. For that which emerges
is no common affair.

And when the king abode there and watched
the statues, the harpers of their own accord be-
gan to strike their harps, and the muses to sing ;
and whatsoever creatures were within, whether
quadruped or fowl, in silver and gold, uttered
their several voices. And as the king shuddered,
and was filled with great fear, he was about to
retire. For he could not endure the sponta-
neous tumult. The priest therefore said to him.
Remain, O king, for the full revelation is at hand
which the God of gods has chosen to declare
to us.

And when these things were said, the roof
was opened, and a bright star descended and


* i.e., Fountain, Spring, or Stream.

5 The initial letters of the Greek 'Iijo-oO? XptcrTo? %fo\) Yibs
SujT^p, i.e., "Jesus Christ the Son of God the Saviour," when joined
together, make the word i\Su?, i.e., fi.'-h; and the fathers used the
word, therefore, as a mystic symbol of Christ, who could live in the
depth of our mortality as in the abyss of the sea. [Vol. ii. p. 297.]

'' i.e., as sea, land, and sky.


THE EXTANT WRITINGS OF JULIUS AFRICANUS.


129


stood above the pillar of Pege, and a voice was
heard to this effect : Sovereign Pege, the mighty
Son has sent me to make the announcement to
you, and at the same time to do you service in
parturition, designing blameless nuptials with
you, O mother of the chief of all ranks of being,
bride of the triune Deity. And the child begot-
ten by extraordinary generation is called the
Beginning and the End, — the beginning of sal-
vation, and the end of perdition.

And when this word was spoken, all the statues
fell upon their faces, that of Pege alone standing,
on which also a royal diadem was found placed,
having on its upper side a star set in a carbuncle
and an emerald. And on its lower side the star
rested.

And the king forthwith gave orders to bring
in all the interpreters of prodigies, and the sages
who were under his dominion. And when all
the heralds sped with their proclamations, all
these assembled in the temple. And when they
saw the star above Pege, and the diadem with
the star and the stone, and the statues lying on
the floor, they said : O king, a root (offspring)
divine and princely has risen, bearing the image
of the King of heaven and earth. For Pege-
Myria is the daughter of the Bethlehemite Pege.
And the diadem is the mark of a king, and the
star is a celestial announcement of portents to
fall on the earth. Out of Judah has arisen a
kingdom which shall subvert all the memorials
of the Jews. And the prostration of the gods
upon the floor prefigured the end of their hon-
our. For he who comes, being of more ancient
dignity, shall displace aU the recent. Now there-
fore, O king, send to Jerusalem- For you will
find the Christ of the Omnipotent God borne in
bodily form in the bodily arms of a woman.
And the star remained above the statue of Pege,
called the Celestial, until the wise men came
forth, and then it went with them.

And then, in the depth of evening, Dionysus
appeared in the temple, unaccompanied by the
Satyrs, and said to the images : Pege is not
one of us, but stands far above us, in that
she gives birth to a man whose conception is in
divine fashion.' O priest Prupupius ! what dost
thou tarrying here? An action, indicated in
writings of old,^ has come upon us, and we shall
be convicted as false by a person of power and
energy.3 Wherein we have been deceivers, we
have been deceivers ; and wherein we have ruled,
we have ruled. No longer give we oracular re-
sponses. Gone from us is our honour. With-
out glory and reward are we become. There is
One, and One only, who receives again at the
hands of all His proper honour. For the rest.


^ fyypaffiOt;,
3 e/ATT-paKTou.


be not disturbed. ■♦ No longer shall the Persians
exact tribute of earth and sky. For He who es-
tablished these things is at hand, to bring practi-
cal tribute 5 to Him who sent Him, to renew the
ancient image, and to put image with image, and
bring the dissimilar to similarity. Heaven re-
joices with earth, and earth itself exults at receiv-
ing matter of exultation from heaven. Things
which have not happened above, have happened
on earth beneath. He whom the order of the
blessed has not seen, is seen by the order of the
miserable. Flame threatens those ; dew attends
these. To Myria is given the blessed lot of
bearing Pege in Bethlehem, and of conceiving
grace of grace. Judaea has seen its bloom, and
this country is fading. To Gentiles and aliens,
salvation is come ; to the wretched, relief is min-
istered abundantly. With right do women dance,
and say. Lady Pege, Spring-bearer, thou mother
of the heavenly constellation. Thou cloud that
bringest us dew after heat, remember thy de-
pendants, O mistress.

The king then, without delay, sent some of
the Magi under his dominion with gifts, the star
showing them the way. And when they returned,
they narrated to the men of that time those
same things which were also written on the plates
of gold, and which were to the following effect : —

When we came to Jerusalem, the sign, together
with our arrival, roused all the people. How is
this, say they, that wise men of the Persians are
here, and that along with them there is this
strange stellar phenomenon ? And the chief of
the Jews interrogated us in this way : What is
this that attends you,^ and with what purpose
are you here ? And we said : He whom ye call
Messias is born. And they were confounded,
and dared not withstand us. But they said to us,
By the justice of Heaven, tell us what ye know
of this matter. And we made answer to them :
Ye labour under unbelief; and neither without
an oath nor with an oath do ye believe us, but
ye follow your own heedless counsel. For the
Christ, the Son of the Most High, is born, and
He is the subverter of your law and synagogues.
And therefore is it that, struck with this most
excellent response as with a dart,^ ye hear in
bitterness this name which has come upon you
suddenly. And they then, taking counsel to-
gether, urged us to accept their gifts, and tell
to none that such an event had taken place in
that land of theirs, lest, as they say, a revolt rise
against us. But we replied : \\'e have brought
gifts in His honour, with the view of proclaiming
those mighty things which we know to have hap-
pened in our country on occasion of His birth ;
and do ye bid us take your bribes, and conceal


■* The text gives 0poj3aSet, for which Migne proposes Sopu/SijSi.

5 7rpa*cTt/cou? ^opov;,

6 Ti TO eTTo/uci'oi', perhaps meant for, What business brings you?

7 iiirep juai'Teitts aptffTijs wffirtp /caxaTo^ti/Ojaei'oi.


I ^o


THE EXTANT WRITINGS OF JULIUS AFRICANUS.


the things which have been communicated to us
by the iJivinity who is above the heavens, and
neglect the commaniiments of our proper King?
And after urging many considerations on us,
they gave the matter up. And when the king
of Judaea sent for us and had some converse with
us, and put to us certain questions as to the
statements we made to him, we acted in the
same manner, until he was thorouglily enraged
at our replies. We left him accordingly, with-
out giving any greater heed to him than to any
common person.

And we came to that place then to which we
were sent, and saw the mother and the child,
the star indicating to us the royal babe. And
we said to the mother : What art thou named, O
renowned mother? And she says: Mary, mas-
ters. And we said to her : Whence art thou
sprung?' And she replies: From this district
of the Bethlehemites.^ Then said we : Hast
thou not had a husband ? And she answers : I
was only betrothed with a view to the marriage
covenant, my thoughts being far removed from
this. For I had no mind to come to this. And
while I was giving very little concern to it, when
a certain Sabbath dawned, and straightway at
the rising of the sun, an angel appeared to me
bringing me suddenly the glad tidings of a son.
And in trouble I cried out. Be it not so to me,
Lord, for I have not a husband. And he per-
suaded me to believe, that by the will of God I
should have this son.

Then said we to her : Mother, mother, all
the gods of the Persians have called thee blessed.
Thy glory is great ; for thou art exalted above
all women of renown, and thou art shown to be
more queenly than all queens.

The child, moreover, was seated on the ground,
being, as she said, in His second year, and hav-
ing in part the likeness of His mother. And she
had long hands,^ and a body somewhat delicate ;
and her colour was like that of ripe wheat ; ■* and
she was of a round face, and had her hair bound


3 ixaKpai; Tas x^'P"? according to Migne, instead of the reading
of the manuscript, fj.aKp\v ttji' Krjpav i)^ov(7a,
* atTovpoos.


up. And as we had along with us a sen-ant
skilled in painting from the life, we brought with
us to our country a likeness of them both ; and
it was placed by our hand in the sacred 5 temple,
with this inscription on it : To Jove the Sun, the
mighty God, the King of Jesus, the power of
Persia dedicated this.

And taking the child up, each of us in turn,
and bearing Him in our arms, we saluted Him
and worshipped Him, and presented to Him
gold, and myrrh, and frankincense, addressing
Him thus : We gift Thee with Thine own, O
Jesus, Ruler of heaven. Ill would things un-
ordered be ordered, wert Thou not at hand. In
no other way could things heavenly be brought
into conjunction with things earthly, but by Thy
descent. Such service cannot be discharged, if
only the servant is sent us, as when the blaster
Himself is present ; neither can so much be
achieved when the king sends only his satraps
to war, as when the king is there himself. It
became the wisdom of Thy system, that Thou
shouldst deal in this manner with men.*^

And the child leaped and laughed at our ca-
resses and words. And when we had bidden the
mother farewell,^ and when she had shown us
honour, and we had testified to her the reverence
which became us, we came again to the place in
which we lodged. And at eventide there ap-
peared to us one of a terrible and fearful coun-
tenance, saying : Get ye out quickly, lest ye be
taken in a snare. And we in terror said : And
who is he, O divine leader, that plotteth against so
august an embassage ? And he replied : Herod ;
but get you up straightway and depart in safety
and peace.

And we made speed to depart thence in all
earnestness ; and we reported in Jerusalem all
that we had seen. Behold, then, the great things
that w^e have told you regarding Christ ; and we
saw Christ our Saviour, who was made known
as both God and man. To Him be the glory and
the power unto the ages of the ages. Amen.


5 rtlOTTfTfl.

6 The manuscripts give ai'Tapras, for which Migne proposes
niflpuijrous or ai'TepyaTa?. [Unworthy, wholly so, of our author.
This curious specimen of the romances of antiquity might better have
iound its place with other Protevaiigelia in vol. viii., this series.]

7 criTTa^a/xei'Ot.


III. — THE EXTANT FRAGMENTS OF THE FIVE BOOKS OF THE CHRONOG-

RAPHY OF JULIUS AFRICANUS.

such subjects profoundly have in a summary
On the Mythical Chronology of the Egyptians and Chaldeans, way Called lunar years ; and inclining no less

rp, T- ^- • A ^ VI ^1 • 1^ .r 1 than others to the mythical, they think thev fall

Ihe Egyptians, mdeed, with their boastful ■ -^x^ ^\^ • w • Ii ^ c "

^^*- c i\ ■ ^- ■,. u X. r .1 in with the eight or nine thousands of years

notions of their own antiquity, have put forth a v.- i. ^i -c r ■ ^ to .. r i i

o^ 4- ^f 4. r •* 1 tu u \j f ^u • ..1 which the Egyptian priests in Plato falsely

sort of account of it by the hand of their astrolo- , , o /

„„ • , J ■ J f I.- i. reckon up to Solon,

gers in cycles and myriads of years ; which some ^

of those who have had the repute of studying


' In Georgius Syncellus, Chron., p. 17, ed. Pans, 14 Venet.


^ The text is: , . . (rufxTrtTT-TOutri rat? oktoj icat kvvia. j^iXtao'LV
tThiv, as AiyvTrTiuiv ot Trapd UAarufi Upeis €ts ZoAuifa KaTaptB-
/AoGj'Tes ovK 6.\T)6svovai.


THE EXTANT WRITINGS OF JULIUS AFRICANUS.


i^i


(^And after some other matter .•)

For why should I speak of the three myriad
years of the Phoenicians, or of the foHies of the
Chaldeans, their forty-eight myriads? For the
Jews, deriving their origin from them as descend-
ants of Abraham, having been taught a modest
mind, and one such as becomes men, together
with the truth by the spirit of Moses, have
handed down to us, by their extant Hebrew his-
tories, the number of 5500 years as the period
up to the advent of the Word of salvation, that
was announced to the world in the time of the
sway of the Csesars.

When men multiplied on the earth, the angels
of heaven came together with the daughters of
men. In some copies I found " the sons of
God." What is meant by the Spirit, in my opin-
ion, is that the descendants of Seth are called
the sons of God on account of the righteous
men and patriarchs who have sprung from him,
even clown to the Saviour Himself; but that the
descendants of Cain are named the seed of men,
as having nothing divine in them, on account of
the wickedness of their race and the inequality
of their nature, being a mixed people, and hav-
ing stirred the indignation of God.^ But if it is
thought that these refer to angels, we must take
them to be those who deal with magic and jug-
glery, who taught the women the motions of the
stars and the knowledge of things celestial, by
whose power they conceived the giants as their
children, by whom wickedness came to its height
on the earth, until God decreed that the whole
race of the living should perish in their impiety
by the deluge.

Adam, when 230 years old, begets Seth ; and
after living other 700 years he died, that is, a
second death.

Seth, when 205 years old, begat Enos ; from
Adam therefore to the birth of Enos there are
435 years in all.

Enos. when 190 years old, begets Cainan.

Cainan again, when 170 years old, begets
Malaleel ;

And Malaleel, when 165 years old; begets
Jared ;

And Jared, when 162 years old, begets Enoch ;

And Enoch, when 165 years old, begets Ma-
thusala ; and having pleased God, after a life of
other 200 years, he was not found.

Mathusala, when 187 years old, begat Lamech.

Lamech, when 188 years old, begets Noe.


' In Georgius Syncellus, Citron., p. 19, al. 15.

2 The text here is manifestly corrupt: i-ni.y.\.\QivTiiiV ain
ayavaKTTjfTLv TTOirjcrao-flat Toi/ Wtoc.

3 In Georgius Syncellus, Chroti., p. 81, al. 65.


On the Deluge.

God decreed to destroy the whole race of the
living by a flood, having threatened that men
should not survive beyond 1 20 years. Nor let it
be deemed a matter of difficulty, because some
lived afterwards a longer period than that. For
the space of time meant was 100 years up to the
flood in the case of the sinners of that time ;
for they were 20 years old. God instructed Noe,
who pleased him on account of his righteous-
ness, to prepare an ark ; and when it was finished,
there entered it Noe himself and his sons, his
wife and his daughters-in-law, and firstlings of
every living creature, with a view to the duration
of the race. And Noe was 600 years old when
the flood came on. And when the water abated,
the ark settled on the mountains of Ararat, which
we know to be in Parthia ; 5 but some say that
they are at Celaenge ^ of Phrygia, and I have seen
both places. And the flood prevailed for a year,
and then the earth became dry. And they came
out of the ark in pairs, as may be found, and
not in the manner in which they had entered,
viz., distinguished according to their species, and
were blessed by God. And each of these things
indicates something useful to us.

V.7

Noe was 600 years old when the flood came
on. From Adam, therefore, to Noe and the
flood, are 2262 years,

vi.^

And after the flood, Sem begat Arphaxad.

Arphaxad, when 135 years old, begets Sala in
the year 2397.

Sala, when 130 years old, begets Heber in the
year 2527,

Heber, when 134 years old, begets Phalec in
the year 2661, so called because the earth was
divided in his days.

Phalec, when 1 30 years old, begat Ragan, and
after living other 209 years died.

VII.9

In the year of the world 3277, Abraham en-
tered the promised land of Canaan.

VIII. '°
Of Abraham.

From this rises the appellation of the Hebrews.
For the word Hebrews is interpreted to mean

4 In Georgius Syncellus, CAr<7«.,p. 2i, al. 17.

5 That is, in Armenia.

<> For there was a hill Ararat in Phrygia, from which the Marsyas
issued, and the ark was declared to have rested there by the Sibylline
oracles. [But see vol. v. p. 149.]

^ In Georgius Syncellus, C/iron., p. 83, al. 67.

^ In the same, p, 86, al. 68.

9 in the same, p. 93, al. 74. [Compare vol. v p. 148]

'" In the same, p. 99, al. 79. [13^* is the verb.]


1^2


THE EXTANT WRITINGS OF JULIUS AFRICANUS.


those who ftiigrafe across, viz., who crossed the
Euphrates with Abraham ; and it is not derived,
as some think, from the fore-mentioned Heber.
From the flood and Noe, therefore, to Abraham's
entrance into the promised land, there are in all
1015 years; and from Adam, in 20 generations,
3277 years.

IX.'

Of Abraham and Lot.

When a famine pressed the land of Canaan,
Abraham came down to Egypt ; and fearing lest
he should be put out of the way on account of
the beauty of his wife, he pretended that he was
her brother. But Pharaoh took her to himself
when she was commended to him ; for this is
the name the Egyptians give their kings. And
he was punished by God ; and Abraham, along
with all pertaining to him, was dismissed en-
riched. In Canaan, Abraham's shepherds and
Lot's contended with each other ; and with
mutual consent they separated. Lot choosing
to dwell in Sodom on account of the fertility
and beauty of the land, which had five cities,
Sodom, Gomorrah, Adama, Seboim, Segor, and
as many kings. On these their neighbours the
four Syrian kings made war, whose leader was
Chodollogomor king of ^lam. And they met
by the Salt Sea, which is now called the Dead
Sea. In it I have seen very many wonderful
things. For that water sustains no living thing,
and dead bodies are carried beneath its depths,
while the living do not readily even dip under
it. Lighted torches are borne upon it, but when
extinguished they sink. And there are the springs
of bitumen ; and it yields alum and salt a little
different from the common kinds, for they are
pungent and transparent. And wherever fruit is
found about it, it is found full of a thick, foul
smoke. And the water acts as a cure to those
who use it, and it is drained in a manner con-
trary to any other water.^ And if it had not the
river Jordan feeding it like a shell,^ and to a great
extent withstanding its tendency, it would have
failed more rapidly than appears. There is also
by it a great quantity of the balsam plant ; but
it is supposed to have been destroyed by God
on account of the impiety of the neighbouring
people.

X.4

Of the Patriarch Jacob.

I. The shepherd's tent belonging to Jacob,
which was preserved at Edessa to the time of
Antonine Emperor of the Romans, was destroyed
by a thunderbolt.5


' In Georgius Syncellus, Chron., p. loo, al. 80.

2 \r)yii. TC irai/Ti v&aTi iradxuiv Taivdvria,

3 lu? 7T-op<f>vpav.

* In Georgius Syncellus, Chron., p. 107, al. 86.
5 Heliogabalus is probably intended, in whose time Africanus
flourished. At least so thinks Syncellus.


2. Jacob, being displeased at what had been
done by Symeon and Levi at Shecem against the
people of the country, on account of the viola-
tion of their sister, buried at Shecem the gods
which he had with him near a rock under the
wonderful terebinth,^ which up to this day is
reverenced by the neighbouring people in honour
of the patriarchs, and removed thence to Bethel.
By the trunk of this terebinth there was an altar
on which the inhabitants of the country offered
ectence ? in their general assemblies ; and though
it seemed to be burned, it was not consumed.
Near it is the tomb of Abraham and Isaac. And
some say that the staff of one of the angels who
were entertained by Abraham was planted there.


From Adam, therefore, to the death of Joseph,
according to this book, are 23 generations, and
3563 years.

XI1.9

From this record,'" therefore, we affirm that
Ogygus," from whom the first flood (in Attica)
derived its name,'^ and who was saved when
many perished, lived at the time of the exodus
of the people from Egypt along with Moses,'^
{After a brealz) : And after Ogygus, on account
of the vast destruction caused by the flood,
the present land of Attica remained without a
king till the time of Cecrops, 189 years."* Phi-
lochorus, however, affirms that Ogygus, Actaeus,
or whatever other fictitious name is adduced,
never existed. {After another break) : From
Ogygus to Cyrus, as from Moses to his time, are
1235 years.

XIII.'S

I. Up to the time of the Olympiads there is
no certain history among the Greeks, all things
before that date being confused, and in no way
consistent with each other. But these Olympiads


* On this terebinth, see Scaliger {ad Gmca Euseb., p. 414);
Franciscus Quaresimus, in Eiucid. term sa7tctce ; Eugenius Ro-
gerius, etc. ; and also Valesius, ad Euieb. De ViL Constant., iii. 53,
notes 3 and 5.

7 Scaliger acknowledges himself ignorant of this word tKTiva.^,
In the Eastern Church it is used to denote protracted prayers {preces
/>rotensiorei) offered by the deacon on behalf of all classes of men,
and the various necessities of human life. See Suicer, sub voce.
AUatius thinks the text corrupt, and would read, k^ ov ra re oAo/cau-
TiuM-ara ica'i Ta? exardfi/Sas ave4>epov = on which they offered both
holocausts and hecatombs. ( Littledale, Eastern Offices, p. 253.]

8 In Georgius Syncellus, Chron., p. 106, al. 85

9 In the same, p. 148, al. 118, from the Third Book of the Chron.
of Africanus.

'^ truiray/LtaTO?.

" Others write Ogyges Josephus {in Apionetn'), Euseb. {de
Pmpar.). Tatian [vol. ii. p. 81J, Clemens [not so, vol ii. p. 324],
and others, write Ogygus.

'- The text is, bs lov n-pioToC ko-to-kKv <Tti.o\> yeyovei' eTriivunxos.
The word eTruii-unio? is susceptible of two meanings, either " taking
the name from" or " giving the name to." 'fiyuyta ko-ko. was a pro-
verbial expression for primeval ills.

'^ The text is here, Kara T(]v AiyvTrrov toO AaoO /xfra Mwvae'w?
f^yBov yeveadai., for which we may read Kara tjji' e^ .\1yu7rTOi', etc.

^* 'Clyvyov 'AKTalov 17 Ta TrAacrcro^et'a toji* oi'O/xaTiot'. Compare
xiii. 6, where we have rbi' yap /aexa 'nyvyof Wkthioi-, etc.

'5 From Georgius Syncellus, Chron-, Third Book, In Euseb.,
Prcepar., x. 40. [Compare vol. ii. pp. 324-334. 1


THE EXTANT WRITINGS OF JULIUS AFRICANUS.


^33


were thoroughly investigated ' by many, as the
Greeks made up the records of their history not
according to long spaces, but in periods of four
years. For which reason I shall select the most
remarkable of the mythical narratives before the
time of the first Olympiad, and rapidly run over
them. But those after that period, at least those
that are notable, I shall take together, Hebrew
events in connection with Greek, according to
their dates, examining carefully the affairs of the
Hebrews, and touching more cursorily on those
of the Greeks ; and my plan will be as follows :
Taking up some single event in Hebrew history
synchronous with another in Greek history, and
keeping by it as the main subject, subtracting or
adding as may seem needful in the narrative, I
shall note what Greek or Persian of note, or re-
markable personage of any other nationality,
flourished at the date of that event in Hebrew
history ; and thus I may perhaps attain the ob-
ject which I propose to myself.

2. The most famous exile that befell the He-
brews, then — to wit, when they were led captive
by Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon — lasted
70 years, as Jeremias had prophesied. Berosus
the Babylonian, moreover, makes mention of
Nabuchodonosor. And after the 70 years of
captivity, Cyrus became king of the Persians at
the time of the 55 th Olympiad, as may be ascer-
tained from the Bibliothecoi of Diodorus and the
histories of Thallus and Castor, and also from
Polybius and Phlegon, and others besides these,
who have made the Olympiads a subject of study.
For the date is a matter of agreement among
them all. And Cyrus then, in the first year of
his reign, which was the first year of the 55th
Olympiad, effected the first partial restoration
of the people by the hand of Zorobabel, with
whom also was Jesus the son of Josedec, since the
period of 70 years was now fulfilled, as is nar-
rated in Esdra the Hebrew historian. The nar-
ratives of the beginning of the sovereignty of
Cyrus and the end of the captivity accordingly
coincide. And thus, according to the reckoning
of the Olympiads, there will be found a Hke
harmony of events even to our time. And by
following this, we shall also make the other
narratives fit in with each other in the same
manner.

3. But if the Attic time-reckoning is taken as
the standard for affairs prior to these, then from
Ogygus, who was believed by them to be an au-
tochthon, in whose time also the first great flood
took place in Attica, while Phoroneus reigned
over the Argives, as Acusilaus relates, up to the
date of the first Olympiad, from which period the
Greeks thought they could fix dates accurately,
there are altogether 1020 years ; which number


both coincides with the above-mentioned, and
will be established by what follows. For these
things are also recorded by the Athenian ^ his-
torians Hellanicus and Philochorus, who record
Attic affairs ; and by Castor and Thallus, who
record Syrian affairs \ and by Diodorus, who
writes a universal history in his Bibliothecce ;
and by Alexander Polyhistor, and by some of
our own time, yet more carefully, and^ by all
the Attic writers. Whatever narrative of note,
therefore, meets us in these 1020 years, shall be
given in its proper place.

4. In accordance with this writing, therefore,
we affirm that Ogygus, who gave his name to the
first flood, and was saved when many perished,
lived at the time of the exodus of the people
from Egypt along with INIoses.-* And this we
make out in the following manner. From Ogy-
gus up to the first Olympiad already mentioned,
it will be shown that there are 1020 years \ and
from the first Olympiad to the first year of the
55 th, that is the first year of King Cyrus, which
was also the end of the captivity, are 217 years.
From Ogygus, therefore, to Cyrus are 1237. And
if one carries the calculation backwards from
the end of the captivity, there are 1237 years.
Thus, by analysis, the same period is found to the
first year of the exodus of Israel under Moses
from Egypt, as from the 55 th Olympiad to
Ogygus, who founded Eleusis. And from this
point we get a more notable beginning for Attic
chronography.

5. So much, then, for the period prior to
Ogygus. And at his time Moses left Egypt.
And we demonstrate in the following manner
how reliable is the statement that this happened
at that date. From the exodus of Moses up to
Cyrus, who reigned after the captivity, are 1237
years. For the remaining years of Moses are 40.
The years of Jesus, who led the people after
him, are 25 ; those of the elders, who were
judges after Jesus, are 30 ; those of the judges,
whose history is given in the book of Judges,
are 490 ; those of the priests Eh and Samuel
are 90 ; those of the successive kings of the He-
brews are 490. Then come the yo years of the
captivity,^ the last year of which was the first
year of the reign of Cyrus, as we have already
said.

6. And from Moses, then, to the first Olym-
piad there are 1020 years, as to the first year of
the 55th Olympiad from the same are 1237, in
which enumeration the reckoning of the Greeks
coincides with us. And after Ogygus, by reason


2 There is a difficulty in the text; Viger omits " Athenian."

3 The Latin translator expunges the " and" (tat), and makes it
= more careful than all the Attic writers.

* The original here, as in the same passage above, is corrupt. It
gives (Card trfv hlyv-mov, which Aligne would either omit entirely or
replace by ojt' ,\iyv7rTov.

5 These words are inserted according to Viger's proposal, as there
is a manifest omission in the text.


134


THE EXTANT WRITINGS OF JULIUS AFRICANUS.


of the vast destruction caused by the flood, the
present land of Attica remained without a king
up to Cecrops, a period of 189 years. For
Philochorus asserts that the Actseus who is said
to have succeeded Ogygus, or whatever otlier fic-
titious names are adduced, never existed. And
again ': From Ogygus, therefore, to Cyrus, says
he, the same period is reckoned as from Moses
to the same date, viz., 1237 years; and some of
the Greeks also record that Moses lived at that
same time. Polemo, for instance, in the first
book of his Greek History, says : In the time
of Apis, son of Phoroneus, a division of the
army of the Egyptians left Egypt, and settled in
the Palestine called Syrian, not far from Arabia :
these are evidently those who were with Moses.
And Apion the son of Poseidonius, the most labo-
rious of grammarians, in his book Against the
Jews, and in the fourth book of his History,
says that in the time of Inachus king of Argos,
when Amosis reigned over Egypt, the Jews re-
volted under the leadership of Moses. And
Herodotus also makes mention of this revolt,
and of Amosis, in his second book, and in a
certain way also of the Jews themselves, reck-
oning them among the circumcised, and calling
them the Assyrians of Palestine, perhaps through
Abraham. And Ptolemy the Mendesian, who
narrates the history of the Egyptians from the
earliest times, gives the same account of all these
things ; so that among them in general there is
no difference worth notice in the chronology.

7. It should be observed, further, that all the
legendary accounts which are deemed specially
remarkable by the Greeks by reason of their
antiquity, are found to belong to a period pos-
terior to Moses ; such as their floods and confla-
grations, Prometheus, lo, Europa, the Sparti, the
abduction of Proserpine, their mysteries, their
legislations, the deeds of Dionysus, Perseus, the
Argonauts, the Centaurs, the Minotaur, the affairs
of Troy, the labours of Hercules, the return of
the Heraclidse, the Ionian migration and the
Olympiads. And it seemed good to me to give
an account especially of the before-noted period
of the Attic sovereignty, as I intend to narrate
the history of the Greeks side by side with that
of the Hebrews, For any one will be able, if
he only start from my position, to make out the
reckoning equally well with me. Now, in the
first year of that period of 1020 years, stretching
from Moses and Ogygus to the first Olympiad,
the passover and the exodus of the Hebrews from
Egypt took place, and also in Attica the flood of
Ogygus. And that is according to reason. For
when the Egyptians were being smitten in the
anger of God with hail and storms, it was only
to be expected that certain parts of the earth
should suffer with them ; and, in especial, it was
but to be expected that the Athenians should


participate in such calamity with the Egyptians,
since they were supposed to be a colony from
them, as Theopompus alleges in his Tricarenns,
and others besides him. The intervening j^eriod
has been passed by, as no remarkable event is
recorded during it among the Greeks. But after
94 years Prometheus arose, according to some,
who was fabulously reported to have formed
men ; for being a wise man, he transformed them
from the state of extreme rudeness to culture.

XIV.'

^schylus, the son of Agamestor, ruled the
Athenians twenty-three years, in whose time
Joatham reigned in Jerusalem.

And our canon brings Joatham king of Juda
within the first Olympiad.

XV.2

And Africajins, in the third hook of his His-
tory, wj-ites: Now the first Olympiad recorded
— which, however, was really the fourteenth —
was the period when Corcebus was victor ; ^ at
that time Ahaz was in the first year of his reign
in Jerusalem. Then in the fourth book he says:
It is therefore with the first year of the reign of
Ahaz that we have shown the first Olympiad to
fall in.

XVI. 4
On the Seventy Weeks of Daniel.

I. This passage, therefore, as it stands thus,
touches on many marvellous things. At present,
however, I shall speak only of those things in it
which bear upon chronology, and matters con-
nected therewith. That the passage speaks then
of the advent of Christ, who was to manifest
Himself after seventy weeks, is evident. For in
the Saviour's time, or from Him, are transgres-
sions abrogated, and sins brought to an end.
And through remission, moreover, are iniquities,
along with offences, blotted out by expiation ;
and an everlasting righteousness is preached,
different from that which is by the law, and vis-
ions and prophecies (are) until John, and the
Most Holy is anointed. For before the advent of
the Saviour these things were not yet, and were
therefore only looked for. And the beginning
of the numbers, that is, of the seventy weeks
which make up 490 years, the angel instructs us
to take from the going forth of the command-
ment to answer and to build Jerusalem. And


' From Georgius Syncellus, Third Book. In the Chroti Pas-
chal., p. 104, ed. Paris, 84 Venet.

2 From the same, Book III., and from Book IV. In Syncellus,
p. 197, al. 158. ,.,,,, s .

3 The text is, avaypaqyrivai 61 TrpioTTjv T)ji/ T€(r<Tape<rKaioeKaTr)v,
etc.

* From Book v. In Eusebius, Demons/. Evang , Book VIII.
ch. ii. p. 389, etc. The Latin version of this section is by Bernar-
dinus Donatus of Verona. There is also a version by Jerome given
in his commentary on Dan ix. 24.


THE EXTANT WRITINGS OF JULIUS AFRICANUS.


this happened in the twentieth year of the reign
of Artaxerxes king of Persia. For Nehemiah his
cup-bearer besought him, and received the an-
swer that Jerusalem should be built. And the
word went forth commanding these things ; for
up to that time the city was desolate. For when
Cyrus, after the seventy years' captivity, gave free
permission to all to return who desired it, some
of them under the leadership of Jesus the high
priest and Zorobabel, and others after these
under the leadership of Esdra, returned, but
were prevented at first from building the temple,
and from surrounding the city with a wall, on
the plea that that had not been commanded.

2. It remained in this position, accordingly,
until Nehemiah and the reign of Artaxerxes,
and the 115 th year of the sovereignty of the
Persians. And from the capture of Jerusalem
that makes 185 years. And at that time King
Artaxerxes gave order that the city should be
built ; and Nehemiah being despatched, super-
intended the work, and the street and the sur-
rounding wall were built, as had been prophesied.
And reckoning from that point, we make up
seventy weeks to the time of Christ. For if
we begin to reckon from any other point, and
not from this, the periods will not correspond,
and very many odd results will meet us. For if
we begin the calculation of the seventy weeks
from Cyrus and the first restoration, there will
be upwards of one hundred years too many,
and there will be a larger number if we begin
from the day on which the angel gave the
prophecy to Daniel, and a much larger number
still if we begin from the commencement of
the captivity. For we iind the sovereignty of the
Persians comprising a period of 230 years, and
that of the Macedonians extending over 370
years, and from that to the i6th ' year of Tibe-
rius Caesar is a period of about 60 years.

3. It is by calculating from Artaxerxes, there-
fore, up to the time of Christ that the seventy
weeks are made up, according to the numera-
tion of the Jews. For from Nehemiah, who was
despatched by Artaxerxes to build Jerusalem in
the 115th year of the Persian empire, and the
4th year of the 83d Olympiad, and the 20th
year of the reign of Artaxerxes himself, up to
this date, which was the second year of the 202d
Olympiad, and the i6th year of the reign of
Tiberius Caesar, there are reckoned 475 years,
which make 490 according to the Hebrew nu-
meration, as they measure the years by the
course of the moon ; so that, as is easy to show,
their year consists of 354 days, while the solar
year h^as 365^days. For the latter exceeds the
period of twelve months, according to the moon's
course, by 11^ days. Hence the Greeks and


' Jerome in his version gives the 15th {guintum deciimun).


the Jews insert three intercalary months every
8 years. For 8 times ii:^ days makes up 3
months. Therefore 475 years make 59 periods
of 8 years each, and 3 months besides. But
since thus there are 3 intercalary months every
8 years, we get thus 15 years minus a few days ;
and these being added to the 475 years, make
up in all the 70 weeks.

XVI1.2

On the Fortunes of Hyrcanus and Anti^onus, and nn Herod,
Augustus, Antony, and Cleopatra, in abstract.

I. Octavius Sebastus, or, as the Romans call
him, Augustus, the adopted son of Caius, on
returning to Rome from Apollonia^ in Epirus, ^
where he was educated, possessed himself of the
first place in the government. And Antony
afterwards obtained the rule of Asia and the dis-
tricts beyond. In his time the Jews accused
Herod ; but he put the deputies to death, and
restored Herod to his government. Afterwards,
however, along with Hyrcanus and Phastelus his
brother, he was driven out, and betook himself
in flight to Antony. And as the Jews would not
receive him, an obstinate battle took place ; and
in a short time after, as he had conquered in
battle, he also drove out Antigonus, who had
returned. And Antigonus fled to Herod the
Parthian king, and was restored by the help of
his son Pacorus, which help was given on his
promising to pay 1000 talents of gold. And
Herod then in his turn had to flee, while Pha-
saelus was slain in battle, and Hyrcanus was sur-
rendered alive to Antigonus. And after cutting
off his ears, that he might be disqualified for the
priesthood, he gave him to the Parthians to lead
into captivity; for he scrupled to put him to
death, as he was a relation of his- own. And
Herod, on his expulsion, betook himself first to
Alalichus king of the Arabians; and when he
did not receive him, through fear of the Par-
thians, he went away to Alexandria to Cleopatra.
That was the 185 th Olympiad. Cleopatra hav-
ing put to death her brother, who was her consort
in the government, and being then summoned
by Antony to Cilicia to make her defence, com-
mitted the care of the sovereignty to Herod ;
and as he requested that he should not be en-
trusted with anything until he was restored to
his own government,^ she took him with her and
went to Antony. And as he was smitten with
love for the princess, they despatched Herod
to Rome to Octavius Augustus, who, on behalf
of Antipater, Herod's father, and on behalf of
Herod himself, and also because Antigonus was
established as king by the help of the Par-

^ In Syncellus, p. 307, al. 244.

3 The sense is doubtful here: Kai tos ovtiv rj^iov n-io-TeutcrSat
eor' an KaTa>^9ij eij Tr)v iavTou OLpxrjv^ etc.


136


THE EXTANT WRITINGS OF JULIUS AFRICANUS.


thians, gave a commission to the generals in
Palestine and Syria to restore him to his govern-
ment. And in concert with Sosius he waged
war against Antigonus for a long time, and in
manifold engagements. At that time also, Jose-
phus, Herod's brother, died in his command.
And Herod coming to Antony ' . . .

2. For three years they besieged Antigonus,
and then brought him alive to Antony. And
Antony himself also proclaimed Herod as king,
and gave him, in addition, the cities Hippus,
Gadara, Gaza, Joppa, Anthedon, and a part of
Arabia, Trachonitis, and Auranitis, and Sacia,
and Gaulanitis ; ^ and besides these, also the
procuratorship of Syria. Herod was declared
king of the Jews by the senate and Octavius
Augustus, and reigned 34 years. Antony, when
about to go on an expedition against the Parthi-
ans, slew Antigonus the king of the Jews, and
gave Arabia to Cleopatra ; and passing over into
the territory of the Parthians, sustained a severe
defeat, losing the greater part of his army. That
was m the i86th Olympiad. Octavius Augustus
led the forces of Italy and all the West against
Antony, who refused to return to Rome through
fear, on account of his failure in Parthia, and
through his love for Cleopatra. And Antony
met him with the forces of Asia. Herod, how-
ever, like a shrewd fellow, and one who waits
upon the powerful, sent a double set of letters,
and despatched his army to sea, charging his
generals to watch the issue of events. And when
the victory was decided, and when Antony, after
sustaining two naval defeats, had fled to Egypt
along with Cleopatra, they who bore the letters
delivered to Augustus those which they had been
keeping secretly for Antony. And on Herod
falls 3 . . .

3. Cleopatra shut herself up in a mausoleum,*
and made away with herself, employing the wild
asp as the instrument of death. At that time
Augustus captured Cleopatra's sons, Helios and
Selene, 5 on their flight to the Thebaid. Nicopo-
lis was founded opposite Actium, and the games
called Actia were instituted. On the capture of
Alexandria, Cornelius Gallus was sent as first
governor of Egvpt, and he destroyed the cities
of the Egyptians that refused obedience. Up
to this time the Lagidse ruled ; and the whole
duration of the Macedonian empire after the
subversion of the Persian power was 298 years.
Thus is made up the whole period from the
foundation of the Macedonian empire to its
subversion in the time of the Ptolemies, and
under Cleopatra, the last of these, the date of

^ There is a break here in the original.

^ This is according to the rendering of the Latin version.

3 Here again there is a blank in the original.

* The text is corrupt here. It gives, iv tio /uetraioAt'o), a word
unknown in Greek. Scaliger reads .UaitraioAtoi'. Goarus proposes
iiaviTuiKaloi', which we adopt in the translation.

5 i.e., sun and moon.


which event is the nth year of the monarchy
and empire of the Romans, and the 4th year
of the 187th Olympiad. Altogether, from Adam
5472 years are reckoned.

4. After the taking of Alexandria the i88th
Olympiad began. Herod founded anew the city
of the Gabinii,'' the ancient Samaria, and called it
Sebaste ; and having erected its seaport, the
tower of Strato, into a city, he named it Caesarea
after the same, and raised in each a temple in
honour of Octavius. And afterwards he founded
Antipatris in the Lydian plain, so naming it after
his father, and settled in it the people about
Sebaste, whom he had dispossessed of their land.
He founded also other cities ; and to the Jews he
was severe, but to other nations most urbane.

It was now the 189th Olympiad, which (Olym-
piad) in the year that had the bissextile day, the
6th day before the Calends of March, — i.e.,
the 24th of February, — corresponded with the
24th year of the era of Antioch, whereby the year
was determined in its proper hmits.7


On the Circumstances connected with our Saviour's Passion
and His Life-giving Resurrection.

I. As to His works severally, and His cures
effected upon body and soul, and the mysteries
of His doctrine, and the resurrection from the
dead, these have been most authoritatively set
forth by His disciples and apostles before us.
On the whole world there pressed a most fearful
darkness ; and the rocks were rent by an earth-
quake, and many places in Judea and other dis-
tricts were thrown down. This darkness Thallus,
in the third book of his I/is/orv, calls, as appears
to me without reason, an eclipse of the sun.
For the Hebrews celebrate the passover on the
14th day according to the moon, and the passion
of our Saviour falls on the day before the pass-
over ; but an eclipse of the sun takes place only
when the moon comes under the sun. And it
cannot happen at any other time but in the in-
terval between the first day of the new moon
and the last of the old, that is, at their junction :
how then should an eclipse be supposed to hap-
pen when the moon is almost diametrically op-
posite the sun? Let that opinion pass however;
let it carry the majority with it; and let this por-


6 Samaria was so named in reference to its restoration by Gabinius,
the proconsul of Syria. See Josephus [Aiii/g., hook xiv. ch.x.),who
states that Gabinius traversed Judea, and gave orders for the rebuild-
ing of such towns as he found destroyed; and that in this way Sama-
ria, Azotus, Scythopolis, Antedon, Raphia, Dora, Marissa, and not a
few others, were restored.

7 The text is: ^i' OAujuiTrta? pTr6\ rJTt? Trpb 9' KakavSdv Maprt'cui'
Kara 'At'Tto;^et? k6' eret rj^^rj, 6t* rjf; €7rt Ttor lSlwu opuov ecTTTj o
ei'iavTo?. In every fourth year the 24th day of February( = vi. Cal.
Mart.) was reckoned twice. There were three difierent eras of An-
tioch, of which the one most commonly used began in November 49
B.C. Migne refers the reader to the notes of Goarus on the passage,
which we have not .seen. The sense of this obscure passage seems
to be, that that period formed another fixed point in chronology.

8 In Georgius Syncellus, Cliron., p. 322 or 256.


THE EXTANT WRITINGS OF JULIUS AFRICANUS.


^2,7


tent of the world be deemed an eclipse of the
sun, like others a portent only to the eye.'
Phlegon records that, in the time of Tiberius
Csesar, at full moon, there was a full eclipse of
the sun from the sixth hour to the ninth — mani-
festly that one of which we speak. But what
has an eclipse in common with an earthquake,
the rending rocks, and the resurrection of the
dead, and so great a perturbation throughout
the universe ? Surely no such event as this is re-
corded for a long period. But it was a darkness
induced by God, because the Lord happened
then to suffer. And calculation makes out that
the period of 70 weeks, as noted in Daniel, is
completed at this time.

2. From Artaxerxes, moreover, 70 weeks are
reckoned up to the time of Christ, according to
the numeration of the Jews. For from Nehe-
miah, who was sent by Artaxerxes to people
Jerusalem, about the 1 20th year of the Persian
empire, and in the 20th year of Artaxerxes him-
self, and the 4th year of the 83d Olympiad, up
to this time, which was the 2d year of the i02d
Olympiad, and the i6th year of the reign of
Tiberius Caesar, there are given 475 years, which
make 490 Hebrew years, since they measure the
years by the lunar month of 29J days, as may
easily be explained, the annual period according
to the sun consisting of 365:^ days, while the
lunar period of 12 mjDuths has ii|- days less.
For which reason the Greeks and the Jews insert
three intercalary months every eight years. For
8 times 1 1^ days make 3 months. The 475 years,
therefore, contain 59 periods of 8 years and three
months over : thus, the three intercalary months
for every 8 years being added, we get 15 years,
and these together with the 475 years make 70
weeks. Let no one now think us unskilled in
the calculations of astronomy, when we fix with-
out further ado the number of days at 365^.
For it is not in ignorance of the truth, but rather
by reason of exact study,^ that we have stated
our opinion so shortly. But let what follows also
be presented as in outline ^ to those who en-
deavour to inquire minutely into all things.

3. Each year in the general consists of 365
days ; and the space of a day and night being
divided into nineteen parts, we have also five
of these. And in saying that the year consists of
3651- days, and there being the five nineteenth
parts ... to the 475 there are 6\ days. Fur-
thermore, we find, according to exact computa-
tion, that the lunar month has 29^ days. . . . ^


' «!/ Tt Kara Tr]v oi/zii/. [Vol. iii. p. 58, Elucid. V., this series.]

2 6ta Ty\v AeTTToAoyiai',

^ Or, on a table; w? ei/ ypajtri.

* The text in the beginning of this section is hopelessly corrupt.
Scaligei declares that neither could he follow these things, nor did the
man that dreamt them understand them. We may subjoin the Greek
text as it stands in Migne: Mera^u &e rou Aeyecv toi/ ei'iaurbi'
rjiA.€pu)v T^t, (Cat T€Tpafxopiov, Kii Toil/ an-b i0' t^s vvx^rmepov,
liepiov «... ei? TO. voe, rj^xtpai to TrapoiAATjAof etui y, Kai Terpa-
liopLov. 'Eti ye liriv t'ov t^s <reAr)Vr)9 fxriva Kara, riji' aKpt^ij AeTrro-


And these come to 5 a little time. Now it hap-
pens that from the 20th year of the reign of
Artaxerxes (as it is given in Ezra among the
Hebrews), which, according to the Greeks, was
the 4th year of the 80th Olympiad, to the i6th
year of Tiberius Caesar, which was the second
year of the 10 2d Olympiad, there are in all the
475 years already noted, which in the Hebrew
system make 490 years, as has been previously
stated, that is, 70 weeks, by which period the
time of Christ's advent was measured in the an-
nouncement made to Daniel by Gabriel. And
if any one thinks that the 15 Hebrew years added
to the others involve us in an error of 10, noth-
ing at least which cannot be accounted for has
been introduced. And the i^ week which we
suppose must be added to make the whole num-
ber, meets the question about the 15 years, and
removes the difficulty about the time ; and that
the prophecies are usually put forth in a some-
what symbolic form, is quite evident.

4. As far, then, as is in our power, we have
taken the Scripture, I think, correctly ; especially
seeing that the preceding section about the vision
seems to state the whole matter shortly, its first
words being, " In the third year of the reign of
Belshazzar," ^ where he prophesies of the sub-
version of the Persian power by the Greeks,
which empires are symbolized in the prophecy
under the figures of the ram and the goat re-
spectively.7 "The sacrifice," he says, "shall be
abolished, and the holy places shall be made
desolate, so as to be trodden under foot ; which
things shall be determined within 2300 days."^
For if we take the day as a month, just as else-
where in prophecy days are taken as years, and
in different places are used in different ways, re-
ducing the period in the same way as has been
done above to Hebrew months, we shall find the
period fully made out to the 20th year of the
reign of Artaxerxes, from the capture of Jerusa-
lem. For there are given thus 185 years, and
one year falls to be added to these — the year in
which Nehemiah built the wall of the city. In 186
years, therefore, we find 2300 Hebrew months,
as 8 years have in addition 3 intercalary months.
From Artaxerxes, again, in whose time the com-
mand went forth that Jerusalem should be built,
there are 70 weeks. These matters, however, we
have discussed by themselves, and with greater
exactness, in our book On the Weeks and this
Prophecy. But I am amazed that the Jews deny
that the Lord has yet come, and that the fol-
lowers of Marcion refuse to admit that His com-
ing was predicted in the prophecies when the
Scriptures display the matter so openly to our


Aoytaf €vpi<TKOn€v k6 , /cat Vj/itcreta? ))/j.£'pas ica't wktos Statpe^etcrrjs
et? fj-ipri ere, tovtwi' tci o , xai rj/itcru ... & ■ytVerai ei'i'ei'TjKOO'TOTe-
Tapra rpta.

S KaTayiverai.

^ Dan. viii. i.

7 Dan. viii. 13, 14.


138


THE EXTANT WRITINGS OF JULIUS AFRICANUS.


view. And after something else : The period,
then, to the advent of the Lord from Adam and
the creation is 5531 years, from which epoch to
the 250th Olympiad there are 192 years, as has
been shown above.

XIX.'

For we who both know the measure of those

* In Basil, De Sfiiritu Saiicto, ch. xxix. § 73; Works, vol iii.
p. 61, edit. Paris. [Elucidation II. j


words,^ and are not ignorant of the grace of faith,
give thanks to the Father,3 who has bestowed
on us His creatures Jesus Christ the Saviour
of all, and our Lord ; ■♦ to whom be glory and
majesty, with the Holy Spirit, for ever.


^ For pTquaTMif, words, three MSS. give pTjTwi', sayings.
3 For riti'iv llarpi there is another reading, riixajy TrarpatTi ■■
Him who gave to our fathers.

■* These words, " and our Lord," are wanting in three MSS.


IV. — THE PASSION OF ST. SYMPHOROSA AND HER SEVEN SONS.'

The text is given from the edition of Ruinart. His preface, which Migne also cites, is as
follows : " The narrative of the martyrdom of St. Symphorosa and her seven sons, which we
here publish, is ascribed in the mss. to Julius Africanus, a writer of the highest repute. And it
may perhaps have been inserted in his books on Chronograph}', — a work which Eusebius {Hist.
Eccles., vi. 31) testifies to have been written with the greatest care, since in these he detailed the
chief events in history from the foundation of the world to the times of the Emperor Heliogaba-
lus. As that work, however, is lost, that this narrative is really to be ascribed to Africanus, I
would not venture positively to assert, although at the same time there seems no ground for
doubting its genuineness. We print it, moreover, from the editions of Mombritius, Surius, and
Cardulus, collated with two Colbert mss. and one in the library of the Sorbonne. The occasion
for the death of these saints was found in the vicinity of that most famous palace which was
built by Adrian at his country seat at Tibp", according to Spartianus. For when the emperor
gave orders that this palace, which he had built for his pleasure, should be purified by some
piacular ceremonies, the priests seized this opportunity for accusing Symphorosa, alleging that the
gods would not be satisfied until Symphorosa should either sacrifice to them or be herself sacri-
ficed ; which last thing was done by Hadrian, whom, from many others of his deeds, we know to
have been exceedingly superstitious, about the year of Christ 120, that is, about the beginning
of his reign, at which period indeed, as Dio Cassius observes, that emperor put a great number
to death. The memory of these martyrs, moreover, is celebrated in all the most ancient martyr-
ologies, although they assign different days for it. The Roman, along with Notker, fixes their
festival for the i8th July, Rabanus for the 21st of the same month, Usuardus and Ado for the
2 1 St June. In the Tiburtine road there still exists the rubbish of an old church, as Aringhi states
{Rom. Siibter., iv. 17), which was consecrated to God under their name, and which still retains
the title. To the Seven Brothers. I have no doubt that it was built in that place to which the
pontiffs in the Acta, sec. iv., gave the name. To the Scveti Biothanati, i.e., those cut off by a
violent death, as Baronius remarks, at the year 138." So far Ruinart : see also Tillemont, Man,
Eccles., ii. pp. 241 and 595 ; and the Bollandists, Act. S.S. yunii, vol. iv. p. 350.


I. When Adrian had built a palace, and wished
to dedicate it by that wicked ceremonial, and
began to seek responses by sacrifices to idols,
and to the demons that dwell in idols, they
replied,^ and said : " The widow Symphorosa,
with her seven sons, wounds us day by day in
invoking her God. If she therefore, together
with her sons, shall offer sacrifice, we promise
to make good all that you ask." Then Adrian
ordered her to be seized, along with her sons,
and advised them in courteous terms to consent


' Gallandi, Bibl. Patrum, vol. i. Proleg. p. Ixxi. and p. 329.
2 See Eusebius, Life of Consiantine, ii. 50.


to offer sacrifice to the idols. To him, however,
the blessed Symphorosa answered : " My hus-
band Getulius,^ together with his brother Araan-
tius, when they were tribunes in thy service,
suffered different punishments for the name of
Christ, rather than consent to sacrifice to idols,
and, like good athletes, they overcame thy de-
mons in death. For, rather than be prevailed
on, they chose to be beheaded, and suffered
death ; which death, being endured for the name
of Christ, gained them temporal ignominy indeed


A


3 The Martyrologies celebrate their memory on the loth June:
one of the Colbert MSS. gives Zoticus for GeUtlius.


ELUCIDATIONS.


139


among men of this earth, but everlasting honour
and glory among the angels ; and moving now
among them, and exhibiting ' trophies of their
sufferings, they enjoy eternal life with the King
eternal in the heavens."

2. The Emperor Adrian said to the holy
Symphorosa : " Either sacrifice thou along with
thy sons to the omnipotent gods, or else I shall
cause thee to be sacrificed thyself, together with
thy sons." The blessed Symphorosa answered :
" And whence is this great good to me, that I
should be deemed worthy along with my sons to
be offered as an oblation to God? " ^ The Em-
peror Adrian said : " I shall cause thee to be
sacrificed to my gods." The blessed Symphorosa
replied : " Thy gods cannot take me in sacrifice ;
but if I am burned for the name of Christ, my
God, I shall rather consume those demons of
thine." The Emperor Adrian said : " Choose
thou one of these alternatives : either sacrifice
to my gods, or perish by an evil death." The
blessed Symphorosa replied : " Thou thinkest
that my mind can be altered by some kind of
terror ; whereas I long to rest with my husband
Getulius,3 whom thou didst put to death for
Christ's name." Then the Emperor Adrian or-
dered her to be led away to the temple of Her-
cules, and there first to be beaten with blows on
the cheek, and afterwards to be suspended by the
hair. But when by no argument and by no ter-
ror could he divert her from her good resolution,
he ordered her to be thrown into the river with
a large stone fastened to her neck. And her
brother Eugenius, principal of the district of
Tiber, picked up her body, and buried it in a
suburb of the same city.

' A Colbert MS. gives " laudantes " = praising.
2 This response, along with the next interrogation, is wanting in
the Colbert manuscript.

■3 Sur., Card., and the Colbert Codex give " Zoticus."


3. Then, on another day, the Emperor Adrian
ordered all her seven sons to be brought before
him in company ; and when he had challenged
them to sacrifice to idols, and perceived that they
yielded by no means to his threats and terrors,
he ordered seven stakes to be fixed around the
temple of Hercules, and commanded them to be
stretched on the blocks there. And he ordered
Crescens, the first, to be transfixed in the throat ;
and Julian, the second, to be stabbed in the
breast] and Nemesius, the third, to be struck
through the heart ; and Primitivus, the fourth, to
be wounded in the navel ; and Justin, the fifth,
to be struck through in the back with a sword ;
and Stracteus,'* the sixth, to be wounded in the
side ; and Eugenius, the seventh, to be cleft in
twain from the head downwards.

4. The next day again the Emperor Adrian
came to the temple of Hercules, and ordered
their bodies to be carried off together, and cast
into a deep pit ; and the pontiffs gave to that
place the name. To the Seven Biothanati^ After
these things the persecution ceased for a year
and a half, in which period the holy bodies* of
all the martyrs were honoured, and consigned
with all care to tumuli erected for that purpose,
and their names are written in the book of life.
The natal day, moreover, of the holy martyrs of
Christ, the blessed Symphorosa and her seven
sons, Crescens, Julian, Nemesius, Primitivus, Jus-
tin, Stracteus, and Eugenius, is held on the iSth
July. Their bodies rest on the Tiburtine road,
at the eighth mile-stone from the city, under the
kingship of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom is
honour and glory for ever and ever. Amen.


■• The Colbert Codex reads " Extacteus; " Cardulus gives " Stac-
teus," by which name he is designated beneath by them all.

5 In one of the Colbert codices, and in another from the Sorbonne,
there is a passage inserted here about the death of Adrian, which is
said to have happened a little after that ol these martyrs.


ELUCIDATIONS.


(Joseph the son of both, p. 127.)

The opinion that Luke's genealogy is that of JSTary was unknown to Christian antiquity. In the
fifteenth century it was first propounded by Latin divines to do honour (as they supposed) to the
Blessed Virgin. It was first broached by Annius of Viterbo, a.d. 1502. Christian antiquity is
agreed that : —

1. Both genealogies are those of Joseph.

2. That Joseph was the son of Jacob or of Heli, either by adoption, or because Jacob and
Heli were either own brothers or half-brothers ; so that, —

3. On the death of one of the brothers, without issue, the surviving brother married his


I40 ELUCIDATIONS.


widow, who became the mother of Joseph by this marriage ; so that Joseph was reckoned the
son of Jacob and the son of Heh.'

4. Joseph and Mary were of the same hneage, but the Hebrews did not reckon descent from the
side of the woman. For them St. Luke's genealogy is the sufficient register of Christ's royal
descent and official claim. St. Luke gives his /(^rj-^/^t?/ pedigree, ascending to Adam, and identify-
ing Him with the whole human race.

IL

(Conclusion, cap. xix. p. 138.)

On Jewish genealogies, note Dean Prideaux,^ vol. i. p. 296, and compare Lardner, vol. li.
\2^, et alibi. Stillingfleet ^ should not be overlooked in what he says of the uncertainties of
heathen chronology.

Lardner repeatedly calls our author a " great man ; " and his most valuable account,"* digested
from divers ancient and modern writers, must be consulted by the student. Let us observe the
books of Scripture which his citations attest, and the great value of his attestation of the two
genealogies of our Lord. Lardner dates the Letter to OrigenS a.d. 228 or 240, according to
divers conjectures of the learned. He concludes with this beautiful tribute : " We may glory in
Africanus as a Christian" among those "whose shining abilities rendered them the ornament of
the'age in which they lived, — men of unspotted characters, giving evident proofs of honesty and
integrity."


NOTE.

The valuable works of Africanus are found in vol. ix. of the Edinburgh edition, mixed up with
the spurious Decretals and remnants of preceding volumes. I am unable to make out very
clearly who is the translator, but infer that Drs. Roberts and Donaldson should be credited with
this work.

' Routh, Reltqu. Sacrce, vol. ii. pp. 233, 339, 341, 355. Compare also vol. ii. 334 and 346, this series.

* Also on the Seventy Weeks (p. 134, supra), vol i. pp. 227-240 and 322,
3 Origines Sacm, vol. i. pp. 64-120,

* Works, vol. ii. pp. 457-468.

S See Introductory Notice, p. 123, note 4, supra.


ANATOLIUS AND MINOR WRITERS.


[TRANSLATED BY THE REV. S. D. SALMOND, M.A.]


INTRODUCTORY NOTICE

TO

ANATOLIUS AND MINOR WRITERS.


Instead of reprinting a disjointed mass of " Fragments," I have thought it desirable to
present them in a group, iUustrative of the Alexandrian school. I give to Anatolius the deser\'ed
place of prominence, marking him as the meet successor of Africanus in ability if not in the
nature of his pursuits. His writings and the testimony of Eusebius prove him to have been a
star of no inferior magnitude, even in the brilliant constellation of faith and genius of which he
is part.

These minor writers I have arranged, not with exclusive reference to minute chronology, but
with some respect to their material, as follows : —

I. Anatolius, a.d. 270,

II. Alexander of Cappadocia, a.d. 250.

III. Theognostus, a.d. 265,

IV. Pierius, a.d. 300.
V, Theonas, a.d. 300.

VI. Phileas, a.d. 307.

VII. Pamphilus, a.d. 309.


143


ANATOLIUS AND MINOR WRITERS.


ANATOLIUS OF ALEXANDRIA.


TRANSLATOR'S BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE.

[a.d. 230-270-280.] From Jerome ' we learn that Anatolius flourished in the reign of Probus
and Carus, that he was a native of Alexandria, and that he became bishop of Laodicea. Euse-
bius gives a somewhat lengthened account of him,^ and speaks of him in terms of the strongest
laudation, as one surpassing all the men of his time in learning and science. He tells us that
he attained the highest eminence in arithmetic, geometry, and astronomy, besides being a great
proficient also in dialectics, physics, and rhetoric. His reputation was so great among the Alex-
andrians that they are said to have requested him to open a school for teaching the Aristotelian
philosophy in their city.^ He did great service to his fellow-citizens in Alexandria on their being
besieged by the Romans in a.d. 262, and was the means of saving the lives of numbers of them.
After this he is said to have passed into Syria, where Theotecnus, the bishop of Caesareia, ordained
him, destining him to be his own successor in the bishopric. After this, however, having occasion
to travel to Antioch to attend the synod convened to deal with the case of Paul of Samosata, as
he passed through the city of Laodicea, he was detained by the people and made bishop of the
place, in succession to Eusebius.* This must have been about the year 2 70 a.d. How long he
held that dignity, however, we do not know. Eusebius tells us that he did not write many books,
but yet enough to show us at once his eloquence and his erudition. Among these was a treatise
on the Chronology of Easter, of which a considerable extract is preserved in Eusebius. The
book itself exists now only in a Latin version, which is generally ascribed to Rufinus, and which
was published by JEgidius Bucherius in his Doctrina Temponuti, which was issued at Antwerp in
1634. Another work of his was the Institutes of Arithmetic, of which we have some fragments
in the ^eoAoyou/Aei/a rijs apLOixr]TLKr}<;, which was published in Paris in 1543. Some small fragments
of his mathematical works, which have also come down to us, were published by Fabricius in his
Bibliotheca Grceca, iii. p. 462.

' De illnstr. vtris., ch. 73. [The dates which are known suggest conjectural dates of our author's birth and death J
^ In the 32d chapter of the seventh book of his Ecclesiastical History.

^ [" There were giants in those days." How gloriously, even in the poverty and distress of the martyr-ages, the cultivation of learn-
ing was established by Christianity! J

* [This Eusebius was a learned man, born at Alexandria.]

145


146


THE WRITINGS OF ANATOLIUS.


THE PASCHAL CANON OF ANATOLIUS OF ALEXANDRIA.'


I. j world, he speaks thus : In the (matter of the)

As we are about to speak on the subject of' day of Easter, he remarks, I do not say that it
2 order of the times and alternations of the >« to be observed that the Lord's day should be


the

world, we shall first dispose of the positions of di-
verse calculators ; who, by reckoning only by the
course of the moon, and leaving out of account
the ascent and descent of the sun, with the addi-
tion of certain problems, have constructed di-
verse periods,^ self-contradictory, and such as
are never found in the reckoning of a true com-
putation ; since it is certain that no mode of
computation is to be approved, in which these
two measures are not found together. For even
in the ancient exemplars, that is, in the books
of the Hebrews and Greeks, we find not only
the course of the moon, but also that of the sun,
and, indeed, not simply its course in the general,^
but even the separate and minutest moments of
its hours all calculated, as we shall show at the
proper time, when the matter in hand demands
it. Of these Hippolytus made up a period of,
sixteen years with certain unknown courses of j Players animate us for a little? For we beheve
the moon. Others have reckoned by a period that nothmg is nnpossible to your power of

prayer, and to your faith. Strengthened, there-
fore, by this confidence, we shall set bashfulness
aside, and shall enter this most deep and unfore-
seen sea of the obscurest calculation, in which
swelling questions and problems surge around us
on all sides.

II.


found, and the seven "^ days of the moon which
are to elapse, but that the sun should pass that
division, to wit, between light and darkness, con-
stituted in an equality by the dispensation of the
Lord at the beginning of the world ; and that,
from one hour to two hours, from two to three,
from three to four, from four to five, from five
to six hours, while the light is increasing in the
ascent of the sun, the darkness should decrease. ^
. . . and the addition of the twentieth number
being completed, twelve parts should be supplied
in one and the same day. But if I should have
attempted to add any little drop of mine * after
the exuberant streams of the eloquence and sci-
ence of some, what else should there be to be-
lieve but that it should be ascribed by all to
ostentation, and, to speak more truly, to mad-
ness, did not the assistance of your promised


of twenty-five years, others by thirty, and some
by eighty-four years, without, however, teaching
thereby an exact method of calculating Easter.
But our predecessors, men most learned in the
books of the Hebrews and Greeks, — I mean Isi-
dore and Jerome and Clement, — although they
have noted similar beginnings for the months,
just as they differ also in language, have, never-


There is, then, in the first year, the new moon


theless, come harmoniously to one and the same j of the first month, which is the beginning of
most exact reckoning of Easter, day and month ! every cycle of nineteen years, on the six and
and season meeting in accord with the highest . twentieth day of the month called by the Egyp-
honour for the Lord's resurrection.'' But Origen j tians Phamenoth.9 But, according to the months
also, the most erudite of all, and the acutest in j of the Macedonians, it is on the two-and-twenti-
making calculations, — a man, too, to whom the I eth day of Dystrus. And, as the Romans would
epithet xaA/<6i;Ti7s s is given, — has published in j say, it is on the eleventh day before the Kalends
a very elegant manner a litde book on Easter. | of April. Now the sun is found on the said six-
And in this book, while declaring, with respect j and-twentieth day of Phamenoth, not only as
to the day of Easter, that attention must be j having mounted to the first segment, but as
given not only to the course of the moon and | already passing the fourth day in it. And this
the transit of the equinox, but also to the pas- 1 segment they are accustomed to call the first
sage {transcensum) of the sun, which removes I dodecatemorion (twelfth part), and the equinox,
every foul ambush and offence of all darkness, j and the beginning of months, and the head of
and brings on the advent of light and the power |
and inspiration of the elements of the whole


6 Lunae vii. Perhaps, as Bucher conjectures, Lunae xiv., four-
teen days, &c

1 Ttie text IS doubtful and corrupt here.
First edited from an ancient manuscript by yEgidius Bucherius, * Ali/jjiid stiUiiiiiii.

of the Society of Jesus. 9 [The Church's Easter-calculations created modern astronomy,

2 Circulos. (\ote the reference to Hippolytus.] I which passed to the Arabians from the Church. (Sec Whewell's

i Gressus. Vol. v. p. 3: also Dunsen, i. pp. 13, 281] ! Inductive Sciences.) They preserved it, but did not improve it, m

* \\\. seems probable that the hegemotty which Alexandria had ] Spain. Christianity re-adopted it, and the presbyter Copernicus
established in all matters of learning led to that full recognition of it, ! new-created it. The court of Rome (not the Church Catholic)
by the Council of Nicaca, which made us bishop the dictator to the I persecuted Galileo: but it did so under the lead of profession.!!
whole Church in the annual calculation of Easter. Vol. ii. 343 ) " Science," which had darkened the human mind, from the days of

5 i.e., "smith" ot " brasier," probably from his aisiduity. I Pythagoras, respecting fits more enlightened system.]


THE WRITINGS OF ANATOLIUS.


147


the cycle, and the starting-point ' of the course
of the planets. And the segment before this
they call the last of the months, and the twelfth
segment, and the last dodecate morion, and the
end of the circuit ^ of the planets. And for this
reason, also, we maintain that those who place
the first month in it, and who determine the
fourteenth day of the Paschal season by it, make
no trivial or common blunder.

III.

Nor is this an opinion confined to ourselves
alone. For it was also known to the Jews of
old and before Christ, and it was most carefully
observed by them. 3 And this may be learned
from what Philo, and Josephus, and Musaeus
have written ; and not only from these, but in-
deed from others still more ancient, namely, the
two Agathobuli,'' who were surnamed the Mas-
ters, and the eminent Aristobulus,s who was one
of the Seventy who translated the sacred and
holy Scriptures of the Hebrews for Ptolemy
Philadelphus and his father, and dedicated his
exegetical books on the law of Moses to the
same kings. These writers, in solving some ques-
tions which are raised with respect to Exodus,
say that all alike ought to sacrifice the Passover'^
after the vernal equinox in the middle of the
first month. And that is found to be when the
sun passes through the first segment of the solar,
or, as some among them have named it, the
zodiacal circle.

IV.

But this Aristobulus also adds, that for the
feast of the Passover it was necessary not only
that the sun should pass the equinoctial segment,
but the moon also. For as there are two equi-
noctial segments, the vernal and the autumnal,
and these diametrically opposite to each other,
and since the day of the Passover is fixed for


' The word is d<4e<Tc9. which Valesius makes equivalent to a<JeTr)-
pio. the rope or post from which the chariots started in the race, and
so = starting-point. — Tr.

^ nepiobov,

3 irphi avTuiv — others read irpo. before them.

* Anatolius writes that there were two Agathobuli with the sur-
name Masters: but I fear that he is wrong in his opinion that they
were more ancient than Philo and Joseph\is. For Agathobulus, the
philosopher, flourished in the times of Adrian, as Eusebius writes in
his Chrofiicoii, and after him Ueorgius Syncellus. — Vai.es

5 ApicTTO^ovAou ToO -navv — Rufinus erroneously renders it ..^r/j-
tobiiliim ex Paneade, Aristobulus of Paneas, Scaliger also, in his
Anitiiadversioncs Eusehiatice, p. 130, strangely thinks that the text
should be corrected from the version of Rufinus. And Bede, in his
De Ratioiie Coiiifiiiti, also follows the faulty rendering of Rufinus,
and writes Aristobulus et Paniada, as though the latter word were
the proper name of a Jewish writer, finding probably in the Codex of
Rufinus, which he possessed, the reading A ristobulus ct Paiieada,
which indeed is found in a very ancient Paris manuscript, and also in
the Codex Corbeitusts. But that that Aristobulus was not one of the
seventy translators, as Anatolius writes, is proved by Scaliger in the
work cited above. This Aristobulus was also surnamed 61.60.0 KaKo<;,
or Master, as we see from the Maccabees, li i. For I do not agree
with Scaliger in distinguishing this Aristobulus, of whom mention is
made in the Maccabees, from the Peripatetic philosopher who dedi-
cated his Cointnentaries on the Law of Moses to Ptolemy Philo-
metor. — Vales. [See vol. ii. p. 487, and Elucidation II. p. 520,
same volume, this series.]

** Ta 6tafiijTjjpLa QOnv,


the fourteenth day of the month, in the evening,
the moon will have the position diametrically
opposite the sun ; as is to be seen in full moons.
And the sun will thus be in the segment of the
vernal equinox, and the moon necessarily will be
at the autumnal equinox.


I am aware that very many other matters were
discussed by them, some of them with consider-
able probability, and others of them as matters
of the clearest demonstration, 7 by which they
endeavour to prove that the festival of the Pass-
over and unleavened bread ought by alF means
to be kept after the equinox. But I shall pass
on without demanding such copious demonstra-
tions (on subjects ^) from which the veil of the
Mosaic law has been removed ; for now it re-
mains for us with unveiled face t«o behold ever
as in a glass Christ Himself and the doctrines
and sufferings of Christ. But that the first month
among the Hebrews is about the equinox, is
clearly shown also by what is taught in the book
of Enoch.9

VI.

And, therefore, in this concurrence of the sun
and moon, the Paschal festival is not to be
celebrated, because as long as they are found in
this course the power of darkness is not over-
come ; and as long as equality between light and
darkness endures, and is not diminished by the
light, it is shown that the Paschal festival is not
to be celebrated. Accordingly, it is enjoined
that'that festival be kept after the equinox, be-
cause the moon of the fourteenth,'" if before the
equinox or at the equinox, does not fill the whole
night. But after the equinox, the moon of the
fourteenth, with one day being added because
of the passing of the equinox, although it does
not extend to the true light, that is, the rising of
the sun and the beginning of day, will never-
theless leave no darkness behind it. And, in
accordance with this, Moses is charged by the
Lord to keep seven days of unleavened bread for
the celebration of the Passover, that in them no
power of darkness should be found to surpass
the light. And although the outset of four nights
begins to be dark, that is, the 17th and i8th and
19th and 20th, yet the moon of the 20th, which


7 KvpiaKai; oTToSeiffi? — Christophorsonus renders it raias; Rufi-
nus gives validissimas assertiones. 'I'he Greeks use iciipios in this
sense, Kvpi-ci. &i.Kai, 6o^ai, &c., decisive, valid, judgments, opinions,
&c.

8 The text gives aTranuiv Sjv Trepi.jjpr)Tai, &c. ; various codices
read air' avnav, &c. Valesius now proposes uAa? dn-aiTMi' • <<; rrcpi-
rjpTjTai, I shall pass on without . . . for the veil is remedied from
me.

9 An apocryphal book of some antiquity, which professes to pro-
ceed from the patriarch of that name, but of whose e.xistence prior to
the Christian era there is no real evidence. The first author who
clearly refers to it by name isTertuUian. [Vol iii. p. 62, and iv. 38c.)

■° xiv hina. The Romans used the phrase /«««/?-/;««, Jfc^/Wfi'rt,
&c., as meaning, the first, second day, &c., after new moon. — Tr.


148


THE WRITINGS OF ANATOLIUS.


rises before that, does not permit tlie darkness to
extend on even to midnight.

VII.

To us, however, with whom it is impossible
for all these things to come aptly at one and the
same time, namely, the moon's fourteenth, and
the Lord's day, and the passing of the equinox,
and whom the obligation of the Lord's resurrec-
tion binds to keep the Paschal festival on the
Lord's day, it is granted that we may extend the
beginning of our celebration even to the moon's
twentieth. For although the moon of the 20th
does not fill the whole night, yet, rising as it
does in the second watch, it illumines the greater
part of the night. Certainly if the rising of the
moon should be delayed on to the end of two
watches, that is to say, to midnight, the light
would not then exceed the darkness, but the dark-
ness the light. But it is clear that in the Paschal
feast it is not possible that any part of the dark-
ness should surpass the light ; for the festival of
the Lord's resurrection is one of light, and there
is no fellowship between light and darkness.
And if the moon should rise in the third watch,
it is clear that the 2 2d or 23d of the moon would
then be reached, in which it is not possible that
there can be a true celebration of Easter. For
those who determine that the festival may be
kept at this age of the moon, are not only unable
to make that good by the authority of Scripture,
but turn also into the crime of sacrilege and con-
tumacy, and incur the peril of their souls ; inas-
much as they affirm that the true light may be
celebrated along with something of that power
of darkness which dominates all.

VIII.

Accordingly, it is not the case, as certain cal-
culators of Gaul allege, that this assertion is
opposed by that passage in Exodus," where we
read : " In the first month, on the fourteenth
day of the first month, at even, ye shall eat un-
leavened bread until the one-and-twentieth day
of the month at even. Seven days shall there
be no leaven found in your houses." From this
they maintain that it is quite permissible to cele-
brate the Passover on the twenty-first day of the
moon ; understanding that if the twenty-second
day were added, there would be found eight
days of unleavened bread. A thing which can-
not be found with any probability, indeed, in the
Old Testament, as the Lord, through Moses,
gives this charge : " Seven days ye shall eat un-
leavened bread." ^ Unless perchance the four-
teenth day is not reckoned by them among the
days of unleavened bread with the celebration

' Exod. xii. 18, 19.

2 Exod. xii. 15; Levit. xxiii. 6.


of the feast ; which, however, is contrary to the
Word of the Gosi^ei which says : " Moreover, on
the first day of unleavened bread, the disciples
came to Jesus." ^ And there is no doubt as to its
being the fourteenth day on which the disciples
asked the Lord, in accordance with the custom
established for them of old, " Where wilt Thou
that we prepare for Thee to eat the Passover?"
But they who are deceived with this error main-
tain this addition, because they do not know
that the 13th and 14th, the 14th and 15 th, the
15th and 1 6th, the i6th and 17th, the 17th and
1 8th, the iSth and 19th, the 19th and 20th, the
20th and 21st days of the moon are each found,
as may be most surely proved, within a single
day. For every day in the reckoning of the
moon does not end in the evening as the same
day in respect of number, as it is at its begin-
ning in the morning. For the day which in the
morning, that is up to the sixth hour and half,
is numbered the 13th day of the month, is found
at even to be the 14th. Wherefore, also, the
Passover is enjoined to be extended on to the
2 1 St day at even ; which day, without doubt, in
the morning, that is, up to that term of hours
which we have mentioned, was reckoned the
2oth. Calculate, then, from the end of the 13th'*
day of the moon, which marks the beginning of
the 14th, on to the end of the 20th, at which
the 2 1 St day also begins, and you will have only
seven days of unleavened bread, in which, by
the guidance of the Lord, it has been determined
before that the most true feast of the Passover
ought to be celebrated.


IX.

But what wonder is it that they should have
erred in the matter of the 21st day of the moon
who have added three days before the equinox,
in which they hold that the Passover may be
celebrated ? An assertion which certainly must
be considered altogether absurd, since, by the
best- known historiographers of the Jews, and by
the Seventy Elders, it has been clearly deter-
mined that the Paschal festival cannot be cele-
brated at the equinox.


But nothing was difficult to them with whom
it was lawful to celebrate the Passover on any
day when the fourteenth of the moon happened
after the equinox. Following their example up
to the present time all the bishops of Asia — as
themselves also receiving the rule from an unim-
peachable authority, to wit, the evangelist John,
who leant on the Lord's breast, and drank in
instructions spiritual without doubt — were in


3 M.itt. xxvi. 17; Mark xiv. 12; Luke xxii. 7.
* Dut the text gives 12th.


THE WRITINGS OF ANATOLIUS.


149


the way of celebrating the Paschal feast, without
question, every year, whenever the fourteenth
day of the moon had come, and the lamb was
sacrificed by the Jews after the equinox was past ;
not acquiescing, so far as regards this matter,
with the authority of some, namely, the success-
ors of Peter and Paul, who have taught all the
churches in which they sowed the spiritual seeds
of the Gospel, that the solemn festival of the
resurrection of the Lord can be celebrated only
on the Lord's day. Whence, also, a certain con-
tention broke out between the successors of these,
namely, Victor, at that time bishop of the city
of Rome, and Polycrates, who then appeared to
hold the primacy among the bishops of Asia.
And this contention was adjusted most rightfully
by Irenjeus,' at that time president of a part of
Gaul, so that both parties kept by their own or-
der, and did not decline from the original cus-
tom of antiquity. The one party, indeed, kept
the Paschal day on the fourteenth day of the
first month, according to the Gospel, as they
thought, adding nothing of an extraneous kind,
but keeping through all things the rule of faith.
And the other party, passing the day of the
Lord's Passion as one replete with sadness and
grief, hold that it should not be lawful to cele-
brate the Lord's mystery of the Passover at any
other time but on the Lord's day, on which the
resurrection of the Lord from death took place,
and on which rose also for us the cause of ever-
lasting joy. For it is one thmg to act in accord-
ance with the precept given by the apostle, yea,
by the Lord Himself, and be sad with the sad,
and suffer with him that suft'ers by the cross. His
own word being : "My soul is exceeding sorrow-
ful, even unto death ; "^ and it is another thing
to rejoice with the victor as he triumphs over an
ancient enemy, and exults with the highest tri-
umph over a conquered adversary, as He Him-
self also says : " Rejoice with Me ; for I have
found the sheep which I had lost."^

XI.

Moreover, the allegation which they some-
times make against us, that if we pass the moon's
fourteenth we cannot celebrate the beginning of
the Paschal feast in light,'* neither moves nor
disturbs us. For, although they lay it down as
a thing unlawful, that the beginning of the Pas-
chal festival should be extended so far as to the
moon's twentieth ; yet they cannot deny that
it ought to be extended to the sixteenth and
seventeenth, which coincide v^'ith the day on
which the Lord rose from the dead. But we


' [Vol. iii. p. 630. The convenire ad of Irenaeus is thus shown
to be geographical, not ecclesiastical. Vol. i. pp. 415, 569 J

2 Matt xxvi. 38.

3 Luke XV. 6.
* Luciditnt.


decide that it is better that it should be extended
even on to the twentieth day, on account of
the Lord's day, than that we should anticipate the
Lord's day on account of the fourteenth day ;
for on the Lord's day was it that light was shown
to us in the beginning, and now also in the end,
the comforts of all present and the tokens of all
future blessings. For the Lord ascribes no less
praise to the twentieth day than to the fourteenth.
For in the book of Leviticus 5 the injunction is
expressed thus : " In the first month, on the four-
teenth day of this month, at even, is the Lord's
Passover. And on the fifteenth day of this
month is the feast of unleavened bread unto the
Lord. Seven days ye shall eat unleavened bread.
The first day shall be to you one most diligently
attended ^ and holy. Ye shall do no servile
work thereon. And the seventh day shall be to
you more diligently attended ^ and holier ; ye
shall do no servile work thereon." And hence
we maintain that those have contracted no guilt'*
before the tribunal of Christ, who have held
that the beginnmg of the Paschal festival ought
to be extended to this day. And this, too, the
most especially, as we are pressed by three diffi-
culties, namely, that we should keep the solemn
festival of the Passover on the Lord's day, and
after the equinox, and yet not beyond the limit
of the moon's twentieth day.

XII.

But this again is held by other wise and most
acute men to be an impossibility, because with-
in that narrow and most contracted limit of a
cycle of nineteen years, a thoroughly genuine
Paschal time, that is to say, one held on the
Lord's day and yet after the equinox, cannot
occur. But, in order that we may set in a
clearer light the difficulty which causes their in-
credulity, we shall set down, along with the
courses of the moon, that cycle of years which
we have mentioned ; the days being computed
before in which the year rolls on in its alternating
courses, by Kalends and Ides and Nones, and
by the sun's ascent and descent.

XIII.
The moon's age set forth in the Julian Calendar.

January, on the Kalends, one day, the moon's
first (day) ; on the Nones, the 5th day, the
moon's 5 th; on the Ides, the 13th day, the
moon's 13th. On the day before the Kalends
of February, the 31st day, the moon's ist ; on
the Kalends of February, the 3 2d day, the moon's


5 Levit. xxiii. 5-7.

6 Celeberrimus, honoured, solemn.

7 Solemn.

8 [The sanctification of the I^/Ord's Day is thus shown to be a
Christian principle The feast of Easter was the Great Lord's Day,
but the rule was common to the weekly Easter.]


^50


THE WRITINGS OF ANATOLIUS.


2d ; on the Nones, the 36th day, the moon's 6th ;
on the Ides, the 44th day, the moon's 14th. On
the day before the Kalends of March, the 59th
day, the moon's 29th ; on the Kalends of March,
the 60th day, the moon's ist; on the Nones, the
66th day, the moon's 7th ; on the Ides, the 74th
day, the moon's 15th. On the day before the
Kalends of April, the 90th day, the moon's 2d ;
on the Kalends of April, the 91st day, the moon's
3d ; on the Nones, the 95th day, the moon's 7th ;
on the Ides, the 103d day, the moon's 15 th. On
the day before the Kalends of May, the 120th
day, the moon's 3d ; on the Kalends of May,
the i2ist day, the moon's 4th; on the Nones,
the 127th day, the moon's loth ; on the Ides, the
135th day, the moon's iSth. On the day before
the Kalends of June, the 151st day, the moon's
3d; on the Kalends of June, the 15 2d day,
the moon's 5 th; on the Nones, the 153d day,
the moon's 9th ; on the Ides, the 164th day, the
moon's 1 7th. On the day before the Kalends
of July, the i8ist day, the moon's 5th ; on the
Kalends of July, the i82d day, the moon's 6th ; on
the Nones, the iSSth day, the moon's 12th;
on the Ides, the 196th day, the moon's 20th.
On the day before the Kalends of August, the
212th day, the moon's 5th; on the Kalends of
August, the 213th day, the moon's 7th; on the
Nones, the 217th day, the moon's 12th; on the
Ides, the 225th day, the moon's 19th. On
the day before the Kalends of September, the
243d day, the moon's 7th ; on the Kalends of
September, the 244th day, the moon's 8th ; on
the Nones, the 248th day, the moon's 12th;
on the Ides, the 256th day, the moon's 20th. On
the day before the Kalends of October, the 273d
day, the moon's 8th ; on the Kalends of October,
the 247th day, the moon's 9th; on the Nones,
the 280th day, the moon's 15 th ; on the Ides, the
288th day, the moon's 23d. On the day before
the Kalends of November, the 304th day, the
moon's 9th ; on the Kalends of November, the
305th day, the moon's loth; on the Nones,
the 309th day, the moon's 14th; on the Ides,
the 317th day, the moon's 2 2d. On the day
before the Kalends of December, the 334th day,
the moon's loth ; on the Kalends of Decem-
ber, the 335th day, the moon's nth; on the
Nones, the 339th day, the moon's 15th; on
the Ides, the 347th day, the moon's 23d. On
the day before the Kalends of January, the
365th day, the moon's nth; on the Kalends
of January, the 366th day, the moon's 12th.

XIV.
The Paschal or Easter Table of Anatolius.

Now, then, after the reckoning of the days
and the exposition of the course of the moon,
whereon the whole revolves on to its end, the


cycle of the years may be set forth from the com-
mencement.' This makes the Passover (Easter
season) circulate between the 6th day before
the Kalends of April and the 9th before the
Kalends of May, according to the following
table : —


Equinox.

Moon.

Easter.

Moon.

I. Sabbath . .

XXVI.

XVth before the Kalends of
May, i.e., 17th April . .

XVIII

2. Lord's Day .

3. IId day (fe-

rial) . .

VII.
XVIII.

Kalends of April, i.e., ist
April

XIV.

Xlth before the Kalends of
May, I.e., 21st April . .

XVI.

4. IIId day . .

XXIX.

Ides of April, i.e., 13th
April

XIX.

5. IVth day .

X. '

IVth before the Kalends of
April, i.e., 29th March .

XIV.

6. Vth day . .

XXI.

XlVth before the Kalends
of May, i.e., 18th April .

XVI.

7. Sabbath 2 .

II.

VIth before the Kalends of
April, i.e., 27th March .

XVII.

8. Lord's Day .

XIII.

Kalends of April, i.e., ist
April

XX.

9. IId day . .

XXIV.

XVIIIth before the Kalends
of May, i.e., 14th March,

XV.

10. IIId day . .

V.

Vlllth before the Ides of
April, i.e., 6th April . .

XV.

II. I Vth day .

XVI.

IVth before the Kalends of
April, i.e., 29th March .

XX.

12. Vth day . .

XXVII.

IIId before the Ides of
April, i.e., nth April .

XV.

13. VIth day .

VIII.

IIId before the Nones of
April, i.e., 3d April . .

XVII.

14. Sabbath . .

XX.

IXth before the Kalends of
May, i.e., 23d April . .

XX.

15. Lord's Day .

I.

VIth 'before the Ides of
April, I.e., 8th April . .

XV.

16. IId day . .

XII.

IId before the Kalends of
April, i.e., 31st March .

XVIII.

17. IVth day^ .

XXIII.

XlVth before the Kalends
of May, i.e., i8th April .

XIX.

18. Vth day . .

IV.

IId before the Nones of
April, i.e., 4th April . .

XIV.

19. VIth day .

XV.

VIth before the Kalends of
April, i.e., 27th March .

XVII.

XV.

This cycle of nineteen years is not approved
of by certain African investigators who have
drawn up larger cycles, because it seems to be
somewhat opposed to their surmises and opinions.
For these make up the best proved accounts
according to their calculation, and determine a
certain beginning or certain end for the Easter
season, so as that the Paschal festival shall not
be celebrated before the eleventh day before the
Kalends of April, i.e., 24th March, nor after the


' Atinorum circitli princtpijim inchoattdum est.

* Bissextile reckoning. [Compare note 2, p. no, supra.\


THE WRITINGS OF ANATOLIUS.


151


moon's twenty-first, and the eleventh day before
the Kalends of May, i.e., 21st April. But we
hold that these are hmits not only not to be fol-
lowed, but to be detested and overturned. For
even in the ancient law it is laid down that this
is to be seen to, viz., that the Passover be not
celebrated before the transit of the vernal equi-
nox, at which the last of the autumnal term is
overtaken,' on the fourteenth day of the first
month, which is one calculated not by the begin-
nings of the day, but by those of the moon.^
And as this has been sanctioned by the charge
of the Lord, and is in all things accordant with
the Catholic faith, it cannot be doubtful to any
wise man that to anticipate it must be a thing
unlawful and perilous. And, accordingly, this
only is it sufficient for all the saints and Catho-
lics to observe, namely, that giving no heed to
the diverse opinions of very many, they should
keep the solemn festival of the Lord's resurrec-
tion within the limits which we have set forth.

XVI.

Furthermore, as to the proposal subjoined to
your epistle, that I should attempt to introduce
into this little book some notice of the ascent
and descent of the sun, which is made out in
the distribution of days and nights. The matter
proceeds thus : In fifteen days and half an hour,
the sun ascending by so many minutes, that is,
by four in one day, from the eighth day before
the Kalends of January, i.e., 25th December,
to the eighth before the Kalends of April, i.e.,
25th March, an hour is taken up;^ at which
date there are twelve hours and a twelfth. On
this day, towards evening, if it happen also to be
the moon's fourteenth, the lamb was sacrificed
among the Jews. But if the number went be-
yond that, so that it was the moon's fifteenth
or sixteenth on the evening of the same day, on
the fourteenth day of the second moon, in the
same month, the Passover was celebrated ; and
the people ate unleavened bread for seven days,
up to the twenty-first day at evening. Hence,
if it happens in like manner to us, that the
seventh day before the Kalends of April, 26th
March, proves to be both* the Lord's day and
the moon's fourteenth, Easter is to be celebrated
on the fourteenth. But if it proves to be the
moon's fifteenth or sixteenth, or any day up to
the twentieth, then our regard for the Lord's res-
urrection, which took place on the Lord's day,
will lead us to celebrate it on the same princi-
ple ; yet this should be done so as that the
beginning of Easter may not pass beyond the

' In ijuo auiitmnalis novissinia pars vincitur.
^ LuHcE orsibus.

3 Diminnitur. [This year (1886) we have the lowest possible
Easter. ]


close of their festival, that is to say, the moon's
twentieth. And therefore we have said that those
parties have committed no trivial offence who
have ventured either on anticipating or on going
beyond this number, which is given us in the di-
vine Scriptures themselves. And from the eighth
day before the Kalends of April, 25 th March,
to the eighth before the Kalends of July, 24th
June, in fifteen days an hour is taken up : the
sun ascending every day by two minutes and a
half, and the sixth part of a minute. And from
the eighth day before the Kalends of July, 24th
June, to the eighth before the Kalends of Octo-
ber, 24th September, in like manner, in fifteen
days and four hours, an hour is taken up : the
sun descending every day by the same number
of minutes. And the space remaining on to the
eighth day before the Kalends of January, 25 th
December, is determined in a similar number
of hours and minutes. So that thus on the
eighth day before the Kalends of January, for
the hour there is the hour and half. For up to
that day and night are distributed. And the
twelve hours which were established at the vernal
equinox in the beginning by the Lord's dispensa-
tion, being distributed over the night on the
eighth before the Kalends of July, the sun as-
cending through those eighteen several degrees
which we have noted, shall be found conjoined
with the longer space in the twelfth. And, again,
the twelve hours which should be fulfilled at the
auUimnal equinox in the sun's descent, should be
found disjoined on the sixth before the Kalends
of January as six hours divided into twelve, the
night holding eighteen divided into twelve. And
on the eighth before the Kalends of July, in like
manner, it held six divided into twelve.

xvn.

Be not ignorant of this, however, that those
four determining periods,'* which we have men-
tioned, although they are approximated to the
Kalends of the following months, yet hold each
the middle of a season, viz., of spring and sum-
mer, and autumn and winter. And the begin-
nings of the seasons are not to be fixed at that
point at which the Kalends of the month begin.
But each season is to be begun in such way
that the equinox divides the season of spring
from its first day ; and the season of summer is
divided by the eighth day before the Kalends
of July, and that of autumn by the eighth before
the Kalends of October, and that of winter by
the eighth before the Kalends of January in like
manner.5


^ Tcmporum confinia.

5 [Compare what is said of Hippolytus, vol. v, p. 3, this series.
Sec the valuable worit of Professor Seabury on the Calendar, ed.


152


TPIE WRITINGS OF ANATOLIUS.


FRAGMENTS OF THE BOOKS ON ARITHMETIC


What is mathematics?

Aristotle thinl^s that all philosophy consisted
of theory and practice,- and divides the practi-
cal into ethical and political, and the theoretic
again into the theological, the physical, and the
mathematical. And thus very clearly and skil-
fully he shows that mathematics is (a branch of)
philosophy.

The Chaldjeans were the originators of as-
tronomy, and the Egyptians of geometry and
arithmetic. . . ,

And whence did mathematics derive its name ?

Those of the Peripatetic school affirmed that
in rhetoric and poetry, and in the popular music,
any one may be an adept though he has gone
through no process of study ; but that in those
pursuits properly called studies,' none can have
any real knowledge unless he has first become a
student of them. Hence they supposed that the
theory of these things was called Mathematics,
from fxddrjfxa, study, science. And the followers
of Pythagoras are said to have given this more
distinctive name of mathematics to geometry and
arithmetic alone. For of old these had each its
own separate name ; and they had up till ^hen
no name common to both. And he (Archytas)
gave them this name, because he found science "*
in them, and that in a manner suitable to man's
study.5 For they (the Pythagoreans) perceived
that these studies dealt with things eternal and
immutable and perfect,^ in which things alone
they considered that science consisted. But the
more recent philosophers have given a more ex-
tensive application to this name, so that, in their
opinion, the mathematician deals not only with
substances ^ incorporeal, and falling simply within
the province of the understanding,^ but also with
that which touches upon corporeal and sensible
matter. For he ought to be cognisant of ^ the
course of the stars, and their velocity, and their
magnitudes, and forms, and distances. And, be-
sides, he ought to investigate their dispositions
to vision, examining into the causes, why they
are not seen as of the same form and of the
same size from every distance, retaining, indeed,
as we know them to do, their dispositions rela-


' Fabricius, Biblioth. Crceca, ed. Harles, vol. iii. p. 462.
burg, 1793.

2 Seioptas (cat Trpoif ecot.

< TO il!l<jn\)i.0VlK6v .

5 /aaOi)<rtr.

6 eiAtxpivij, absolute.
'' uAtji'.

8 va-r\Tr\v.

9 0eiopi)TiKOS,


Ham-


tive to each other, '° but producing, at the same
time, deceptive appearances, both in respect of
order and position. And these are so, either
as determined by the state of the heavens and
the air, or as seen in reflecting and all polished
surfaces and in transparent bodies, and in all
similar kinds. In addition to this, they thought
that the man ought to be versed in mechanics and
geometry and dialectics. And still further, that
he should engage himself with the causes of the
harmonious combination of sounds, and with the
composition of music ; which things are bodies,"
or at least are to be ultimately referred to sensi-
ble matter.

What is mathematics?

Mathematics is a theoretic science " of things
apprehensible by perception and sensation for
communication to others. '^ And before this a
certain person indulging in a joke, while hitting
his mark, said that mathematics is that science
to which Homer's description of Discord may
be apphed : —

" Small at her birth, but rising every hour,
While scarce the skies her horrid (mighty) head can

bound,
She stalks on earth and shakes the world around.""

For it begins with a point and a line,'5 and forth-
with it takes heaven itself and all things within
its compass.

How many divisions are there of mathematics?

Of the more notable and the earliest mathe-
matics there are two principal divisions, viz.,
arithmetic and geometry. And of the mathe-
matics which deals with things sensible there are
six divisions, viz., computation (practical arith-
metic), geodesy, optics, theoretical music, me-
chanics, and astronomy. But that neither the
so-called tactics nor architecture,'^ nor the popu-
lar music, nor physics, nor the art which is called
equivocally the mechanical, constitutes, as some
think, a branch of mathematics, we shall prove,
as the discourse proceeds, clearly and system- ■
atically. 'I

As to the circle having eight solids and six
superficies and four angles. . . . What branches
of arithmetic have closest affinity with each other?
Computation and theoretical music have a closer


'° TOWS Trpbs aAA>)Aa A670U9.
" (TuJ^iaTa, substances.
'- kn{.(jTi\)x-r\ diuipriTiKrj.

^^ TTpby TrjV TOJl' itlTOmiTTOVTlOV &6(TIV,

'■* Iliad, iv. 442-443 (Pope),

'S a-r\fX.tioV Kai ypafi^^5.
'* TO 6.p\I.TiKTOVt.K6v,


ALEXANDER OF CAPPADOCIA.


153


affinity than others with arithmetic ; for this de-
partment, being one also of quantity and ratio,
approaches it in number and proportion.' Op-
tics and geodesy, again, are more in affinity with
geometry. And mechanics and astrology are
in general affinity with both.

As to mathematics having its principles^ in
hypothesis and about hypothesis. Now, the
term hypothesis is used in three ways, or indeed
in many ways. For according to one usage of
the term we have the dramatic revolution ;3 and
in this sense there are said to be hypotheses in
the dramas of Euripides. According to a sec-
ond meaning, we have the investigation of mat-
ters in the special in rhetoric ; and in this sense
the Sophists say that a hypothesis must be pro-
posed. And, according to a third signification,
the beginning of a proof is called a hypothesis,
as being the begging of certain matters with a
view to the establishment of another in question.
Thus it is said that Democritus-* used a hypothe-
sis, namely, that of atoms and a vacuum ; and
Asclepiades 5 that of atoms ^ and pores. Now,
when applied to mathematics, the term hypothe-
sis is to be taken in the third sense.

That Pythagoras was not the only one who
duly honoured arithmetic, but that his best known


^ avoAoyta?.

2 apxa?, beginnings.

3 TT-epiTTcTeia, reversal of circumstances on which the plot of a
tragedy hinges.

■♦ A native of Abdera, in Thrace, born about 460 B.C., and, along
with Leucippus, the founder of the philosophical theory of atoms,
according to which the creation of all thmgs was explained as being
due to the fortuitous combination of an infinite number of atoms float-
ing in mfinite space.

5 A famous physician, a native of Bithynia, but long resident in
great repute at Rome in the middle of the first century b c. He
adopted the Epicurean doctrine of atoms and pores, and tried to form
a new theory of disease, on the principle that it might be in all cases
reduced to obstruction of the pores and irregular distribution of the
atoms.

*> oyKois.


disciples did so too, being wont to say that " all
things fit number." ^

That arithmetic has as its immediate end
chiefly the theory of science,'^ than which there
is no end either greater or nobler. And its sec-
ond end is to bring together in one all that is
found in determinate substance.'^

Who among the mathematicians has made
any discovery?

Eudemus '° relates in his Astrologies that
CEnopides " found out the circle of the zodiac
and the cycle '^ of the great year. And Thales '^
discovered the eclipse of the sun and its period
in the tropics in its constant inequality. And
Anaximander '•♦ discovered that the earth is poised
in space,'5 and moves round the axis of the uni-
verse. And Anaximenes '^ discovered that the
moon has her light from the sun, and found out
also the way in which she suffers eclipse. And
the rest of the mathematicians have also made
additions to these discoveries. We may instance
the facts — that the fixed stars move round the
axis passing through the poles, while the planets
remove from each other ''' round the perpendicu-
lar axis of the zodiac ; and that the axis of the
fixed stars and the planets is the side of a pente-
decagon with four-and-twenty parts.


7 [Wisd. xi. 20; Ecclus. xxxviii. 29 and xlii. 7.]

8 tVji/ €7rt(TTTj/jL0i'i*cV)i' Netopia!'.

9 <ruAA>)85r)i' KaraXaBeiv TTOcra rrj uipi(TiJ.dvr) oxxrCa (TV tiBifiriKfv ,
'° A native of Rhodes, a disciple of Aristotle, and editor of his

works.

'^ A native of Chios, mentioned by Plato in connection with Anax-
agoras, and therefore supposed by some to have been a contemporary
of the latter sage.

■2 TTepKjraoLv, revolution.

'3 Of Miletus, one of the sages, and founder of the Ionic school.

'■» Of Miletus, born 610 B.C., the immediate successor of Thales in
the Ionic school of philosophy.

15 ^ereupos.

*'' Of Miletus, the third in the series of Ionic philosophers.

'7 a.T!^\ov<Ti,v dAAjjAwj/.


ALEXANDER OF CAPPADOCIA.


TRANSLATOR'S BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE.

[a.d. 170-233-251.] Alexander was at first bishop of a church in Cappadocia, but on his
visiting Jerusalem he was appointed to the bishopric of the church there, while the previous
bishop Narcissus was alive, in consequence of a vision which was believed to be divine." During
the Decian persecution he was thrown into prison at Caesarea, and died there,^ a.d. 251. The
only writtings of his which we know are those from which the extracts are made.^


* Euseb., Hist. Eccles., vi. ii. [Narcissus must have been born about A.D. 121. Might have known Polycarp.]
- Ibid., vi. 46. [Narcissus lived till a.d. 237, and died a martyr, aged 116.]

3 [He was a pupil of Pantaenus, continued under Clement, and defended Origen against the severity of Demetrius. Two dates which
are conjectural are adjusted to these facts. I find it difficult to reconcile them with those implied by Eusebius.]


154


ALEXANDER OF CAPPADOCIA


FROM THE EPISTLES OF ALEXANDER.


I. AN EPISTLE TO THE PEOPLE OF ANTIOCH.'

Alexander, a servant and prisoner of Jesus
Christ, sends greeting in the Lord to the blessed
church of Antioch. Easy and light has the Lord
made my bonds to me during the time of my im-
prisonment, since I have learned that in the prov-
idence of God, Asclepiades — who, in regard to
the right faith, is most eminently qualified for the
office — has undertaken the episcopate of your
holy church of Antioch. And this epistle, my
brethren and masters, I have sent by the hand
of the blessed presbyter Clement,^ a man vir-
tuous and well tried, whom ye know already, and
will know yet better ; who also, coming here by
the providence and supervision of the Master,
has strengthened and increased the Church of
the Lord.

IL FROM AN EPISTLE TO THE ANTINOITES.^

Narcissus salutes you, who held the episcopate
in this district before me, who is now also my
colleague and competitor in prayer for you,-*
and who, having now attained to 5 his hundred
and tenth year, unites with me in exhorting you
to be of one mind.^

in. FROM AN EPISTLE TO 0RIGEN.7

For this, as thou knowest, was the will of God,

1 A fiagment. In Eusebius, Hist. Eccles., book vi. ch. xi.

2 It was the opinion of Jerome in hi;; Catalogus that the Clement
spoken of by Alexander was Clement of Alexandria. This Clement, at
any rate, did live up to the time of the Emperor Severus, and sojourned
in these parts, as he telU us himself in the first book of his Stro-
mcitiis. And he was also the friend ol bishop Alexander, to whom
he dedicated his book On the Eccli.'siasticat Caitoii^ or Against the
ye-n's^ as Eusebius states in his Eccles. Hist., book vi. ch. .\iii,
(Migne). [But from the third of these epistles one would certainly
draw another inference. How could he, a pupil of Clement, describe
and introduce his master in such terms as he uses here?]

■* In Euseb., Hist. Eccles., book vi. ch. xi.

* avi'i^tTaC,ofiev6<; jioi 6i.a riov ev\i'av. Jerome renders it: Salu-
tat vos Narcissus, qui ante me hie tenuit episcopalem locum et nunc
mecum eundem orationibus regit.

? •qVVKiiif;.

* The text gives oixoiux; e^ot <J)poi'^<7ai. Several of the codices
and also Nicephorus give the better reading, 6;aoiws e/iioi oixoiipovijaai.,
which is confirmed by the interpretations of Rufinus and Jerome.

? In Euseb , Hist. Eccles., ch xiv.


that the friendship subsisting between us from
our forefathers should be maintained unbroken,
yea rather, that it should increase in fervency and
strength. For we are well acquainted with those
blessed fathers who have trodden the course
before us, and to whom we too shall soon go :
Pantaenus, namely, that man verily blessed, my
master ; and also the holy Clement, who was once
ray master and my benefactor ; and all the rest
who may be like them, by whose means also I
have come to know thee, my lord and brother,
who excellest all.^


IV. FROxM AN EPISTLE TO DEMETRIUS, BISHOP OF
ALEXANDRIA.^

And he '° — i.e., Demetrius — has added to his
letter that this is a matter that was never heard
cf before, and has never been done now, —
namely, that laymen should take part in public
speaking," when there are bishops present. But
in this assertion he has departed evidently far
from the truth by some means. For, indeed,
wherever there are found persons capable of
profiting the brethren, such persons are exhorted
by the holy bishops to address the people. Such
was the case at Laranda, where Evelpis was thus
exhorted by Neon ; and at Iconium, Paulinus
was thus exhorted by Celsus ; and at Synada,
Theodorus also by Atticus, our blessed breth-
ren. And it is probable that this is done in
other places also, although we know not the
fact.'^'


8 [This contemporary tribute confirms the enthusiastic eulogy of
the youthful Gregory. See p. 38, supra.^

9 In Euseb., Hist. Eccles., ch. xix.

■° Demetrius is, for honour's sake, addressed in the third person.
Perhaps 17 <t>j ayioT))? or some such form preceded.

** owtAetr.

'- [This precise and definite testimony is not to be controverted.
It follows the traditions of the Synagogue (Acts xiii 15), and agrees
with the Pauline prescription as to the use of the charistiiata in
I Cor. xiv. The chiefs of the Synagogue retained the power of giving
this liberty, and this passed to the Christian authorities.] ,


NOTE BY THE AMERICAN EDITOR.


If Alexander died in the Decian persecution, it is noteworthy how far the sub-apostolic age
extended. This contemporary of Cyprian was coadjutor to Narcissus, who may have seen those
who knew St. John. See vol. i. p. 416, note i, this series ; also vol i. p. 568, Fragment ii.


THEOGNOSTUS OF ALEXANDRIA.


155


THEOGNOSTUS OF ALEXANDRIA.


TRANSLATOR'S BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE.

[a.d. 260. I can add nothing but conjectures to the following :] Of this Theognostus we
have no account by either Eusebius or Jerome. Athanasius, however, mentions him more
than once with honour. Thus he speaks of him as avrjp Aoyto?, an eloquent or learned man.'
And again as ©coyrwo-ros 6 6avfxdcno<; /cat a-nrovSaios, the admirable and zealous Theognostus.^
He seems to have belonged to the Catechetical school of Alexandria, and to have flourished there
in the latter half of the third century, probably about a.d. 260. That he was a disciple of Origen,
or at least a devoted student of his works, is clear from Photius.^ He wrote a work in seven
books, the title of which is thus given by Photius : •* T/ie Oictlines of the blessed Theognostus, the
exegete of Alexandria. Dodwell and others are of opinion that by this term exegete,^ is meant
the presidency of the Catechetical school and the privilege of public teaching ; and that the
title, Outlines^ was taken from Clement, his predecessor in office. According to Photius, the
work was on this plan. The first book treated of God the Father, as the maker of the universe ;
the second, of the necessary existence of the Son ; the third, of the Holy Spirit ; the fourth,
of angels and demons ; the fifth and sixth, of the incarnation of God ; while the seventh bore
the title. On God's CreationJ Photius has much to say in condemnation of Thegnostus, who,
however, has been vindicated by BulP and Prudentius Maranus.^ Gregory of Nyssa has also
charged him with holding the same error as Eunomius on the subject of the Son's relation to
the work of creation.'" He is adduced, however, by Athanasius as a defender of the HomoUsian
doctrine.


FROM HIS SEVEN BOOKS OF HYPOTYPOSES OR OUTLINES.


The substance " of the Son is not a substance
devised extraneously,'^ nor is it one introduced
out of nothing ; '■♦ but it was born of the sub-
stance of the Father, as the reflection of light or
as the steam of water. For the reflection is not


' De Decret. Nic. Syn., 25, Works, vol. i. part i. p. 230.

2 Epist. 4, to Serapion, sec. 9, vol. i. part ii. p. 702.

3 Bibl., cod. io5.

* ToO naxapiov &eoyvitt<rTOV 'AAefai'Speiu; koX efr)yijTou iurorv-

5 e|r)YT)ToO.

^ U7TOTU7rtU(7et5.

' De Dei Creatione.

^ Defeus.fid. Nic, sec. ii. chap. 10. [Bull always vindicates
where he can do so, on the principle of justice, for which I have con-
tended on p. V. (prefatory) of vol. iv.]
9 Divinit I. C, iv. 24.

'° Book iii., against Eitnotnius.

" From book li. In Athanasius, On the Decrees of the Nicene
Council, sec. xxv. From the edition BB , Paris, 1698, vol. i. part i.
p. 230. Athanasius introduces this fragment in the following terms:
— Learn then, ye Christ-opposing Arians, that Theognostus, a man
of learning, did not decline to use the expression " 0/ the substance"
(ex TTJ? ouo-ias). For, writing of the Son in the second book of liis
Outlines, he has spoken thus: The substance 0/ the Son. — Tr.

'^ oueria.

'3 (^u}6ev €ijievp{$ela-a.

'* €K (LIT) ofTtuv eTreiaTJxflij.


the sun itself, and the steam is not the water
itself, nor yet again is it anything alien ; neither
is He Himself the Father, nor is He alien, but
He is '5 an emanation '^ from the substance of the
Father, this substance of the Father suffering
the while no partition. For as the sun remains
the same and suffers no diminution from the rays
that are poured out by it, so neither did the
substance of the Father undergo any change in
having the Son as an image of itself.

Theognostus, moreover, himself adds words to
this effect : He who has offended against the
first term'^ and the second, may be judged to de-
serve smaller punishment ; but he who has also
despised the third, can no longer find pardon.


'5 The words in italics were inserted by Routh from a Catena on the
Epistle to the Hebrews, where they are ascribed to Theognostus:
" He Himself" is the Son.

'6 aTToppoia.

'7 In Athanasius, Epist. 4, to Serapion, sec. 11, vol. i. part ii. p. 703.

'3 opOf.


156


PIERIUS OF ALEXANDRIA.


For by the first term and the second, he says, is
meant the teaching concerning the Father and
the Son ; but by the third is meant the doctrine
committed to us with respect to the perfection ■
and the partaking of the Spirit. And with the
view of confirming this, he adduces the word
spoken by the Saviour to the disciples : " I have
yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot
bear them now. But when the Holy Spirit is
come, He will teach you."^

III. 3
Then he says again : As the Saviour converses
with those not yet able to receive what is per-


1 TeAeioicrei. [i e., making the disciples TeAeioi

- Jno- xvi. 12, 13

3 From Athanasius, as above, p. 155.


Jas. i. 4.]


feet,"* condescending to their littleness, while the
Holy Spirit communes with the perfected, and
yet we could never say on that account that the
teaching of the Spirit is superior to the teaching
of the Son, but only that the Son condescends
to the imperfect, while the Spirit is the seal of
the perfected; even so it is not' on account of
the superiority of the Spirit over the Son that the
blasphemy against the Spirit is a sin excluding
impunity and pardon, but because for the im-
perfect there is pardon, while for those who
have tasted the heavenly gift, 5 and been made
perfect, there remains no plea or prayer for
pardon.


4 ra TcAeid.

5 Heb. vi. 4.


[Compare Matt. xii. 31.]


PIERIUS OF ALEXANDRIA.'


TRANSLATOR'S BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE.


[a.d. 275.] Among the very eminent men who flourished near his own time, Eusebius men-
tions Pierius, a presbyter of Alexandria, and speaks of him as greatly renowned for his voluntary
poverty, his philosophical erudition and his skill in the exposition of Scripture and in discoursing
to the public assemblies of the Church. ^ He lived in the latter part of the third century, and
seems to have been for a considerable period president of the Catechetical school at Alexandria.
Jerome says that he was called Origenes, ju7iior ; and according to Photius, he shared in some of
the errors of Origen, on such subjects especially as the doctrine of the Holy Ghost and the pre-
existence of souls. •'' In his manner of life he was an ascetic. After the persecution under Galerius
or Maximus he lived at Rome. He appears to have devoted himself largely to sacred criticism
and the study of the text of Scripture ; and among several treatises written by him, and extant in
the time of Photius, we find mention made of one on the prophet Hosea. And, in addition to
the Commentary on the First Epistle to the Corinthians,^ Photius notices twelve books of his, and
praises both their composition and their matter.s

' [See Introductory Note, p. 143, supra ; also p. 99, note 8, s?ipra.]

- Hist. EccL, vii. 32.

3 [Perhaps only speculatively (see Frag II. infra), not dogmatically. Compare Wordsworth's Platonic Ode on Immortality.']

* Lardner (part ii. book i. chap. .\xiv.) does not think that there was a commentary written by Pierius on this epistle, but only that the
word of Paul, mentioned below, was expounded at length in some work or other by Pierius. Fabricius holds the opposite opinion. — Tr.

5 See Eusebius as above, Jerome in the preface to Hosea, Photius, cod. 118, 119; Epiphaniiis, 69, 2; Lardner, part ii. book i. chap.
24; &c.


PIERIUS OF ALEXANDRIA.


157


A FRAGMENT OF A WORK OF PIERIUS ON THE FIRST EPISTLE OF
PAUL TO THE CORINTHIANS.'


Origen, Dionysius, Pierius, Eusebius of Csesa-
reia, Didymus, and Apollinaris, have interpreted
this epistle most copiously ; ^ of whom Pierius,
when he was expounding and unfolding the


' This very brief quotation is preserved in Jerome's Second Epis-
tle to Pammachius.
^ Latissime.


meaning of the aposde, and purposed to explain
the words. For I would that all men 7uere even
as I myself,^ added this remark : In saying this,
Paul, without disguise, preaches celibacy.^


■5 I Cor. vii. 7.

■* Vol. iv. p. 243, edit. Benedictin. [No doubt he does, as did his
Master, Christ, before him, and under the same lunitauons. Matt.
xix. 12. J


II. — A SECTION ON THE WRITINGS OF PIERIUS.'


DIFFERENT DISCOURSES OF THE PRESBYTER PIERIUS.

There was read a book by Pierius the pres-
byter, who, they say, endured the conflict^ for
Christ, along with his brother Isidorus. And he
is reputed to have been the teacher of the mar-
tyr Pamphilus in ecclesiastical studies, and to
have been president of the school at Alexandria.
The work contained twelve books.^ And in
style he is perspicuous and clear, with the easy
flow, as it were, of a spoken address, displaying
no signs of laboured art,'* but bearing us quietly
along, smoothly and gently, like off-hand speak-
ing. And in argument he is most fertile, if any
one is so. And he expresses his opinion on
many things outside what is now established
in the Church, perhaps in an antique manner ; s
but with respect to the Father and the Son, he
sets forth his sentiments piously, except that he
speaks of two substances and two natures ; using,
however, the terms substance and nature, as is
apparent from what follows, and from what pre-
cedes this passage, in the sense of person^ and


t From the Bibtiotheca of Photius, cod. 119, p. 300, ed. Hoeschel.

- Of martyrdom.

3 Aoyoi"?.

^ €7rtjtxeAe9 kvh^iKvvp.^vQ<;.

S [e.g., his Platonic ideas, as explained in note 3, p. 156, siipra.\

*> i;ir6<7Ta(ris. [See my remarks, vol. iv. p. v., introductory.]


not in the sense put on it by the adherents of
Arius. With respect to the Spirit, however, he
lays down his opinion in a very dangerous and
far from pious manner. For he affirms that He
is inferior to the Father and the Son in glory.^
He has a passage also in the book ^ entitled. On
the Gospel according to Luke, from which it is
possible to show that the honour or dishonour
of the image is also the honour or dishonour of
the original. And, again, he indulges in some
obscure speculations, after the manner of the non-
sense of Origen, on the subject of the " pre-ex-
istence of souls." And also in the book on the
Passover (Easter) and on Hosea, he treats both
of the cherubim made by Moses, and of the pil-
lar of Jacob, in which passages he admits the
actual construction of those things, but propounds
the foolish theory that they were given economi-
cally, and that they were in no respect like other
things which are made ; inasmuch as they bore
the likeness of no other form, but had only, as
he foolishly says, the appearance of wings.9


7 [Photius must often be received with a grain of salt ]

8 ei? Toi' Koyof. [On images, etc., Photius is no authority.]

9 The text here is evidently corrupt. It runs thus: o'tnovoixiat
he A^-ycij <xvy\o>firiQy]vai ^aTatoAo-yet aj5 ovhev r)aav a>s €7€pa Ta
yiyi-vy)ixiva, a»? ovhk tvttov aWov e(^epe M0p(i)^9, aAAa juoJ'Ot- tttc-
pvyuiv KivoKoyel (^tpeiv ai/To. 0';^)j/aa. Hoeschelius proposes <ov
oii&ii' r)(Tav, lu? erepov rjaai', tu? erepa, &c., and he rejects the <o5 in
lus oiidiv TVJTov on the authority of four codices. — Tr.


1=^8


THEONAS OF ALEXANDRIA.


THEONAS of ALEXANDRIA.


TRANSLATOR'S BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE.

[a.d. 300.] Of this Theonas we know extremely little. Eusebius ' tells us that Maximus,
who had held the episcopal office at Alexandria for eighteen years after the death of Dionysius,
was succeeded by Theonas. That bishopric, we also learn, he held for nineteen years. His date
is fixed as from about 282 to 300 a.d. The only thing of his that has come down to our time is
his letter to Lucianus, the chief chamberlain,^ and a person in high favour with the emperor.
This epistle, which is a letter of advice to that individual on the duties of his office, was first
published in the Spicilegiuin of Dacherius, and again in Gallandi's Bibliotheca. The name of the
emperor is not given, neither does the letter itself tell us who the Bishop Theonas was who wrote
it. Hence some have, without much reason, supposed another Theonas, bishop of Cyzicus, as
the author. And some, such as Cave, have thought the emperor in question was Constantius
Chlorus. But the whole circumstances suit Diocletian best.^ Some infer from the diction of the
epistle, as we have it, that it is a translation from a Greek original.


THE EPISTLE OF THEONAS, BISHOP OF ALEXANDRIA, TO LUCLANUS, THE

CHIEF CHAMBERLAIN.*


BISHOP THEONAS TO LUCIANUS, THE CHIEF
CHAMBERLAIN OF OUR MOST INVINCIBLE
EMPEROR.

L

I give thanks to Almighty God and our Lord
Jesus Christ, who has not given over the mani-
festing of His faith throughout the whole world,
as the sole specific for our salvation, 5 and the
extending of it even in the course of the perse-
cutions of despots. Yea, like gold reduced in
the furnace, it has only been made to shine
the more under the storms of persecution, and
its truth and grandeur have only become always
the more and more illustrious, so that now, peace
being granted to the churches by our gracious
prince, the works of Christians are shining even
in sight of the unbelieving, and God your Father,
who is in heaven, is glorified thereby ; ^ a thing
which, if we desire to be Christians in deed
rather than in word, we ought to seek and aspire
after as our first object on account of our salva-

' Hist, Eccl., vii. 32.

^ Pnepositiis cuhicuinrionint.

J See Neander's Church History, \o\. \. p. 197 (Bohn). [Chris-
tians began to be preferred for their probity. Diocletian's reign at
first gave the Church a long peace (see vol. iv. p. 126) of well-nigh
ten years. J

* In Dncherii Spicileginm, iii pp 297-299.

S 1)1 salutis ttostrie uniciim remeditim.

•> Matt. V. 16.


tion. For if we seek our own glory, we set our
desire upon a vam and perishing object, and one
which leads ourselves on to death. But the glory
of the Father and of the Son, who for our salva-
tion was nailed to the cross, makes us safe for
the everlasting redemption ; and that is the
greatest hope of Christians.

Wherefore, my Lucianus, I neither suppose
nor desire that you should make it a matter of
boasting, that by your means many persons be-
longing to the palace of the emperor have been
brought to the knowlege of the truth ; but rather
does it become us to give the thanks to our God
who has made thee a good instrument for a good
work, and has raised thee to great honour with
the emperor, that you might diffuse the sweet
savour of the Christian name to His own glory
and to the salvation of many. For just the more
completely tliat the emperor himself, though not
yet attached ^ to the Christian religion, has en-
trusted the care of his life and person to these
same Christians as his more faithful servants, so
much the more careful ought ye to be, and the
more diligent and watchful in seeing to his safety,
and in attending upon him, so that the name of
Christ may be greatly glorified thereby, and His


' Ascriptus.


J


THEONAS OF ALEXANDRIA.


159


faith extended daily through you who wait upon
the emperor. For in old times some former
princes thought us malevolent and filled with all
manner of crime ; but now, seeing your good
works, they should not be able to avoid glorifying
Christ Himself.'


Therefore you ought to strive to the utmost
of your power not to fall into a base or dishon-
ourable, not to say an absolutely flagitious way
of thinking, lest the name of Christ be thus
))lasphemed even by you. Be it far from you
that you should sell the privilege of access to
the emperor to any one for money, or that you
should by any means place a dishonest account
of any affair before your prince, won over either
by prayers or by bribes. Let all the lust of ava-
rice be put from you, which serves the cause of
idolatry rather than the religion of Christ.^ No
filthy lucre, no duplicity, can befit the Christian
who embraces the simple and unadorned ^ Christ.
Let no scurrilous or base talk have place among
you. Let all things be done with modesty,
courteousness, affability, and uprightness, so that
the name of our God and Lord Jesus Christ
may be glorified in all.

Discharge the official duties to which you are
severally appointed with the utmost fear of God
and affection to your prince, and perfect care-
fulness. Consider that every command of the
emperor which does not offend God has pro-
ceeded from God Himself ;•♦ and execute it in
love as well as in fear, and with all cheerfulness.
For there is nothing which so vvell refreshes a
man who is wearied out with weighty cares as
the seasonable cheerfulness and benign patience
of an intimate servant ; nor, again, on the other
hand, does anything so much annoy and vex
him as the moroseness and impatience and
grumbling of his servant. Be such things far
from you Christians, whose walk is in zeal for the
faith.5 But in order that God may be honoured ^
in yourselves, suppress ye and tread down all
your vices of mind and body. Be clothed with
patience and courtesy ; be replenished with the
virtues and the hope of Christ. Bear all things
for the sake of your Creator Himself; endure
all things ; overcome and get above all things,
that ye may win Christ the Lord. Great are
these duties, and full of painstaking. But he
that strivetli for the mastery ^ is temperate in all
things ; and they do it to obtain a corruptible
crown, but we an incorruptible.


' [A beautiful concern of our author for the honour of the Master
seems to have dictated this noble letter. Matt. v. 16. j
^ Eph. V. 4, 5.
3 Nudum.

* [See note i, p. 108, supra.^
' Qui zclofidL-i iHceditis.
' 1 Peter iv. 11.
' 1 Cor. ix. 25.


But because, as I apprehend it, ye are assigned
to different offices, and you, Lucianus, are styled
the head of them all, whom, also, by the grace
of Christ given you, you are able to direct and
dispose in their different spheres, I am certain
that it will not displease you if I also bring
before your notice, in a particular and summary
manner, some of my sentiments on the subject
of these offices. For I hear that one of you
keeps the private moneys of the emperor ; an-
other the imperial robes and ornaments ; another
the precious vessels ; another the books, who, I
understand, does not as yet belong to the believ-
ers ; and others the different parts of the house-
hold goods. And in what manner, therefore,
these charges ought, in my judgment, to be
executed, I shall indicate in a few words.

IV.

He who has charge of the private moneys of
the emperor ought to keep every thing in an exact
reckoning. He should be ready at any time to
give an accurate account of all things. He
should note down every thing in writing, if it is
at all possible, before giving money to another.
He should never trust such things to his mem-
ory, which, being drawn off day by day to other
matters, readily fails us, so that, without writing,
we sometimes honestly certify things which have
never existed ; neither should this kind of writ-
ing be of a commonplace order, but such as easily
and clearly unfolds all things, and leaves the
mind of the inquirer without any scruple or
doubt on the subject ; a thing which will easily
be effected if a distinct and separate account
is kept in writing of all receipts, and of the time
when, and the person by whom, and the place
at which they were made.^ And, in like man-
ner, all that is paid out to others, or expended
by order of the emperor, should be entered in
its own place by itself in the reckoning; and
that servant should be faithful and prudent, so
that his lord may rejoice that he has set him
over his goods,'' and may glorify Christ in him.


Nor will the diligence and care of that servant
be less who has the custody of the robes and
imperial ornaments. All these he should enter
I in a most exact catalogue, and he should keep a
■ note of what they are and of what sort, and in
what places stored, and when he received them,
and from whom, and whether they are soiled or
unsoiled. All these things he should keep in his
diligence ; he should often review again, and he

8 [A most important hint to the clergy in their accounts with the
Church.]

9 Matt. xxiv. 45, 47.


i6o


THEONAS OF ALEXANDRIA.


should often go over them that they may be the
more readily known again. All these he should
have at hand, and all in readiness ; and he
should always give the clearest information on
every matter on which it is sought, to his prince
or his superior, whenever they ask about any
thing ; and all this at the same time in such wise
that every thing may be done in humility and
cheerful patience, and that the name of Christ
may be praised even in a small matter.

VI.

In a similar manner should he conduct him-
self to whose fidelity are entrusted the vessels of
silver and gold, and crystal or murrha,' for eating
or for drinking. All these he should arrange
suitably, of them all he should keep an account, j
and with all diligence he should make an inven- {
tory of how many and which sort of precious !
stones are in them. He should examine them i
all with great prudence ; he should produce them |
in their pro])er places and on their proper occa- j
sions. And he should observe most carefully to
whom he gives them, and at what time, and from |
whom he receives them again, lest there should
occur any mistake or injurious suspicion, or per-
haps some considerable loss in things of value.

VII.

The most responsible person, however, among
you, and also the most careful, will be he who
may be entrusted by the emperor with the cus-
tody of his library. He will himself select for
this office a person of proved knowledge, a man
grave and adapted to great affairs, and ready to
reply to all applications for information, such a
one as Philadelphus chose for this charge, and
appointed to the superintendence of his most
noble library — I mean Aristeus, his confidential
chamberlain, whom he sent also as his legate to
Eleazar, with most magnificent gifts, in recogni-
tion of the translation of the Sacred Scriptures ;
and this person also wrote the full history of the
Seventy Interpreters. If, therefore, it should
happen that a believer in Christ is called to this
same office, he should not despise that secular lit-
erature and those Gentile intellects which please
the emperor.2 To be praised are the poets for
the greatness of their genius, the acuteness of
their inventions, the aptness and lofty eloquence
of their style. To be praised are the orators ;
to be praised also are the philosophers in their
own class. To be praised, too, are the historians,
who unfold to us the order of exploits, and the


' Murrhine vessels were first introduced into Rome by Pompey.
They were valued chiefly for their variegated colours, and were ex-
tremely cosily Some think they were made of onyx stone, others ol
variegated glass: but most modern writers suppose that what is meant
was some sort of porcelain.

' (A lofty spirit of liberal love for literature is here exemplified. J


manners and institutions of our ancestors, and
show us the rule of life from the proceedings of
the ancients. On occasion also he will endeav-
our to laud the divine Scriptures, which, with
marvellous care and most liberal expenditure,
Ptolemy Philadelphus caused to be translated
into our language ; ^ and sometimes, too, the
Gospel and the Apostle will be lauded for their
divine oracles ; and there will be an opportunity
for introducing the mention of Christ ; and, lit-
tle by little, His exclusive divinity will be ex-
plained ; and all these things may happily come
to pass by the help of Christ.

He ought, therefore, to know all the books
which the emperor possesses ; he should often
turn them over, and arrange them neatly in their
proper order by catalogue ; if, however, he shall
have to get new books, or old ones transcribed,
he should be careful to obtain the most accurate
copyists ; and if that cannot be done, he should
appoint learned men to the work of correction,
and recompense them justly for their labours.
He should also cause all manuscripts to be
restored according to their need, and should
embellish them, not so much with mere super-
stitious extravagance, as with useful adornment ;
and therefore he should not aim at having the
whole manuscripts written on purple skins and
in letters of gold, unless the emperor has spe-
cially required that. With the utmost submis-
sion, however, he should do every thing that is
agreeable to Ceesar. As he is able, he should,
with all modesty, suggest to the emperor that he
should read, or hear read, those books which suit
his rank and honour, and minister to good use
rather than to mere pleasure. He should him-
self first be thoroughly familiar with those books,
and he should often commend them in presence
of the emperor, and set forth, in an appropriate
fashion, the testimony and the weight of those
who a]Dprove them, that he may not seem to lean
to his own understanding only.


Those, moreover, who have the care of the
emperor's person should be in all things as
prompt as possible ; always, as we have said,
cheerful in countenance, sometimes merry, but
ever with such perfect modesty as that he may
commend it above all else in you all, and per-
ceive that it is the true product of the religion
of Christ. You should also all be elegant and
tidy in person and attire, yet, at the same time,
not in such wise as to attract notice by extrava-
gance or affectation, lest Christian modesty be
scandalised.-* Let every thing be ready at its


3 It is from these words that the inference is drawn that this epis-
tle was written by a Greek.

* (The teachings of Clement had formed the minor morals of
Christians. See vol. ii. book ii. pp. 237, 284.]


PHILEAS.


i6i


proper time, and disposed as well as possible
in its own order. There should also be due
arrangement among you, and carefulness that
no confusion appear in your work, nor any loss
of property in any way ; and appropriate places
should be settled and suitably prepared, in ac-
cordance with the capacity {captu) and impor-
tance of the places.

Besides this, your ser\'ants should be the most
thoroughly honest, and circumspect, and modest,
and as serviceable to you as possible. And see
that you instruct and teach them in true doctrine
with all the patience and charity of Christ ; but
if they despise and lightly esteem your instruc-
tions, then dismiss them, lest their wickedness
by any hap recoil upon yourselves. For some-
times we have seen, and often we have heard,
how masters have been held in ill-repute in con-
sequence of the wickedness of their servants.

If the emperor visits her imperial majesty, or
she him, then should ye also be most circumspect
in eye and demeanour, and in all your words.
Let her mark your mastery of yourselves and
your modesty ; ' and let her followers and 2iX.-
tendants mark ycur demeanour; let them mark
it and admire it, and by reason thereof praise
Jesus Christ our Lord in you. Let your conver-
sation always be temperate and modest, and sea-
soned with religion as with salt.^' And, further,
let there be no jealousy among you or conten-
tiousness, which might bring you into all manner
of confusion and division, and thus also make
you objects of aversion to Christ and to the
emperor, and lead you into the deepest abomina-


' [Thus is reflected the teaching of St. Paul, i Tim. v. 2. All
women to be honoured, and " all purity " to characterize society with
them. I

2 Col. iv. 6.


tion, so that not one stone of your building could
stand upon another.

IX.

And do thou, my dearest Lucianus, since thou
art wise, bear with good-will the unwise ; ^ and
they too may perchance become wise. Do no
one an injury at any time, and provoke no one
to anger. If an injury is done to you, look to
Jesus Christ ; and even as'ye desire that He may
remit your transgressions, do ye also forgive them
theirs ; ^ and then also shall ye do away with all
ill-will, and bruise the head of that ancient ser-
pent,? who is ever on the watch with all subtlety
to undo your good works and your prosperous
attainments. Let no day pass by without read-
ing some portion of the Sacred Scriptures, at
such convenient hour as offers, and giving some
space to meditation.'^ And never cast off the
habit of reading in the Holy Scriptures; for
nothing feeds the soul and enriches the mind so
well as those sacred studies do. But look to this
as the chief gain you are to make by them, that,
in all due patience, ye may discharge the duties
of your office religiously and piously — that is,
in the love of Christ — and despise all transitory
objects for the sake of His eternal promises,
which in truth surpass all human comprehension
and understanding,^ and shall conduct you into
everlasting felicity.

A happy adieu to you in Christ, my Lord
Lucianus.


•5 2 Cor. xi. 19.

■♦ Mark xi. 25.

5 Rom. XVI. 20.

<> [Blessed spint of primitive piety! Is not this rule too much
relaxed m oar own Laodicean age?J

^ Phil. IV. 7. [How much there is in this letter which ought to
prick the consciences of wealthy and " fashionable " Christians of our
dayij


PHILEAS.


TRANSLATOR'S BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE.

[a.d. 30 7. J From Jerome ■ we learn that this Phileas belonged to Thmuis, a town of Lower
Egypt, the modern Tmai, which was situated between the Tanite and Mendesian branches of the
Nile, an episcopal seat, and in the time of Valentinian and Theodosius the Great a place of con-
siderable consequence, enjoying a separate government of its own. Eusebius^ speaks of him as
a man not less distinguished for his services to his country than for his eminence in philosophical
studies and his proficiency in foreign literature and science. He tells us further, that, along with
another person of considerable importance, by name Philoromus, being brought to trial for his


' De vir. illustr., chap 78.


Hist. EccUs., viii. 9 and 10.


l62


PHILEAS.


faith, he withstood the threats and insults of the judge, and all the entreaties of relatives and
friends, to compromise his Christian belief, and was condemned to lose his head. Jerome also,
in the passage already referred to, names him a true philosopher, and, at the satne time, a godly
martyr ; and states, that on assuming the bishopric of his native district, he wrote a very elegant
book in praise of the martyrs. Of this book certain fragments are preserved for us in Eusebius.
In addition to these we have also an epistle which the same Phileas seems to have written in the
name of three other bishops, as well as himself, to Meletius, the bishop of Lycopolis, and founder
of the Meletian schism. This epistle appears to have been written in Greek ; but we possess only
a Latin version, which, however, from its abrupt style, is believed to be very ancient. The four
bishops whose names stand at the head of the Epistle — viz., Hesychius, Pachomius, Theodorus,
and Phileas, are also mentioned by Eusebius {Hist. EccL, viii. 13) as distinguished martyrs. This
epistle was written evidently when those bishops were in prison, and its date is determined by the
mention of Peter as the then bishop of Alexandria. The martyrdom of Phileas is fixed with much
probability as happening at Alexandria, under Maximus, about the year 307 a.d.' [But see Neale,
Patriarchate of Alex., i. pp. 97-101, for his view of two bearing this name.]


FRAGMENTS OF THE EPISTLE OF PHILEAS TO THE PEOPLE OF THMUIS.^


Having before them all these examples and
signs and illustrious tokens which are given us
in the divine and holy Scriptures, the blessed
martyrs who lived with us did not hesitate, but,
directing the eye of their soul in sincerity to that
God who is over all, and embracing with willing
mind the death which their piety cost them, they
adhered steadfastly to their vocation. For they
learned that our Lord Jesus Christ endured man's
estate on our behalf, that He might destroy all
sin, and furnish us with the provision needful for
our entrance mto eternal life. " For He thought
it not robbery to be ecjual with God : but made
Himself of no reputation, taking upon Him the
form of a servant : and being found in fashion
as a man, He humbled Himself unto death, even
the death of the cross." ^ For which reason also
these Christ-bearing'* martyrs sought zealously
the greater gifts, and endured, some of them,
every kind of pain and all the varied contrivances
of torture not merely once, but once and again ;
and though the guards showed their fury against
them not only by threatenings in word, but also
by deeds of violence, they did not swerve from
their resolution, because perfect love casteth out
fear.^

II.

And to narrate their virtue and their manly
endurance under every torment, what language

' [His diocese belonged to the region over which Alexandria had
the primacy by the " ancient usages."]

' In Eusebius, Hist. EccUs., viii lo.

3 Phil, iu 6-8.

* \pio-Tor66pot. So Ignatius of .^ntioch was called 5eo06pos, God-
bearer. [Vol. i. pp. 45, 49, this series.]

S I John iv. 18.


would suffice ? For as every one who chose was
at liberty to abuse them, some beat them with
wooden clubs,^ and others with rods, and others
with scourges, and others again with thongs,
and others with ropes. And the spectacle of
these modes of torture had great variety in it,
and exhibited vast malignity. For some had their
hands bound behind them, and were suspended
on the rack and had every limb in their body
stretched with a certain kind of pulleys.^ Then
after all this the torturers, according to their
orders, lacerated with the sharp iron claws ^ the
whole body, not merely, as in the case of mur-
derers, the sides only, but also the stomach and
the knees and the cheeks. And others were
hung up in mid-air, suspended by one hand
from the portico, and their sufl'erings were fiercer
than any other kind of agony by reason of the
distention of their joints and limbs. And others
were bound to pillars, face to face, not touching
the ground with their feet, but hanging with all
the weight of the body, so that their chains were
drawn all the more tightly by reason of the ten-
sion. And this they endured not simply as long
as the governor 9 spoke with them, or had leisure
to hear them, but well-nigh through the whole
day. For when he passed on to others he left
some of those under his authority to keep watch
over these former, and to observe whether any
of them, being overcome by the torture, seemed

<> f uAoi5. What is meant, however, may be the instrument called
by the Romans equulens, a kind of rack in the shape of a horse,
commonly used in taking the evidence of slaves.

^ The text gives i/xvcTrjpiois eKoAa^oc, for which Nicephorus
reads a/uivvTT)pioi? Ta5 icoAacrei?. The a.it.vvTr\pio. were probably the
Latin 7ii!gii!ii', an instrument of torture like claws. So Rufinus un-
derstands the phrase.

9 r^yiixiuv. That is probably the Roman Praefectus Augustalis.


PHILEAS.


163


likely to yield. But he gave them orders at the
same time to cast them into chains without spar-
ing, and thereafter, when they were expiring, to
throw them on the ground and drag them along.
For they said that they would not give them-
selves the slightest concern about us, but would
look upon us and deal with us as if we were
nothing at all. This second mode of torture
our enemies devised then over and above the


scourgmg.


III.


And there were also some who, after the tor-
tures, were placed upon the stocks and had both
their feet stretched through all the four holes, so
that they were compelled to lie on their back on
the stocks, as they were unable (to stand) in
consequence of the fresh wounds they had over
the whole body from the scourging. And others
being thrown upon the ground lay prostrated
there by the excessively frequent application of
the tortures ; in which condition they exhibited
to the onlookers a still more dreadful spectacle
than they did when actually undergoing their
torments, bearing, as they did, on their bodies
the varied and manifold tokens of the cruel in-
genuity of their tortures. While this state of
matters went on, some died under their tortures,
putting the adversary to shame by their con-
stancy. And others were thrust half-dead into


the prison, where in a few days, worn out with
their agonies, they met their end. But the rest,
getting sure recovery under the application of
remedies, through time and their lengthened
detention in prison, became more confident.
And thus then, when they were commanded to
make their choice between these alternatives,
namely, either to put their hand to the unholy
sacrifice and thus secure exemption from further
trouble, and obtain from them their abominable
sentence of absolution and liberation,' or else to
refuse to sacrifice, and thus expect the judgment
of death to be executed on them, they never
hesitated, but went cheerfully to death.^ For
they knew the sentence declared for us of old
by the Holy Scriptures : "He that sacrificeth to
other gods," it is said, " shall be utterly de-
stroyed." ^ And again,4 "Thou shalt have no
other gods before Me." 5


' Tr)9 fTrapOLTOV eXev8epia(;.

2 [It is impossible to accept modern theories of the z'nconsidera-
hle number of the primitive martyrs, in view of the abounding evi-
dences of a chronic and continuous persecution always evidenced by
even these fragments of authentic history. See vol. iv. p. 125.]

3 Exod. xxii. 20.
^ Exod. XX. 3.

5 Eusebius, after quoting these passages, adds: — " These are the
words of a true philosopher, and one who was no less a lover of God
than of wisdom, which, before the final sentence of his judge, and
while he lay yet in prison, he addressed to the brethren in his church,
at once to represent to them in what condition he was himself, and to
exhort them to maintain steadfastly, even after his speedy death, their
piety towards Christ." — Tr.


THE EPISTLE OF THE SAME PHILEAS OF THMUIS TO MELETIUS, BISHOP

OF LYCOPOLIS.


THE BEGINNING OF THE EPISTLE OF THE BISHOPS.'

Hesychius, Pachomius, Theodorus, and Phil-
eas, to Meletius, our friend and fellow-minister
in the Lord, greeting. Some reports having
reached us concerning thee, which, on the tes-
timony of certain individuals who came to us,
spake of certain things foreign to divine order
and ecclesiastical rule which are being attempted,
yea, rather which are being done by thee, we, in
an ingenuous manner held them to be untrust-
worthy, regarding them to be such as we would
not willingly credit, when we thought of the auda-
city implied in their magnitude and their uncer-
tain attempts. But since many who are visiting
us at the present time have lent some credibility
to these reports, and have not hesitated to attest
them as facts, we, to our exceeding surprise,
have been compelled to indite this letter to
thee. And what agitation and sadness have
been caused to us all in common and to each of
us individually by (the report of) the ordination


' This epistle was first edited by Scipio Maffeius from an ancient
Verona manuscript in the Osscrv. Letter, vol. iii. pp. 11-17, where
^ given the Fragment of a History of the Meletian Sc/ii
See Neander's important remarks on this whole document, Chu
History, iii. p. 310 (Bohn). — Tr.


isru.
rch


carried through by thee in parishes having no
manner of connection with thee, we are unable
sufficiently to express. We have not delayed,
however, by a short statement to prove your
practice wrong. There is the law of our fathers
and forefathers, of which neither art thou thy-
self ignorant, established according to divine
and ecclesiastical order ; for it is all for the
good pleasure of God and the zealous regard
of better things.^ By them it has been estab-
lished and settled that it is not lawful for any
bishop to celebrate ordinations in other parishes ^
than his own ; a law which is exceedingly im-
portant * and wisely devised. For, in the first
place, it is but right that the conversation and
life of those who are ordained should be exam-
ined with great care ; and in the second place,
that all confusion and turbulence should be
done away with. For every one shall have
enough to do in managing his own parish, and
in finding with great care and many anxieties


^ Zclo tnelioruni.

3 \ Parishes = dioceses (so called now) ; but they were very small
territorially, and every city had its " bishop." See Bingham, book ix.
cap. 2, and Euseb., book v, cap. 23. Comp. note i, p. 106, su/ra.\

* Bene nimis inagjia.


1 64


PHILEAS.


suitable subordinates ajnong these with whom he
has passed his whole life, and who have been
trained under his hands. But thou, neither
making any account of these things, nor regard-
ing the future, nor considering the law of our
sainted fathers and those who have been taken
to Christ time after time, nor the honour of our
great bishop and father," Peter,^ on whom we all
depend in the hope which we have in the Lord
Jesus Christ, nor softened by our imprisonments
and trials, and daily and multiplied reproach,
hast ventured on subverting all things at once.
And what means will be left thee for justifying
thyself with respect to these things? But per-
haps thou wilt say : I did this to prevent many
beuig drawn away with the unbelief of many,
because the flocks were in need and forsaken,
there being no pastor with them. Well, but it
is most certain that they are not in such destitu-
tion : in the first place, because there are many
going about them and in a position to act as
visitors ; and in the second place, even if there
was some measure of neglect on their side, then
the proper way would have been for the repre-
sentation to be made prompdy by the people,
and for us to take account of them according to
their desert.^ But they knew that they were in
no want of ministers, and therefore they did not
come to seek them. They knew that we were
wont to discharge them with an admonition from
such inquisition for matter of complaint, or that
everything was done with all carefulness which
seemed to be for their profit ; for all was done
under correction,-* and all was considered with
well-approved honesty. Thou, however, giving
such strenuous attention to the deceits of certain
parties and their vain words, hast made a stealthy
leap to the celebrating of ordinations. For if,
indeed, those with thee were constraining thee
to this, and in their ignorance were doing vio-
lence to ecclesiastical order, thou oughtest to
have followed the common rule and have in-
formed us by letter ; and in that way what
seemed expedient would have been done. And
if perchance some persuaded you to credit their
story that it was all over with us, — a thing of
which thou couldest not have been ignorant,
because there were many passing and repassing
by us who might visit you, — even although, I
say, this had been the case, yet thou oughtest to
have waited for the judgment of the superior
father and for his allowance of this practice.
But without giving any heed to these matters,
but indulging a different expectation, yea rather,
indeed, denying all respect to us, thou hast pro-


' [The bishops of Alexandria are called popes to this day, and
were so from the beginning. See vol. v. p 154.]

^ [ Peter succeeded Theonas as sixteenth bishop and primate of
Alexandria. See vol. iv. p 384; also Neale, Pat of Alex., \. p. 90.]

3 Oportiierat ex populo properare ac nos exigere pro mcrito.

* Sub arguente.


vided certain rulers for the people. For now we
have learned, too, that there were also divisions, s
because thy unwarrantable exercise of the right
of ordination displeased many. And thou wert
not persuaded to delay such procedure or re-
strain thy purpose readily even by the word of
the Apostle Paul, the most blessed seer,"^ and the
man who put on Christ, who is the Christ of all
of us no less ; for he, in writing to his dearly-
beloved son Timothy, says : " Lay hands sud-
denly on no man, neither be partaker of other
men's sins." 7 And thus he at once shows his
own anxious consideration for him,'* and gives
him his example and exhibits the law according
to which, with all carefulness and caution, par-
ties are to be chosen for the honour of ordina-
tion.9 We make this declaration to thee, that in
future thou mayest study '° to keep within the
safe and salutary limits of the law.

THE CONCLUSION OF THE EPISTLE OF THE BISHOPS.

After receiving and perusing this epistle, he
neither wrote any reply nor repaired to them in
the prison, nor went to the blessed Peter. But
when all these bishops and presbyters and dea-
cons had suffered martyrdom in the prison at
Alexandria, he at once entered Alexandria. Now
in that city there was a certain person, by name
Isidorus, turbulent in character, and possessed
with the ambition of being a teacher. And
there was also a certain Arius, who wore the
habit of piety, and was in like manner possessed
with the ambition to be a teacher. And when
they discovered the object of Meletius's passion "
and what it was that he sought, hastening to him,
and looking with an evil eye on the episcopal
authority of the blessed Peter, that the aim and
desire of Meletius might be made patent,'^ they
discovered to Meletius certain presbyters, then
in hiding, to whom the blessed Peter had given
power to act as parish-visitors. And Meletius
recommending them to improve the opportunity
given them for rectifying their error, suspended
them for the time, and by his own authority or-
dained two persons in their place, '^ namely, one
in prison and another in the mines. On learn-
ing these things the blessed Peter, with much
endurance, wrote to the people of Alexandria an
epistle in the following terms."*


s The manuscript reads chrismata, for which sckistnala is pro-
posed.

•> Provisoris — perhaps rather, the provider — //?^ saint mho
ivith careful forethought has mapped out our proper course in
such matters,

7 I Tim. V. 22.

8 Erga ilium providentiam.

9 The manuscript gives ordinando adnuntias, for which is pro-
posed ordinandi. Adnnntiamus.

^° Reading stiideas for studetur.

" Cupiditatem,

*- Ut cogniscatur concupiscentia Mcletii.
j '3 The text is — Commendayis ei occnsionem Meletius, scpara-

vii eos, &c. : on which see especially Neander, iii. p. 311 (Hohil).
I '■• This epistle is given elsewhere. [This volume, infra.]


PAMPHILUS. 165


PAMPHILUS.


TRANSLATOR'S BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE.

[a.d. 309.] According to the common account Pamphilus was a native of Berytus, the
modern Beirut, and a member of a distinguished Phoenician family. Leaving Berytus, however,
at an early period, he repaired to Alexandria and studied under Pierius, the well-known head of
the Catechetical school there. At a subsequent period he went to the Palestinian Caesareia, and
was made a presbyter of the Church there under Bishop Agapius. In course of the persecutions
of Diocletian he was thrown into prison by Urbanus, the governor of Palestine. This took place
towards the end of the year 307 a.d., and his confinement lasted till the beginning of the year
309, when he suffered martyrdom by order of Firmilianus, who had succeeded Urbanus in the
governorship of the country. During his imprisonment he enjoyed the affectionate attendance
of Eusebius, the Church historian, and the tender friendship which subsisted long between the
two is well known. It was as a memorial of that intimacy that Eusebius took the surname of
Pamphili. Pamphilus appears to have given himself up with great enthusiasm to the promotion
of Biblical studies, and is spoken of as the founder of a theological school in which special
importance was attached to exposition. He busied himself also with the transcription and dis-
semination of the Scriptures and other writings, such as those of Origen, of whom he was a
devoted follower. At Csesareia he established a great public library,' consisting mainly of eccle-
siastical writers ; and among the treasures of that library are mentioned the Tetrapla and Hexapla
of Origen, from which, with the help of Eusebius, he produced a new and revised edition of the
Septuagint. There is a statement in Jerome ^ to the effect that, though he was so great a student
of the writings of others, Pamphilus, through an excess of modesty, wrote no work of his own,
with exception of some letters to his friends.^ But there is a work bearing the title oi An Exposi-
tion 0/ the Chapters of the Acts of the Apostles, which is attributed by. many to him, although
others ascribe it to Euthalius, bishop of Sulce. And besides this there is also the Apology for
Origen, of which, according to the statement of Photius,"* the first five books were compiled by
Pamphilus, in conjunction with Eusebius, during the period of his imprisonment, the sixth book
being added by Eusebius after his friend's martyrdom. Of this Apology we possess now only the
first book, and that, too, only in the faulty Latin version of Rufinus. There are repeated and
warmly eulogistic references to Pamphilus in the Ecclesiastical History of Eusebius. Thus he
speaks of hini as that holy martyr of our day ; 5 and as that most eloquent man, and that philoso-
pher truly such in his life ;^ and again, as that most admirable fuan of our times, that glory of
the church of CcesareiaJ He devotes the eleventh chapter of the eighth book also to a notice
of Pamphilus and other martyrs. And besides all this he wrote a separate life of his friend, in
three books, of which, however, all has perished, with exception of a few disputed fragments.*

* [Another glorious product of the school of Alexandria.]

2 Apol. contr. Ruf., book i. num. g. Works, ii. p. 465.

3 Proprii operis nihil omnino scripsit, cxceptis cpistolis quas ad ainicos forte miUebat ; in tantum se hrunilitate dejecerat.

* Bibl. Cod., cxviii. p. 295.
S Ibid., vi. 32.

* Ibid., vii. 32.
" Ibid., viii. 13.

* [Evidently he impressed Eusebius as an extraordinary man in an age of colossal minds, and we must lament the loss of his writings.]


i66


PAMPHILUS.


AN EXPOSITION OF THE CHAPTERS OF THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES.'


Having had ourselves the advantage of the
method and model received from our fathers
and teachers, we attempt, in a modest way, to
give these in this exposition of the chapters,
entreating your forgiveness for the rashness of
such an endeavour in us who are young in point
both of years and of study,^ and looking to have
the indulgence 3 of every one who reads this
writing in prayer on our behalf. We make this
exposition, therefore, after the history of Luke,
the evangelist and historian. And, accordingly,
we have indicated whole chapters by the letters
of the alphabet,'* and their subdivisions into parts
we have noted by means of the asterisk. 5

A. Of Christ's teaching after His resurrection,

and of His appearing to the disciples,
and of the promise of the gift of the
Holy Ghost, and of the spectacle and
manner of Christ's assumption.^

B. Peter's discourse to those who were made

disciples, on the subject of the death and
reprobation ^ of Judas ; ^ * in this chapter
we have also the section on the substitu-
tion of Matthias, who was elected by lot
through the grace of God with prayer.

C. Of the divine descent ^ of the Holy Ghost

on the day of Pentecost which lighted
on them who believed. In this we have
also * the instruction delivered by Peter,
and * passages from the prophets on the
subject, and * on the passion and res-
urrection and assumption of Christ, and
the gift of the Holy Ghost ; also * of the
faith of those present, and their salva-
tion by baptism ; and, further,* of the
unity of spirit pervading the believers
and promoting the common good, and of
the addition made to their number.

D. Of the healing in (the name of) Christ of

the man lame from his birth ; and of the
discourse '° of Peter, in which he reasons


* This eK^eo-i? was edited, under the name of EiUhalius, Bishop
of Sulce, towards the end of the preceding century, by Laurentiiis
Zacagnius, in the collection oi Monuiiienta Vetera, p. 428, published
at Rome. Fabricius also compared the edition of Montfaucon with
the Roman. This collation is added here. — Migne.

2 The text is veot xP°^V '^^ ""^^ fj-OiOTiixdruiv , iKatxTov, &c.; for
which Euthal., ^poruiv re Kal fiaBTjixdruiv Trap' vij.iiv inddTov,

3 (TViJ.nepLffyopdi' Kop-i^ofxcvoi,

* But Euthal., iio ii.iv toO ixiXavov , . . 6ta he TOi" icivi'aPapeu)?,
i.e., by the different colours of black and vermilion.

5 These marks are wholly wanting in the Coislin Codex, from
which Montfaucon edited the piece. But they are found in the Vati-
can Codex. — Tr.

^ Euthal. adds, Kal Tttpi rjj? iv&o^ov Ka'i Sevrepa^ ainov irapov-
(ria?, i.e, and of His glorious and second coming.

* But Euthal. cLTToaTokri^ , apostleship.
9 €7rt<|)otTrjo-eaj9,

^o KaTtjxijo'etos.


and sympathizes and counsels with re-
spect to his" salvation. And here we
have * the interposition '^ of the chief
priests through jealousy of what had taken
place, and their judgment on the miracle,
and Peter's confession '3 of the power and
grace of Christ. Also the section on *
the unbelieving chief priests, command-
ing that they should not speak boldly in
the name of Christ,"' and of the dismissal '5
of the apostles. Then * the thanksgiv-
ings offered up by the Church for the
faithful constancy of the apostles.

E. Of the harmonious and universal fellowship

of the believers ; and also * of Ananias
and Sapphira and their miserable end.

F. Of the apostles being cast into prison, and

led out of it by night by the angel of the
Lord, who enjoined them to preach Jesus
without restraint ; and * of the fact that,
on the following day, the chief priests ap-
prehended them again, and, after scour-
ging them, sent them away with the charge
not to teach any longer. Then * the
trusty opinion of Gamaliel touching the
apostles, together with certain examples
and proofs.

G. Of the election of the seven deacons.

H. The rising and slanderous information of the
Jews against Stephen, and his address
concerning the covenant of God with
Abraham, and concerning the twelve pa-
triarchs. Also the account of the famine
and the buying of corn, and the mutual
recognition of the sons of Jacob, and of
the birth of Moses and the appearance
of God '*" to Moses, which took place at
Mount Sinai. * Also of the exodus and
and calf-making of Israel (and other mat-
ters), up to the times of Solpmon and the
building of the temple. * T hen the ac-
knowledgment of the supercelestial glory
of Jesus Christ which was revealed to
Stephen himself, on account of which
Stephen was himself stoned, and fell
asleep piously.

I. Of the persecution of the Church and the
burial of Stephen ; also * of the healing
of many in Samaria by Philip the apostle.


" But Euthal., avrCiv, their.
'2 c7n<rTa<na.

'3 Euthal. inserts wepl dn-ecA^;, and of the threatening of the
chief priests.

'4 fTTi Tco ofdnan; but Euthal., erri to hvo\i.a..

'5 Reading avecreu)! with Euthal., instead of di'aj'cuia'eajs.

16 6ioi^a.vii.a.,


PAMPHILUS.


167


J. Of Simon Magus, who believed and was bap-
tized with many others ; also * of the
sending of Peter and John to them, and
their praying for the descent of the Holy
Ghost upon the baptized.

K. That the participation of the Holy Ghost was
not given ' for money,^ nor to hypocrites,
but to saints by faith ; also * of the hypoc-
risy and the reproof of Simon.

L. That the Lord helps the good and the believ-
ing on the way to salvation, as is shown
from the instance of the eunuch.

M. Of the divine call that came from heaven for
Paul to the apostleship of Christ ; also *
of the healing and the baptism of Paul
by the hand of Ananias, in accordance
with the revelation from God, and of his
boldness of speech and his association
with the apostles by the instrumentality
of Barnabas.3

N. Of the paralytic ^neas who was cured by
Peter at Lydda. Also * the account of
Tabitha, the friend of widows, whom Peter
raised from the dead by means of prayer
in Joppa.

O. Of Cornelius, and what the angel said to him.
Also what was spoken'* to Peter from
heaven with respect to the calling of the
Gentiles. Then * that Peter, on being
summoned, came to Cornelius. * The
repetition by Cornelius of the things
which the angel said s to Cornelius him-
self.* Peter's instruction of them in
Christ, and the gift of the Holy Ghost
upon those who heard him, and how
those who believed from among the Gen-
tiles were baptized there.

P. That Peter recounts to the apostles who con-
tended with him^ all the things that
had happened in order and separately.
* Then the sending of Barnabas to the
brethren in Antioch.

Q. The prophecy of Agabus respecting the fam-
ine in the world,^ and the liberal relief
sent to the brethren in Jerusalem,

R. The slaying of the Apostle James. * Also
the apprehension of Peter by Herod, and
the account of the manner in which the
angel by divine command delivered him
from his bonds, and how Peter, after show-
ing himself to the disciples by night,
quietly withdrew. Also of the punish-
ment of the keepers, and then of the


' e&iBoTo; Euthal., Siiorai is given.

2 OTC oiiic apyvpLov; Euthal., oii Si apyvplov,

3 Euthal., 6ia Bapvd^av, on Barnabas s account.
* Euthal. inserts TroiAti' again.

5 The text is <x>v tl-niv o ayy^^o^i &c. But Euthal., u>v o ayyeXo?
eirenapTupTjo-eKal v(j)TqyricraTo, which the angel testified and showed.
° 6ta»cptdeL(rt Trpb? tx-VTov.
' The text gives oiKou^6»'Kc^5; Euthal., o'ikov \i.ivi\<:.


miserable and fatal overthrow^ of the
impious Herod.

S. The sending of Barnabas and Paul by the
Holy Ghost to Cyprus. * The things
which he did ^ there in the name of
Christ on Elymas the sorcerer.

T. Paul's admirable '° exposition of the truth con-
cerning Christ, both from the law and
from the prophets in their order, both
historical and evangelical ; * his use both
of the confuting and the argumentative
mode of discourse on the subject of the
transference of the word of preaching to
the Gentiles, and of their persecution and
their arrival at Iconium.

U. How, when they had preached Christ in
Iconium, and many had believed, the
apostles were persecuted.

V. Of the man lame from his birth in Lystra
who was healed by the apostles ; on ac-
count of which they were taken by the
people of the place for gods who had
appeared on earth. After that, however,
Paul is stoned there by the neighbouring
people.

W. That according to the decree and judgment
of the apostles, the Gentiles who believe
ought not to be circumcised. Here, also,
is the epistle of the apostles themselves
to those from among the Gentiles, on
the subject of the things from which they
should keep themselves." * The dissen-
sion of Paul with Barnabas on account
of Mark.

X. Of the teaching of Timothy, and of the com-
ing of Paul into Macedonia according
to revelation. * Of the faith and salva-
tion of a certain woman Lydia, and * of
the cure of the damsel having a spirit of
divination, on account of which the mas-
ters of the damsel cast Paul into prison ;
and * of the earthquake and miracle which
happened there ; and how the jailer be-
lieved and was baptized forthwith that
same night with all his house." * That
the apostles on being besought went out
from the prison.

Y. Of the tumult that arose in Thessalonica on
account of their preaching, and of the
flight of Paul to Berea, and thence to
Athens.

Z. Of the inscription on the altar at Athens, and
of the philosophic preaching and piety
of Paul.


8 The text gives KaTa(7<|>oy^s; Euthal., KaTo.<npo^r\%.

9 Euthal., eipyacraKTO, they did.

" Reading <i>v\aKTeoiv with Euthal., instead of <l>v\a.K€oiv.
'^ The text gives Trai/tuTto?; Euthal., TraftcrTio?. Montfaucon
reads rravoiKi.


i68


MALCHION.


AA. Of Aquila and Priscilla, and the unbelief
of the Corinthians, and of the good-will
of God towards them according to fore-
knowledge revealed to Paul. Also * of
Priscus/ the chief ruler of the synagogue,
who believed with certain others and was
baptized. And * that a tumult being
stirred up in Corinth, Paul departed ; and
coming to Ephesus, and having dis-
coursed there, he left it. * And con-
cerning Apollos, an eloquent man and a
believer.

BB. Of baptism and the gift of the Holy Ghost
conferred by means of the prayer of
Paul on those who believed in Ephesus,
and of the healing of the people. * Of
the sons of Sceva, and as to its not being
meet to approach ^ those who have be-
come unbelieving and unworthy of the
faith ; and of the confession of those who
believed ; * and of the tumult that was
stirred up in Ephesus by Demetrius, the
silversmith, against the apostles.

CC. Of the circuit of Paul, in which also we
have the account of the death of Euty-
chus and his restoration by prayer in
Troas ; also Paul's own pastoral exhorta-
tions 3 to the presbyters at Ephesus ; also
Paul's voyage from Ephesus to Caesareia
in Palestine.

DD. The prophecy of Agabus as to what should
befall Paul in Jerusalem.

EE. The address of James to Paul touching
the matter that he should not offer to
keep the Hebrews back from the prac-
tice of circumcision.

FF. Of the tumult that was excited against Paul
in Jerusalem, and how the chief-cap-
tain rescues him from the mob. * Also
Paul's speech ■♦ concerning himself and his


' But Euthal., Kpicrirou, Crispus.

2 TTpoo'xwpeti'; Euthal., t-j/^cipeii'.

3 Euthal., jrapaiVto'is ■noi.\i.a.vT\.K-i), pastoral exhortation.

* (CaTOO-TOO'tS.


vocation to be an apostle ; * and of what
Ananias said to Paul in Damascus, and
of the vision and the voice of God that
befell him once in the temple. * And
that when Paul was about to be beaten
for these words, on declaring that he was
a Roman, he was let go.

GG. What Paul endured, and what he said, and
what he did exactly 5 when he came down
into the council.

HH. Of the ambush planned by the Jews against
Paul, and its discovery to Lysias ; * and
that Paul was sent to C?esareia to the
governor with soldiers and with a letter.

n. Of the accusation laid by TertuUus in Paul's
case, and of his defence of himself be-
fore the governor.

JJ. Of the removal of Felix and the arrival of
Festus as his successor, and of Paul's
pleading before them,** and his dismissal.

KK. The coming of Agrippa and Bernice, and
their inquiry into the case of Paul.?
* Paul's defence of himself before Agrippa
and Bernice, respecting his nurture in the
law, and his vocation to the Gospel. That
Paul does no wrong to the Jews, Agrippa
said to Festus.

LL. Paul's voyage to Rome, abounding in very
many and very great perils. * Paul's ex-
hortation to those with him as to his
hope of deliverance. The shipwreck of
Paul, and how they effected their safety
on the island of Melita, and w'hat mar-
vellous things he did on it.

MM. How Paul reached Rome from Melita.

NN. Of Paul's discourse with the Jews in Rome.

There are in all forty chapters ; and the sec-
tions following these, and marked with the aster-
isk,** are forty-eight.


5 evflujSoAo)?, perhaps here, as Montfaucon makes it, sagaciously.

6 Euthal., en-' avTov, before him.

7 Euthal., Kara Yia.v\ov, against Paul.

8 Euthal., 6ia (cifi'tt/Sapews, witli the vermilion.


MALCHION.


TRANSLATOR'S BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE.

[a.d. 2 70.] Eusebius ' speaks of Malchion as a man accomplished in other branches of learn-
ing 2 and well-versed in Greek letters in particular, and as holding the presidency of the Sophists'
school at Antioch. Jerome ^ says that he taught rhetoric most successfully in the same city.


* Hist. Eccl., vii. 29.


2 dvijp Ta TC oAAa Adyiot.


3 De ziris illustr., ch. 71.


MALCHION.


169


Nor was it only that he excelled in secular erudition ; but for the earnest sincerity of his Christian
faith he obtained the dignity of presbyter in the church of that place, as Eusebius also tells us.
He took part in the Synod of Antioch, which Eusebius calls the final council, and which Gallandi
and others call the second, in opposition to Pearson, who hdlds that there was but one council at
Antioch. This synod met apparently about a.d. 269, and dealt with Paul of Samosata, who had
introduced the heresy of Artemon into the church of Antioch ; and Eusebius says that Malchion
was the only one who, in the discussion which took place there with the arch-heretic, and which
was taken down by stenographers who were present, was able to detect the subtle and crafty sen-
timents of the man. Paul's real opinions being thus unveiled, after he had baffled the acuteness
of his ecclesiastical judges for some time, he was at length convicted ; and the discussion was
published, and a synod ical epistle was sent on the subject to Dionysius, bishop of Rome, and
to Maximus of Alexandria, and to all the provinces, which, according to Jerome i^De vir. iiiustr.,
ch. 71), was written by Malchion, and of which we have extracts in Eusebius.'


I. —THE EPISTLE WRITTEN BY MALCHION, IN NAME OF THE SYNOD OF
ANTIOCH, AGAINST PAUL OF SAMOSATA.'


To Dionysius and Maximus, and to all our
fellows in the ministry throughout the world,
both bishops and presbyters and deacons, and
to the whole Catholic Church under heaven,
Helenus and Hymenaeus and Theophilus and
Theotecnus and Maximus, Proclus, Nicomas, and
Aelianus, and Paul and Bolanus and Protogenes
and Hierax and Eutychius and Theodorus and
Malchion and Lucius, and all the others who are
with us, dwelling in the neighbouring cities and
nations, both bishops and presbyters and deacons,
together with the churches of God, send greet-
ing to our brethren beloved in the Lord.

I. After some few introductory words, they
proceed thus : — We wrote to many of the bish-
ops, even those who live at a distance, and ex-
horted them to give their help in relieving us
from this deadly doctrine ; among these, we ad-
dressed, for instance, Dionysius, the bishop of
Alexandria, and Firmilian of Cappadocia, those
men of blessed name. Of these, the one wrote
to Antioch without even deigning to honour the
leader in this error by addressing him ; nor did
he write to him in his own name, but to the whole
district.^ of which letter we have also subjoined
a copy. And Firmilian, who came twice in per-
son, condemned the innovations in doctrine, as
we who were present know and bear witness, and
as many others know as well as we. But when
he (Paul) promised to give up these opinions, he
believed him ; and hoping that, without any re-
proach to the W^ord, the matter would be rightly
settled, he postponed his decision ; in which
action, however, he was deceived by that denier
of his God and Lord, and betrayer of the faith


' In Eusebius, vii 30. [Elucidation I., p. 172.]

* n-apoiKi'a [= jurisdiction. See p. 163, note 3, supra.\


which he formerly held. And now Firmilian was
minded to cross to Antioch ; and he came as far
as Tarsus, as having already made trial of the
man's infidel ^ iniquity. But when we had just
assembled, and were calling for him and waiting
for his arrival, his end came upon him.

2. After other matters again, they tell us in the
following terms of what manner of life he was :
— But there is no need of judging his actions
when he was outside (the Church), when he re-
volted from the faith and turned aside to spuri-
ous and illegitimate doctrines. Nor need we say
any thing of such matters as this, that, whereas
he was formerly poor and beggarly, having neither
inherited a single possession from his fathers, nor
acquired any property by art or by any trade, he
has now come to have excessive wealth by his
deeds of iniquity and sacrilege, and by those
means by which he despoils and concusses the
brethren, casting the injured unfairly in their
suit,** and promising to help them for a price, yet
deceiving them all the while and to their loss,
taking advantage of the readiness of those in
difficulties to give in order to get deliverance
from what troubled them, and thus supposing
that gain is godliness. 5 Neither need I say any
thing about his pride and the haughtiness with
which he assumed worldly dignities, and his wish-
ing to be styled procurator ^ rather than bishop,
and his strutting through the market-places, and
reading letters and reciting them ^ as he walked
in public, and his being escorted by multitudes of


3 a.pVTj(Ti0eov.

* KaTa^pa^fvujv, perhaps = receiving bribes from.
5 I Tim. vi. 5.

*" AovKtjvapios, the name given under the Emperors to those
procurators who received 200 sestertia of annual salary.
' virayopfvuiy. [Letters, e.g , from Zenobia.]


lyo


MALCHION.


people going before him and following him ; so
that he brought ill-will and hatred on the faith
by his haughty demeanour and by the arrogance
of his heart. Nor shall I say any thing of the
quackery which he practises in the ecclesiastical
assemblies, in the way of courting popularity and
making a great parade, and astounding by such
arts the minds of the less sophisticated ; nor of
his setting up for himself a lofty tribunal and
throne, so unlike a disciple of Christ ; nor of his
having a secretum ' and calling it by that name,
after the manner of the rulers of this world ; nor
of his striking his thigh with his hand and beat-
ing the tribunal with his feet ; nor of his censur-
ing and insulting those who did not applaud him
nor shake their handkerchiefs,- as is done in the
theatres, nor bawl out and leap about after the
manner of his partisans, both male and female,
who were such disorderly listeners to him, but
chose to hear reverendy and modestly as in the
house of God ; nor of his unseemly and violent
attacks in the congregation upon the expounders
of the Word who have already departed this life,
and his magnifying of himself, not like a bishop,
but like a sophist and juggler ; nor of his putting
a stop to the psalms sung in honour of our Lord
Jesus Christ, as the recent compositions of recent
men, and preparing women to sing psalms in
honour of himself in the midst of the Church,
in the great day of the Paschal festival, which
choristers one might shudder to hear. And be-
sides, he acted on those bishops and presbyters,
who fawned upon him in the neighbouring dis-
tricts and cities, to advance the like opinions in
their discourses to their people.

3. For we may say, to anticipate a little what
we intend to write below, that he does not wish
to acknowledge that the Son of God came down
from heaven. And this is a statement which
shall not be made to depend on simple asser-
tion ; for it is proved abundantly by those memo-
randa which we sent you, and not least by that
passage in which he says that Jesus Christ is
from below. And they who sing his praise and
eulogise him among the people, declare that
their impious teacher has come down as an angel
from heaven. And such utterances the haughty
man does not check, but is present even when
they are made. And then again there are these
women — these adopted sisters,^ as the people
of Antioch call them — who are kept by him

' o-i9Kp7)TOi' (from the Latin secerno, to separate) was the name
given to the elevated place, railed in and curtained, where the magis-
trate sat to decide cases.

2 KaTao-fiono-i Tai? o86vai<;, alluding to the custom of shaking the
oraria or linen handkerchiefs as a token of applause. [Elucid. II.]

3 (Tvve.i(jo.KJov<i yufaiKas, priests'-housekeepers. i^ee Lange on
Nicephorus, vi. 30, and B. Rhenanus on Rufinus, vii. The third
canon of the Nicene Council in the Codex Corbeiensis has this title,
De subintroductis id est adoptivis sororibus, Of the subintro-
duced, that is, the adopted sisters. See also on the abuse, Jerome,
in the Epistle to Eitstochius. They appear also to have been called
commanentes and agapetie. See the note of Valesius in Migne.
[Vol. ii. p. 47, and (same vol.) Elucidation II. p. 57.]


and by the presbyters and deacons with him,
whose incurable sins in this and other matters,
though he is cognisant of them, and has con-
victed them, he connives at concealing, with the
view of keeping the men subservient to himself,
and preventing them, by fear for their own posi-
tion, from daring to accuse him in the matter
of his impious words and deeds. Besides this,
he has made his followers rich, and for that he
is loved and admired by those who set their
hearts on these things. But why should we write
of these things? For, beloved, we know that
the bishop and all the clergy* ought to be an
example in all good works to the people. Nor
are we ignorant of the fact that many have fallen
away through introducing these women into their
houses, while others have fallen under suspicion.
So that, even although one should admit that he
has been doing nothing disgraceful in this matter,
yet he ought at least to have avoided the sus-
picion that springs out of such a course of con-
duct, lest perchance some might be offended,
or find inducement to imitate him. For how,
then, should any one censure another, or warn
him to beware of yielding to greater familiarity
with a woman, lest perchance he might slip, as
it is written : 5 if, although he has dismissed one,
he has still retained two with him, and these in
the bloom of their youth, and of fair counte-
nance ; and if when he goes away he takes them
with him ; and all this, too, while he indulges in
luxury and surfeiting?

4. And on account of these things all are
groaning and lamenting with themselves; yet
they have such a dread of his tyranny and power
that they cannot venture on accusing him. And
of these things, as we have said already, one
might take account in the case of a man who
held Catholic sentiments and belonged to our
own number ; but as to one who has betrayed ^
the mystery (of the faith), and who swaggers ?
with the abominable heresy of Artemas, — for
why should we hesitate to disclose his father? —
we consider it unnecessary to exact of him an
account for these things.

5. Then at the close of the epistle they add the .
following words : — We have been compelled,
therefore, to excommunicate this man, who thus
opposeth God Himself, and refuses submission,
and to appoint in his place another bishop for
the Church Catholic, and that, as we trust, by
the providence of God — namely, the son of
Demetrianus, a man of blessed memory, and one
who presided over the same Cljurch with dis-
tinction in former times, Domnus by name, a
man endowed with all the noble qualities which


* lepareiov,

S Referring either to Proverbs vi. or to Ecclesiasticus xxv.

^ ef opx>)o"a;ueroi', danced away.

' C/uTTO/u.ireuacTa.


MALCHION.


171


become a bishop. And this fact we have com-
municated to you in order that ye may write
him, and receive letters of communion ' from


' KOivoivi.KaiypdiJiiJ.aTa. On this Valesius gives the following note:
— The Latins call these litterce coinmunicatoricB, the use of which
is of very ancient date in the Church. They called the same also
/ortna£<e, as Augustine witnesses in Epistle 163. There were, more-
over, two kinds of them. For there were some which were given to
the clergj- and laity when about to travel, that they might be admitted
to communion by foreign bishops. And there were others which
bishops were in the way of sending to other bishops, and which they


him. And that other may write to Artemas, if
it please him ; and those who think with Artemas
may hold communion with him, if they are so
minded.


in turn received from others, for the purpose of attesting their inter-
communion; of which sort the Synod speaks here. These were
usually sent by recently-ordained bishops soon after their ordination.
Augustine, Epistle 162; Cyprian, in the Epistle to Cornelius, p. 320;
and the Synodical Epistle of the Council of Sardica, appear to refer to
these, though they may refer also to ih^/or/natte. [Vol. i. p. 12, n.g.]


II. — FRAGMENTS APPARENTLY OF THE SAME EPISTLE OF THE SYNOD OF
ANTIOCH; TO WIT, OF THAT PART OF IT WHICH IT IS AGREED THAT
EUSEBIUS LEFT UNNOTICED.'


He says, therefore, in the commentaries (they
speak of Paul), that he maintains the dignity of
wisdom.

A?id thereafter :

If, however, he had been united^ according
to formation and generation, this is what befalls
the man. A/ut again : For that wisdom, as we
believe, was not congenerate ^ with humanity sub-
stantially, but qualitatively .■♦

And thereafter :

In what respect, moreover, does he mean to
allege that the formation 5 of Christ is different
and diverse from ours, when we hold that, in this
one thing of prime consequence. His constitution
differs from ours, to wit, that what in us is the
interior man, is in Him the Word.^

And thereafter :

If he means to allege that Wisdom dwells in
Him as in no other, this expresses indeed the
same mode of inhabitation, though it makes it
excel in respect of measure and multitude ; He
being supposed to derive a superior knowledge
from the Wisdom, say for example, twice as large
as others, or any other number of times as large ;
or, again, it may be less than twice as large a
knowledge as others have. This, however, the
catholic and ecclesiastical canons disallow, and
hold rather that other men indeed received of
Wisdom as an inspiration from without, which.


' In Leontius of Byzantium, contra Nestor., book iii., towards
the end.

^ Copulatus erat.
3 Cougeneratam.

♦ Secundum guaWtatetn.
S Formationem.

* We say, that as the e.xterior and the interior man are one person,
so God the Word and humanity have been assumed as one person, a
thing which Paul denies. — Can.


though with them, is distinct from them ; 7 but
that Wisdom in verity came of itself substantially
into His body by Mary.

And after other matters :

And they hold that there are not t^vo Sons.
But if Jesus Christ is the Son of God, and if
Wisdom also is the Son of God ; and if the
Wisdom is one thing and Jesus Christ another,
there are two Sons.

A7td thereafter ;

Moreover understand (Paul would say) the
union with Wisdom in a different sense, namely
as being one according to instruction and par-
ticipation ; ^ but not as if it were formed accord-
ing to the substance in the body.

And after other matters :

Neither was the God who bore the human
body and had assumed it, without knowledge ^
of human affections '° in the first instance ; " nor
was the human body without knowledge, in the
first instance, of divine operations in him in
whom He (the God) was, and by whom He
wrought these operations. He was formed, in
the first instance, as man in the womb ; and, in
the second instance, '^ the God also was in the
womb, united essentially with the human,'^ that
is to say, His substance being wedded with the
man.


7 A lia est apiid ipsos.

8 Secundum disciplinant et participationem. Paul of Samo-
sata used to say that the humanity was united with the Wisdoin as
instruction {disciplina') is united with the learner by participation.
— Can. [See Hooker, book v. cap. 52, sec. 4.]

9 Expers.

'° Passionum, sufferings.

'' Principaliter.

'^ Secundaria, i.e., /card Sevrcpov Adyov. — TuRRIAN.

13 ijwovo'nofj.ivo'i Tw avQpttjnivw,


172


ELUCIDATIONS.


III. — FROM THE ACTS OF THE DISPUTATION CONDUCTED BY MALCHION

AGAINST PAUL OF SAMOSATA.'


The compound is surely made up of the sim-
ple elements,^ even as in the instance of Jesus
Christ, who was made one (person), constituted
by God the Word, and a human body which is
of the seed of David, and who subsists without
having any manner of division between the two,
but in unity. You, however, appear to me to
decline to admit a constitution ^ after this fash-
ion : to the effect that there is not in this person,
the Son of God according to substance, but only
the Wisdom according to participation. For you
made this assertion, that the Wisdom bears dis-


' In Petnis Diaconus, De [ncarnat. ad Fulgentium, ch. 6.
Among the works of Fulgentius, Epistle 16.

2 Ex simplicibusfit certe compositutn.

3 Compositioneni,


pensing, and therefore cannot be compounded ; "•
and you do not consider that the divine Wisdom
remained undiminished, even as it was before it
evacuated itself ; 5 and thus in this self-evacua-
tion, which it took upon itself in compassion (for
us), it continued undiminished and unchange-
able. And this assertion you also make, that
the Wisdom dwelt in Him, just as we also dwell
in houses, the one in the other,*^ and yet not as
if we formed a part of the house, or the house
a part of us.


* Quia sapicntia dispendiiitn patiatur et idea composita esse
non possit — the sense intended being perhaps just that Paul alleged
that the divine Wisdom admitted of being dispensed or imparted to
another, but not of being substantially united with him. — Tr.

5 Exinanisset.

6 Some read alter in altera, others alter in altera.


IV.— A POINT IN THE SAME DISPUTATION.'


Did I not say before that you do not admit
that the only-begotten Son, who is from all eter-
nity before every creature, was made substantially


' From the same Acts in Leontius, as above.


existent ^ in the whole person of the Saviour ; ?
that is to say, was united with Him according
to substance ?


2 ov(TLu}adai.

3 /« toto Salvaiore.


ELUCIDATIONS.
I.

(The epistle written by Malchion, p. 169.)

Malchion, though a presbyter of Antioch, reflects the teaching of Alexandria, and illustrates
its far-reaching influence. Firmilian, presiding at the Council of Antioch, was a pupil of Origen ;
and Dionysius was felt in the council, though unable to be present. Malchion and Firmilian,
therefore, vindicate the real mind of Origen, though speaking in language matured and guarded.
This council was, providentially, a rehearsal for Nicsea.

II.

(Putting a stop to psalms, etc., p. 170.)

Coleridge notes this, with an amusing comment on Paulus Samosatenus,^ and refers to Pliny's
letter, of which see vol. v. p. 604, this series. Jeremy Taylor, from whom Coleridge quotes,
gives the passage of our author as follows : " Psalmos et cantus qui ad Dom. nostri J. C. honorem
decantari solent, tanquam recentiores et a viris recentioris memoriae editos, exploserit " ( Works,
ii. p. 281, ed. Bohn, 1844). Observe what Coleridge says elsewhere^ on errors attributed to
Origen : " Never was a great man so misunderstood as Origen." He adds : " The caro noumetion
was what Origen meant by Christ's ' flesh consubstantial with His Godhead.' "


* Notes on English Divines, vol. i. p. 199.


Ibid., p. 313.


ARCHELAUS.

[TRANSLATED BY THE REV. S. D. F. SALMOND, M.A.]
I


INTRODUCTORY NOTICE

TO

ARCHELAUS.


[a.d. 277.] The Manichsean heresy, which was destined to operate so terribly against the
Church and the purity of the Gospel, encountered its earliest successful .antagonism in the The-
baid ; and I have not doubted the wisdom of prefixing this Disputation to the veritable name
and work of Alexander of Lycopolis, as important to the complete history of the great /\lexan-
drian school. The Edinburgh translator of this work regards it as an " authentic relic of an-
tiquity," in spite of Beausobre, who treats it as a romance. I have forced myself, in this
republication, to reject no theory of the Edinburgh collaborators to which I have not been able
to give as much critical attention, at least, as they have evidently bestowed upon their work. It
seems to me a well-sustained presumption that the work is fundamentally real, and Dr. Neander
admits its base of fact. It is useful, at any rate, in its form and place, as here presented, and so
much may be inferred from the following : —

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTORY NOTICE.

A CERTAIN memorable Disputation, which was conducted by a bishop of the name of Arche-
laus with the heretic Manes, is mentioned by various writers of an early date.' What professes to
be an account of that Disputation has come down to us in a form mainly Latin, but with parts in
Greek. A considerable portion of this Latin version was published by Valesius in his edition of
Socrates and Sozomen, and subsequently by others in greater completeness, and with the addi-
tion of the Greek fragments.^ There seems to be a difference among the ancient authorities cited
above as to the person who committed these Acts to writing. Epiphanius and Jerome take it to
have been Archelaus himself, while Heraclianus, bishop of Chalcedon, represents it to have been
a certain person named Hegemonius. In Photius ^ there is a statement to the effect that this
HeracHanus, in confuting the errors of the Manichgeans, made use of certain Acts of the Dispu-
tation of Bishop Archelaus with Manes which were written by Hegemonius. And there are
various passages in the Acts themselves which appear to confirm the opinion of Heraclianus.'*
Zacagnius, however, thinks that this is but an apparent discrepancy, which is easily reconciled on

' Thus Cyril of Jerusalem, in the sixth book of his Catecheses, §§ 27 and 30, tells us how Manes fled into Mesopotamia, and was met
there by that shield of righteousness (ottAo;' SticatocriirT)?) Bishop Archelaus, and was refuted by him in the presence of a number of Greek
philosophers, who had been brought together as judges of the discussion. Epiphanius, in his Heresies, Ixvi., and again in his work De
Mensuris et Poderibus, § 20, makes reference to the same occasion, and gives some excerpts from the Acts of the Disputation. And
there are also passages of greater or less importance in Jerome {De vir. illustr., ch 72), Socrates {Hist. Eccles., i. 22), Heraclianus bishop
of Chalcedon (as found in Photius, Bihliotheca, Cod. xcv.), Petrus Siculus {Historia ManichcEorum, pp. 25, 35, 37), Photius {Adversus
Manichiros, book i., edited in the Biblioth. Coislin., Mont/ajtcon, pp. 356, 358), and the anonymous authors of the Libcllus Synodicus,
ch. 27, and the Historia Heereseos Manic/itEorum in the Codex Regius of Turin. [See Cyril's text in Routh, R. S., vol. v. pp. 198-205.]

* As by Zacagnius at Rome, in 1698, in his Collectanea Monuitientorum Veterum Ecclesice Criecce ac Latina ; by Fabricius, in
the Spicilcgium Sanctorutn Patrum Sceculi, iii., in his edition of Hippolytus, etc.

3 Biblioth., Cod Ixxxv. [Coleridge thinks " Manes" himself a myth, " a doubtful Ens."'\

* See especially ch. 39 and 55. [Note reference to John de Soyres, vol. v. p. 604, this series.]


176 INTRODUCTORY NOTICE.

the supposition that the book was first composed by Archelaus himself in Syriac, and afterwards
edited, with certain amendments and additions, by Hegemonius. That the work was written
originally in Syriac is clear, not only from the express testimony of Jerome,' but also from inter-
nal evidence, and specially from the explanations offered now and again of the use of Greek
equivalents. It is uncertain who was the author of the Greek version ; and we can only con-
jecture that Hegemonius, in publishing a new edition, may also have undertaken a translation into
the tongue which would secure a much larger audience than the original Syriac. But that this
Greek version, by whomsoever accomplished, dates from the very earliest period, is proved by the
excerpts given in Epiphanius. As to the Latin interpretation itself, all that we can allege is, that
it must in all probability have been published after Jerome's time, who might reasonably be
expected to have made some allusion to it if it was extant in his day ; and before the seventh
century, because, in quoting the Scriptures, it does not follow the Vulgate edition, which was
received generally throughout the West by that period. That the Latin translator must have had
before him, not the Syriac, but the Greek copy, is also manifest, not only from the general idio-
matic character of the rendering, but also from many nicer indications.^

The precise designation of the seat of the bishopric of Archelaus has been the subject of
considerable diversity of opinion. Socrates ^ and Epiphanius ■♦ record that Archelaus was bishop
of Caschar, or Caschara.^ Epiphanius, however, does not keep consistently by that scription.^
In the opening sentence of the Acts themselves it appears as Carchar.7 Now we know that there
were at least two towns of the name of Carcha : for the anonymous Ravenna geographer^ tells
us that there was a place of that name in Arabia Felix ; and Ammianus Marcellinus '^ mentions
another beyond the Tigris, within the Persian dominion. The clear statements, however, to the
effect that the locality of the bishopric of Archelaus was in Mesopotamia, make it impossible
that either of these two towns could have been the seat of his rule. Besides this, in the third
chapter of the Acts themselves we find the name Charra occurring ; and hence Zacagnius and
others have concluded that the place actually intended is the scriptural Charrafi, or Haran, in
Mesopotamia, which is also written Charra in Paulus Diaconus,'° and that the form Carchar or
Carchara was either a mere error of the transcribers, or the vulgar provincial designation. It
must be added, however, that Neander" allows this to be only a very uncertain conjecture, while
others hold that Caschar is the most probable scription, and that the town is one altogether
different from the ancient Haran.

The date of the Disputation itself admits of tolerably exact settlement. Epiphanius, indeed,'*
says that Manes fled into Mesopotamia in the ninth year of the reign of Valerianus and Gallienus,
and that the discussion with Archelaus took place about the same time. This would carry the
date back to about 262 a.d. But this statement, although he is followed in it by Petrus Siculus
and Photius, is inconsistent with the specification of times which he makes in dealing with the
error of the Manichaeans in his book On the Heresies. From the 37th chapter of the Acts, how-
ever, we find that the Disputation took place, not when Gallienus, but when Probus held the

' De vir. illustr., ch. 72.

2 Such as the apparent confusion between arip and avrip in ch. 8, and again between Aoi/ud? and Ai/iids in the same chapter, and between
7r>)(T<Tfi and TrArjo-ffei in ch. 9, and the retention of certain Greek words, sometimes absolutely, and at other times with an explanation, as
cybi, apocrusis, etc.

3 Hist. Eccles., i. 22.

* H ceres., Ixvi. ch. 5 and 7, and De Mens, et Pond., ch. 20.

6 For elsewhere {Hares., Ixvi. 11) he writes KafT\ap-iiv, or, according to another reading, which is held by Zacagnius to be corrupt
KaAx^P'^i'.

7 And that form is followed by Petrus Siculus {Hist. Manieh., p. 37) and Photius (lib. i., Adv. Munich.), who, in epitomizing the
statements of Epiphanius, write neither Kaa\6.pMv nor KoA;^apiui', but ¥iap)^a.pmv .

8 Geogr., book ii. ch. 7.

9 Book xviii. 23, and xxv. 20, 21.
'° Hist. Misc., xxii. 20.

" Church History, ii. p. 165, ed. Bohn.
'2 De Mensur. et Pond., ch. 20.


INTRODUCTORY NOTICE. 177

empire, and that is confirmed by Cyril of Jerusalem.' The exact year becomes also clearer from
Eusebius, who ^ seems to indicate the second year of the reign of Probus as the time when the
Manichoean heresy attained general publicity — Secundo atino Prodi . . . insana ATanichcEorinn
hceresis in commune humani generis malum exorta ; and from Leo Magnus, who in his second
Discourse on Pentecost also avers that Manichaeus became notorious in the consulship of Probus
and Paulinus. And as this consulship embraced part of the first and part of the second years of
the empire of Probus, the Disputation itself would thus be fixed as occurring in the end of a.d. 277
or the beginning of 278, or, according to the precise calculation of Zacagnius, between July and
December of the year 277.

That the Acts of this Disputation constitute an authentic relic of antiquity, seems well estab-
lished by a variety of considerations. Epiphanius, for instance, writing about the year a.d. 376,
makes certain excerpts from them which correspond satisfactorily with the extant Latin version.
Socrates, again, whose Ecclesiastical History dates about 439, mentions these Acts, and acknowl-
edges that he drew the materials for his account of the Manichaean heresy from them. The book
itself, too, offers not a few evidences of its own antiquity and authenticity. The enumeration given
of the various heretics who had appeared up to the time of Archelaus, the mention of his presence
at the siege of the city ,3 and the allusions to various customs, have all been pressed into that
service, as may be seen in detail in the elaborate dissertation prefixed by Zacagnius in his Collec-
tanea Afonumentorum EcclesicB Grczcce. At the same time, it is very evident that the work has
come down to us in a decidedly imperfect form. There are, for example, arguments by Manes
and answers by Archelaus recorded in Cyril ^ which are not contained in our Latin version at all.
And there are not a few notes of discrepancy and broken connections in the composition itself,^
which show that the manuscripts must have been defective, or that the Latin translator took great
liberties with the Greek text, or that the Greek version itself did not faithfully reproduce the
original Syriac. On the historical character of the work Neander ^ expresses himself thus : ^
" These Acts manifestly contain an ill-connected narrative, savouring in no small degree of the
romantic. Although there is some truth at the bottom of it — as, for instance, in the statement
of doctrine there is much that wears the appearance of truth, and is confirmed also by its agree-
ment with other representations : still the Greek author seems, from ignorance of Eastern languages
and customs, to have introduced a good deal that is untrue, by bringing in and confounding
together discordant stories through an uncritical judgment and exaggeration."

* Cateches., vi. p. 140.

2 Chronicon, lib. post., p. 177.

3 In ch. 24.

* Catech., vi. p. m. 147.

S As in the 12th, 25th, and 28th chapters.

^ [Compare Routh, Reliquice Sacm, vol. v. pp. 4-206, and his everywhere learned notes.]

1 Church History, ii. pp. 165, 166, ed. Bohn. [Compare Robertson, vol. i. pp. 136-144.]


THE ACTS OF THE DISPUTATION'
WITH THE HERESIARCH MANES.


I. The true Thesaurus;^ to wit, the Disputa-
tion conducted in Carcliar, a city of Mesopotamia,
before Manippus^ and ^gialeus and Claudius and
Cleobolus, who acted as judges. In this city of
Mesopotamia there was a certain man, MarceUus
by name, who was esteemed as a person worthy
of the highest honour for his manner of Hfe, his
pursuits, and his Hneage, and not less so for his
discretion and his nobility of character : he was
possessed also of abundant means ; and, what is
most important of all, he feared God with the
deepest piety, and gave ear always with due rever-
ence to the things which were spoken of Christ.
In short, there was no good quality lacking in
that man, and hence it came to pass that he was
held in the greatest regard by the whole city ;
while, on the other hand, he also made an ample
return for the good-will of his city by his munifi-
cent and oft-repeated acts of liberality in bestow-
ing on the poor, relieving the afflicted, and giving
help to the distressed. But let it suffice us to
have said thus much, lest by the weakness of our
words we rather take from the man's virtues than
adduce what is worthy of their splendour. I
shall come, therefore, to the task which forms
my subject. On a certain occasion, when a large
body of captives were offered to the bishop
Archelaus by the soldiers who held the camp in
that place, their numbers being some seven thou-
sand seven hundred, he was harassed with the
keenest anxiety on account of the large sum of
money which was demanded by the soldiers as
the price of the prisoners' deliverance. And as
he could not conceal his solicitude, all aflame for
the religion and the fear of God, he at length
hastened to Marcellus, and explained to him the
importance and difficulty of the case. And when
that pattern of piety, Marcellus, heard his narra-
tion, without the least delay he went into his
house, and provided the price demanded for the
prisoners, according to the value set upon them
by those who had led them captive ; and unlock-


ing the treasures of his goods, he at once dis-
tributed the gifts of piety * among the soldiers,
without any severe consideration of number or
distinction,5 so that they seemed to be presents
rather than purchase-moneys. And those soldiers
were filled with wonder and admiration at the
grandeur of the man's piety and munificence,
and were struck with amazement, and felt the
force ^ of this example of pity ; so that very
many of them were added to the faith of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and threw off the belt of mili-
tary service, 7 while others withdrew to their camp,
taking scarcely a fourth part of the ransom, and
the rest made their departure without receiving
even so much as would defray the expenses of
the way.

2. Marcellus, as might well be expected, was
exceedingly gratified by these incidents ; and
summoning one of the prisoners, by name Cor-
tynius, he inquired of him the cause of the war,
and by what chance it was that they were over-
come and bound with the chains of captivity.
And the person addressed, on obtaining liberty
to speak, began to express himself in these
terms : " My lord Marcellus, we believe in the
living God alone. And we have a custom of
such a nature as I shall now describe, which has
descended to us by the tradition of our brethren
/« //le faith, and has been regularly observed by
us up to the present day. The practice is, that
every year we go out beyond the bounds of the
city, in company with our wives and children,
and offer up supplications to the only and invisi-
ble God, praying Him to send us rains for our
fields and crops.^ Now, when we were cele-
brating this observance at the usual time and in
the wonted manner, evening surprised us as we
lingered there, and were still fasting. Thus we


' Of Archelaus, bishop of Caschar in Mesopotamia.

^ Treasury.

3 In Epiphanius, Hieres., Ixvi. lo, it is Marsipus.


* Pietaiis pretia.

5 Nee numero aliquo nee discretione ulla distinguit. For distzH-
gui't, some propose d/stribuit.

* Reading cotittuottentur, as in the text. Comtnm'eittur is also
suggested, = " were deeply moved."

'' On the attitude of the Christiansof the primitive Church towards
warfare, see Tertullian's De Corona Militis, ch. ii, and the twelfth
canon of the Niceiie Council.

^ [The similar institution of the Rogation fasts in the West is referred
to the fifth century. Pellicia, p. 372; Hooker, book v. cap. xlt. 2.]

.. 170 ...


I So


THE DISPUTATION WITH MANES.


were feeling the pressure of two of the most try-
ing things men have to endure, — namely, fast-
ing and want of sleep. But about midnight sleep
enviously and inopportunely crept upon us, and
with necks drooping and unstrung, and heads
hanging down, it made our faces strike against
our knees.' Now this took place because the
time was at hand when by the judgment of God
we were to pay the penalty proper to our deserts,
whether it might be that we were offenders in
ignorance, or whether it might be that with the
consciousness of wrong we nevertheless had not
given up our sin. Accordingly at that hour a
multitude of soldiers suddenly surrounded us,
supposing us, as I judge, to have lodged our-
selves in ambush there, and to be persons with
f j11 experience and skill in fighting battles ; and
without making any exact inquiry into the cause
of our gathering there, they threatened us with
war, not in word, but at once by the sword. And
though we were men who had never learned to
do injury to any one, they wounded us ])itilessly
with their missiles, and thrust us through with
their spears, and cut our throats with their
swords. Thus they slew, indeed, about one
thousand and three hundred men of our num-
ber, and wounded other five hundred. And
when the day broke clearly, they carried off the
survivors amongst us as prisoners here, and that,
too, in a way showing their utter want of pity for
us. For they drove us before their horses, spur-
ring us on by blows from their spears, and im-
pelling us forward by making the horses' heads
press upon us. And those who had sufficient
powers of endurance did indeed hold out ; but
very many fell down before the face of their
cruel masters, and breathed out their life there ;
and mothers, with arms wearied, and utterly
powerless with their burdens, and distracted by
the threats of those behind them, suffered the
little ones that were hanging on their breasts to
fall to the ground ; while all those on whom old
age had come were sinking, one after the other,
to the earth, overcome with their toils, and ex-
hausted by want of food. The proud soldiers
nevertheless enjoyed this bloody spectacle of
men continually perishing, as if it had been a
kind of entertainment, while they saw some
stretched on the soil in hopeless prostration,
and beheld others, worn out by the fierce fires
of thirst and with the bands of their tongues
utterly parched, lose the power of speech, and
beheld others with eyes ever glancing backwards,
groaning over the fate of their dying little ones,
while these, again, were constantly appealing to
their most unhappy mothers with their cries, and
the mothers themselves, driven frantic by the
severities of the robbers, responded with their


' Reading cervicibus degravatis et laxis, demisso capite,
Jrontem gcnibus elidit. The text gives demerso.


lamentations, which indeed was the only thing
they could do freely. And those of them whose
hearts were most tenderly bound up with their
offspring chose voluntarily to meet the same pre-
mature fate of death with their children ; while
those, on the other hand, who had some capacity
of endurance were carried off prisoners here with
us. Thus, after the lapse of three days, during
which time we had never been allowed to take
any rest, even in the night, we were conveyed to
this place, in which what has now taken place after
these occurrences is better known to yourself."

3. When Marcellus, the man of consummate
piety, had heard this recital, he burst into a
flood of tears, touched with pity for misfortunes
so great and so various. But making no delay,
he at once prepared victuals for the sufferers,
and did service with his own hand for the
wearied ; in this imitating our father Abraham
the patriarch, who, when he entertained the
angels hospitably on a certain occasion, did not
content himself with merely giving the order to
his slaves to bring a calf from the herd, but did
himself, though advanced in years, go and place
it on his shoulders and fetch it in, and did with
his own hand prepare food, and set it before
the angels. So Marcellus, in discharge of a sim-
ilar office, directed them to be seated as his
guests in companies of ten ; and when the seven
hundred tables were all provided, he refreshed
the whole body of the captives with great de-
light, so that those who had had strength to sur-
vive what they had been called to endure, forgot
their toils, and became oblivious of all their ills.
When, however, they had reached the fifteenth
day, and while Marcellus was still liberally sup-
plying all things needful for the prisoners, it
seemed good to him that they should all be put
in possession of the means of returning to their
own parts, with the exception of those who were
detained by the attention which their wounds
demanded ; and providing the -proper remedies
for these, he instructed the rest to depart to their
own country and friends. And even to all these
charities Marcellus added yet larger deeds of
piety. For with a numerous band of his own
dependants he went to look after the burying of
the bodies of those who had perished on the
march ; and for as many of these as he could
discover, of whatsoever condition, he secured
the sepulture which was meet for them. And
when this service was completed he returned to
Charra, and gave permission to the wounded to
return thence to their native country when their
health was sufficiently restored, providing also
most liberal supplies for their use on their jour-
ney. And truly the estimate of this deed made
a magnificent addition to the repute of the other
noble actions of Marcellus ; for through that
whole territory the fame of the piety of Marcellus


THE DISPUTATION WITH MANES.


I8i


spread so grandly, that large numbers of meA
belonging to various cities were inflamed with
the intensest desire to see and become acquainted
with the man, and most especially those persons
who had not had occasion to bear penury before,
— to all of whom this remarkable man, following
the example of a Marcellus of old, furnished
aid most indulgently, so that they all declared
that there was no one of more illustrious piety !
than this man. Yea, all the widows, too, who
were believers in the Lord had recourse to him,
while the imbecile also could reckon on obtain-
ing at his hand most certain help to meet their
circumstances ; and the orphaned, in like man-
ner, were all supported by him, so that his house
was declared to be the hospice for the stranger
and the indigent. And above all this, he re-
tained in a remarkable and singular measure his
devotion to the faith, building up his own heart
upon the rock that shall not be moved.

4. Accordingly,' as this man's fame was be-
coming always the more extensively diffused
throughout different localities, and when it had
now penetrated even beyond the river Stranga,
the honourable report of his name was carried
into the territory of Persia. In this country dwelt
a person called Manes, who, when this man's re-
pute had reached him, deliberated largely with
himself as to how he might entangle him in the
snares of his doctrine, hoping that Marcellus
might be made an upholder of his dogma. For
he reckoned that he might make himself master
of the whole province, if he could only first
attach such a man to himself. In this project,
however, his mind was agitated with the doubt
whether he should at once repair in person to
the man, or first attempt to get at him by letter ;
for he was afraid lest, by any sudden and unex-
pected introduction of himself upon the scene,
some mischance might possibly befall him. At
last, in obedience to a subtler policy, he resolved
to write ; and calling to him one of his disciples,
by name Turbo,^ who had been instructed by
Addas, he handed to him an epistle, and bade
him depart and convey it to Marcellus. This
adherent accordingly received the letter, and
carried it to the person to whom he had been
commissioned by Manes to deliver it, overtaking
the whole journey within five days. The above-
mentioned Turbo, indeed, used great expedition
on this journey, in the course of which he also
underwent very considerable exertion and trouble.
For whenever he arrived,^ as '' a traveller in Tor-

* At this point begins the portion of the work edited by Valesius
from the Codex Bobiensis, which is preserved now in the Ambrosian
Library.

^ The Codex Bobiensis reads. Adda Turbonem. This Adda, or
Addas, as the Greek gives it below in ch. xi., was one of those dis-
ciples of Manes whom he charged with the dissemination of his heret-
ical opinions in the East, as we see from ch. xi.

^ Codex Bobiensis adds, ad vesperam, towards evening.

* The text gives veluti peregrinans. The Codex Bobiensis has
guippe peregrinar.s.


eign parts, at a hospice, — and these were inns
which Marcellus himself had supplied in his large
hospitality, 5 — on his being asked by the keepers
of these hostels whence he came, and who he was,
or by whom he had been sent, he used to reply :
*• I belong to the district of Mesopotamia, but I
come at present from Persis, having been sent
by Manichaeus, a master among the Christians."
But they were by no means ready to welcome a
name unknown'^ to them, and were wont some-
times to thrust Turbo out of their inns, refusing
him even the means of getting water for drinking
purposes. And as he had to bear daily things
like these, and things even worse than these, at
the hands of those persons in the several locali-
ties who had charge of the mansions and hospices,
unless he had at last shown that he was convey-
ing letters to Marcellus, Turbo would have met
the doom of death in his travels.

5. On receiving the epistle, then, Marcellus
opened it, and read it in the presence of Arche-
laus, the bishop of the place. And the follow-
ing is a copy of what it contained : ^ —

Manichaeus, an apostle of Jesus Christ, and
all the saints who are with me, and the virgins,
to Marcellus, my beloved son : Grace, mercy,
and peace be with you from God the Father, and
from our Lord Jesus Christ; and may the right
hand of light preserve you safe from this present
evil world, and from its calamities, and from the
snares of the wicked one. Amen.

I was exceedingly delighted to observe the
love cherished by you, which truly is of the
largest measure. But I was distressed at your
faith, which is not in accordance with the right
standard. Wherefore, deputed as I am to seek
the elevation of the race of men, and sparing,*
as I do, those who have given themselves over
to deceit and error, I have considered it needful
to despatch this letter to you, with a view, in the
first place, to the salvation of your own soul, and
in the second place also to that of the souls of
those who are with you, so as to secure you
against 9 dubious opinions, and specially against
notions like those in which the guides of the
simpler class of minds indoctrinate their subjects,
when they allege that good and evil have the
same original subsistence,'" and when they posit
the same beginning for them, without making
any distinction or discrimination between light
and darkness, and between the good and the


5 On the attention paid by the primitive Church to the duties of
hospitality, see Tertullian, Dc Frcescriptiouibiis, ch. 20 [vol. iii. p.
252, this series] ; Gregory Nazianzenus, in his First hivectire
against Julian; also I'riorius, De Uteris canonicis, ch. 5, etc.;
and Thomassin, De Tesseris hpspitalitatis, ch. 26.

*> In the text, ignotnm; in the Codex Bobiensis, ignoraium.

"> This letter, along with the reply of Marcellus, is given by Epi-
phanius in his Heresies, n. 6, from which the Greek text is taken.

8 ii€i6o/u.€v'o9. The Latin gives subveniens, relieving.

9 The Greek text of Epiphanius gave irpb? to a.&iaKpi.Tov. Peta-
vius substituted jrpo5 to m'? aiSioiicpiToi'; and that reading is confirmed
by the Latin, uti ne indiscretos aniiiws geras.

■° aTTO TOW auToO (|>cpea9(ii.


I»2


THE DISPUTATION WITH MANES.


evil or worthless, and between the inner man
and the outer, as we have stated before, and
without ceasing to mix up and confound together
the one with the other. But, O my son, refuse
thou thus thoughtlessly to identify these two
things in the irrational and foolish fashion com-
mon to the mass of men, and ascribe no such
confusion to the God of goodness. For these
men refer the beginning and the end and the
paternity of these ills to God Himself, — "whose
end is near a curse." ' For they do not believe
the word spoken by our Saviour and Lord Jesus
Christ Himself in the Gospels,- namely, that " a
good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither
can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit." ^ And
how they can be bold enough to call God the
maker and contriver of Satan and his wicked
deeds, is a matter of great amazement to me.
Yea, would that even this had been all the length
to which they had gone with their silly efforts,
and that they had not declared that the only-
begotten Christ, who has descended from the
bosom of the Father,-* is the son of a certain
woman, Mary, and born of blood and flesh and
the varied impurides proper to women ! 5 How-
beit, neither to write too much in this epistle,
nor to trespass at too great length upon your
good nature, — and all the more so that I have
no natural gift of eloquence, — I shall content
myself with what I have said. But you will have ;
full knowledge of the whole subject when I am ;
present with you, if indeed you still continue to I
care for *" your own salvation. For I do not " cast
a snare upon any one," ^ as is done by the less |
thoughtful among the mass of men. Think of;
what I say, most honourable son.

6. On reading this epistle, Marcellus, with the
kindest consideration, attended hospitably to the
needs of the bearer of the letter. Archelaus, on
the other hand, did not receive very pleasantly
the matters which were read, but "gnashed^ with
his teeth like a chained lion," impatient to have
the author of the epistle given over to him. Mar-
cellus, however, counselled him to be at peace ;
promising that he would himself take care to se-
cure the man's presence. And accordingly Mar-
cellus resolved to send an answer to what had
been written to him, and indited an epistle con-
taining the following statements : —

Marcellus, a man of distinction, to Manichaeus,
who has made himself known to me by his epis-
tle, greeting.


* u>v TO TeAo9 xarapaf eVyOs. Cf. Heb. vi. 8.

2 Xhe text gives iv rois eipT)H,€'i'oc? eva-y7eAiots, for which tois
€ip))fie'ioi5 kv Totj eOayyeAiots may be proposed.

3 Matt. vii. i8.

* John i. i8.

S T^9 aAAjj! hvaiati.a<i riov yvvaiKiov.

* <bei&r).

1 I Cor. vii. 35.

^ The text gives tnfrendehat ; the Codex Bobiensis has in-
fringebat. [It seems to be a proverb, and I have so marked it. We
should say, " he chafed hke a lion," etc. J


An epistle written by you has come to my
hand, and I have received Turbo with my wonted
kindness ; but the meaning of your letter I have
by no means apprehended, and may not do so
unless you give us your presence, and explain its
contents in detail in the way of conversation, as
you have offered to do in the epistle itself.
Farewell.

This letter he sealed and handed to Turbo,
with instructions to deliver it to the person from
whom he had already conveyed a similar docu-
ment. The messenger, however, was extremely
reluctant to return to his master, being mindful
of what he had had to endure on the journey, and
begged that another person should be despatched
in his stead, refusing to go back to Manes, or to
have any intercourse whatever with him again.
But Marcellus summoned one of his young men,^
Callistus by name, and directed him to proceed
to the place. Without any loss of time this young
man set out promptly on his journey thither ; and
after the lapse of three days he came to Manes,
whom he found in a certain fort, that of Arabion '°
to wit, and to whom he presented the epistle.
On perusing it, he was glad to see that he had
been invited by Marcellus ; and without delay he
undertook the journey ; yet he had a presenti-
ment that Turbo's failure to return boded no good,
and proceeded on his way to Marcellus, not, as
it were, without serious reflections. Turbo, for
his part, was not at all thinking of leaving the
house of Marcellus ; neither did he omit any
opportunity of conversing with Archelaus the
bishop. For both these parties were very dili-
gently engaged in investigating the practices of
Manichaeus, being desirous of knowing who he ^
was and whence he came, and what was his man- H
ner of discourse. And he, Turbo, accordingly ^
gave a lucid account of the whole position, nar-
rating and expounding the terms of his faith in
the following manner : " —

If you are desirous of being instructed in the
faith of Manes by me, attend to me for a short
space. That man worships two deities, unorigi-
nated, self-existent, eternal, opposed the one to
the other. Of these he represents the one as
good, and the other as evil, and assigns the name
of Light to the former, and that of Darkness to
the latter. He alleges also that the soul in men
is a portion of the light, but that the body and
the formation of matter are parts of the darkness.
He maintains, further, that a certain commingling
or "blending '^ has been effected between the two
in the manner about to be stated, the following


9 Ex pueris sui's.

'° Epiphanius, under this Heresy, num. 7, says that this was a
fort situated on the other side of the river Stranga, between Persia
and Mesopotamia.

" The section extending from this point on to ch. xii. is found
word for word in the Greek of Epiphanius, num. 25.

'■^ ^i^w 6i JjTot (Tvyxpadiy,


THE DISPUTATION WITH MANES.


analogy being used as an illustration of the same ;
to wit, that their relations may be likened to
those of two kings in conflict with each other,
who are antagonists from the beginning, and
have their own positions, each in his due order.
And so he holds that the darkness passed with-,
out its own boundaries, and engaged in a similar
contention with the light; but that the good
Father then, perceiving that the darkness had
come to sojourn on His earth, put forth from
Himself a power ' which is called the Mother of
Life ; and that this power thereupon put forth
from itself the first mafi, and the five elements.-
And these five elements are wind,^ light, water,
fire, and matter. Now this primitive man, being
endued with these, and thereby equipped, as it
were, for war, descended to these lower parts, and
made war against the darkness. But the princes
of the darkness, waging war in turn against him,
consumed that portion of his panoply which is
the soul. Then was that first man grievously
injured there underneath by the darkness ; and
had it not been that the Father heard his prayers,
and sent a second power, which was also put
forth from Himself and was called the living
Spirit, and came down and gave him the right
hand, and brought him up again out of the grasp
of the darkness, that first man would, in those
ancient times, have been in peril of absolute over-
throw. From that time, consequently, he left the
soul beneath. And for this reason the Mani-
chaeans, if they meet each other, give the right
hand, in token of their having been saved from
darkness ; for he holds that the heresies have
their seat all in the darkness. Then the living
Spirit created the world ; and bearing in himself
three other powers, he came down and brought
off the princes, and settled ■♦ them in the firma-
ment, which is their body, (though it is called)
the sphere. Then, again, the living Spirit created
the luminaries, which are fragments of the soul,
and he made them thus to move round and round
the firmament ; and again he created the earth


' TTpoSaAAeii' ff avTov SHva/jLiv. But the Codex Bobiensis gives
produxit ex I'irtiite, put forth from His power one, etc. The Codex
Casinensis has, prcdnxerit et esse vzrtiitem, etc.

2 The text is simply xai avTr^v 7rpo/3e^AI)«el'al toj' npiarov av0po)-
irov, TO. nevT€ (TToixha. The Latin, with emendations from the Codex
Bobiensis and Epiphanius, gives y7id virtute circmndi'dit przinunt
hominem, qii<E sunt quingue elemeiita, etc., = with which power He
begirt the first man, which is the same as the five elements, etc. With
slight difiererces the Codex Bobiensis reads quA circumdedi't, and
the Codex Casinensis, qum virtute. Pelavius pointed out that there
is probably an omission in the text here. And from a passage in
Epiphanius, Hcer., Ixvi. n. 45, it has been proposed to fill out the
sentence thus: TrpofidWeiv i^ iavTov Svvati.Lv nrjTepa t^s ^w^s, Kai
avTr}v TTpo^e^XjjKevai toj/ irpCiTov avOpuinov^ avrr^v 6e rrfv fj.rirfpa ttj?
^«J^9 Toi' Te rrpwToi' avBpuiwov ra irevre crToixeia. The sense might
then be, that the good Father put forth from Himself a power called
the Mother of Life, that this Mother of Life put forth ^<t first man,
and that the said Mother of Life and the first man put forth (or con-
stituted) the five elements. See the note in Routh's Reliquice Sacrce,

^ The Codex Bobiensis omits the venius, wind.

* The Greek gives eCTTepeoxrei' iv Tcjj cmpaonaTi, The Latin
version has, " crucifixit eos in firmamento." And Routh apparently
favours the reading icTTavpiatrtv = crucified them, etc. Valesius and
the Codex Bobiensis have, " descendens eduxit principes Jesu, exiens
in firmamentiun quod est," etc.


in its eight species. 5 And the Omophorus ^ sus-
tains the burden thereof beneath ; and when he
is wearied with bearing it he trembles, and in
that manner becomes the cause of a quaking
of the earth in contravention of its determinate
times. On account of this the good Father sent
His Son forth from His own bosom ^ into the
heart of the earth, and into these lowest parts
of it, in order to secure for him the correction
befitting him.^ And whenever an earthquake
occurs, he is either trembling under his weari-
ness, or is shifting his burden from one shoulder
to the other. Thereafter, again, the matter also
of itself produced growths ; ^ and when these
were carried off as spoil on the part of some of
the princes, he summoned together all the fore-
most of the princes, and took from all of them
individually power after power, and made up the
man who is after the image of that first man,
and united'" the soul (with these powers) in him.
This is the account of the manner in which his
constitution was planned.

8. But when the hving Father perceived that
the soul was in tribulation in the body, being full
of mercy and compassion. He sent His own
beloved Son for the salvation of the soul. For
this, together with the matter of Omophorus,
was the reason of His sending Him. And the
Son came and transformed Himself into the
likeness of man, and manifested " Himself to
men as a man, while yet He was not a man, and
men supposed that He was begotten. Thus He
came and prepared the work which was to effect
the salvation of the souls, and with that object
constructed an instrument with twelve ums,'^
which is made to revolve by the sphere, and
draws up with it the souls of the dying. And
the greater luminary receives these souls, and
purifies them with its rays, and then passes them
over to the moon ; and in this manner the
moon's disc, as it is designated by us, is filled
up. For he says that these two luminaries are
ships or passage-boats. '3 Then, if the moon
becomes full, it ferries its passengers across
toward the east wind, and thereby effects its own
waning '■♦ in getting itself delivered of its freight.
And in this manner it goes on making the pas-


S 61! e'lSrj oKTio. The Latin, however, gives ei sunt octo, " and
they are eight; " thus apparently having read eitri Si oktou, instead ol
ets cIStj oKToi.

*> i e., one who bears on his shoulder's, the upholder.

7 Reading ix riav koXttmv, de sinibus siiis. But the Codex
Bobiensis gives (/^/?K/i^?<J, from His own territories.

^ The Greek text is, ottco? avim triv ;rpo<r»)KOVcrav eTriTijiiav Sw.
The Latin gives, " quo ilium, ut par erat, coerceret." The Codex
Bobiensis reads, "quod ilium, ut pareret, coerceret." It is clear
also that Petavius read correctly cTriTijiiiaf for iTndvtiiav in Epipha-
nius.

9 TO. <l>VTd.

10 eS-qcrev. The Codex Bobiensis gives, " vexit animam in eo."

" But certain codices read et parebat, " and was obedient," in
stead of apparebat.

'2 Ka.Sov<i,

'3 TTopOfiela,

'■* anoKpovuiv. The Codex Casinensis has apocrtsin ; but the
Codex Bobiensis gives apocrusin.


1 84


THE DISPUTATION WITH MANES.


sage across, and again discharging its freight of
souls drawn up by the urns, until it saves its own
proper portion of the souls.' Moreover, he
maintains that every soul, yea, every living crea-
ture that moves, partakes of the substance of
the good Father. And accordingly, when the
moon delivers over its freight of souls to the
aeons of the Father, they abide there in that
pillar of glory, which is called the perfect air.^
And this air is a pillar of light, for it is filled
with the souls that are being purified. Such,
moreover, is the agency by which the souls are
saved. But the following, again, is the cause of
men's dying : A certain virgin, fair in person,
and beautiful in attire, and of most persuasive
address, aims at making spoil of the princes
that have been borne up and crucified on the
firmament by the living Spirit ; and she appears
as a comely female to the princes, but as a
handsome and attractive young man to the prin-
cesses. And the princes, when they look on her
in her splendid figure, are smitten with love's
sting ; and as they are unable to get possession
of her, they burn fiercely with the flame of amo-
rous desire, and lose all power of reason. While
they thus pursue the virgin, she disappears from
view. Then the great prince sends forth from
himself the clouds, with the purpose of bringing
darkness on the whole world, in his anger. And
then, if he feels grievously oppressed, his ex-
haustion expresses itself in perspiration, just as
a man sweats under toil ; and this sweat of his
forms the rain. At the same time also the har-
vest-prince,3 if he too chances to be captivated
by the virgin, scatters pestilence '' on the whole
earth, with the view of putting men to death.
Now this body (of man) is also called a cosmos,
i.e., a microcosm, in relation to the great cosmos,
i.e., the macrocosm of the universe ; apd all
men have roots which are linked beneath with
those above. Accordingly, when this prince is
captivated by the virgin's charms, he then begins
to cut the roots of men ; and when their roots
are cut, then pestilence commences to break
forth, and in that manner they die. And if he
shakes the upper parts of the root mightily,' an
earthquake bursts, and follows as the conse-
quence of the commotion to which the Omoph-
orus is subjected. This is the explanation of
(the phenomenon of) death.
9. I shall explain to you also how it is that


' The text gives t^s i//vxi?. But from the old Latin version,
which has aniinarum, we may conjecture that tuiv xj/v^Qiv was
read.

2 The Latin version has " r'zV perfectus," — a reading which is
due apparently to the fact that the author had mistaken the arip of the
Greek for avrip. [See note 2, p. 176, su/>ret.]

3 6 flepicrub? apxuii'. The version of Petavius has, " Sic et prin-
ceps alter, messor appellatus." Perhaps the reading should be o
6ipi.aij.ov dpx^tui'.

4 Xoifiou. Other codices %\\& fatnent, as reading \{.ti.6v, famine.

5 iav hi Ta tu'oj Trj? P'^')? ttoi/oj (raAeutrr;. It may be also = And
if the upper parts of the root shake under the exertion.


the soul is transfused into five bodies.^ First of
all, in this process some small portion of it is
purified ; and then it is transfused into the body
of a dog, or a camel, or some other animal.
But if the soul has been guilty of homicide, it
is translated into the body of the celephi ; ^
and if it has been found to have engaged
in cutting,^ it is made to pass into the body
of the dumb. Now these are the designations
of the soul, — namely, intelligence, reflection,
prudence, consideration, reasoning.'' Moreover,
the reapers who reap are likened to the princes
who have been in darkness from the beginning,'"
since they consumed somewhat of the panoply
of the first man. On this account there is a
necessity for these to be translated into hay,
or beans, or barley, or corn, or vegetables, in
order that in these forms they, in like manner,
may be reaped and cut. And again, if any one
eats bread, he must needs also become bread
and be eaten. If one kills a chicken," he will
be a chicken himself. If one kills a mouse, he
will also become a mouse himself. If, again,
one is wealthy in this world, it is necessary
that, on quitting the tabernacle of his body, he
should be made to pass into the body of a beg-
gar, so as to go about asking alms, and thereafter
he shall depart into everlasting punishment.
Moreover, as this body pertains to the princes
and to matter, it is necessary that he who plants
a persea '^ should pass though many bodies until
that persea is prostrated. And if one builds a
house for himself, he will be divided and scat-
tered among all the bodies. '^ If one bathes irt
water, he freezes "* his soul ; and if one refuses
to give pious regard 's to his elect, he will be
punished through the generations,''' and will be
translated into the bodies of catechumens, until
he render many tributes of piety ; and for this
reason they offer to the elect whatever is best in
their meats. And when they are about to eat


6 Trio? fieTa-yyi^eTai 17 'iiv'lfy ei? TTfvre (TMixara. But the Codex
Bobiensis reads transferiintnr ; and the Latin version gives, " quo-
modo et animae in alia quoque corpora transfunduntur " = how the
souls are also transfused into other bodies.

7 The text gives Ke\«l>wv, which is spoken of in Migne as an un-
known animal, though /ccAec^o? (thus accentuated) occurs in ecclesias-
tical writers in the sense of a leper. It is proposed to read ikti^avTi.uiv,
"of elephants; " and so the Codex Bobiensis gives " elephantorum
corpora," and Codex Casinensis has " in elefantia eorum corpora,"
which is probably an error for " in elephantiacorum corpora." Routh
suggests e'At^afTeioj^. \_Reliqii. Sac, vol. v. p. 58.]

° 0fpi<Ta<Ta, reaping.

9 I'ovi;, fi'i'oia, 4>povrj(Ti?, evSvp.rfa-i';, Aoytcr/ud!. The Latin ver-
sion renders, vtens, sensns, pr7tdentia, intellectus, cogitatio. Peta-
vius gives, mens, iiotio, iyitelligcntia, cogitatio, ratiocinatio.

'° T019 a7rap\r;? oSo'ii' eis o-koto?. But the Latin version gives
" qui ex materia orti," etc. — who, having sprung from matter, are in
darkness.

It opinQiov.

■2 Explained as a species of Egyptian tree, in which the fruit grows
from the stem. The Codex Casinensis has the strange readme, per
se ad illain, {ox perscam, etc. See also Epiphanius, num. 9.

13 ei^ ra oAa aiu^iaTa.

'•• TTijcrcTft. But the Latin version gives vulnerat, "wounds,"
from the reading TrAtjcrcrfi. [Note 2, p. 176, 5upra.\

15 (.vai^tiav. But the Latin version gives alimcnta.

'<> ei! Ta5 yfvio.'i. But the Latin version has " pocnis siibdetur
gehennse " = will suffer the pains of hell. [Compare p. 185, in/ra,
" Gehen."]


THE DISPUTATION WITH MANES.


i8 =


bread, they offer up prayer first of all, address-
ing themselves in these terms to the bread : " I
have neither reaped thee, nor ground thee, nor
pressed thee, nor cast thee into the baking-ves-
sel ; but another has done these things, and
brought thee to me, and I have eaten thee with-
out fault." And when he has uttered these
things to himself, he says to the catechumen,'
" I have prayed for thee ; " and in this manner
that person then takes his departure. For, as I
remarked to you a little before, if any one reaps,
he will be reaped ; and so, too, if one casts
grain into the mill, he will be cast in himself in
like manner, or if he kneads he will be kneaded,
or if he bakes he will be baked ; and for this
reason they are interdicted from doing any such
work. Moreover, there are certain other worlds
on which the luminaries rise when they have set
on our world.- And if a person walks upon the
ground here, he injures the earth ; and if he
moves his hand, he injures the air ; for the air is
the soul {life) of men and living creatures, both
fowl, and fish, and creeping thing. And as to
every one ^ existing in this world, I have told
you that this body of his does not pertain to
God, but to matter, and is itself darkness, and
consequently it must needs be cast in darkness.
lo. Now, with respect to paradise, it is not
called a cosmos^ The trees that are in it are
lust and other seductions, which corrupt the
rational powers of those men. And that tree in
paradise, by which men know the good, is Jesus
Himself, or'^ the knowledge of Him in the
world. He who partakes thereof discerns the
good and the evil. The world itself, however,
is not God's ivork ; but it was the structure of
a portion of matter, and consequently all things
perish in it. And what the princes took as spoil
from the first man, that is what makes the moon
full, and what is being purged day by day of the
world. And if the soul makes its exit without
having gained the knowledge of the truth, it is
given over to the demons, in order that they
may subdue it in the Gehennas of fire ; and
after that discipline it is made to pass into bodies
with the purpose of being brought into subjec-
tion, and in this manner it is cast into the mighty
fire until the consummation. Again, regarding
the prophets amongst you,^ he speaks thus :
Their spirit is one of impiety, or of the lawless-


' But the Latin version gives, " respondet ad eum qui ei detulit"
= he makes answer to the person who brought it to him.

^ The text is, /cai Tr6.Kt.v eicrii/ crcpoi k6<tixoi Tii-e?, tcui' liujcrTjj'pwv
ovvdyTuiv anb toutou toO K6<Tfiov, ef aiv avaTiWovdi, Routh sug-
gests o'? Tivi<;, deleting e'f Siv,

3 Reading ei tkt, as in the text. Routh suggests et Tt, = As to
everything existing in this world, I have told you that the body
thereof does, etc.

* But the Latin has "qui vocatur," etc. = which is called, etc.
And Routh thereof proposes 6; KaAeirai for v KaXelrai.,

5 The text gives simply r; yvu>cn<;. The Codex Bobiensis has et
scientta. Hence Routh would read ical r; 71-10(71!, and the knowl-
edge.

} Retaining the reading vixlv, though Petavius would substitute
rif.i.i', us. [Routh corrects Petav., R. S., vol. v. pp. 63, 64 j


ness of the darkness which arose at the begin-
ning. And being deceived by this spirit, they
have not spoken truth ; for the prince blinded
their mind. And if any one follows their words,
he dies for ever, bound to the clods of earth,
because he has not learned the knowledge of
the Paraclete. He also gave injunctions to his
elect alone, who are not more than seven in
number. ''And the charge was this : " When ye
cease eating, pray, and put upon your head an
olive, sworn with the invocation of many names
for the confirmation of this faith." The names,
however, were not made known to me ; for only
these seven make use of them. And again, the
name Sabaoth, which is honourable and mighty
with you, he declares to be the nature of man,
and the parent of desire ; for which reason the
simple 7 worship desire, and hold it to be a deity.
Furthermore, as regards the manner of the crea-
tion of Adam, he tells us that he who said,
" Come and let us make man in our image, after
our likeness," or " after the form which we have
seen," is the prince who addressed the other
princes in terms which may be thus interpreted :
" Come, give me of the light which we have
received, and let us make man after the form of
us princes, even after that form which we have
seen, that is to say,^ the first man." And in
that manner he 9 created the man. They cre-
ated Eve also after the like fashion, imparting to
her of their own lust, with a view to the de-
ceiving of Adam. And by these means the
construction of the world proceeded from the
operations of the prince.

II. He holds also that God has no part with
the world itself, and finds no pleasure in it, by
reason of its having been made a spoil of from
the first by the princes, and on account of the
ill that rose on it. Wherefore He sends and
takes away from them day by day the soul be-
longing to Him, through the medium of these
luminaries, the sun and the moon, by which the
whole world and all creation are dominated.
Him, again, who spake with Moses, and the
Jews, and the priests, he declares to be the
prince of the darkness ; so that the Christians,
and the Jews, and the Gentiles are one and the
same body, worshipping the same God : for He
seduces them in His own passions, being no God
of truth. For this reason all those who hope in
that God who spake with Moses and the prophets
have to be bound together with the said deity,'°
because they have not hoped in the God of
truth ; for that deity spake with him in accord-
ance with their own passions. Moreover, after


7 cnrKapioi, in the Latin version Simpliciores, a name apparently
'given to the Catholics by the Manichseans. See Ducangii Glossa-
rium nicdiiB et iiifiiiice Griecitatis. [Routh, v. p. 65, worth noting, j

* The text gives o tori Trpioros acSpujiros. Routh proposes b
ecTTi, etc.

9 Or, they.


i86


THE DISPUTATION WITH MANES.


all these things, he speaks in the following terms
with regard to the end,' as he has also written :
When the elder has displayed his image,^ the
Omophorus then lets the earth go from him, and
so the mighty fire gets free, and consumes the
whole world. Then, again, he lets the soil go
with the new seon,^ in order that all the souls
of sinners may be bound for ever. These things
will take place at the time when the man's
image ^ has come.s And all these powers put
forth by God,^ — namely, Jesus, who is in the
smaller ship, 7 and the Mother of Life, and the
twelve helmsmen,^ and the virgin of the light,
and the third elder, who is in the greater ship, and
the living spirit, and the wall "^ of the mighty fire,
and the wall of the wind, and the air, and the
water, and the interior living fire, — have their
seat in the lesser luminary, until the fire shall
have consumed the whole world : and that is to
happen within so many years, the exact number
of which, however, I have not ascertained. And
after these things there will be a restitution of the
two natures ; '° and the princes will occupy the
lower parts proper to them, and the Father
the higher parts, receiving again what is His own
due possession. — All this doctrine he delivered
to his three disciples, and charged each to jour-
ney to a separate clime." The Eastern parts fell
thus to the lot of Addas ; Thomas '^ obtained the
Syrian territories as his heritage ; and another,
to wit, Hermeias, directed his course towards
Egypt. And to this day they sojourn there, with
the purpose of establishing the propositions con-
tained in this doctrine.'-''

12. When Turbo had made this statement,
Archelaus was intensely excited ; but Marcellus
remained unmoved, for he expected that God
would come to the help of His truth. Arche-
laus, however, had additional cares in his anxiety
about the people, like the shepherd who be-
comes concerned for his sheep when secret perils
threaten them from the wolves. Accordingly
Marcellus loaded Turbo with the most hberal
gifts, and instructed him to remain in the house
of Archelaus the bishop. '•< But on that selfsame

' eiri TeAfi.

^ The text is Ka9u>s outos €ypa\tiev • 'O irpe<r(3vTi;?, etc. The
Codex Bobicnsis gives, " Sicut ipse senior scripsit: Cum manifestam
feceris," etc., = As the elder himself wrote: When thou hast, etc.
The eMer here is probably the same as the third elder farther on.

3 The Greek is, a<|)iT)cri. toi- QmAoi' /ueTo. toO viov acu)i'05; but the
Latin version has the strangely diverse rendering, " dimittunt animam
quae objicitur inter medium novi ssculi " = they let go the soul that is
placed in the midst of the new age. [Routh has rrji' ^utKov.\

* ai'Spia?.

S But the Latin gives, " cum statuta venerit dies " = when the ap-
pointed day has come.

^ at 6e TrpoSoAat Tratrat.

7 ttAoim. [See Routh, p. 68, on this locus mire dej>ravaius.'\

8 Ku/3epi'rJTai.

9 Tei;(09.

'o TMv &V0 <l>v<T(u)v, But the Latin version gives dttorum lumi-
narium, and the Codex Casinensis has luminarioru/n, the two
luminaries.

" Reading K-AiVara, with Petavius, for Kkrinara.

'^ The Codex Casinensis makes no mention of Thomas.

" Here ends the Greek of Epiphanius.

'•* The words, ike bishop, are omitted in the Codex Bobiensis.


day Manes arrived, bringing along with him cer-
tain chosen youths and virgins to the number
of twenty-two. '5 And first of all he sought for
Turbo at the door of the house of Marcellus ;
and on failing to find him there, he went in to
salute Marcellus. On seeing him, Marcellus at
first was struck vvith astonishment at the costume
in which he presented himself For he wore a
kind of shoe which is usually called in common
speech the quadrisole ; "^ he had also a party-
coloured cloak, of a somewhat airy '^ appearance ;
in his hand he grasped a very sturdy staff of
ebony-wood ; '** he carried a Babylonian book
under his left arm ; his legs were swathed in
trousers of different colours, the one being red,
and the other green as a leek ; and his whole
mien was like that of some old Persian master
and commandant. ■'5 Thereupon Marcellus sent
forthwith for Archelaus, who arrived so quickly
as almost to outstrip the word, and on entering
was greatly tempted at once to break out against
him, being provoked to that instantly by the
very sight of his costume and his appearance,
though more especially also by the fact that he
had himself been turning over in his mind in his
retirement^" the various matters which he had
learned from the recital of Turbo, and had thus
come carefully prepared. But Marcellus, in his
great thoughtfulness, repressed all zeal for mere
wrangling, and decided to hear both parties.
With that view he invited the leading men of
the city ; and from among them he selected as
judges of the discussion certain adherents of the
Gentile religion, four in number. The names
of these umpires were as follows : Manippus, a
person deeply versed in the art of grammar and
the practice of rhetoric ; ^gialeus,"' a very emi-
nent physician, and a man of the highest repu-
tation for learning ; and Claudius and Cleobolus,"
two brothers famed as rhetoricians.^^ A splendid
assemblage was thus convened ; so large, indeed,
that the house of Marcellus, which was of im-
mense size, was filled with those who had been
called to be hearers. And when the parties who
proposed to speak in opposition to each other


'5 But Codex Bobiensis gives duodecim, twelve.

'6 But the Codex Bobiensis gives trisoliutn, the trisole. Strabo,
book XV., tells us that the Persians wore high shoes.

■7 Aerina, sky-like. [This portrait seems from life.]

'3 Ducange in his Glossary, under the word E^eAAl;'0?, shows
from Callisthenes that the prophets or interpreters of sacred things
carried an ebony staff. [Ezek. xxvii. 15; Routh, p. 71.-]

'9 The text is, " vultus vero ut senis Persse artificis et bellorum_
ducis videbatur." Philippus Buonarruotius, in the Osservazioni
sopra alctini/rannncjiti di 7<asi anticlii di Vetro, Florence, 1716,
p. 69, thinks that this rendering has arisen from the Latin translator's
having erroneously read is SrjjiioupyoO /cai o-TpaTrjyoi' instead of uj!
6r;MapX°" ''<'"• (rrpaTrjyoi). Taking cTTpaTT/yoO, therefore, in the civil
sense which it bears in various passages, he would interpret the sen-
tence thus : "His whole mien was like that of an old Persian tribune
and viagistrate." See Gallandi's note [in Routh, p. 71].

20 The text is secretius factum, etc. Routh suggests secretius
/actus, etc.

2' The Codex Bobiensis reads " jEgidius."

2^ Epiphanius gives KAf63ovAo?.

23 Codex Casinensis reads rectores, governors. And Epiphanius,
num. 10, makes the first a professor of Gentile philosophy, the second
a physician, the third a grammarian, and the fourth a rhetorician.


THE DISPUTATION WITH MANES.


187


had taken their places in view of all, then those
who had been elected as judges took their seats
in a position elevated above all others : and the
task of commencing the disputation was assigned
to Manes. Accordingly, when silence was se-
cured, he began ' the discussion in the following
terms : ^ —

13. My brethren, I indeed am a disciple of
Christ, and, moreover, an apostle of Jesus ; and
it is owing to the exceeding kindness of Mar-
cellus that I have hastened hither, with the view
of showing him clearly in what manner he ought
to keep the system of divine religion, so that
the said Marcellus verily, who at present has put
himself, like one who has surrendered himself
prisoner, under the doctrine of Archelaus, may
not, like the dumb animals, which are destitute
of intellect and understand not what they do, be
fatally smitten to the ruin of his soul, in conse-
quence of any failure in the possession of further
facilities for setting about the right observance
of divine worship. I know, furthermore, and am
certain, that if Marcellus is once set right,^ it will
be quite possible that all of you may also have
your salvation effected ; for your city hangs sus-
pended upon his judgment. If vain presump-
tion is rejected by every one of you, and if those
things which are to be declared by me be heard
with a real love for the truth, ye will receive the
inheritance of the age to come, and the kingdom
of heaven. I, in sooth, am the Paraclete, whose
mission was announced of old time by Jesus, and
who was to come to " convince the world of sin
and unrighteousness." '* And even as Paul, who
was sent before me, said of himself, that " he
knew in part, and prophesied in part," 5 so I re-
serve the perfect for myself, in order that I may
do away with that which is in part. Therefore
receive ye this third testimony, that I am an elect
apostle of Christ ; and if ye choose to accept
my words, ye will find salvation ; but if ye refuse
them, eternal fire will have you to consume you.
For as Hymenseus and Alexander were " delivered
unto Satan, that they might learn not to blas-
pheme," ^ so will all ye also be delivered unto
the prince of punishments, because ye have done
injury to the JFather of Christ, in so far as ye
declare Him to be the cause of all evils, and the
founder of unrighteousness, and the creator of
all iniquity. By such doctrine ye do, indeed,
bring forth from the same fountain both sweet
water and bitter, — a thing which can in no pos-

' Tor /n'mtim the Codex Casinensis reads /Iurtma, = he began
a lengthened statement, etc.

^ Thus far Valesius edited the piece from the Codex Bobiensis.

3 Reading emendato. Codex Casinensis gives enim data.

* John xvi. 8. Injiistitia. This reading, de iiijustitia, maybe
due to an error on the part of the scribe, but is more probably to be
referred to the practice pursued by Manes in ahering and corrupting
the sacred text to suit his own tenets. See Epiphaniuson this heresy,
num. 53, and cap. 53, infra. [" He introduced much new matter."]

5 I Cor. xiii. 9.

' I Tim. i. 20.


sible way be either done or apprehended. For
who ought to be believed ? Should it be those
masters of yours whose enjoyment is in the flesh,
and who pamper themselves with the richest de-
lights ; or our Saviour Jesus Christ, who says, as
it is written in the book of the Gospels, " A good
tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can a •
corrupt tree bring forth good fruit," ^ and who
in another place assures us that the " father of
the devil ^ is a liar and a murderer from the be-
ginning," 9 and tells us again that men's desire
was for the darkness,'" so that they would not fol-
low that ^\■ ord that had been sent forth in the
beginning from the light," and (once more shows
us) the man who is the enemy of the same, the
sower of tares, '^ and the god and prince of the
age of this world, who blinds the minds of men
that they may not be obedient to the truth in the
Gospel of Christ? '3 Is that God goodwlio has
no wish that the men who are his own should be
saved ? And, not to go over a multitude of other
matters, and waste much time, I inay defer '■* till
another opportunity the exposition of the true
doctrine ; and taking it for granted that I have
said enough on this subject for the present, I may
revert to the matter immediately before me, and
endeavour satisfactorily to demonstrate the ab-
surdity of these men's teaching, and show that
none of these things can be attributed to the
God and Father of our Lord and Saviour, but
that we must take Satan to be the cause of all >
our ills. To him, certainly, these must be car-
ried back, for all ills of this kind are generated
by him. But those things also which are written
in the prophets and the law are none the less to
be ascribed to him ; for he it is who spake then
in the prophets, introducing into their minds very
many ignorant notions of God, as well as tempta-
tions and passions. They, too, set forth that
devourer of blood and flesh ; and to that Satan
and to his prophets all these things properly per-
tain which he wished to transfer '5 to the Father
of Christ, prepared as he was to write a few
things in the way of truth, that by means of these
he might also gain credence for those other state-
ments of his which are false. Hence it is well
for us to receive nothing at all of all those things
which have been written of old even down to
John, and indeed to embrace only the kingdom
of heaven, which has been preached in the Gos-
pel since his days ; for they verily but made a


^ Matt. vii. i8.
' Patrem diaboli.
9 John viii. 44.

'° Referring, perhaps, to John i. 5.

" The text gives, " ut insequerentur. . . . Verbum, et inimicum,"
etc. The sense seems to be as above, supposing either that the verb
insequerentur is used with the meaning of assailing, persecuting, or
that the ut is put for ut ne, as is the case with the exccecat ut at the
close of the sentence.
'- Matt. xiii. 25.
'3 Eph. vi. 12; 2 Cor. iv 4.

'•* Reading differcns. But Codex Casinensis gives disserens.
'5 Transforiuare.


THE DISPUTATION WITH MANES.


mockery of themselves, introducing as they did
things ridiculous and ludicrous, keeping some
small words given in obscure outline in the law^,
but not understanding that, if good things are
mixed up with evil, the result is, that by the cor-
ruption of these evil things, even those others
which are good are destroyed. And if, indeed,
there is any one who may prove himself able to
demonstrate that the law upholds the right, that
law ought to be kept ; but if we can show it to
be evil, then it ought to be done away with and
rejected, inasmuch as it contains the ministration
of death, which was graven,' which also covered
and destroyed the glory on the countenance of
Moses. ^ It is a thing not without peril, there-
fore, for any one of you to teach the New Testa-
ment along with the law and the prophets, as if
they were of one and the same origin ; for the
knowledge of our Saviour renews the one from
day to day, while the other grows old and infirm,
and passes almost into utter destruction.^ And
this is a fact manifest to those who are capable
of exercising discernment. For just as, when
the branches of a tree become aged, or when the
trunk ceases to bear fruit any more, they are cut
down ; and just as, when the members of the
body suffer mortification, they are amputated, for
the poison of the mortification diffuses itself from
these members through the whole body, and un-
less some remedy be found for the disease by the
skill of the physician, the whole body will be
vitiated ; so, too, if ye receive the law without
understanding its origin, ye will ruin your souls,
and lose your salvation. For " the law and the
prophets were until John ; " ■* but since John the
law of truth, the law of the promises, the law of
heaven, the new law, is made known to the race
of man. And, in sooth, as long as there was no
one to exhibit to you this most true knowledge
of our Lord Jesus, ye had not sin. Now, how-
ever, ye both see and hear, and yet ye desire to
walk in ignorance, 5 in order that ye may keep ^
that law which has been destroyed and aban-
doned. And Paul, too, who is held to be the
most approved apostle with us, expresses himself
to the same effect in one of his epistles, when he
says : " For if I build again the things which I
destroyed, I make myself a prevaricator." ? And
in saying this he pronounces on them as Gentiles,
because they were under the elements of the
world,** before the fulness of faith came, believ-
ing then as they did in the law and the prophets.


' ttiformatiDii.

^ I Cor. iii. 7.

3 Cf. Heb. viii. 13.

* Luke xvi. 16.

5 In inscitias ire vultis. It is proposed to read inficias = and yet
ye desire to deny the truth. Routh suggests, et odistis et in insci-
tiavt ire vultis = and ye hate it, and choose to take your way into
ignorance.

* Supplying oiserretis in the clause ui legem, etc.

' Prm<aricatorem. Gal. ii. 18 [Vulgate. But see p. 176].
8 Gal. iv. 3.


14. The judges said: If you have any clearer
statement yet to make, give us some explanation
of the nature 9 of your doctrine and the designa-
tion '° of your faith. Manes irplicd : I hold that
there are two natures, one good and another evil ;
and that the one which is good dwells indeed in
certain parts proper to it, but that the evil one
is this world, as well as all things in it, which are
placed there like objects imprisoned " in the por-
tion of the wicked one, as John says, that " the
whole world lieth in wickedness," '- and not in
God. Wherefore we have maintained that there
are two localities, — one good, and another which
lies outside of this,'^ so that, having space therein
in his, it might be capable of receiving into itself
the creature, i.e., creation, of the world. For if
we say that there is but a monarchy of one nature,
and that God fills all things, and that there is no
location outside of Him, what will be the sus-
tainer of the creature, i.e., creation} where will
be the Gehenna of fire ? where the outer dark-
ness? where the weeping? Shall I say in Him-
self? God forbid; else He Himself will also be
made to suffer in and with these. Entertain no
such fancies, whosoever of you have any care for
your salvation ; for I shall give you an example,
in order that you may have fuller understanding
of the truth. The world is one vessel ; ■■* and if 's
the substance of God has already filled this entire
vessel, how is it possible now that anything more
can be placed in this same vessel? If it is full,
how shall it receive what is placed in it, unless
a certain portion of the vessel is emptied ? Or
whither shall that which is to be emptied out
make its way, seeing that there is no locality for
it ? Where then is the earth ? where the heavens ?
where the abyss? where the stars? where the
settlements ? '^ where the powers ? where the
princes? where the outer darkness? Who is he
that has laid the foundations of these, and where ?
No one is able to tell us that without stumbling
on blasphemy. And in what way, again, has He
been able to make the creatures, if there is no
subsistent matter? For if He has made them
out of the non-existent, it will follow that these
visible creatures should be superior, and full of
all virtues. But if in these there ^re wickedness,
and death, and corruption, and whatever is op-
posed to the good, how say we that they owe
their formation to a nature different from them-
selves? Howbeit if you consider the way in
which the sons of men are begotten, you will


9 Or, standard.

JO Titulo.

" Ergastula.

'2 Or, in the wicked one. i John v. 19.

'3 The text gives "extra eu»i." Routh suggests /?«/>«, outside
of God.

■-i Vas.

'S The text gives simply " quod Dei substantia," etc. We may
perhaps adopt, with Routh, " quod si Dei," etc.

"> Sedes. ["Thrones," as in Milton.] Routh suggests sidera,
luminaries.


THE DISPUTATION WITH MANES.


189


find that the creator of man is not the Lord, but
another being, who is also himself of an unbe-
gotten ' nature, who has neither founder, nor
creator, nor maker, but who, such as he is, has
been produced by his own malice alone. In ac-
cordance with this, you men have a commerce
with your wives, which comes to you by an occa-
sion of the following nature. When any one of
you has satiated himself with carnal meats, and
meats of other kinds, then the impulse of con-
cupiscence rises in him, and in this way the enjoy-
ment - of begetting a son is increased ; and this
happens not as if that had its spring in any vir-
tue, or in philosophy, or in any other gift of mind,
but in fulness of meats only, and in lust and for-
nication. And how shall any one tell me that
our father Adam was made after the image of
God, and in His likeness, and that he is like Him
who made him? How can it be said that all of
us who have been begotten of him are like him ?
Yea, rather, on the contrary, have we not a great
variety of forms, and do we not bear the impress
of different countenances? And how true this
is, I shall exhibit to you in parables. Look, for
instance, at a person who wishes to seal up a
treasure, or some other object, and you will ob-
serve how, when he has got a little wax or clay,
he seeks to stamp it with an impression of his
own countenance from the ring which he wears ; ^
but if another countenance also stamps the figure
of itself on the object in a similar manner, will
the impression seem like? By no means, al-
though you may be reluctant to acknowledge
what is true. But if we are not like in the cotn-
7/10)1 impression, and if, instead of that, there are
differences in us, how can it fail to be proved
thereby that we are the workmanship of the
princes, and of matter? For in due accordance
with their form, and likeness, and image, we also
exist as diverse forms. But if you wish to be
fully instructed as to that commerce which took
place at the beginning, and as to the manner in
which it occurred, I shall explain the matter to
you.

15. The judges said: We need not inquire as
to the manner in which that primitive commerce
took place until we have first seen it proved that
there are two natural principles. For when once
it is made clear that there are two unbegotten
natures, then others of your averments may also
gain our assent, even although something in them
may not seem to fit in very readily with what is

' IngenitiE.

^ Fructus.

3 The reference is to the ancient custom of using wax and certain
earths and clays for the purpose of affixing, by means of the ring, a
seal with an impression on any object which it was desired to secure.
Thus Herodotus, ii. 38, tell us how the Egyptians marked the pure
victim by wrapping it round the horns with papyrus, and then smear-
ing some sealing earth {yy)v crriu-avrpLSa) on it, and stamping it with
a ring. See also Cicero, Pro Flacco, where he speaks of the laudatio
obsignata cretA ilia Asiatica ; and Plautus, Pseiidolus,'&cex\s\.,
where he mentions the cxpressatn in ccrn ex aniiulo suani imagi-
nem, etc. [Compare vol. v. p. 466, note 3, this series.]


credible. For as the power of pronouncing judg-
ment has been committed to us, we shall declare
what may make itself clear to our mind. \Wq
may, however, also grant to Archelaus the liberty
of speaking to these statements of yours, so that,
by comparing what is said by each of you, we
may be able to give our decision in accordance
with the truth. Archelaus said : Notwithstand-
ing, the adversary's intent is replete with gross
audacity and blasphemy. Manes said : Hear, O
judges, what he has said of the adversary.^ He
admits, then, that there are two objects. Arche-
laus said : It seems to me that this man is full
of madness rather than of prudence, who would
stir up a controversy with me to-day because I
chance to speak of the adversary. But this ob-
jection of yours may be removed with few words,
notwithstanding that you have supposed from
this expression of mine that I shall allow that
there are these two natures. s You have come
forward with a most extravagant ^ doctrine ; for
neither of the assertions made by you holds
good. For it is quite possible that one who is
an adversary, not by nature, but by determina-
tion, may be made a friend, and cease to be an
adversary ; and thus, when the one of us has
come to acquiesce with the other, we twain shall
appear to be, as it were, one and the same ob-
ject. This account also indicates that rational
creatures have been entrusted with free-will,'' in
virtue of which they also admit of conversions.
And consequently there cannot be two unbegotten
natures.** What do you say, then? Are these
two natures inconvertible? hx are they converti-
ble ? or is one of them converted ? Manes, how-
ever, held back, because he did not find a
suitable reply ; for he was pondering the con-
clusion which might be drawn from either of
two answers which he might make, turning the
matter over thus in his thoughts : If I say that
they are converted, he will meet me with that
statement which is recorded in the Gospel about
the trees ; ^ but if I say that they are not con-
i vertible, he will necessarily ask me to explain
' the condition and cause of their intermingling.
In the meantime, after a little delay. Manes re-
\ plied : They are indeed both inconvertible in so
I far as contraries are concerned ; but they ^re
convertible as far as properties '° are concerned.
Archelaus then said : You seem to me to be out


•♦ The text is "quid dixerit adversarii; " some propose " ywo^^ '
Ot " gnia dixerit," etc.

5 The manuscript reading is, " tam si quidem ex hoc arbitratus
est se afifirmaturum." For this it is proposed to read, as in the
translation, " tametsi quidem ex hoc arbitratus es me affirmaturum."

*> The text gives iiigeiitem. Routh suggests itisciftitcm, stupid.

7 [Vol. iii. 301-302. See Coleridge (on t)onne) , English Divines,
vol. i. p. 87 ]

8 Adopting the proposed reading, " et ideo dnce ingenitse naturae
esse non possunt." The text omits the ducp, however: and in that
case the sense would be simply, .And consequently there cannot be
unbegotten natures; or perhaps, And so they (the creatures) cannot
be of an unbegotten nature.

9 [Matt. vii. 15-20.]
10 Propria.


IQO


THE DISPUTATION WITH MANES.


of your mind, and oblivious of your own proposi-
tions ; yea, you do not appear even to recognise
the powers or qualities of the very words which
you have been learning.' For you do not un-
derstand either what conversion is, or what is
meant by tcnbegotten, or what duality implies,
or what is past, or what is present, or what is
future, as I have gathered from the opinions to
which you have just now given expression. For
you have affirmed, indeed, that each of these
two natures is inconvertible so far as regards
contraries, but convertible so far as regards prop-
erties. But I maintain that one who moves in
properties does not pass out of himself, but sub-
sists in these same properties, in which he is
ever inconvertible ; while in the case of one who
is susceptible of conversion, the effect is that he
is placed outside the pale of properties, and
passes within the sphere of accidents.^

1 6. The judges said: Convertibility translates
the person whom it befalls into another ; as, for
example, we might say that if a Jew were to
make up his mind to become a Christian, or, on
the other hand, if a Christian were to decide to
be a Gentile, this would be a species of converti-
bihty, and a cause of the same.^ But, again, if
we suppose a Gentile to keep by all his own
heathen properties, and to offer sacrifices to his
gods, and to do service to the temples as usual,
surely you v/ould not be of opinion that he
could be said to be converted, while he yet
holds by his properties, and goes on in them?
What, then, do you say ? Do they sustain con-
vertibility or not? And as Manes hesitated,
Archelaus proceeded thus: If, indeed, he says
that both natures are convertible,-* what is there
to prevent our thinking them to be one and the
same object? For if they are inconvertible,
then surely in natures which are similarly incon-
vertible and similarly unbegotten there is no
distinction, neither can the one of them be rec-
ognised as good or as evil. But if they are both
convertible, then, forsooth, the possible result
may be both that the good is made evil, and
that the evil is made good. If, however, this
is the possible result, why should we not speak
of one only as unbegotten,5 which would be
a conception in worthier accordance with the
reckoning of truth? For we have to consider
how that evil one became so at first, or against
what objects he exercised his wickedness before
the formation of the world. When the heavens


' Didicisti. But perhaps we ought to read dixisti, which you
have been uttering.

2 Altcna, of what is alien.

3 The text runs thus: " ut si dicamus, Judseus, si velit fieri Chris-
tianus, aut si Christianus veht esse gentilis, haec species est converti-
bilitatis et causa."

* The text gives convertibiles. Routh suggests inconvertibiles,
inconvertible.

5 The text is uniim dicatniis ingenitiitn, Routh suggests
vnum bonmn, etc. = Why should we not speak of only one unbe-
gotten good?


had not yet appeared, when the earth did not
yet subsist, and when there was neither man nor
animal, against whom did he put his wickedness
in operation? whom did he oppress unjustly?
whom did he rob and kill ? But if you say that
; he first appeared in his evil nature to his own
kin,^ then without doubt you give the proof that
he comes of a good nature. And if, again, all
these are also evil, how can Satan then cast out
Satan ? ^ But while thus reduced to a dilemma
on this point, you may change your position in
the discussion, and say that the good suffered
violence from the evil. But none the more is
it without peril for you to ma^e such a state-
ment, to the effect of affirming the vanquishing
of the light ; for what is vanquished has destruc-
tion near it.^ For what says the divine word ?
" Who can enter into a strong man's house, and
spoil his goods, except he be stronger than he? "9
But if you allege that he first appeared in his evil
nature to men, and only from that time showed
openly the marks of his wickedness, then it fol-
lows that before this time he was good, and that
he took on this quality of conversion because
the creation of man '° was found to have emerged
as the cause of his wickedness. But, in fine, let
him tell us what he understands by evil, lest per-
chance he may be defending or setting up a
mere name. And if it is not the name but llie
substance of evil that he speaks of, then let him
set before us the fruits of this wickedness and
iniquity, since the nature of a tree can never be
known but by its fruit.

17. Manes said: Let it first be allowed on
your side that there is an alien root of wicked-
ness, which God has not planted, and then I
shall tell you its fruits. Archelaus said: Truth's
reckoning does not make any such require-
ment ; and I shall not admit to you that there is
a root of any such evil tree, of the fruit whereof
no one has ever tasted. But just as, when a
man desires to make any purchase, he does not
produce the money unless he first ascertains by
tasting the object whether it is of a dry or a
moist species, so I shall not admit to you that
the tree is evil and utterly corrupt, unless the
quality of its fruit is first exhibited ; for it is
written, that "the tree is known by its fruits." "
Tell us, therefore, O Manes, what fruit is yielded
by that tree which is called evil, or of what na-
ture it is, and what virtue it is, that we may also J|
believe with you that the root of that same tree T


6 The text is, " quod si suis eum dicas extitisse malum, sine dubio
ergo ostenditur ilium bona; esse naturae." Routh suggests, " quia
istis suis adversatur qui mali sunt," etc. = The fact that he is adverse
to those who are of his own kin, and who are evil, would be a proof
that he comes of a good nature.

7 Mark iii. 23.

5 Or, kin to it, vicinum habet interitum.

9 Mark iii. 27.

'° The text is, " creati hominis causa invenitur exstitisse malitise,"
for which we read " creatio hominis," etc.
" Matt. vii. 16.


THE DISPUTATION WITH MANES.


191


is of that character which you ascribe to it.
Manes said: The root indeed is evil, and the
tree is most corrupt, but the increase is not from
God. Moreover, fornications, adulteries, mur-
ders, avarice, and all evil deeds, are the fruits of
that evil root. Arche/aus said : That we may
credit you when you say that these are the fruits
of that evil root, give us a taste of these things ;
for you have pronounced the substance of this
tree to be ungenerate,' the fruits of which are
produced after its own likeness. Afanes said :
The very unrighteousness which subsists in men
offers the proof itself, and in avarice too you
may taste that evil root. Archelaus said : Well,
then, as you have stated the question, those in-
iquities which prevail among men are fruits of
this tree. Manes said: Quite so. Archelaus
proceeded : If these, then, are the fruits, that is
to say, the wicked deeds of men, it will follow
that the men themselves will hold the place of
the root and of the tree ; for you have declared
that they produce fruits of this nature. Manes
said: That is my statement. Archelaus an-
swered: Not well say you, That is my statement:
for surely that cannot be your statement ; other-
wise, when men cease from sinning, this tree of
wickedness will appear to be unfruitful." Manes
said: What you say is an impossibility ; for even
though one or another, or several, were to cease
sinning, there would yet be others doing evil
still. Archelaus said : If it is at all possible for
one or another, or several, as you admit, not to
sin, it is also possible for all to do the same ; for
they are all of one parent, and are all men of
one lump. And, not to follow at my ease those
affirmations which you have so confusedly made
through all their absurdities, I shall conclude
their refutation by certain unmistakeable counter-
arguments. Do you allege that the fruits of the
evil root and the evil tree are the deeds of men,
that is to say, fornications, adulteries, perjuries,
murders, and other similar things ? Manes said :
I do. Archelaus said: Well, then, if it hap-
pened that the race of men was to die off the
face of the earth, so that they should not be able
to sin any more, the substance of that tree would
then perish, and it would bear fruit no more.
Manes said : And when will that take place of
which you speak? Archelaus said: What^ is in
the future I know not, for I am but a man ; never-
theless I shall not leave these words of yours
unexamined. What say you of the race of men?
Is it unbegotten, or is it a production? Manes
said: It is a production. Archelaus said : If
man is a production, who is the parent of adultery
and fornication, and such other things ? Whose


' Ingenitam.

^ The text gives " quoniam quod futurum est nescio, homo enim
sum, non tanien," etc. Routh suggests " ^wowaw;/' quod futurum,"
etc. = What has that to do with the matter? The future I know not,
etc.


fruit is this? Before man was made, who was
there to be a fornicator, or an adulterer, or a
murderer? Manes said: But if the man is
fashioned of the evil nature, it is manifest that
he is such a fruit,^ albeit he may sin, albeit he
may not sin ; whence also the name and race of
men are once for all and absolutely of this char-
acter, whether they may do what is righteous or
what is unrighteous. Archelaus said : Well, we
may also take notice of that matter. If, as you
aver, the wicked one himself made man, why is
it that he practises his malignity on him ?

18. The judges said : We desire to have in-
formation from you on this point, Manichaeus,
to wit, to what effect you have affirmed him to
be evil. Do you mean that he has been so from
the time when men were made, or before that
period? For it is necessary that you should
give some proof of his wickedness from the very
time from which you declare him to have been
evil. Be assured ■♦ that the quality of a wine
cannot be ascertained unless one first tastes it ;
and understand that, in like manner, every tree
is known by its fruit. What say you, then?
From what time has this personality been evil?
For an explanation of this problem seems to us
to be necessary. Manes said : He has always
been so. Archelaus said: Well, then, I shall
also show from this, most excellent friends, and
most judicious auditors, that his statement is by
no means correct. For iron, to take an exam-
ple, has not been an evil thing always, but only
from the period of man's existence, and since
his art turned it to evil by applying it to false
uses ; and every sin has come into existence
since the period of man's being. Even that
great serpent himself was not evil previous to
man, but only after man, in whom he displayed
the fruit of his wickedness, because he willed it
himself. If, then, the father of wickedness
makes his appearance to us after man has come
into being, according to the Scriptures, how can
he be unbegotten who has thus been constituted
evil subsequently to man, who is himself a pro-
duction? But, again, why should he exhibit
himself as evil just from the period when, on
your supposition, he did himself create man? 5
VVhat did he desire in him? If man's whole
body was his own workmanship, what did he
ardently affect in him ? For one who ardently
affects or desires, desires something which is
different and better. If, indeed, man takes his
origin from him in respect of the evil nature,
we see how man was his own, as I have fre-


3 The text is, " sed homo a mala natura plasmatus manifestum
est quia ipse sit fructus," etc.

* Routh, however, points differently, so that the sense is: Be
assured that it is necessary to give some proof, etc. . . . For the
quality of a wine, etc.

s The text is, " ex hominis tempore a se creati cur malus osten-
datur," which is taken to be equivalent to, " e.\ tempore quo homi-
nem ipse creavit," etc.


192


THE DISPUTATION WITH MANES.


quently shown.' For if man was his own, he
was also evil himself, just as it holds with our
illustration of the like tree and the like fruit ;
for an evil tree, as you say, produces evil fruit.
And seeing that all were evil, what did he desid-
erate, or in what could he show the beginning
of his wickedness, if from the time of man's
formation man was the cause of his wickedness?
Moreover, the law and precept having been
given to the man himself, the man had not by
any means the power to yield obedience to the
serpent, and to the statements which were made
by him ; and had the man then yielded no
obedience to him, what occasion would there
have been for him to be evil? But, again, if
evil is unbegotten, how does it happen that man
is sometimes found to be stronger than it? For,
by obeying the law of God, he will often over-
come every root of wickedness ; and it would
be a ridiculous thing if he, who is but the pro-
duction, should be found to be stronger than the
unbegotten. Moreover, whose is that law with
its commandment — that commandment, I mean,
which has been given to man? Without doubt
it will be acknowledged to be God's. And how,
then, can the law be given to an alien ? or who
can give his commandment to an enemy? Or,
to speak of him who receives the command-
ment, how can he contend against the devil?
that is to say, on this supposition, how can he
contend against his own creator, as if the son,
while he is a debtor to him for deeds of kind-
ness, were to choose to inflict injuries on the
father? Thus you but mark out the profitless-
ness ^ of man on this side, if you suppose him
to be contradicting by the law and command-
ment him who has made him, and to be making
the effort to get the better of him. Yea, we
shall have to fancy the devil himself to have
gone to such an excess of folly, as not to have
perceived that in making man he made an ad-
versary for himself, and neither to have consid-
ered what might be his future, nor to have
foreseen the actual consequence of his act ;
whereas even in ourselves, who are but produc-
tions, there are at least some small gifts of
knowledge, and a measure of prudence, and a
moderate degree of consideration, which is some-
times of a very trustworthy nature. And how,
then, can we believe that in the unbegotten there
is not some little portion of prudence, or con-
sideration, or intelligence? Or how can we
make the contrary supposition, according to your


' The reading adopted by Migne is, " si ergo ex eo homo est,
mala natura, demonstratur quomodo suus fuit, ut frequenter ostendi."
Others put the sentence interrogatively = If man takes his origin
from him, (and) the evil nature is thus demonstrated, in what sense
was man his own, etc.? Routh suggests ex quo for ex eo = If the
evil nature is demonstrated just from the time of man's existence,
how was man, etc.?

2 The reading is iniitiliiatein. But Routh points out that this is
probably tlie translation of -tiiv eiire'Aeiai', vilitatem, meanness.


assertion, namely, that he is discovered to be of
the most senseless apprehension, and the dullest
heart, and, in short, rather like the brutes in his
natural constitution? But if the case stands
thus, again, how is it that man, who is possessed
of no insignificant power in mental capacity and
knowledge, could have received his substance
from one who thus is, of all beings, the most
ignorant and the bluntest in apprehension ? How
shall any one be rash enough to profess that ^
man is the workmanship of an author of this
character? But, again, if man consists both of
soul and of body, and not merely of body with-
out soul, and if the one cannot subsist apart
from the other, why will you assert that these
two are antagonistic and contrary to each other?
For our Lord Jesus Christ, indeed, seems to me
to have spoken of these in His parables, when
He said : " No man can put new wine into old
bottles, else the bottles will break, and the wine
run out." 3 But new wine is to be put into new
bottles, as there is indeed one and the same
Lord for the bottle and for the wine. For al-
though the substance may be different, yet by
these two substances, in their due powers, and
in the maintenance of their proper mutual rela-
tions,-* the one person of man subsists. We do
not say, indeed, that the soul is of one substance
with the body, but we aver that they have each
their own characteristic qualities ; and as the
bottle and the wine are applied in the similitude
to one race and one species of men, so truth's
reckoning requires us to grant that man was pro-
duced complete by the one God : for the sou]
rejoices in the body, and loves and cherishes it ;
and none the less does the body rejoice that it
is quickened by the soul. But if, on the other
hand, a person maintains that the body is the
work of the wicked one, inasmuch as it is so
corruptible, and antiquated, and worthless, it
would follow then that it is incapable of sustain- ^^
ting the virtue of the spirit or the movement of S
the soul, and the most splendid creation of the ^^
same. For just as, when a person puts a piece
of new cloth into an old garment, the rent is
made worse ; 5 so also the body would perish if
it were to be associated, under such conditions,
with that most brilliant production the soul.
Or, to use another illustration : just as, when a
man carries the light of a lamp into a dark
place, the darkness is forthwith put to flight and
makes no appearance ; so we ought to under-
stand that, on the soul's introduction into the
body, the darkness is straightway banished, and
one nature at once effected, and one man con-
stituted in one species. And thus, agreeably
therewith, it will be allowed that the new wine is


3 Matt. ix. 17.

•< Domhiatione et observantice usu.

s Matt. ix. 16.


THE DISPUTATION WITH MANES.


19:


put into new bottles, and that the piece of new
cloth is not put into the old garment. But from
this we are able to show that there is a unison
of powers in these two substances, that is to say,
in that of the body and in that of the soul ; of
which unison that greatest teacher in the Scrip-
tures, Paul, speaks, when he tells us, that " God
hath set the members every one of them in the
body as it hath pleased Him." '

19. But if it seems difficult for you to un-
derstand this, and if you do not acquiesce in
these statements, I may at all events try to make
them good by adducing illustrations. Contem-
plate man as a kind of temple, according to the
similitude of Scripture : ^ the spirit that is in
man may thus be likened to the image that
dwells in the temple. Well, then, a temple can-
not be constituted unless first an occupant is
acknowledged for the temple ; and, on the other
hand, an occupant cannot be settled in the tem-
ple unless the structure has been erected. Now,
since these two objects, the occupant and the
structure, are both consecrated together, how can
any antagonism or contrariety be found between
them, and how should it not rather appear that
they have both been the products of subjects
that are in amity and of one mind? And that
you may know that this is the case, and that
these subjects are truly at one both in fellowship
and in lineage. He who knows and hears ^ all
has made this response, "Let us make man,"
and so forth. For he who constructs ■♦ the tem-
ple interrogates him who fashions the image, and
inquires carefully about the measurements of
magnitude, and breadth, and bulk, in order that
he may mark off the space for the foundations
in accordance with these dimensions ; and no
one sets about the vain task of building a temple
without first making himself acquainted with
the measurements needed for the placing of the
image. In like manner, therefore, the mode and
the measure of the body are made the subject
of inquiry, in order that the soul may be appro-
priately lodged in it by God, the Artificer of all
things. But if any one say that he who has
moulded the body is an enemy to the God who
is the Creator of my soul, 5 then how is it that,
while regarding each other with a hostile eye,
these two parties have not brought disrepute
upon the work, by bringing it about either that
he who constructs the temple should make it of
such narrow dimensions as to render it incapa-

' I Cor. xii. i3.

^ I Cor. iii. 17; 2 Cor. vi. 16.

3 The reading is scit et audit. Routh somewhat needlessly sug-
gests sctte audit = he who hears intelligently.

■♦ The codex gives " hie enim qui exstruis." It is proposed to read
SIC enim qui exstruit " = For in this very way he who constructs.

5 The text gives "quod si dicat quis inimicum esse eum qui
plasmaverit corpus; Deus qui Creator," etc. The Codex Casinensis
reads Deuin. We adopt the emendation Deo and the altered punc-
tuation, thus: " quod si dicat quis inimicum esse eum qui plasmaverit
corpus Deo qui creator est animse," etc.


ble of accommodating what is placed within it,
or that he who fashions the image should come
with something so massive and ponderous, that,
on its introduction into the temple, the edifice
would at once collapse ? If such is not the case,
then, with these things, let us contemplate them
in the light of what we know to be the objects
and intents of antagonists. But if it is right for
all to be disposed with the same measures and
the same equity, and to be displayed with like
glory, what doubt should we still entertain on
this subject ? We add, if it please you, this one
illustration more. Man appears to resemble a
ship which has been constructed by the builder
and launched into the deep, which, however, it
is impossible to navigate without the rudder, by
which it can be kept under command, and turned
in whatsoever direction its steersman may wish
to sail. Also, that the rudder and the whole
body of the ship require the same artificer, is
a matter admitting no doubt ; for without the
rudder the whole structure of the ship, that huge
body, will be an inert mass. And thus, then, we
say that the soul is the rudder of the body ;
that both these, moreover, are ruled by that
liberty of judgment and sentiment which we •
possess, and which corresponds to the steers-
man ; and that when these two are made one
by union,^ and thus possess a unison of function
applicable to all kinds of work, whatever may
be the products of their own operation, they
bear a testimony to the fact that they have both
one and the same aiUhor and maker.

20. On hearing these argumentations, the mul-
titudes who were present were exceedingly de-
lighted ; so much so, indeed, that they were
almost laying hands on Manes ; and it was with
difficulty that Archelaus restrained them, and
kept them back, and made them quiet again.
The judges said : Archelaus has given us proof
sufficient of the fact that the body and soul of
man are the works of one hand ; because an
object cannot subsist in any proper consonance
and unison as the work of one hand, if there is
any want of harmony in the design and plan.
But if it is alleged that one could not possi-
bly have sufficed to develop both these objects,
namely, body and soul, this is simply to exhibit
the incapacity of the artificer. For thus, even
though one should grant that the soul is the
creation of a good deity, it will be found to
be but an idle work so far as the man is con-
cerned, unless it also takes to itself the body.
And if, again, the body is held to be the forma-
tion of an evil deity, the work will also none
the less be idle unless it receives the soul ; and,
in truth, unless the soul be in unison with the
body by commixture and due introduction, so


'J Reading "per conjunctionera " for the simple coiijunctiouc


194


THE DISPUTATION WITH MANES.


that the two are in mutual connections, the man
will not exist, neither can we speak of him.
Hence we are of opinion tJiat Archelatis has
proved by a variety of illustrations that there is
but one and the same maker for the whole man.
Archclaus said : I doubt not, Manes, that you
understand this, namely, that one who is born
and created ' is called the son of him who begets
or creates. But if the wicked one made man,
then he ought to be his father, according to na-
ture. And to whom, then, did the Lord Jesus
address Himself, when in these terms He taught
men to pray : " When ye pray, say. Our Father
which art in heaven ; " - and again, " Pray to
your Father which is in secret ? " ^ But it was of
Satan that He spake when He said, that He "be-
held him as lightning fall from heaven ; " ■♦ so
that no one dare say that He taught us to pray
to him. And surely Jesus did not come down
from heaven with the purpose of bringing men
together, and reconciling them to Satan ; but, on
the contrary, He gave him over to be bruised
beneath the feet of His faithful ones. However,
for my part, I would say that those Gentiles are
the more blessed who do indeed bring in a
multitude of deities, but at least hold them all
to be of one mind, and in amity with each other ;
whereas this man, though he brings in but two
gods, does not blush to posit enmities and
discordant sentiments between them. And, in
sooth, if these Gentiles were to bring in 5 their
counterfeit deities under conditions of that kind,
we would verily have it in our power to witness
something like a gladiatorial contest proceeding
between them, with their innumerable natures
and diverse sentiments.

21. But now, what it is necessary for me to
say on the subject of the inner and the outer
man, may be expressed in the words of the
Saviour to those who swallow a camel, and v/ear
the outward garb of the hypocrite, begirt with
blandishments and flatteries. It is to them that
Jesus addresses Himself when He says: "Woe
unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites ! for
ye make clean the outside of the cup and of the
platter, but within they are full of uncleanness.
Or know you not, that He that made that which
is without, made that which is within also?"^
Now why did He speak of the cup and of the
platter? Was He who uttered these words a
glassworker, or a potter who made vessels of
clay? Did He not speak most manifestly of the
body and the soul? For the Pharisees truly
looked to the " tithinar of anise and cummin, and


' Reading " natus est et creatus." The Codex Casinensis has
" natus est creatus."

- Matt. vi. 9; Luke xi. 2.
5 Matt. vi. 6.

4 Luke X. i8.

5 Codex Casinensis gives i^itrodiiccret ; but, retaining the refer-
ence to the Gentiles, we read introditcerctit.

*> Matt, xxiii. 25; Luke xi. 39.


left undone the weightier matters of the law ; " ^
and while devoting great care to the things which
were external, they overlooked those which bore
upon the salvation of the soul. For they also
had respect to "greetings in the market-place,"^
and " to the uppermost seats at feasts : " 9 and
to them the Lord Jesus, knowing their perdition,
made this declaration, that they attended to those
things only which were without, and despised as
strange things those which were within, and under-
stood not that He who made the body made also
the soul. And who is so unimpressible and stolid
in intellect, as not to see that those sayings of our
Lord may suffice him for all cases ? Moreover,
it is in perfect harmony with these sayings that
Paul speaks, when he interprets to the following
intent certain things written in the law: "Thou
shalt not muzzle the mouth of the ox that tread-
eth out the corn. Doth God take care for oxen?
Or saith He it altogether for our sakes? " '° But
why should we waste further time upon this sub-
ject? Nevertheless I shall add a few things out
of many that might be offered. Suppose now
that there are two unbegotten principles, and
that -we determine fixed localities for these : it
follows then that God is separated," if He is sup-
posed to be within a certain location, and not
diffused everywhere ; and He will consequently
be 1-eprescnted as much inferior to the locality in
which He is understood to be for the object
which contains is aliuays greater^- than the object
whicli is contained in it: and thus God is made
to be of that magnitude which corresponds with
the magnitude of the locality in which He is
contained, just as is the case with a man in a
house. '3 Then, further, reason asks who it is that
has divided between them, or who has appointed
for them their determinate limits ; and thus both
would be made out to be the decided inferiors
of man's own power. '+ For Lysimachus and
Alexander held the empire of the whole world,
and were able to subdue all foreign nations, and
the whole race of men ; so that throughout thatj
period there was no other in possession of empirej
besides themselves under heaven. And how willj
any one be rash enough to say that God, who is]
the true light that never suffers eclipse, and whose]
is also the kingdom that is holy and everlasting, j
is not everywhere present, as '5 is the way with
this most depraved man, who, in his impiety,!


7 Luke xi. 42.

^ Matt, xxiii- 6; Mark xii. 3S; Luke xx. 46.
9 The Codex Casinensis gives a strangely corrupt reading here: I
" priinos discipulos subitos in coenis, quod scientes Dominus." It isl
restored thus: " primos discubitus in coenis, quos sciens Dominus,"'
etc.

V 'o I Cor. ix. 9.
" D!vziiit?cr.

I- Reading tuajits for the inept mahts of the Codex Casinensis. |
•3 Routh refers us here to Maximus, De Natura, § 2. See Reli'^,
qjtite Sacrce, ii. 89-91.

''' The text is " multo inferior virtutis humanae," which is probablyj
a Graecism.

'5 Reading ceu for the cii of the Codex Casinensis.


THE DISPUTATION WITH MANES.


195


refuses to ascribe to the Omnipotent God even
equal power with men ? '

22. The judges said: We know that a light
shines through the whole house, and not in some
single part of it ; as Jesus also intimates when
He says, that " no man lighting a candle puts it
under a bushel, but on a candlestick, that it may
give light unto all that are in the house." ^ If,
then, God is a light, it must needs be that that
light (if Jesus is to be credited) shall shine on
the whole world, and not on any portions of it
merely. And if,^ then, that light holds posses-
sion of the whole world, where now can there be
any ungenerated darkness? or how can darkness
be understood to exist at all, unless it is some-
thing simply accidental? Archelaus said : For-
asmuch, indeed, as the word of the Gospel is
understood much better by you than by this per-
son who puts himself forward as the Paraclete,
although I could call him rather parasite than
paraclete, I shall tell you how it has happened
that there is darkness. When the light had been
diffused everywhere, God began to constitute the
universe, and commenced with the heaven and
the earth ; in which process this issue appeared,
to wit, that the midst,-* vvhich is the locality of
earth covered with shadow, as a consequence
of the interposition s of the creatures which were
called into being, was found to be obscure, in
such wise that circumstances required light to
be introduced into that place, which was thus
situated in the midst. Hence in Genesis, where
Moses gives an account of the construction of
the world, he makes no mention of the darkness
either as made or as not made. But he keeps
silence on that subject, and leaves the explana-
tion of it to be discovered by those who may be
able to give proper attention to it. Neither, in-
deed, is that a very arduous and difficult task.
For to whom may it not be made plain that this
sun of ours is visible, when it has risen in the
east, and taken its course toward the west, but
that when it has gone beneath the earth, and
been carried farther within that formation which
among the Greeks is called the sphere, it then
ceases to appear, being overshadowed in dark-
ness in consequence of the interposition of the
bodies?"^ When it is thus covered, and when
the body of the earth stands opposite it, a shadow
is superinduced, which produces from itself the


' The Codex Casinensis gives " nee quae vellem quidem," for
which " nee a;qualem quidem," etc., is suggested, as in the translation.

2 Matt. V. 16.

3 The text gives a guo si, etc. Routh suggests atqiii si, etc.
■* Medietas.

■ J Reading objectu . . . creattiraruni, instead of obtectu, etc.,
in Codex Casinensis.

„ ^ The text of this sentence stands thus in Migne and Routh:
cui enim non fiat manifestum, solem istum visibilem, cum ab oriente
fuent exortus, et tetenderit iter suum ad occidentem, cum sub terram
lent, et interior effectus fuerit ea quae apud Grjecos sf>kcera vocatur,
quod tunc objectu corporum obumbratus non appareat? " The Codex
Casmensis reads quod nunc oblecfit, etc. We should add that it was
held by Anaximander and others that there was a species of globe or
sphere (o-(/)atpa) which surrounded the universe. [Vol. ii. p. 136, n. 2.]


darkness ; and it continues so until again, after
the course of the inferior space has been trav-
ersed in the night, it rolls towards the east, and
is seen to rise once more in its wonted seats.
Thus, then, the cause of the shadow and the
night is discovered in the solidity of the body
of the earth, — a thing, indeed, which a man
may understand from the fact of the shadow cast
by his own body.'' For before the heaven and
the earth and all those corporeal creatures ap-
peared, the light remained always constant, with-
out waning or eclipse, as there existed no body
which might produce shadow by its opposition
or intervention ; and consequently one must say
that nowhere was there darkness then, and no-
where night. For if, to take an illustration, it
should please Him who has the power of all
things to do away with the quarter ^ which lies to
the west, then, as the sun would not direct its
course toward that region, there would nowhere
emerge either evening or darkness, but the sun
would be on its course always, and would never
set, but would almost always hold the centre tract
of heaven, and would never cease to appear ;
and by this the whole world would be illumined
with the clearest light, in virtue of which no part
of it would suffer obscuration, but the equal
power of one light would remain everywhere.
But on the other hand, while the western quarter
keeps its position, and the sun executes 9 its
course in three parts of the world, then those
who are under the sun will be seen to be illu-
minated more brightly ; so that I might almost
say, that while the people who belong to the
diverse tract are still asleep, those former are in
possession of the day's beginning. But just '° as
those Orientals have the light rising on them
earlier than the people who live in the west, so
they have it also more quickly obscured, and
they only who are settled in the middle of the
globe see always an equality of light. For when
the sun occupies the middle of the heavens, there
is no place that can appear to be either brighter
or darker (than another), but all parts of the
world are illuminated equally and impartially by'
the sun's effulgence." If, then, as we have said
above, that portion of the western tract were
done away with, the part which is adjacent to it
would now no more suffer obscuration., And
these things I could indeed set forth somewhat
more simply, as I might also describe the zodiacal
circle ; but I have not thought of looking into
these matters at present.'- I shall therefore say


' Reading ex suimet ipsius umbra for exuet ipsius umbra,
which is given in the Codex Casinensis.
, ^ Ptngam.
9 Ministrante.

'° The text is " Sicut autem ante," etc. Routh suggests, Sole
adcunte, etc.

" Reading " e.v aequo et justo, solis fulgore," etc. The Codex
Casinensis has " ex ea quo solis fulgure."

■^ The text is altogether corrupt — sed non intiii himc fieri ratus
sum; so that the sense can only be guessed at. Routh suggest:*
istud for intui.


196


THE DISPUTATION WITH MANES.


nothing of these, but shall revert to that capital
objection urged by my ach^ersary, in his afifirming
so strenuously ' that the darkness is ungenerated ;
which position, however, has also been confuted
already, as far as that could have been done by
us.

23. T}ic jiid^^cs said : If we consider that the
light existed before the estate of the creatures was
introduced, and that there was no object in an
opposite position which might generate shadow,
it must follow that the light was then diffused
everywhere, and that all places were illuminated
with its effulgence, as has been shown by what
you have stated just now ; and as we perceive
that the true explanation is given in that, we as-
sign the palm to the affirmations of Archelaus.
For if the universe is clearly divided, as if some
wall had been drawn through the centre of it,
and if on the one side the light dwells, and on
the other side the darkness, it is yet to be under-
stood that this darkness has been brought acci-
dentally about through the shadow generated in
consequence of the objects which have been set
up in the world ; and hence again we must ask
who it is that has built this wall between the two
divisions, provided you indeed admit the exist-
ence of such a construction, O Manichseus. But
if we have to take account of this matter on the
supposition that no such wall has been built, then
again it comes to be understood that the universe
forms but one locality, without any exception,
and is placed under one power ; and if so, then
the darkness can in no way have an ungenerated
nature. Archelaus said : Let him also explain
the following subject with a view to what has
been propounded. If God is seated in His
kingdom, and if the wicked one in like manner
is seated in his kingdom, who can have con-
structed the wall between them? For no object
can divide two substances except one that is
greater than either,^ even as it is said ^ in the
book of Genesis, that "God divided the light
from the darkness." ■♦ Consequently the con-
structor of this wall must also be some one of
a capacity like that : for the wall marks the
boundaries of these two parties, just as among
people who dwell in the rural parts a stone is
usually taken to mark off the portion of each
several party ; which custom, however, would
afford a better apprehension of the case were
we to take the division to refer specially to the
marking out of an inheritance falling to brothers.
But for the present I have not to speak of mat-
ters like these, however essential they may ap-
pear. For what we are in (juest of is an answer

' Codex Casinensis gives " omni nisi," for which we adopt " omni
nisu."

- Reading ntriusque inajus. The Codex Casinensis has utru7i-
g7ie iiiajns.

^ The text is dicii, for which dicitur may be adopted.

■* Gen. i. 4.


to the question. Who can have constructed the
wall recjuired for the designation of the limits
of the kingdom of each of these twain? No
answer has been given. Let not this perfidious
fellow hesitate, but let him now acknowlege that
the substance of his duality has been reduced
again to a unity. Let him mention any one who
can have constructed that middle wall. What
could the one of these two parties have been
engaged in when the other was building? Was
he asleep ? or was he ignorant of the fact ? or
was he unable to withstand the attempt? or was
he bought over with a price ? Tell us what he
was about, or tell us who in all the universe was
the person that raised the construction. I ad-
dress my appeal to you, O judges, whom God
has sent to us with the fullest plenitude of in-
telligence ; judge ye which of these two could
have erected the structure, or what the one could
have been doing all the while that the other was
engaged in the building.

24. The judges said : Tell us, O Manes, who
designated the boundaries for the kingdom of
each, and who made the middle wall? For Ar-
chelaus begs that due importance be attached to
the practice of interrogation in this discussion.
Manes said : The God who is good, and who
has nothing in common with evil, placed the fir-
mament in the midst, in order to make it plain s^
that the wicked one is an alien to Him. Arche-
laus said : How fearfully you belie the dignity
of that name ! You do indeed call Him God,
but you do so in name only, and you make His
deity resemble man's infirmities. At one time
out of the non-existent, and at another time out
of underlying matter, which indeed thus existed
before Hmiself, you assert that He did build the
structure, as builders among men are wont to do.
Sometimes also you speak of Him as apprehen-
sive, and sometimes as variable. It is, however,
the part of God to do what is proper to God,
and it is the part of man to do what is proper
to man. If, then, God, as you say, has con-
structed a wall, this is a God who marks Llim-
self out as apprehensive, and as possessed of no
fortitude. For we know that it is always the case
that those who are suspicious of the preparation
of secret perils against them by strangers, and
who are afraid of the plots of enemies, are ac-
customed to surround their cities with walls, by
which procedure they at once secure themselves
in their ignorance, and display their feeble ca-
pacity. But here, too, we have something which
ought not to be passed over by us in silence,
but rather brought prominently forward ; so that
even by the great abundance of our declarations
on the subject our adversary's manifold craftiness
may be brought to nought, with the help of the


5 Reading " patcfaceret " for the " partum faceret" of Codex
Casinensis.


/


THE DISPUTATION WITH MANES.


197


truth on our side. We may grant, then, that the
structure of the wall has been made with the pur-
pose of serving to distinguish between the two
kingdoms ; for without this one division ' it is
impossible for either of them to have his own
proper kingdom. But granting this, then it fol-
lows further that in the saiile manner it will also
be impossible for the wicked one to pass without
his own proper limits and invade the territories
of the good King, inasmuch as the wall stands
there as an obstacle, unless it should chance first
to be cast down, for we have heard that such
things have been done by enemies, and indeed
with our own eyes we have quite recently seen
an achievement of that nature successfully carried
out.- And when a king attacks a citadel sur-
rounded by a strong wall, he uses first of all the
ballista 3 and projectiles ; then he endeavours to
cut through the gates with axes, and to demolish
the walls by the battering-rams ; and when he at
last obtains an entrance, and gains possession of
the place, he does whatever he listeth, whether
it be his pleasure to carry off the citizens into
captivity, or to make a complete destruction of
the fortress and its contents, or whether, on the
other hand, it may be his will to grant indulgence
to the captured stronghold on the humble suit
of the conquered. What, then, does my oppo-
nent here say to this analogy? Did no adversary
substantially — which is as much as to say,
designedly — overthrow the muniment cast up
between the two?* For in his former state-
ments he has avouched that the darkness passed
without its own limits, and supervened upon the
kingdom of the good God. Who, then, over-
threw that munition before the one could thus
have crossed over to the other? For it was
impossible for the evil one to find any entrance
while the munition stood fast. Why are you
silent ? Why do you hesitate, Manichteus ? Yet,
although you may hold back, I shall proceed
with the task of my own accord. For if we sup-
pose you to say that God destroyed it, then I
have to ask what moved Him in this way to
demolish the very thing which He had Himself
previously constructed on account of the impor-
tunity of the wicked one, and for the purpose
of preserving the separation between them ? In
what fit of passion, or under what sense of injury,
did He thus set about contending against Him-

' The text gives sine hoc uno. But perhaps Routh is right in
suggesting itiiiro for uno = without this wall.

- Some suppose that Archelaus refers here to the taking of Charrse
by the Persians in the time of Valerianus Augustus, or to its recapture
and restoration to the Roman power by the Eastern king Odenathus
during the empire of Gallienus.

^ The ballista was a large engine fitted with cords somewhat like
a bow, by which large masses of stone and other missiles were hurled
to a great distance.

* The sense is obscure here. The text gives, " non substantia id
est proposito adversarius quis dejecit," etc. Migne edits the sentence
without an interrogation. We adopt the interrogative form with
Routh. The idea perhaps is, Did no adversary with materials such
as the kings of earth use, and that is as much as to say also with a
determinate plan, overthrow, etc. ?


self? Or was it that He lusted after some of the
possessions of the wicked one ? But if none of
these things formed the real cause that led God
to destroy those very things which He had con-
structed a long time before with the view of
estranging and separating the wicked one from
Him, then it must needs be considered no matter
of surprise if God should also have become de-
lighted with his society ; 5 for, on your supposi-
tion, the munition which had been set up with
the purpose of securing God against trouble
from him, will appear to have been removed just
because now he is to be regarded no more as an
enemy, but as a friend. And, on the other hand,
if you aver that the wall was destroyed by the
wicked one, tell us then how it can be possible
for the works of the good God to be mastered
by the wicked one. For if that is possible, then
the evil nature will be proved to be stronger than
God. Furthermore, how can that being, seeing
that he is pure and total darkness, surprise the
light and apprehend it, while the evangelist gives
us the testimony that " the light shineth in dark-
ness, and the darkness comprehended it not?"^
How is this blind one armed ? How does the
darkness fight against the kingdom of light?
For even as the creatures of God ^ here cannot
take in the rays of the sun with uninjured eye,^
so neither can that being bear the clear vision
of the kingdom of light, but he remains for ever
a stranger to it, and an alien.

25. Alanes said : Not all receive the word of
God, but only those to whom it is given to know
the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven.^ And
even now '° I know who are ours ; for " my sheep,"
He says, "hear my voice." " For the sake of
those who belong to us, and to whom is given
the understanding of the truth, I shall speak in
similitudes. The wicked one is like a lion that
sought to steal upon the flock of the good shep-
herd ; and when the shepherd saw this, he dug
a huge pit, and took one kid out of the flock
and cast it into the pit. Then the lion, hunger-
ing to get at it, and bursting with passion to
devour it, ran up to the pit and fell in, and dis-
covered no strength sufficient to bring him out
again. And thereupon the shepherd seized him
and shut him up carefully in a den, and at the
same time secured the safety of the kid which
had been with him in the pit. And it is in this
way that the wicked one has been enfeebled,
— the lion, so to speak, possessing no more
capacity for doing aught injurious ; and so all


5 The Codex Caslnensis has " nee mirum putandum est consortio,"
etc. We read with Routh and others, si ejus consortia, or giwd ejus
consortio, etc.

* John i. 5.

7 The text gives simply, siciit eiiiin hcec. Routh suggests hx.

8 Reading illcesis oculis for the illitis oculis of Codex Casinensis.

9 Matt. xix. II.

'° The text gives et jam gitidem for the etiiiiK gnideni of the Cod.
Casin.

" John X. 27.


198


THE DISPUTATION WITH MANES.


the race of souls will be saved, and what once
perished will yet be restored to its proper flock.
Archelaus said : If you compare the wicked one
to the lion, and God to the true shepherd, tell
us, whereunto shall we liken the sheep and the
kid? Manes said: The sheep and the kid
seem to me to be of one nature : and they are
taken as figures of souls. Archelaus said:
Well, then, God gave a soul over to perdition
when He set it before the lion in the pit. Manes
said : By no means ; far from it. But He was
moved by a particular disposition,' and in the
future He will save that other, the soul. Arche-
laus said : Now, surely it would be an absurd
procedure, my hearers, if a shepherd who dreaded !
the inroad of a lion were to expose to the beast's
devouring fury a lamb that he was wont to carry
in his bosom, and if it were then to be said that
he meant to save the creature hereafter. Is not
this something supremely ridiculous ? Yea, there
is no kind of sense in this. For on the supposi-
tion implied in your similitude God thus handed
over to Satan a soul that he might seize and ruin.
But when did the shepherd ever do anything like
that?- Did not David deliver a sheep out of
the mouth of a lion or of a bear? And we
mention this on account of the expression, oiit
of the mouth of the lion ; for, on your theory,
this would imply that the shepherd can bring
forth out of the mouth of the lion, or out of the
belly of the same, the very object which it has
devoured. 3 But you will perhaps make this
answer, that it is of God we speak, and that He
is able to do all things. Hear, however, what I
have to say to that : Why then do you not rather
assert His real capacity, and affirm simply His !
ability to overcome the lion in His own might, !
or with the pure power of God, and without the |
help of any sort of cunning devices, or by con-
signing a kid or a lamb to a pit ? ^ Tell me
this, too, if the lion were to be supposed to come
upon the shepherd at a time when he has no |
sheep, what would the consequence be ? For \
he who is here called the shepherd is supposed
to be unbegotten, and he who is here the lion is
also unbegotten. Wherefore, when man did not
yet exist — in other words, before the shepherd
had a flock — if the lion had then come upon the
shepherd, what would have followed, seeing that
there could have been nothing for the lion to eat
before the kid was in existence? Manes said:
The lion certainly had nothing to devour, but yet


• Afifirehenms est hoc iiigenio. For hoc here, Routh suggests
hie in reference to the leo ; so that the sense might be = But by this
plan the lion was caught, and hereafter He will save the soul.

^ The text is, " Quando enim pastor, nonne David de ore leonis,"
etc. We adopt the amended reading, " Quando enim pastor hoc fecit?
Nonne David," etc.

3 Routh would put this interrogatively = Can he bring out of the
mouth or the belly of the lion what it has once devoured?

•♦ This seems to be the sense intended. The text in the Codex
Casmensis runs thus: " Cur igitur quod possit non illud polius asseris
quod poterit propria virtute vincere leonem, si et pura Dei potentia,"
etd. For si et pura we may read sive pura, or si est pura, etc.


he exercised his wickedness on whatever he was
able to light upon as he coursed over the peaks
of the mountains ; and if at any time food was a
matter of necessity with him, he seized some of
the beasts which were under his own kingdom.
Archelaus said : Are these two objects, then, of
one substance — the t)easts which are under the
kingdom of the wicked one, and the kids which
are in the kingdom of the good God?s Manes
said: Far from it; not at all: they have noth-
ing in common either between themselves or
between the properties which pertain to them
severally. Archelaus said : There is but one
and the same use made of the food in the lion's
eating. And though he sometimes got that food
from the beasts belonging to himself, and some-
times from those belonging to the good God,
there is still no difference between them as far
as regards the meats furnished ; and from this it
is apparent that those are of but one substance.
On the other hand, if we say that there is a great
difference between the two, we do but ascribe
ignorance to the shepherd,^ in so far as he did
not present or set before the Hon food adapted
to his use, but rather alien meats. Or perchance
again, in your desire to dissemble your real posi-
tion, you will say to me that that lion ate noth-
ing. Well, supposing that to be the case, did
God then in this way challenge that being to
devour a soul v.'hile he knew not how to devour
aught? and was the pit not the only thing which
God sought to employ with the view of cheating
him? — if indeed it is at all worthy of God to
do that sort of thing, or to contrive deceitful
schemes. And that would be to act like a king
who, when war is made upon him, puts no kind
of confidence in his own strength, but gets
paralyzed with the fears of his own feebleness,
and shuts himself up within the walls of his city,
and erects around him a rampart and other for-
tifications, and gets them all equipped, and trusts
nothing to his own hand and prowess ; whereas,
if he is a brave man, the king so placed will
march a great distance from his own territories
to meet the enemy there, and will put forth
every possible exertion until he conquers and
brings his adversary into his power.

26. The fudges said: If you allege that the
shepherd exposed the kid or the lamb to the
lion, when the said lion was meditating an as-
sault 7 on the unbegotten, the case is closed.
For seeing that the shepherd of the kids and
lambs is himself proved to be in fault to them,
on what creature can he pronounce judgment,
if It happens that the lamb which has been given


s Routh takes it as a direct assertion = It follows, then, that these
two objects are of one substance, etc.

6 The text runs, " sed aliud .ilio longe differre ignorantiam pastori
ascribimus: " for which we adopt the emendation, " sed alium ab alio
longe differre si dicamus, ignorantiam pastori ascribimus."

7 Migne reads irrueret. Routh gives irruerat, had made an
assault.


THE DISPUTATION WITH MANES.


199


up ' through the shepherd's weakness has proved
unable to withstand the Hon, and if the conse-
quence is that the lamb has had to do whatever
has been the lion's pleasure? Or, to take an-
other instance, that would be just as if a master
were to drive out of his house, or deliver over in
terror to his adversary, one of his slaves, whom
he is unable afterwards to recover by his own
strength. Or supposing that by any chance it
were to come about that the slave was recovered,
on what reasonable ground could the master in-
flict the torture on him, if it should turn out that
the man yielded obedience to all that the enemy
laid upon him, seeing that it was the master
himself- who gave him up to the enemy, just as
the kid was given up to the lion? You affirm,
too, that the shepherd understood the whole
case beforehand. Surely, then, the lamb, when
under the lash, and interrogated by the shepherd
as to the reason why it had submitted to the
lion in these matters, would make some such
answer as this : " Thou didst thyself deliver me
over to the lion, and thou didst offer no resist-
ance to him, although thou didst know and fore-
see what would be my lot, when it was necessary
for me to yield myself to his commandments."
And, not to dilate on this at greater length, we
may say that by such an illustration neither is God
exhibited as a perfect shepherd, nor is the lion
shown to have tasted alien meats ; and conse-
quently, under the instruction of the truth itself,
it has been made clear that we ought to give the
palm to the reasonings adduced by Archelaus.
Arclielaus said : Considering that, on all the
points which we have hitherto discussed, the
thoughtfulness of the judges has assigned us
the amplest scope, it will be well for us to pass
over other subjects in silence, and reserve them
for another period. For just as, if^ a person
once crushes the head of a serpent, he will not
need to lop off any of the other members of its
body ; so, if we once dispose -* of this question of
the duality, as we have endeavoured to do to the
best of our ability, other matters which have been
maintained in connection with it may be held to
be exploded along with it. Nevertheless I shall
yet address myself, at least in a few sentences,
to the assertor of these opinions himself, who is
now in our presence ; so that it may be thor-
oughly understood by all who he is, and whence
he comes, and what manner of person he proves
himself to be. For he has given out that he is
that Paraclete whom Jesus on His departure
promised to send to the race of man for the

' The text gives si cmcsa tradittts, etc. Routh suggests sive
causa. Traditns, etc.: so that the sense would be, tor on what
creature can the shepherd of the kids and lambs pronounce judgment,
seeing that he is himself proved to be in fault to them, or to be the
cause of their position? For the lamb, having been given up, etc.

- Reading euin ipse for ejitn ifisum.

3 Reading si qiiis for the simple qiiis of Codex Casinensis.

■♦Reading " quaestione rejecta" for the relecta of Codex Casi-
oensis.


salvation of the souls of the faithful ; and this
profession he makes as if he were somewhat
superior even to Paul,5 who was an elect vessel
and a called apostle, and who on that ground,
while preaching the true doctrine, said : ^ "Or
seek ye a proof of that Christ who speaks in
me?"'' What I have to say, however, may be-
come clearer by such an illustration as the fol-
lowing : ^ — A certain man gathered into his store
a very large quantity of corn, so that the place
was perfectly full. This place he shut and sealed
in a thoroughly satisfactory fashion, and gave di-
rections to keep careful watch over it. And the
master himself then departed. However, after
a lengthened lapse of time another person came
to the store, and affirmed that he had been
despatched by the individual who had locked up
and sealed the place with a commission also to
collect and lay up a quantity of wheat in the
same. And when the keepers of the store saw
him, they demanded of him his credentials, in
the production of the signet, in order that they
might assure themselves of their liberty to open
the store to him, and to render their obedience
to him as to one sent by the person who had
sealed the place. And when he could ^ neither
exhibit the keys nor produce the credentials of
the signet, for indeed he had no right, he was
thrust out by the keepers, and compelled to flee.
For, instead of being what he professed to be,
he was detected to be a thief and a robber by
them, and was convicted and found out '° through
the circumstance that, although, as it seemed,
he had taken it into his head to make his ap-
pearance a long time after the period that had
been determined on beforehand, he yet could
neither produce keys, or signet, or any token
whatsoever to the keepers, nor display any knowl-
edge of the quantity of corn that was in store : all
which things were so many unmistakeable proofs
that he had not been sent across by the proper
owner ; and accordingly, as was matter oficourse,"
he was forbidden admittance by the keepers.


5 This seems to be the general sense of the corrupt text here, et
non lotige possit ci Paiiliis, etc., in which we must either suppose
something to have been lost, or correct it in some such way as this:
" ut non longe post sit ei Paulus." Compare what Manes says also
of Paul and himself in ch. xiii. above. It should be added, however,
that another idea of the passage is thrown out in Routh. According
to this, the ei refers to ycsjis, and the text being emended thus, etsi
tion lotige post sit ei, the sense would be: although not long after His
departure He had Paul as an elect vessel, etc. The allusion thus
would be to the circumstance that Manes made such a claim as he
did, in spite of the fact that after Christ's departure Paul was gifted
with the Spirit in so eminent a measure for the building up of the
faithful.

^ Reading aiebat for the agebat of Codex Casinensis.

7 2 Cor. xiii. 3. The reading here is, " Aut documentum quaeri-
tis," etc. The Vulgate also gives An experimentuni, for the Greek
£7rei,etc.

8 The text is, " et quidem quod dico tali exemplo sed clarius."
For sed it is proposed to Te3.dy!t, or sit, or est.

9 Codex Casinensis has qtticuni/iic. We adopt the correction,
qui aim itec.

'" Reading coii/ntatns for confitgatiis.

" The text gives '• et ideo ut consequentererat," etc. Codex Casi-
nensis omits the ut. Routh proposes, " et ideo consequenter thesau-
rus," etc. = and thus, of course, the treasure was preserved, etc.
Comp. ch. xxvii. and xxxiv.


200


THE DISPUTATION WITH MANES.


27. We may give yet another illustration, if it
seems good to you. A certain man, the head
of a household, and possessed of great riches,
was minded to journey abroad for a time, and
promised to his sons that he would send them
some one who would take his place, and divide
among them equally the substance falling to
them. And, in truth, not long after that, he did
despatch to them a certain trustworthy and right-
eous and true man. And on his arrival, this
man took charge of the whole substance, and
first of all exerted himself to arrange it and ad-
minister it, giving himself great labour in journey-
ing, and even ' working diligently with his own
hands, and toiling like a servant for the good of
the estate. Afterwards feeling that his end was
at hand,- the man wrote out a will, demitting the
inheritance to the relations and all the next of
kin ; and he gave them his seals, and called
them together one by one by name, and charged
them to preserve the inheritance, and to take
care of the substance, and to administer it rightly,
even as they had received it, and to take their
use of its goods and fruits, as they were them-
selves left its owners and heirs. If, moreover,
any person were to ask to be allowed to benefit
by the fruits of this field, they were to show
themselves indulgent to such. But if, on the
other hand, any one were to declare himself
partner in the heirship with them, and were to
make his demands on that ground, ^ they were
to keep aloof from him, and pronounce him an
alien ; and further, they were to hold that the in-
dividual who desired to be received among them
ought all the more on that account to do work.-*
Well, then, granting that all these things have
been well and rightly disposed of and settled,
and that they have continued in that condition
for a very long time, how shall we deal with one
who presents himself well-nigh three hundred
years after, and sets up his claim to the heirship?
Shall we not cast him off from us ? Shall we not
justly pronounce such a one an alien — one who
cannot prove himself to have belonged to those
related to our Master, who never was with our
departed Lord in the hour of His sickness, who
never walked in the funeral procession of the
Crucified, who never stood by the sepulchre,
who has no knowledge whatsoever of the manner
or the character of His departure, and who, in
fine, is now desirous of getting access to the
storehouse of corn without presenting any token


' The text has, " sedens ipse per se," etc.; for which we adopt,
" sed et ipse," etc.

^ The Codex Casinensis gives, " deinde die moriturus," which
may be either a mistake for " deinde moriturus," or a contraction for
" deinde die qua moriturus " — then on the day that he was about to
die, etc.

■3 The codex has, " Sin autem conderem se dicens, exposceret,
devitarent persequi," etc. ; which is corrected lo, " Sin autem cohjere-
dem se dicens exposceret, devitarent atque," etc., which emendation
is followed in the translation.

■* Opus autem magi's /acere debere.


from him who placed it under lock and seal?
Shall we not cast him off from us like a robber
and a thief, and thrust him out of our number
by all possible means? Yet this man is now in
our presence, and fails to produce any of the
credentials which we have summarized in what
we have already said, and declares that he is
the Paraclete whose mission was presignified by
Jesus. And by this assertion, in his ignorance
perchance, he will make out Jesus Himself to be
a liar ; 5 for thus He who once said that He
would send the Paraclete no long time after, will
be proved only to have sent this person, if we
accept the testimony which he bears to himself,
after an interval of three hundred years and
more.'' In the day of judgment, then, what will
those say to Jesus who have departed this life
from that time on to the present period ? Will
they not meet Him with words like these : " Do
not punish us rigorously if we have failed to do
Thy works. For why, when Thou didst promise
to send the Paraclete under Tiberius Ctesar, to
convince us of sin and of righteousness,'' didst
Thou send Him only under Probus the Roman
emperor, and didst leave us orphaned, notwith-
standing that Thou didst say, ' I will not leave
you comfortless (orphaned),'^ and after Thou
hadst also assured us that Thou wouldest send
the Paraclete presently after Thy departure ?
What could we orphans do, having no guardian ?
We have committed no fault ; it is Thou that
hast deceived us." But away with such a sup-
position in the case of our Lord Jesus Christ,
the Saviour of every soul.9 For He did not con-
fine Himself to mere promises ; '° but when He
had once said, " I go to my Father, and I send
the Paraclete to you," " straightway He sent
(that gift of the Paraclete), dividing and impart-
ing the same to His disciples, — bestowing it,
however, in greater fulness upon Paul.'^

28. Manes said : '^ You are caught in the


5 The same sort of argument is employed against the IMontanists
by Theodoras of Heracleia on John's Gospel, ch. xiv. 17.

6 It is remarked in Migne, tiiat it is only in the heat of his con-
tention that this statement is made by Archelaus as to the date of the
appearance of Manes; for from the death of Christ on to the time of
this discussion there are only some 249 years. [Is it not probable
that here is a token of the spurious character of not a little of this
work?]

7 John xvi. 8.
^ John xiv. 18.

9 Reading " sed absit hoc a Domino nostro Jesu Christo Salvatore
omnis animse," instead of the codex's " sed absit hanc a Domino Jesu
Christo Salvatore omne animae."

'° If the reference, however, is to 2 Pet. iii. 9, as Routh suggests,
it may rather be = He was not slack concerning His promises. The
text is, " non enim moratus est in promissionibus suis." [.4 note-
worthy reference to the second Epistle of St. Peter. For, if this work
be a mere romance, yet its undoubted antiquity makes it useful, not
only in this, but in many other critical matters.]

" John xiv. 12, xvi. 28.

'2 Reading " abundantius vero conferens Paulo," instead of the
corrupt text in the Codex Casinensis, " abundantibus vero confitens
Paulo."

■•3 The opening sentences of this chapter are given in a very cor-
rupt form in our Codex Casinensis. Its text stands thus: " Tuum et
ipsius indicio comprehensus es; ha;c enim versum te locutus, ignorans,
qui dum, me vis probra conjicere majori culpae se succumbit. Die
age mihi studias qua Tiberio usque ad Probum defuncti sunt, dicent


THE DISPUTATION WITH MANES.


20I


charge you yourself bring forward. For you
have been speaking now against yourself, and
have not perceived that, in trying to cast re-
proaches in my teeth, you lay yourself under
the greater fault. Tell me this now, I pray you :
if, as you allege, those who have died from the
time of Tiberius on to the days of Probus are
to say to Jesus, " Do not judge us if we have
failed to do Thy works, for Thou didst not send
the Paraclete to us, although Thou didst promise
to send Him ; " ' will not those much more use
such an address who have departed this life from
the time of Moses on to the advent of Christ
Himself? And will not those with still greater
right express themselves in terms like these :
" Do not deliver us over to torments,^ seeing
that we had no knowledge of Thee imparted to
us?" And will it only be those that have died
thus far previously to His advent who may be
seen making such a charge with right? Will
not those also do the same who have passed
away from Adam's time on to Christ's advent?
For none of these either obtained any knowl-
edge of the Paraclete, or received instruction in
the doctrine of Jesus. But only this latest gen-
eration of men, which has run its course from
Tiberius onward, as you make it out,3 is to be
saved : for it is Christ Himself that " has re-
deemed them from the curse of the law ; " •* as
Paul, too, has given these further testimonies,
that " the letter killeth, and quickeneth no
man," s and that " the law is the ministration
of death," ^ and " the strength of sin." 7 Arche-
laiis said : You err, not knowing the Scriptures,
neither the power of God.^ For many have also
perished after the period of Christ's advent on
to this present period, and many are still perish-
ing, — those, to wit, who have not chosen to
devote themselves to works of righteousness ;
whereas only those who have received Him, and
yet receive Him, " have obtained power to be-
come the sons of God." ^ For the evangelist
has not said all have obtained that power ;
neither, on the other hand, however, has he put
any limit on the time. But this is his expres-
sion: " As many as received Him." Moreover,
from the creation of the world He has ever been
with righteous men, and has never ceased to
require their blood at the hands of the ivicked,
from the blood of righteous Abel to the blood


ad Jesum nolite nos judicare," etc. We have adopted these emenda-
tions: tuiiiiet for tuuvi et ; adversiim for versum ; ignoras for
ignorans ; in tnc for jite ; snccnmbis for se succutnbit ; si, ut ais,
qui a, hr studias qua ; and noli iox ?iolite.

' Supplying missiirnm, which is not in the codex.

- Reading " noli nos tradere tormentis," instead of the meaning-
less " noli nostra de tormentis " of the codex.

^ Reading ui ais instead of ut eas.

* Gal. iii. 13.

5 JVec queinqnam vivificai. 2 Cor. iii. 6.

'' 2 Cor. iii. 7.

7 I Cor. XV. 56.

^ Matt. xxii. 29.

9 John i. 12.


of Zacharias.'° And whence, then, did righteous
Abel and all those succeeding worthies," who are
enrolled among the righteous, derive their right-
eousness, when as yet there was no law of Moses,
and when as yet the prophets had not arisen and
discharged the functions of prophecy? Were
they not constituted righteous in virtue of their
fulfiUing the law, " every one of them showing
the work of the law written in their hearts, their
conscience also bearing them witness?" '^ For
when a man " who has not the law does natu-
rally the things contained in the law, he, not hav-
ing the law, is a law unto himself." '^ And
consider now the multitude of laws thus existing
among the several righteous men who lived a
life of uprightness, at one time discovering for
themselves the law of God implanted in their
hearts, at another learning of it from their
parents, and yet again being instructed in it
further by the ancients and the elders. But in-
asmuch as only few were able to rise by this
medium '+ to the height of righteousness, that is
to say, by means of the traditions of parents,
when as yet there was no law embodied in writ-
ing, God had compassion on the race of man,
and was pleased to give through Moses a written
law to men, since verily the equity of the natural
law failed to be retained in all its perfection in
their hearts. In consonance, therefore, with
man's first creation, a written legislation was
prepared which was given through Moses in
behoof of the salvation of very many. For if
we reckon that man is justified without the
works of the law, and if Abraham was counted
righteous, how much more shall those obtain
righteousness who have fulfilled the law which
contains the things that are expedient for men?
And seeing that you have made mention only
of three several scriptures, in terms of which
the apostle has declared that " the law is a
ministration of death," '5 and that "Christ has
redeemed us from the curse of the law," '*' and
that " the law is the strength of sin," '■^ you may
now advance others of like tenor, and bring for-
ward any passages which may seem to you to be
written against the law, to any extent you please.
29. Manes said : Is not that word also to the
same effect which Jesus spake to the disciples,
when He was demonstrating those men to be
unbelieving : "Ye are of your father the devil,
and the lusts of your father ye will do? " '^ ,By
this He means, in sooth, that whatever the


'° Matt. xiii. 35.

'' Reading reliqiii per ordinem for the qui per ordinem of the
codex.

'- Rom. ii. 15.

'3 Rom. ii. 14.

■'' Re.iding " per hunc modum." But the Codex Casinensis gives
" per hunc mundum " — through this world.

'5 2 Cor. iii. 7.

'*' Gal. iii. 13.

'7 I Cor. XV. 56.

'^ John viii. 44.


202


THE DISPUTATION WITH MANES.


wicked prince of this world desired, and what-
ever he histed after, he committed to writing
through Moses, and by that medium gave it to
men for their doing. For " he was a murderer
from the beginning, and abode not in the truth,
because there is no truth in him. When he
speaketh a He, he speaketh of his own : for he
is a bar, and the father of it." ' Archelaus
said: Are you satisfied^ with what you have
already adduced, or have you other statements
still to make? Manes said: I have, indeed,
many things to say, and things of greater weight
even than these. But with these I shall content
myself. Arclieiaus said : By all means. Now
let us select some instance from among those
statements which you allege to be on your side ;
so that if these be once found to have been
properly dealt with, other questions may also be
held to rank with them ; and if the case goes
otherwise, I shall come under the condemna-
tion of the judges, that is to say, I shall have
to bear the shame of defeat.^ You say, then,
that the law is a ministration of death, and you
admit that " death, the prince of this world,
reigned from Adam even to Moses;"-* for the
word of Scripture is this : " even over them that
did not sin." 4 Manes said: Without doubt
death did reign thus, for there is a duality, and
these two antagonistic powers were nothing else
than both unbegotten.5 Archelaus said : Tell
me this tlien, — how can an unbegotten death
take a beginning at a certain time ? For " from
Adam " is the word of Scripture, and not " be-
fore Adam." Manes said: But tell me, I ask
you in turn, how it obtained its kingdom over
both the righteous and the sinful. Archelaus
said : When you have first admitted that it has
had that kingdom from a determinate time and
not from eternity, I shall tell you that. Manes
said: It is written, that "death reigned from
Adam to Moses." Archelaus said : And conse-
quently it has an end, because it has had a
beginning in time.'^ And this saying is also
true, that " deatli is swallowed up in victory." ^
It is apparent, then, that death cannot be unbe-
gotten, seeing that it is shown to have both a
beginning and an end. Manes said: But in
that way it would also follow that God was its
maker. Archelaus said : By no means ; away
with such a supposition ! " For God made not
death ; neither hath He pleasure in the destruc-


' John viii. 44.

2 The text is " sutficit tibi haec sunt an habes et alia." Routh
proposes " sufficientia tibi hsec sunt," etc.

^ Routh would make it = Yo7i will come under the condemnation
. . . you will have to bear: he suggests eris ergo for ero ego, and
feras {oxferam.

*• Rom. V. 14.

S Nee aliter nisi essent ingenita. Routh, however, would read
esset for essent, making it = and that death could be nothing else
than unbegotten.

*> Reading ex tempore for the corrupt exemplo re of the codex.

^ I Cor. XV. 54.


tion of the living." ** Manes said : God made
it not ; nevertheless it was made, as you admit.
Tell us, therefore, from whom it received its
empire, or by whom it was created. Archelaus
said : If I give the most ample proof of the
fact that death cannot have the substance of an
unbegotten nature, will you not confess that
there is but one God, and that an unbegotten
God? Manes said: Continue your discourse,
for your aim is to speak 9 with subtlety. Arche-
laus said : Nay, but you have put forward those
allegations in such a manner, as if they were to
serve you for a demonstration of an unbegotten
root. Nevertheless the positions which we have
discussed above may suffice us, for by these we
have shown most fully that it is impossible for
the substances of two unbegotten natures to
exist together.

30. The judges said: Speak to those points,
Archelaus, which he has just now propounded.
Archelaus said : By the prince of the world,
and the wicked one, and darkness, and death,
he means one and the same thing, and alleges
that the law has been given by that being, on
the ground of the scriptural statement that it is
"the ministration of death," as weij as on the
ground of other things which he has urged
against it. Well, then, I say '° that since, as we
have explained above, the law which was written
naturally on men's hearts did not keep carefully
by the memory of evil things, and since there
was not a sufficiently established tradition among
the elders, inasmuch as hostile oblivion always
attached itself to the memory," and one man
was mstructed in the knowledge of that law by
a master, and another by himself, it easily came
about that transgressions of the law engraved by
nature did take place, and that through the vio-
lation of the commandments death obtained its
kingship among men. For the race of men is
of such a nature, that it needs to be ruled by
God with a rod of iron. And so death tri-
umphed and reigned with all its power on to
Moses, even over those who had not sinned, in
the way which we have explained : over sinners
indeed, as these ^ were its proper objects, and
under subjection to it, — men after the type of
Cain and Judas ; '- but also over the righteous,
because they refused to consent to it, and rather
withstood it, by putting away from themselves
the vices and concupiscence of lusts, — men
like those who have arisen at times from Abel


8 Wisd. i. 13.

9 The text gives discere, to learn; but dicer e seems the probable
reading.

'° Reading inqitatn for the iniqnam of the Codex Casinensis.
But Routh suggests iniqitee, in reference to what has been said
towards the close of ch. xxviii.

" The codex gives, "cum eas inimica semper memoriae ineresi.=.
sed oblivio; " which is co.rected thus, " cum eis inimica semper me-
morije inhsesisset oblivio."

■- The text writes it Jtida.


THE DISPUTATION WITH MANES.


203


on to Zacharias ; ' — death thus always passing,
up to the time of Moses, upon those after that
simiHtude.^

But after Moses had made his appearance,
and had given the law to the children of Israel,
and had brought into their memory all the re-
quirements of the law, and all that it behoved
men to observe and do under it, and when he
delivered over to death only those who should
transgress the law, then death was cut off from
reigning over all men ; for it reigned then over
sinners alone, as the law said to it, " Touch not
those that keep my precepts." ^ Moses there-
fore served the ministration of this word upon
death, while he delivered up to destruction •♦ all
others who were transgressors of the law ; for it
was not with the intent that death might not
reign in any territory at all that Moses came, in-
asmuch as multitudes were assuredly held under
the power of death even after Moses. And the
law was called a " ministration of death " from
the fact that then only transgressors of the law
were punished, and not those who kept it, and
who obeyed and observed the things which are
in the law, as Abel did, whom Cain, who was
made a vessel of the wicked one, slew. How-
ever, even after these things death wished to
break the covenant which had been made by
the instrumentality of Moses, and to reign again
over the righteous ; and with this object it did
indeed assail the prophets, killing and stoning
those who had been sent by God, on to Zacha-
rias. But my Lord Jesus, as maintaining the
righteousness of the law of Moses,* was wroth
with death for its transgression of the covenant s
and of that whole ministration, and condescended
to appear in the body of man, with the view of
avenging not Himself, but Moses, and those who
in a continuous succession after him had been op-
pressed by the violence of death. That wicked
one, however, in ignorance of the meaning of a
dispensation of this kind, entered into Judas,
thinking to slay Him by that man's means, as
before he had put righteous Abel to death. But
when he had entered into Judas, he was over-
come with penitence, and hanged himself; for
which reason also the divine word says : " O
death, where is thy victory ? O death,^ where
is thy sting? " And again : " Death is swallowed
up of victory." ^ It is for this reason, therefore,
that the law is called a " ministration of death,"
because it delivered sinners and transgressors


over to death ; but those who observed it, it
defended from death ; and these it also estab-
lished in glory, by the help and aid of our Lord
Jesus Christ.

31. Listen also to what I have to say on this
other expression which has been adduced, viz.,
" Christ, who redeemed us from the curse of the
law." ^ My view of this passage is that Moses,
that illustrious servant of God, committed to
those who wished to have the right vision,9 an
emblematic '° law, and also a real law. Thus, to
take an example, after God had made the world,
and all things that are in it, in the space of six
days. He rested on the seventh day from all His
works ; by which statement I do not mean to
affirm that He rested because He was fatigued,
but that He did so as having brought to its per-
fection every creature which He had resolved to
introduce. And yet in the sequel it, the new
law, says : " My Father worketh hitherto, and I
work."" Does that mean, then, that He is
still making heaven, or sun, or man, or animals,
or trees, or any such thing? Nay; but the
meaning is, that when these visible objects were
perfectly finished. He rested from that kind of
work ; while, however. He still continues to work
at objects invisible with an inward mode of
action,'^ and saves men. In like manner, then,
the legislator desires also that every individual
amongst us should be devoted unceasingly to
this kind of work, even as God Himself is ; and
he enjoins us consequently to rest continuously
from secular things, and to engage in no worldly
sort of work whatsoever ; and this is called our
Sabbath. This also he added in the law, that
nothing senseless '^ should be done, but that we
should be careful and direct our life in accord-
ance with what is just and righteous. Now this
law was suspended over men, discharging most
sharply its curse against those who might trans-
gress it. But because its subjects, too, were but
men, and because, as happens also frequently
with us, controversies arose and injuries were
inflicted, the law likewise at once, and with the
severest equity, made any wrong that was done


' Matt xxiii. 35.

^ This would appear to be the meaning of these words, " trans-
ferer s semper usque ad tempus in similes illius," if we suppose the
speaker still to be keeping Rom. v. 12-14 '" view. Routh suggests
traitsiens.

3 Referring perhaps to Ps. cv. 15.

* Reading interitui tradens for the interit ui tradens of the
codex.

' Reading /«(-//■ for the acti of the codex.

* Mors.

' I Cor XV. 54, 55.


8 Gal. iii. 13.

9 Recte videre. But perhaps we should read " recte vivere" to
lead a righteous life.

•° The phrase is /wrt.gv"«rtrzVz;« /<?^i?7«. On this expression there
is a note in Migne, which is worth quoting, to this effect: Archelaus
calls the Old Testament an einb'ematic or imaginary law, because
it was the type or image of a future new law. So, too, Petrus de
Vineis, more than once in his Epistles, calls a messenger or legate a
homo imctginarius, as Du Cange observes in his Glossary, because
he represents the person by whom he is sent, and, as it were, reflects
his image. This word is also used in a similar manner by the old in-
terpreter of Evagrius the monk, in the Disputation ietiveen Tlie-
ophilus, bishop of Alexandria, and Simon the Jew, ch. 13, where
the Sabbath is called the requies imaginaria of that seventh day on
which God rested. Hence Archelaus, in his answer to the presbyter
Diodorus, ch. xli. beneath, devotes himself to proving that the Old
Testament is not to be rejected, because, like a mirror, it gives us a
true image of the new law.

" John v. 17.

■- Reading " invisibilia autem et intrinsecus." The Codex Casi-
nensis has " invisibili autem et trinsecus."

'3 Absurdutn, standing probably for aroTror, which may also be =
flagitious.


204


THE DISPUTATION WITH MANES.


return upon the head of the wrong-doer ; ' so
that, for instance, if a poor man was minded
to gather a bundle of wood upon the Sabbath,
he was placed under the curs^ of the law, and
exposed to the penality of instant death. = The
men, therefore, who had been brought up with
the Egyptians were thus severely 'pressed by the
restrictive power of the law, and they were un-
able to bear the penalties and the curses of the
law. But, again. He who is ever the Saviour,
our Lord Jesus Christ, came and delivered those
men from these pains and curses of the law, for-
giving them their offences. And He indeed did
not deal with them as Moses did, putting the
severities of the law in force, and granting in-
dulgence to no man for any offence ; but He
declared that if any man suffered an injury at
the hands of his neighbour, he was to forgive
him not once only, nor even twice or thrice, nor
only seven times, but even unto seventy times
seven ; ^ but that, on the other hand, if after all
this the offender still continued to do such wrong,
he ought then, as the last resource, to be brought
under the law of Moses, and that no further
pardon should be granted to the man who would
thus persist in wrong-doing, even after having
been forgiven unto seventy times seven. And
He bestowed His forgiveness not only on a
transgressor of such a character as that, but even
on one who did offence to the Son of man. But
if a man dealt thus with the Holy Spirit, He
made him subject to two curses, — namely, to
that of the law of Moses, and to that of His own
law ; to the law of Moses in truth in this present
life, but to His own law at the time of the judg-
ment : for His word is this : " It shall not be
forgiven him, neither in this world, neither in the
world to come." •* There is the law of Moses,
thus, that in this world gives pardon to no such
person ; and there is the law of Christ that pun-
ishes in the future world. From this, therefore,
mark how He confirms the law, not only not
destroying it, but fulfilhng it. Thus, then. He
redeemed them from that curse of the law which
belongs to the present life ; and from this fact
has come the appellation " the curse of the
law." This is the whole account which needs be
given of that mode of speech. But, again, why
the law is called the " strength of sin," we shall
at once explain in brief to the best of our ability.
Now it is written that " the law is not made for
a righteous man, but for the lawless and dis-
obedient, for the ungodly and for sinners." s
In these times, then, before Moses, there was
no written law for transgressors ; whence also


' The codex reads, " ultionem fecerat retorquebat." We adopt
either " ultionem quam fecerat retorquebat," or " ultionem fecit
retorquen."

2 Num. XV. 32.

3 Matt, xviii. 21.
'' Matt, xii 32.

•5 I Tmi. i. 9.


Pharaoh, not knowing the strength of sin, trans-
gressed in the way of afflicting the children of
Israel with unrighteous burdens, and despised
the Godhead, not only himself, but also all who
were with him. But, not to make any round-
about statement, I shall explain the matter briefly
as follows. There were certain persons of the
Egyptian race minglmg with the people of Moses,
when that people was under his rule in the
desert ; and when Moses had taken his position
on the mount, with the purpose of receiving the
law, the impatient people, I do not mean those
who were the true Israel, but those who had
been intermixed with the Egyptians,^ set up a
calf as their god, in accordance with their
ancient custom of worshipping idols, with the
notion that by such means they might secure
themselves against ever having to pay the proper
penalties for their iniquities. ? Thus were they
altogether ignorant of the strength of their sin.
But when Moses returned (from the mount) and
found that out, he issued orders that those men
should be put to death with the sword. From
that occasion a beginning was made in the cor-
rect perception of the strength of sin on the
part of these persons through the instrumentality
of the law of Moses, and for that reason the law
has been called the "strength of sin."

32. Moreover, as to this word which is writ-
ten in the Gospel, " Ye are of your father the
devil," ^ and so forth, we say in brief that there
is a devil working in us, whose aim it has been,
in the strength of his own will, to make us like
himself. For all the creatures that God made.
He made very good ; and He gave to every in-
dividual the sense of free-will, in accordance /
with which standard He also instituted the law
of judgment. To sin is ours, and that we sin
not is God's gift, as our will is constituted to
choose either to sin or not to sin. And this *
you doubtless understand well enough yourself,
Manes ; for you know that, although you were
to bring together all your disciples and admonish ^
them not to commit any transgression or do any
unrighteousness, every one of them might still
pass by the law of judgment. And certainly
whosoever will, may keep the commandments ;
and whosoever shall despise them, and turn aside
to what is contrary to them, shall yet without
doubt have to face this law of judgment. Hence
also certain of the angels, refusing to submit


6 This is one of those passages in which we detect the tendency
of many of the early fathers to adopt the pecnhar opinions of the
Jewish rabbis on difficult points of Scripture. See also the Dispu-
tation between Theophilus of Alexandria and the Jeiu Sitnon,
ch. 13. In accordance with the opinion propounded here by Arche-
laus, we find, for instance, in the ScctnotJi Rabba, p. 157, col. i, that
the making of the golden calf is ascribed to the Egj'ptian proselytes.
See the note in Migne. [The passage is a note of antiquity and
in so far of authenticity.]

7 The text is in quo nee scelerum pcxnas aliquando rependeret.
" John viii. 44.

9 Reading commonens for communis ne. Communiens is also
suggested.


THE DISPUTATION WITH MANES.


205


themselves to the commandment of God, re-
sisted His will ; and one of them indeed fell like
a flash of lightning ' upon the earth, while others,^
harassed by tlie dragon, sought their felicity in
intercourse with the daughters of men, 3 and thus
brought on themselves the merited award of the
punishment of eternal fire. And that angel who
was cast down to earth, finding no further ad-
mittance into any of the regions of heaven, now
flaunts about among men, deceiving them, and
luring them to become transgressors like himself,
and even to this day he is an adversary to the
commandments of God. The example of his
fall and ruin, however, will not be followed by
all, inasmuch as to each is given liberty of will.
For this reason also has he obtained the name
of devil, because he has passed over from the
heavenly places, and appeared on earth as the
disparager of God's commandment.-* But be-
cause it was God who first gave the command-
ment, the Lord Jesus Himself said to the devil,
" Get thee behind me, Satan ; " s and, without
doubt, to go behind God is the sign of being His
servant. And again He says, " Thou shalt wor-
ship the Lord thy God, and Him only shalt thou
serve." 5 Wherefore, as certain men were in-
clined to yield obedience to his wishes, they
were addressed in these terms by the Saviour :
" Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts
of your father ye will do."*" And, in fine, when
they are found to be actually doing his will, they
are thus addressed : " O generation of vipers,
who hath warned you to flee from tlie wrath to
come ? Bring forth therefore fruits meet for re-
pentance." 7 p'rom all this, then, you ought to
see how weighty a matter it is for man to have
freedom of will. However, let my antagonist
here say whether there is a judgment for the
godly and the ungodly, or not. Manes said :
There is a judgment. Archelaus said: I think
that what we ^ have said concerning the devil
contains no small measure of reason as well as
of piety. For every creature, moreover, has its
own order ; and there is one order for the human
race, and another for animals, and another for


' Luke X. 18.

2 We have another instance here of a characteristic opinion of the
Jewish rabbis adopted by a Christian father. This notion as to the
intercourse of the angels with the daughters of men was a current in-
terpretation among the Jews from the times of Philo and Josephus,
and was followed in whole or in part by Tertullian, Justin, Irenaeus,
Clemens Alexandrinus, Athenagoras, Methodius, Cyprian, Lactantius,
etc. Consult the note in Migne; [also p. 131, note 2, s!ipra\.

3 We give the above as a possible rendering. Routh, however,
understands the matter otherwise. The te.\-t is, " alii vero in felicitate
hominum filiabus admisti a dracone afflicti," etc. Routh takes the
phrase in felicitate as = " adhuc in statu felici existentes: " so that
the sense would be, "others, while they still abode in the blessed
estate, had intercourse," etc. [Routh, R. S., vol. v. pp. 118-122.]

* Aichelaus seems here to assign a twofold etj'mology for the
name devil, deriving the Greek 6id/3oAos, accuser, from ^la^aAA(o,
m Its two senses of trajicere and traducere, to cross over and to
slander.

5 Matt. iv. lo.
'' John viii. 44.
' Matt. iii. 7, 8.

* Reading a nobis for the a vobis of the codex.


angels. Furthermore, there is but one only in-
convertible substance, the divine substance, eter-
nal and invisible, as is known to all, and as is
also borne out by this scripture : " No man hath
seen God at any time, save the only begotten
Son, which is in the bosom of the Father." ' All
the other creatures, consequently, are of neces-
sity visible, — such as heaven, earth, sea, men,,
angels, archangels. But if God has not been seen
by any man at- any time, what consubstantiality
can there be between Him and those creatures ?
Hence we hold that all things whatsoever have,
in their several positions, their own proper sub-
stances, according to their proper order. You,
on the other hand, allege that every living thing
which moves is made of one,'° and you say that
every object has received like substance from
God, and that this substance is capable of sin-
ning and of being brought under the judgment ;
and you are unwilling to accept the word which
declares that the devil was an angel, and that he
fell in transgression, and that he is not of the
same substance with God. Logically, you ought
to do away with any allowance of the doctrine of
a judgment, and that would make it clear which
of us is in error." If, indeed, the angel that has
been created by God is incapable of falling in
transgression, how can the soul, as a part of God,
be capable of sinning? But, again, if you say
that there is a judgment for sinning souls, and if
you hold also that these are of one substance
with God ; and if still, even although you main-
tain that they are of the divine nature, you afiirm
that, notwithstanding that fact, they do not keep '^
the commandments of God, then, even on such
grounds, my argument will pass very well,'^ which
avers that the devil fell first, on account of his
failure to keep the commandments of God. He
was not indeed of the substance of God. And
he fell, not so much to do hurt to the race of
man, as rather to be set at nought '■* by the same.
For He " gave unto us power to tread on serpents
and scorpions, and over all the strength of the
enemy." '5


9 John i. i8.

'° Ex tino.

'I The sense is obscure here. The text runs, " Interimere debes
judicii ratione ut quis nostrum fallat appareat." Migne proposes to
read rationetn, as if the idea intended was this: That, consistently
with his reasonings. Manes ought not to admit the fact of a judgment,
because the notions he has propounded on the subject of men and
angels are not reconcilable with such a belief — If this can be ac-
cepte'd as the probable meaning, then it would seem that the use of
the verb interimere may be due to the fact that the Greek text gave
avatpeir, between the two senses of which — viz. to kill and to remove
— the translator did not correctly distinguish. Routh, however, pro-
poses to read interiiiii, taking it as equivalent to condemuari, so
that the idea might be = on all principles of sound judgment you
ought to be condemned, etc.

'^ The codex reads simply, Dei servare mandata. We may
adopt either Dei tzon servare mandata, as above, or, Dei servare
vel non servare mandata, in reference to the freedom o( will, and
so = they may or may not keep the commandments.

'3 The codex has prcecedit, for •fi\\\<:h procedit is proposed.

'■• Reading " laederet — illuderetur." But might it not rather be
" laederet — illidcretur" not to bruise, but rather to be bruised, etc.?

'5 Luke X. ig.


206


THE DISPUTATION WITH MANES.


^^. Tlie judges said: He has given demon-
stration enough of the origin of the devil. And
as both sides admit that there will be a judgment,
it is necessarily involved in that admission that
every individual is shown to have free-will ; and
since this is brought clearly out, there can be no
doubt that every individual, in the exercise of his
own proper power of will, may shape his course
in whatever direction he pleases.' Manes said :
If (only) the good is from (your) God, as you
allege, then you make Jesus Himself a liar.^
Archelaus said : In the first place, admit that
the account of what we have adduced is true,
and then I will give you proof about the "father
of him." 2 Afanes said : If you prove to me
that his father is a liar, and yet show me that for
all that you ascribe no such (evil) notion to
God, then credit will be given you on all points.
Archelaus said : Surely when a full account of
the devil has once been presented, and the dis-
pensation set forth, any one now, with an ordi-
narily vigorous understanding, might simply, by
turning the matter carefully over in his own
mind, get an idea of who this is that is here
called the father of the devil. But though you
give yourself out to be the Paraclete, you come
very far short of the ordinary sagacity of men.
Wherefore, as you have betrayed your ignorance,
I shall tell you what is meant by this expression,
the "father of the devil." Manes said: I say
so-* . . . ; and he added: Every one who is
the founder or maker of anything may be called
the {2ii]^tr, pa?-ent, of that which he has made.
Archelaus said : Well, I am verily astonished
that you have made so correct an admission in
reply to what I have said, and have not concealed
either your intelligent apprehension of the affir-
mation, or the real nature of the same. Now,
from this learn who is this father of the devil.
When he fell from the kingdom of heaven, he
came to dwell upon earth, and there he remained,
ever watching and seeking out some one to whom
he might attach himself, and whom, through an


' This appears to be the general sense of the very corrupt pas-
sage, " Quo videntur ostenso nulli dubium est unusquisque in quam-
cunque elegerit partem propria usus arbilrii potestate." In Migne it
is amended thus: "Quo evidenter ostenso, nulli dubium est, quod
unusquisque in quamcunque elegerit partem, propria usus fuerit
arbitrii potestate."

2 Adopting the emendation, " si a Deo bonus, ut asseris, menda-
ceiii esse dixisti Jesum." In the Codex Casinensis it stands thus:
"sic a Deo bonus ut as mendacem esse dixisti Jesus." But Routh
would substitute " si a Deo diabolus " = if the devil is from God.

3 The argumentation throughout this passage seems to rest on
the fact that, in support of the dogma of the evil deity, Manes per-
verted, among other passages, our Lord's words in John viii. 44, as
if they were not only " Ye are of your father the devil," but possibly
also, " Ye are of the father of the devil; " and again, " He is a liar,
and the father of him is the same." Thus what Manes urges
against Archelaus is this: If only what is good proceeds from the
Deity, and if He is the Supreme Good Himself, you make out Jesus
to have spoken falsely, when in John's Gospel He uses expressions
which imply that the devil's father is a liar, and also the Creator of
the lying devil.

■* There are some words deficient in this sentence. The text
reads, " Manes dixit: . . . dico: et adjecit, Omnis qui conditor est
vel Creator aliquorum pater eorum . . . condiderit appellatur." It
is proposed to supply _/'«;« before dico, and gua: before condiderit.


alliance witli himself, he might also make a part-
ner in his own wickedness. Now as long, indeed,
as man was not yet existent, the devil was never
called either a murderer or a liar together with
his father. But subsequenUy, when man had
once been made, and when further he had been
deceived by the devil's lies and craftiness, and
when the devil had also introduced himself into
the body of tlie serpent, which was the most
sagacious of all the beasts, then from that time
the devil was called a liar together with his father,
and then 5 also the curse was made to rest not
only on himself, but also on his father. Accord-
ingly, when the serpent had received him, and
had indeed admitted him wholly into its own
being, it was, as it were, rendered pregnant, for
it bore the burden of the devil's vast wickedness ;
and it was like one with child, and under the
strain of parturition, as it sought to eject the
agitations '' of his malignant suggestions. For
the serpent, grudging the glory of the first man,
made its way into paradise ; and harbouring
these pains of parturition in itself,'' it began to
produce mendacious addresses, and to generate
death for the men who had been fashioned by
God, and who had received the gift of life. The
devil, however, was not able to manifest himself
completely through the serpent ; but he reserved
his perfection for a time, in order that he might
demonstrate it through Cain, by whom he was
generated completely. And thus through the
serpent, on the one hand, he displayed his hy-
pocrisies and deceits to Eve ; while through
Cain, on the other hand, he effected the begin-
ning of murder, introducing himself into the
firstlings of the " fruits," which that man admin-
istered so badly. Erom this the devil has been
called a murderer from the beginning, and also
a liar, because \\t deceived the parties to whom
he said, " Ye shall be as gods ; " ^ for those very
persons whom he falsely declared destined to
be gods were afterwards cast out of paradise.
Wherefore the serpent which conceived him in
its womb, and bore him, and brought him forth
to the light of day, is constituted the devil's first
father ; and Cain is made his second father, who
through the conception of iniquities produced
pains and parricide : for truly the taking of life
was the perpetrating of iniquity, unrighteousness,
and impiety all together. Eurthermore, all who
receive him, and do his lusts, are constituted his
brothers. Pharaoh is his father in perfection.
Every impious man is made his father. Judas be-
came his father, since he conceived him indeed,
though he miscarried : for he did not present a
perfect parturition there, since it was really a


5 Reading et effecti(m for the lit eff'ectum of the codex.

6 Or it may be " cogitations," reading cogitata for agitata.

7 Concefitis in se doloribus.
^ Gen. iii. 5.


THE DISPUTATION WITH MANES.


207


greater person who was assailed through Judas ;
and consequently, as I say, it proved an abortion.
For just as the woman receives the man's seed,
and thereby also becomes sensible of a daily
growth within her, so also did Judas make daily
advances in evil, the occasions for that being
furnished him like seed by the wicked one. And
the tirst seed of evil in him, indeed, was the lust
of money ; and its increment was theft, for he
purloined the moneys which were deposited in
the bag. Its offspring, moreover, consisted of
less vexations, and compacts with the Pharisees,
and the scandalous bargain for a price ; yet it
was the abortion, and not the birth, that was wit-
nessed in the horrid noose by which he met his
death. And exactly in the same way shall it
stand also with you : if you bring the wicked one
to light in your own deeds, and do his lusts, you
have conceived him, and will be called his father ;
but, on the other hand, if you cherish penitence,
and deliver yourself of your burden, you will be
like one that brings to the birth.' For, as in
school exercises, if one gets the subject-matter
from the master, and then creates and produces
the whole body of an oration by himself, he is
said to be the author of the compositions to
which he has thus given birth ; so he who has
taken in any little leaven of evil from the prime
evil, is of necessity called the father and pro-
creator of that wicked one, who from the begin-
ning has resisted the truth. The case may be
the same, indeed, with those who devote them-
selves to virtue ; for I have heard the most
valiant men say to God, " For Thy fear, O Lord,
we have conceived in the womb, and we have
been in pain, and have brought forth the spirit
of salvation." 3 And so those, too, who conceive
in respect of the fear of the wicked one, and
bring forth the spirit of iniquity, must needs be
called the fathers of the same. Thus, on the
one hand, they are called sons of that wicked
one, so long as they are still yielding obedience
to his service ; but, on the other hand, they are
called fathers if they have attained to the perfec-
tion of iniquity. For it is with this view that
our Lord says to the Pharisees, " Ye are of your
father the devil,"-* thereby making thern his sons,
as long as they appeared still to be perturbed 5
by him, and meditated in their hearts evil for
good toward the righteous. Accordingly, while
they deliberated in such a spirit with their own
hearts, and while their wicked devices were made
chargeable upon'' themselves, Judas, as the head
of all the evil, and as the person who carried out

' The text gives /«r^«r/cj. Routh suggests /rtr/«r-;>«j. The
sense then might be, But if you repent, you will also deliver yourself
of your burden like one who brings to the birth.

- Reading Domine for DomiHum, which is given in the text.

3 The quotation may refer to Isa. xxvi. i8. [A curious version.]

■* John viii. 44.

5 Contiirbari.

* Translatis in se.


their iniquitous counsels to their consummation,
was constituted the father of the crime, having
received at their hands the recornpensQ of thirty
pieces of silver for his impious cruelty. For
"after the sop Satan entered into him " ^ com-
pletely. But, as we have said, when his womb
was enlarged, and the time of his travail came
on, he delivered himself only of an abortive bur-
den in the conception of unrighteousness, and
consequently he could not be called the father
in perfection, except only at that very time when
the conception was still in the womb ; and after-
wards, when he betook himself to the hangman's
rope, he showed that he had not brought it to a
complete birth, because remorse ^ followed.

34. I think that you cannot fail to understand
this too, that the word " father " is but a single
term indeed, and yet one admitting of being
understood in various ways. For one is called
father, as being the parent of those children
whom he has begotten in a natural way ; another
is called father, as being the guardian of chil-
dren whom he has but brought up ; and some,
again, are called fathers in respect of the privi-
leged standing accruing through time or age.
Hence our Lord Jesus Christ Himself is said to
have a variety of fathers : for David was called
His father, and Joseph was reckoned to be His
father, while neither of these two was His father
in respect of the actuality of nature. For David
is called His father as touching the prerogative
of time and age,^ and Joseph is designated His
father as concerning the law of upbringing ; but
God Himself is His only Father by nature, who
was pleased to make all things manifest in short
space '° to us by His word. And our Lord Jesus
Christ, making no tarrying," in the space of one
year '^ restored multitudes of the sick to health,
and gave back the dead to the light of life ; and
He did indeed embrace all things in the power
of His own word.'^ And wherein, forsooth, did
He make any tarrying, so that we should have
to believe Hiiii to have waited so long, ei'en to
these days, before He actually sent the Para-
clete ? '+ Nay, rather, as has been already said
above. He gave proof of His presence with us
forthwith, and did most abundantly impart Him-
self to Paul, whose testimony we also believe
when he says, " Unto me only is this grace
given." '5 For this is he who formerly was a
persecutor of the Church of God, but who


7 John xiii. 27.

^ Pcenitentia. [2 Cor. vii. 10.]
9 Aitatis ac temporis priiiilegio.
'° Velociter.

" Nee in aliqito remoratus.

'- The text gives, " inter unius anni spatium," for which intra,
etc., is proposed. With certain others of the fathers, Archelaiis
seems to assign but one year to the preaching of Christ and to His
working of miracles. See ch. xlix. [Vol. i. p. 391, this series.]
'3 Referring probably to Heb i. 3.

'■* IVIigne gives this sentence as a direct statement. We adopt the
interrogative form with Routh.

'S Eph. iii. 8. Mihi autem soli, etc


208


THE DISPUTATION WITH MANES.


afterwards appeared openly before all men as a
faithful* minister of the Paraclete ; by whose in-
strumentality His singular clemency was made
known to all men, in such wise that even to us
who some time were without hope the largess
of His gifts has come. For which of us could
have hoped that Paul, the persecutor and enemy
of the Church, would prove its defender and
guardian? Yea, and not that alone, but that he
would become also its ruler, the founder and
architect of the churches? Wherefore after
him, and after those who were with Himself —
that is, the disciples — we are not to look for
the advent of any other (such), according to
the Scriptures ; for our Lord Jesus Christ says
of this Paraclete, " He shall receive of mine." '
Him therefore He selected as an acceptable ves-
sel ; and He sent this Paul to us in the Spirit.
Into him the Spirit was poured ; - and as that
Spirit could not abide upon all men, but only
on Him who was born of Mary the mother of
God, so that Spirit, the Paraclete, could not
come into any other, but could only come upon
the apostles and the sainted Paul. '' For he is
a chosen vessel," He says, " unto me, to bear
my name before kings and the Gentiles." 3 The
apostle himself, too, states the same thing in his
first epistle, where he says : " According to the
grace that is given to me of God, that I should
be the minister of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles,
ministering-* the Gospel of God." s " I say the
truth in Christ, I lie not, my conscience also
bearing me witness in the Holy Ghost." ^ And
again : " For I will not dare to speak of any of
those things which Christ hath not wrought by
me by word and deed." ? "I am the last of all
the apostles, that am not meet to be called an
apostle. But by the grace of God I am what I
am."^ And it is his wish to have to deal with 9
those who sought the proof of that Christ who
spake in him, for this reason, that the Paraclete
was in him : and as having obtained His gift of
grace, and as being enriched with magnificent
honour,'" he says : " For this thing I besought
the Lord thrice, that it might depart from me.
And He said unto me, My grace is sufificient for
thee ; for strength is made perfect in weak-
ness." " Again, that it was the Paraclete Him-


' John xvi. 14.

2 The text reads, " quem misit ad nos Paulum in Spiritus influxit
Spiritus," etc. We adopt the emendation, " quem misit ad nos
Paulum in Spiritu. Influxit Spiritus," etc. Routh suggests, " Paul-
um cujus in spiritum influxit Spiritus " = this Paul, into whose spirit
the Spirit was poured.

3 /« conspcctu regiim ct gentium. Acts ix. 15.

■* Co7tsecra>is. [Vol. v. p. 290, note 8; also p. 409.]

5 Rom. XV. 15, 16.

6 Rom. ix. I.

7 Rom. .XV. 18.

^ I Cor. XV. 9, 10. Archelaus here gives " novissimus omnium
apostolorum " for the fAa^icrTo? of the Greek, and the "minimus"
of the Vulgate. [" The last" instead of least.']

9 Vnlt habere.

'° Reading " magnifico honore" for the " magnifico hoc ore " of
the codex.

'' 2 Cor. xii. 8, 9.


self who was in Paul, is indicated by our Lord
Jesus Christ in the Gospel, when He says : '' If
ye love me, keep my commandments. And I
will pray my Father, and He shall give you
another Comforter." '- In these words He points
to the Paraclete Himself, for He speaks of
" another " Comforter. And hence we have
given credit to Paul, and have hearkened to him
when he says, " Or "^ seek ye a proof of Christ
speaking in me ? " '+ and when he expresses him-
self in similar terms, of which we have already
spoken above. Thus, too, he seals his testa-
ment for us as for his faithful heirs, and like a
father he addresses us in these words in his
Epistle to the Corinthians : " I delivered unto
you first of all that which I also received, how
that Christ died for our sins according to the
Scriptures ; and that He was buried, and that
He rose again the third day according to the
Scriptures ; and that He was seen of Cephas,
then of the eleven apostles : 's after that He was
seen of above five hundred brethren at once ;
of whom the greater part remain unto this pres-
ent, but some are fallen asleep. After that He
was seen of James ; then of all the apostles.
And last of all He was seen of me also, as of
one born out of due time. For I am the last
of the apostles." '^ " Therefore, whether it were
I or they, so we preach, and so ye believed." '^
And again, in delivering over to his heirs that
inheritance which he gained first himself, he
says : " But I fear, lest by any means, as the
serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty, so
your minds should be corrupted from the sim-
plicity that is in Christ. For if he that cometh
preacheth another Christ,'*^ whom we have not
preached, or if ye receive another Spirit, which
ye have not received, or another gospel, which
ye have not accepted, ye might well bear with
him. For I suppose that I did nothing less for
you than the other apostles." '^

35. These things, moreover, he has said with
I the view of showing us that all others who may
I come after him will be false apostles, deceitful
workers, transforming them.selves into the apos-
tles ot Christ. And no marvel ; for Satan him-
self is transformed, like an angel of light. What
great thing therefore is it, if his ministers also
be transformed into the ministers of righteous-
ness?— whose end shall be according to their
works.^° He indicates, further, what manner of
men these were, and points out by whom they


'- John xiv. 15, 16.

" ^"'■

-■• 2 Cor. xiii. 3.

'5 Uudecim apostolis.

'^ I Cor. XV. 3-9. [Note 8, supra.]

'7 I Cor. XV. II.

13 Christum.

■9 Nihil minus feci vobis a aeieris apostolis. 2 Cor. xi. 3-5.

-° 2 Cor. ix. 14, 15. The text gives " velut angelum lucis," as if
the Greek had read lu?. So also Cyprian, in the beginning of his
book on The Unity of the Church. [Vol. v. p. 422, sec. 3.]


THE DISPUTATION WITH MANES.


209


were being circumvented. And when the Gala-
tians are minded to turn away from the Gospel,
he says to them : " I marvel that ye are so soon
removed from Him that called you unto another
gospel : which is not another ; but there be
some that trouble you, and would turn you
away ' from the Gospel of Christ. But though
we, or an angel from heaven, preach any other
gospel unto you than that which has been de-
livered to you, let him be accursed." - And
again he says : " To me, who am the least of
all the apostles,^ is this grace given ;" '* and, " I
fill up that which was behind of the afflictions
of Christ in my flesh." 5 And once more, in
another place, he declares of himself that he
was a minister of Christ more than all others,''
as though after him none other was to be looked
for at all ; for he enjoins that not even an angel
from heaven is thus to be received. And how,
then, shall we credit the professions of this
Manes, who comes from Persis,^ and declares
himself to be the Paraclete ? By this very thing,
indeed, I rather recognise in him one of those
men who transform themselves, and of whom the
Apostle Paul, that elect vessel, has given us very
clear indication when he says : " Now in the
last times some shall depart from the faith,
giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines
of devils ; speaking lies in hypocrisy ; having
their conscience seared with a hot iron ; for-
bidding to marry, and commanding to abstain
from meats, which God hath created to be re-
ceived '^ with thanksgiving of them which believe
and know the truth. For every creature of God
is good, and nothing to be refused, if it be re-
ceived with thanksgiving." 9 The Spirit in the
evangelist Matthew is also careful to give note
of these words of our Lord Jesus Christ : " Take
heed that no man deceive you : for many shall
come in my name, saying, I am Christ ; and
shall deceive many. But if any man shall say
unto you, Lo, here is Christ, or there ; believe
it not. For there shall arise false Christs, and
false apostles, '° and false prophets, and shall show
great signs and wonders ; insomuch that, if it
were possible, they shall deceive the very elect.
Behold, I have told you before. If they shall
say unto you, Behold, he is in the desert; go
not forth : if they shall say. Behold, he is in the
secret chambers ; believe it not." " And yet.


' Avertere vos.

2 Gal. i. 6-8.

^ Infimo otiiniuin apostolorunt.

* Eph. iii. 8.
s Col. i. 24.

* 2 Cor. xi. 23.

' The Codex Casinensis gives, " de Persida venientem monet; "
for which corrupt reading it is proposed to substitute " de Perside
venientem Manein," etc.

8 Reading percipiendum with the Vulgate. But the Codex
Casinensis \\a^ perficiendicm.

9 1 Tim. iv. 1-4.

'° These words /a/st apostoli seem to be added by way of explana-
tion, as they are not found either in the Greek or the Vulgate.
" Matt, xxiv, 4, 5, 23-26.


after all these directions, this man, who has
neither sign nor portent of any kind to show,
who has no affinity to exhibit, who never even
had a place among the number of the disciples,
who never was a follower of our departed Lord,
in whose inheritance we rejoice, — this man, I
say, although he never stood by our Lord in His
weakness, and although he never came forward as
a witness of His testament, yea rather, although
he never came even within the acquaintance of
those who ministered to Him in His sickness,
and, in fine, although he obtains the testimony
of no person whatsoever, desires us to believe
this profession which he makes of being the
Paraclete ; whereas, even were you to do signs
and wonders, we would still have to reckon you
a false Christ, and a false prophet, according to
the Scriptures. And therefore it is well for us
to act with the greater caution, in accordance
with the warning which the sainted apostle gives
us, when, in the epistle which he wrote to the
Colossians, he speaks in the following terms :
" Continue in the faith grounded and rooted,'^
and not to be moved away '3 from the hope of
the Gospel, which we have heard,'-* and which
was preached to every creature which is under
heaven." '5 And again : " As ye have therefore
received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in
Him ; rooted and built up in Him, and stab-
lished in the faith, as ye have been taught,
abounding therein with thanksgiving. Beware
lest any one spoil you through philosophy and
vain deceit, after the rudiments of the world,
and not after Christ. For in Him dwelleth all
the fulness of the Godhead." '^ And after all
these matters have been thus carefully set forth,
the blessed apostle, like a father speaking to his
children, adds the following words, which serve
as a sort of seal to his testament : " I have fought
a good fight, I have finished my course,''' I have
kept the faith : henceforth there is laid up for
me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord,
the righteous Judge, shall give me at that day ;
and not to me only, but unto all them also that
love His appearing." '^^

36. None of your party, '"^ O Manes, will you
make a Galatian ; neither will you in this fashion
divert us^° from the faith of Christ. Yea, even
although you were to work signs and wonders,
although you were to raise the dead, although
you were to present to us the very image of Paul


feras
nos."


Eadicati.
Itninobilcs.
A iidiviiuus.
Col. i. 23.
Col. ii. 6-9.

The text gives " circnvi cucurri," perhaps for ^' cursitin cu-
," The Vulgate has " cursum consummavi."
2 Tim. iv. 7, 8.

The text gives "ex vobis." But perhaps we should read "ex
" = none of us.

The Codex Casinensis has " Galatam facies vicit, o nostras
" for which we adopt the correction, " Galatam facies, nee ita


2 lO


THE DISPUTATION WITH MANES.


himself, you would remain accursed still.' For
we have been instructed beforehand with regard
to you : we have been both warned and armed
against you by the Holy Scriptures. You are a
vessel of Antichrist ; and no vessel of honour,
in sooth, but a mean and base one, used by him
as any barbarian or tyrant may do, who, in at-
tempting to make an inroad on a people living
under the righteousness of the laws,^ sends some
select vessel on beforehand, as it were destined
to death, with the view of finding out the exact
magnitude and character of the strength pos-
sessed by the legitimate king and his nation : for
the man is too much afraid to make the inroad
himself wholly at unawares, and he also lacks
the daring to despatch any person belonging to
his own immediate circle on such a task, through
fear that he may sustain some harm. And so it
is that your king. Antichrist, has despatched you
in a similar character, and as it were destined to
death, to us who are a people placed under the
administration of the good and holy King. And
this I do not say inconsiderately or without due
inquiry ; but from the fact that I see you per-
form no miracle, I hold myself entitled to enter-
tain such sentiments concerning you. For we
are given to understand beforehand that the devil
himself is to be transformed into an angel of
light, and that nis servants are to make their
appearance in similar guise, and that they are to
work signs and wonders, insomuch that, if it
were possible, the very elect should be deceived.^
But who, pray, are you then, to whose lot no
such position of kinship has been assigned by
your father Satan ? ■♦ For whom have you raised
from the dead? What issue of blood do you
ever staunch ? What s eyes of the blind do you
ever anoint with clay, and thus cause them to
have vision? When do you ever refresh a hun-
gering multitude with a few loaves ? Where do
you ever walk upon the water, or who of those
who dwell in Jerusalem has ever seen you? O
Persian barbarian, you have never been able to
have a knowledge of the language of the Greeks,
or of the Egyptians, or of the Romans, or of
.any other nation ; but the Chaldean tongue alone
has been known to you, which verily is not a
language prevalent among any great number of
people,^ and you are not capable of understand-
ing any one of another nationality when he
speaks. Not thus is it with the Holy Spirit :


• O Satan! The Codex Casinensis gives "anathema esse ana"
which may be an error, either for '' anathema es, Satana," or for
" anathema es et maranatha." [" O Satan " is less probable.]

2 The text is legum; for which regitm, kings, is also suggested.

3 Matt. xxiv. 24.

* The text gives, " qui neque necessarium aliquem locum sortitus
es," etc. Routh proposes " necessarii." The sense seems to be that
Manes had nothing to prove any connection between him and Christ.

5 Reading " guos luto," etc., for the " quod luto " of the codex.

*> [Note, against Canon Farrar and moderns, the persuasion of
antiquity as to the miraculous gift of tongues; the charismata of
others, also, besides the Apostles.] The text is, " qua; ne in numerum
quidem aliquem ducitur."


God forbid ; but He divides to all, and knows
all kinds of tongues, and has understanding of
all things, and is made all things to all men, so
that the very thoughts of the heart cannot escape
His cognizance. For what says the Scripture ?
" That every man heard the apostles speak in
his own language through the Spirit, the Para-
clete." 7 But why should I say more on this
subject?^ Barbarian*? priest and crafty coad-
jutor of Mithras, you will only be a worshipper
of the sun-god Mithras, who is the illuminator
of places of mystic import, as you opine, and
the self-conscious deity ; " ■" that is, you will sport
as his worshippers do, and you will celebrate,
though with less elegance as it were, his mys-
teries." But why should I take all this so indig-
nantly? Is it not accordant with all that is
fitting, that you should multiply yourself like the
tares, until that same mighty father of yours
comes, raising the dead, as he will profess to do,
and persecuting almost to hell itself all those
who refuse to yield to his bidding, keeping mul-
titudes in check by that terror of arrogance in
which he entrenches himself, and employing
threatenings against others, and making sport of
them by the changing of his countenance and
his deceitful dealing ? '^ And yet beyond that he
shall proceed no further ; for his folly shall be
made manifest to all men, as was the case with
Jamnes and Mambres.'^ The judges said: As
we have heard now from you, as Paul himself
also seems to tell us, and, further, as we have
learned likewise from the earlier account given
in the Gospel, an introduction to preaching, or
teaching, or evangelizing, or prophesying, is not,
in this life at least, held out on the same terms to
any person in times subsequent to the apostle's :^*
and if the opposite appears ever to be the case,
the person can only be held to be a false prophet
or a false Christ. Now, since you have alleged
that the Paraclete was in Paul, and that He
attested all things in him, how is it that Paul
himself said, " We know in part, and we prophesy


7 Acts ii. 6.

8 The text gives " Quid dicabo," which may stand for " quid
dicam;" or perhaps the translator intends to use " dicare " in the
sense of urge.

9 Reading barbare, for which the text offers barba.

10 Conscium. [For Mithras, see vol. iii. p. 475.]

'' In this sentence the sense is somewhat obscure, in consequence
of the corruptions of the text in the codex. We adopt the emend.a-
tions " locorum mysticorum" for inystcrioruin, and " apud eos
hides" for ludis. In the end of the clause Migne gives, as in the
translation, " et tanquam mimis elegans," etc. But Routh reads
niiinus = and like an elegant pantomimist, etc.

'- The Codex Casinensis gives the sentence thus: "... adveniat?
suscitans mortuos? pene usque ad gehennam omnes persequens, qui
si ut obtemperare noluerit, plurimos deterrens arrogantia: metu. Quod
est ipse circumdatus, aliis adhibet minas vultus sui conversione cir-
cumdatio ludificat." The emendations adopted by Migne and Routh
consist in removing these two interrogative marks, and in reading qui
sihi for qui si ut, noluerint for noluerit, quo est for Quod est, ad-
hibcns for adhibet, and et circutndjictione ludificans for the last
two words.

'3 2 Tim. iii. 8, 9.

'* The sense is again obscure throughout this sentence, owing to
the state of the text. The codex gives us this clause, " nuUi alio
atque posterum," etc., for which " nuUi :ilii jeque in posterum " is
proposed.


THE DISPUTATION WITH MANES.


21 I


in part ; but when that which is perfect is come,
then that which is in part shall be done away?" '
What other one did he look for, when he uttered
these words ? For if he professes himself to be
looking for some perfect one, and if some one
must needs come, show us who it is of whom he
speaks ; lest that word of his perchance appear
to carry us back to this man, Afanes, or to him
who has sent him, that is to say, Satan, ac-
cording to your affirmation. But if you admit
that that which is perfect is yet to come, then
this excludes Satan ; and if you look for the
coming of Satan, then that excludes the per-
fect.

37. ArcJielaits said : Those sayings which are
put forth by the blessed Paul were not uttered
without the direction of God, and therefore it is
certain that what he has declared to us is that
we are to look for our Lord Jesus Christ as the
perfect one, who ^ is the only one that knows the
Father, with the sole exception of him to whom
He has chosen also to reveal Him,3 as I am able
to demonstrate from His own words. But let it
be observed, that it is said that when that which
is perfect is come, then that which is in part
shall be done away. Now this man (Manes)
asserts that he is the perfect one. Let him show
us, then, what he has done away with ; for what
is to be done away with is the ignorance which
is in us. Let him therefore tell us what he has
done away with, and what he has brought into
the sphere of our knowledge. If he is able to
do anything of this nature, let him do it now,
in order that he may be believed. These very
words of Paul's, if one can but understand them
in the full power of their meaning, will only se-
cure entire credit to the statements made by me.
For in that iirst Epistle to the Corinthians, Paul
speaks in the following terms of the perfection
that is to come : " Whether there be prophecies,
they shall fail ; whether there be tongues, they
shall cease ; whether there be knowledge, it shall
be destroyed : for we know in part, and we
prophesy in part \ but when that which is per-
fect is come, then that which is in part shall be
done away." •♦ Observe now what virtue that
which is perfect possesses in itself, and of what
order that perfection is. And let this man, then,
tell us what prophecy of the Jews or Hebrews
he has done away with ; or what tongues he has
caused to cease, whether of the Greeks or of
others who worship idols ; or what alien dogmas
he has destroyed, whether of a Valentinian, or a
Marcion, or a Tatian, or a Sabellius, or any others
of those who have constructed for themselves
their peculiar systems of knowledge. Let him


' I Cor. xiii. 9, 10.

^ Reading " qui solus," for the sed, etc., of the codex. See also
Luke X. 22.

^ Matt. xi. 27.
^ I Cor. xiii. 8-10.


tell US which of all these he has already done
away with, ©r when he is yet to do away with any
one of them, in this character of the perfect one.
Perchance he seeks some sort of truce — does
he ? 5 But not thus inconsiderable, not thus ob-
scure ^ and ignoble, will be the manner of the
advent of Him who is the truly perfect one, that
is to say, our Lord Jesus Christ. Nay, but as a
king, when he draws near to his city, does iirst
of all send on before him his life-guardsmen, ^ his
ensigns and standards and banners,"* his generals
and chiefs and prefects, and then forthwith all
objects are roused and excited in different fash-
ions, while some become inspired with terror and
others with exultation at the prospect of the king's
advent ; so also my Lord Jesus Christ, who is the
truly perfect one, at His coming will first send
on before Him His glory, and the consecrated
heralds of an unstained and untainted kingdom :
and then the universal creation will be moved
and perturbed, uttering prayers and supplications,
until He delivers it from its bondage.^ And it
must needs be that the race of man shall then
be in fear and in vehement agitation on account
of the many offences it has committed. Then
the righteous alone will rejoice, as they look for
the things which have been promised them ;
and the subsistence of the affairs of this world
will no longer be maintained, but all things shall
be destroyed : and whether they be prophecies
or the books of prophets, they shall fail ; whether
they be the tongues of the whole race, they
shall cease ; for men will no longer need to feel
anxiety or to think solicitously about those things
which are necessary for life ; whether it be knowl-
edge, by what teachers soever it be possessed, it
shall also be destroyed : for none of all these
things will be able to endure the advent of that
mighty King. For just as a little spark, if '° taken
and put up against the splendour of the sun, at
once perishes from the view, so the whole crea-
tion, all prophecy, all knowledge, all tongues, as
we have said above, shall be destroyed. But
since the capacities of common human nature
are all insufficient to set forth in a few words, and
these so weak and so extremely poor, the coming
of this heavenly King, — so much so, indeed,
that perchance it should be the privilege only
of the saintly and the highly worthy to attempt
any statement on such a subject, — it may yet be
enough for me to be able to say that I have ad-
vanced what I have now advanced on that theme
on the ground of simple necessity, — compelled,
as I have been, to do thus much by this person's


5 Inducias fortassis aliquas qiieerii.

6 Reading non plane, non tarn obscure," etc., instead of the
" non plane nota," etc., of the Codex Casinensis.

7 " Protectores," on which term consult Ducangius in his Glossary.
^ Signa^ dracoiieSy labaros.

9 Rom. viii. 21, 22.

'° The text gives simply, szcnt enitn parva. We may adopt, with
Routh, " sicut enim cum parva," etc.


212


THE DISPUTATION WITH MANES.


importunity, and simply with the view of show-
ing you what kind of character he is.

38. And, in good truth, I hold Marcion, and
Valentinian, and Basilides, and other heretics, to
be sainted men when compared ' with this person.
For they did display a certain kind of intellect,
and they did, indeed, think themselves capable
of understanding all Scripture, and did thus con-
stitute themselves leaders ^ for those who were
willing to listen to them. But notwithstanding
this, not one of these dared to proclaim himself
to be either God, or Christ, or the Paraclete, as
this fellow has done, who is ever disputing, on
some occasions about the ages,^ and on others
about the sun, and how these objects were made,
as though he were superior to them himself;
for every person who offers an exposition of the
method in which any object has been made,
puts himself forward as superior to and older
than the subject of his discussion. But who
may venture to speak of the substance of God,
unless, it may be, our Lord Jesus Christ alone ?
And, indeed, I do not make this statement on
the bare authority of my own words, but I con-
firm it by the authority of that Scripture which
has been our instructor. For the apostle ad-
dresses the following words to us : " That ye may
be lights in this world, holding * the word of life
for my glory against the day of Christ, seeing
that I have not run in vain, neither laboured in
vain." 5 We ought to understand what is the
force and meaning of this saying ; for the word
may suit the leader, but the effectual work suits
the king.^ And accordingly, as one who looks
for the arrival of his king, strives to be able to
present all who are under his charge as obedient,
and ready, and estimable, and lovely, and faith-
ful, and not less also as blameless, and abound-
ing in all that is good, so that he may himself
get commendation from the king, and be deemed
by him to be worthy of greater honours, as hav-
ing rightly governed the province which was en-
trusted to his administration ; so also does the
blessed Paul give us to understand our position
when he uses these words : " That ye may be as
lights in this world, holding the word of life for
my glory against the day of Christ." For the
meaning of this saying is, that our Lord Jesus
Christ, when He comes, will see that his doctrine
has proved profitable in us, and that, finding
that he, t/ie apostle, has not run in vain, neither
laboured in vain, He will bestow on him the


■ Reading " sic ut istius comparatione," for the " sicut istius
paratione " of the codex.

2 Reading se ductores, for the sedieciores, etc., of the codex.

3 Seciih's.

* ContineJites.

5 Phil. li. 13.

'' The precise meaning and connection are somewhat obscure here.
The text gives, " verbum enim ducis obtinet locum, opera vero regis."
And the idea is taken to be, that the actual work of thoroughly doing
away with the ignorance of men was something that suited only the
perfect King who was expected, and that had not been accomplished
by Manes.


crown of recompense. And again, in the same
epistle, he also warns us not to mind earthly
things, and tells us that we ought to have our
conversation in heaven ; from which also we look
for the Saviour, our Lord Jesus Christ.^ And as
the knowledge of the date of the last day is no
secure position for us, he has given us, to that
effect, a declaration on the subject in the epistle
which he wrote to the Thessalonians, thus : " But
of the times and the seasons, brethren, ye have
no need that I write unto you ; for yourselves
know perfectly that the day of the Lord so
Cometh as a thief in the night." ^ How, then,
does this man stand up and try to persuade us
to embrace his opinions, importuning every in-
dividual whom he meets to become a Manichaean,
and going about and creeping into houses, and
endeavouring to deceive minds laden with sins ? *
But we do not hold such sentiments. Nay,
rather, we should be disposed to present the
things themselves before you all, and bring them
into comparison, if it please you, with what we
know of the perfect Paraclete. For you observe
that '° sometimes he uses the interrogative style,
and sometimes the deprecatory. But in the
Gospel of our Saviour it is written that those who
stand on the left hand of the King will say :
" Lord, when saw we Thee an hungered, or
athirst, or naked, or a stranger, or in prison, and
did not minister unto Thee? " " Thus they will
implore Him to be indulgent with them. But
what reply is that righteous Judge and King rep-
resented as making to them? "Depart from
me into everlasting fire, ye workers of iniquity." '^
He casts them into everlasting fire, although they
cease not to direct their entreaties to Him. Do
you see, then, O Manes, what manner of event
that advent of the perfect King is destined to be ?
Do you not perceive that it will not be such a
perfection, or consjimmation, as you allege? But
if the great clay of judgment is to be looked for
after that King, surely this man is greatly inferior
to Him. But if he is inferior, he cannot be per-
fect. And if he is not to be perfect, it is not
of him that the apostle speaks. But if it is not
of him that the apostle speaks, while he still
makes the mendacious statement that it is of
himself that the said word of the apostle was
spoken, then surely he is to be judged a false ■
prophet. Much more, too, might be said to the •
same effect. But if we were to think of going
over in detail all that might thus be adduced,
time would fail us for the accomplishment of so
large a task. Hence I have deemed it abun-
dantly sufficient thus to have brought under your


7 Phil. iii. 19.

^ I Thess. V. 1,2.

9 Alluding to 2 Tim. iii. 6.

'° Routh inserts intcrduin jicem'iei — sometimes he uses the peni-
tential style, which Migne omits.
" Matt. XXV. 44.
'^ Matt. XXV. 46; Luke xiii. 27.


THE DISPUTATION WITH MANES.


213


notice only a few things out of many, leaving the
yet remaining portions of such a discussion to
those who have the inclination to go through
with them.

39. On hearing these matters, those who were
present gave great glory to God, and ascribed to
Him such praise as it is meet for Him to re-
ceive. And on Archelaus himself* they bestowed
many tokens of honour. Then Marcellus rose
up ; and casting off his cloak,' he threw his arms
round Archelaus, and kissed him, and embraced
him, and clung to him. Then, too, the children
who had chanced to gather about the place
began and set the example of pelting Manes and
driving him off;^ and the rest of the crowd fol-
lowed them, and moved excitedly about, with
the intention of compelling Manes to take to
flight. But when Archelaus observed this, he
raised his voice like a trumpet above the din, in
his anxiety to restrain the multitude, and ad-
dressed them thus : " Stop, my beloved breth-
ren, lest mayhap we be found to have the guilt
of blood on us at the day of judgment ; for it
is written of men like this, that ' there must be
also heresies among you, that they which are
approved may be made manifest among you.' " 3
And when he had uttered these words, the
crowds of people were quieted again.^ — Now,
because it was the pleasure of Marcellus that
this disputation should have a place given it,5
and that it should also be described, I could not
gainsay his wish, but trusted to the kind consid-
eration of the readers, believing that they would
pardon me if my discourse should sound some-
what inartistic or boorish : for the great thing
which we have had in view has been, that the
means of knowing what took place on this occa-
sion should not fail to be brought within the
reach of all who desired to understand the sub-
ject. Thereafter, it must be added, when Manes
had once taken to flight, he made his appearance
nowhere there again. His attendant Turbo,
however, was handed over by Marcellus to Arche-
laus ; and on Archelaus ordaining him as a dea-
con, he remained in the suite of Marcellus. But
Manes in his flight came to a certain village
which was at a considerable distance from the
city, and bore the name of Diodorus. Now in
that place there was also a presbyter whose name
likewise was Diodorus,*' a man of quiet and
gentle disposition, and well reputed both for his
faith and for the excellence of his general char-
acter. Now when, on a certain day, Manes had


' The text gives the phiral form stolas, perhaps for stola7n.
^ The text ^\es/ngere, apparently in the sense oi fugare.
3 I Cor. xi. 19.

* [Note the testimony against the persecution of heretics, — a
characteristic of early Christians which too soon began to disappear,
notably in Alexandria under Cyril.]

5 Excipi.

* This Diodorus appears to be called Trypho by Epiphanius, on
this Manicha;an heresy, n. ii.


gathered a crowd of auditors around him, and
was haranguing '' them, and putting before the
people who were present certain outlandish asser-
tions altogether foreign to the tradition of the
fathers, and in no way apprehending any opposi-
tion that might be made to him on the part of
any of these, Diodorus perceived that he was
producing some effect by his wickedness, and
resolved then to send to Archelaus a letter
couched in the following terms : —

Diodorus sends greeting to Bishop Archelaus.^
40. I wish you to know, most pious father,
that in these days there has arrived in our parts
a certain person named Manes, who gives out
that he is to complete the doctrine of the New
Testament. And in the statements which he
has made there have been some things, indeed,
which may harmonize with our faith ; but there
have been also certain affirmations of his which
seem very far removed from what has come
down to us by the tradition of our fathers. For
he has interpreted some doctrines in a strange
fashion, imposing on them certain notions of his
own, which have appeared to me to be altogether
foreign and opposed to the faith. On the ground
of these facts I have now been induced to write
this letter to you, knowing the completeness and
fulness of your intelligence in doctrine, and being
assured that none of these things can escape
your cognizance. Accordingly, I have also in-
dulged the confident hope that you cannot be
kept back by any grudge ^ from explaining these
matters to us. As to myself, indeed, it is not
possible that I shall be drawn away into any
novel doctrine ; nevertheless, in behalf of all the
less instructed, I have been led to ask a word
with your authority. For, in truth, the man shows
himself to be a person of extraordinary force of
character, both in speech and in action ; and
indeed his very aspect and attire also bear that
out. But I shall here write down for your infor-
mation some few points which I have been able
to retain in my memory out of all the topics
which have been expounded by him : for I know
that even by these few you will have an idea of
the rest. You well understand, no doubt, that
those who seek to set up any new dogma have
the habit of very readily perverting into a con-
formity with their own notions any proofs they
desire to take from the Scriptures. ■" In anticipa-
tion, however, of this, the apostolic word marks
out the case thus : " If any one preach any other
gospel unto you than that which you have re-
ceived, let him be accursed." " And conse-
quently, in addition to what has been once


7 Reading co7tcionaretiir for continuaretur.

8 This epistle is also mentioned, and its argument noticed, by
Epiphanius, Hceres., ii.

9 Invidia.

■° [Tertullian, vol. iii. p. 251, this series.]
" Gal. i. 8.


214


THE DISPUTATION WITH MANES.


committed to us by the apostles, a disciple of
Christ ought to receive nothing new as doctrine.'
But not to make what I have got to say too long,
I return to the subject directly in view. This
man then maintained that the law of Moses, to
speak shortly, does not proceed from the good
God, but from the prince of evil ; and that it
has no kinship with the new law of Christ, but
is contrary and hostile to it, the one being the
direct antagonist of the other. When I heard
such a sentiment propounded, I repeated to the
people that sentence of the Gospel in which our
Lord Jesus Christ said of Himself: "I am not
come to destroy the law, but to fulfil it." " The
man, however, averred that He did not utter this
saying at all ; for he held that when we find that
He did abrogate ^ that same law, we are bound
to give heed, above all other considerations, to
the thing which He actually did. Then he began
to cite a great variety of passages from the law,
and also many from the Gospel and from the
Apostle Paul, which have the appearance of con-
tradicting each other. All this he gave forth at
the same time with perfect confidence, and with-
out any hesitation or fear ; so that I verily believe
he has that serpent as his helper, who is ever our
adversary. Well, he declared that there in the
law God said, '' I make the rich man and the
poor man;"'* while here in the Gospel Jesus
called the poor blessed, 5 and added, that no man
could be His disciple unless he gave up all that
he had.^ Again, he maintamed that there Moses
took silver and gold from the Egyptians when
the people ^ fled out of Eg}'pt ; ^ whereas Jesus
delivered the precept that we should lust after
nothing belonging to our neighbour. Then he
affirmed that Moses had provided in the law,
that an eye should be given in penalty for an
eye, and a tooth for a tooth ; '' but that our Lord
bade us offer the other cheek also to him who
smote the one.'° He told us, too, that there
Moses commanded the man to be punished and
stoned who did any work on the Sabbath, and
who failed to continue in all things that were
written in the law," as in fact was done to that
person who, yet being ignorant, had gathered a
bundle of sticks on the Sabbath-day ; whereas
Jesus cured a cripple on the Sabbath, and ordered
him then also to take up his bed.'- And further,


_ ' [Against Scripture and the torrent of patristic testimony, the
men of this generation have seen new dogmas imposed upon a great
portion of Christendom by the voice of a single bishop, and without
synodical deUberation or consent. The whole claim to " Catholicity "
perishes wherever such dogmas are accepted.]

2 Matt. V. 17.

3 Resolvisse.

•* Prov. xxii. 2.

5 Matt. v. 3.

^ Luke xiv. 33.

^ Reading cum popuhis for the cunt populo of the text.

8 Ex. xii. 35.

9 E.X. xxi. 24.
'° Luke vi. 29.
'' Num. XV. 32.
'- Mark ii. 11.


He did not restrain His disciples from plucking
the ears of corn and rubbing them with their
hands on the Sabbath-day,'^ which yet was a thing
which it was unlawful to do on the Sabbaths.
And why should I mention other instances ? For
with many different assertions of a similar nature
these dogmas of his were propounded with the
utmost energy and the most fervid zeal. Thus,
too, on the authority of an apostle, he endeav-
outed to establish the position that the law of
Moses is the law of death, and that the law of
Jesus, on the contrary, is the law of life. For
he based that assertion on the passage which
runs thus : " In which also may God make us '■♦
able ministers of the New Testament ; not of
the letter, but of the spirit : for the letter killeth,
but the spirit giyeth life. But if the ministra-
tion of death, engraven in letters on the stones, 's
was made in glory, so that the children of Israel
could not stedfastly behold the face of Moses
for the glory of his countenance ; which glory
was to be done away ; how shall not the minis-
tration of the Spirit be rather glorious ? For if
the mmistration of condemnation be glory, much
more doth the ministration of righteousness
exceed in glory. For even that which was made
glorious had no glory in this respect, by reason
of the glory that excelleth. For if that which
shall be done away is glorious, much more that
which remaineth is glorious." '^ And this passage,
as you are also well aware, occurs in the second
Epistle to the Corinthians. Besides, he added
to this another passage out of the first epistle,
on which he based his affirmation that the dis-
ciples of the Old Testament were earthly and
natural ; and in accordance with this, that flesh
and blood could not possess the kingdom of
God, '7 He also maintained that Paul himself
spake in his own proper person when he said :
" If I build again the things which I destroyed,
I make myself a transgressor." '^ Further, he
averred that the same apostle made this state-
ment most obviously on the subject of the resur-
rection of the flesh," when he also said that " he
is not a Jew who is one outwardly, neither is that
circumcision which is outward in the flesh," "^ and
that according to the letter the law has in it no
advantage.^" And again he adduced the state-
ment, that " Abraham has glory, but not before
God ; " ^' and that " by the law there comes only
the knowledge of sin." ^- And many other things
did he introduce, with the view of detracting
from the honour of the law, on the ground that


'3 Luke vi. i.

'■* Facial Deus.

's /« liiieris forinatum in lapidibus.

'^ 2 Cor. iii. 6-11.

'' I Cor. XV. 46-50.

18 Gal. ii. 18.

19 Rom. ii. 28.
^° Rom. iv. I.
"' Rom. iv. 2.
-^ Rom. iii. 20.


THE DISPUTATION WITH MANES.


215


the law itself is sin ; by which statements the
simpler people were somewhat influenced, as he
continued to bring them forward ; and in ac-
cordance with all this, he also made use of the
affirmation, that " the law and the prophets were
until John." ' He declared, however, that John
preached the /ri/e kingdom of heaven ; for verily
he held, that by the cutting off of his head it was
signified that all who went before him, and who
had precedence over him, were to be cut off, and
that what was to come after him was alone to be
maintained. With reference to all these things,
therefore, O most pious Archelaus, send us back
a short reply in writing : for I have heard that
you have studied such matters in no ordinary
degree ; and that capacity which you possess is
God's gift, inasmuch as God bestows these gifts
upon those who are worthy of them, and who are
His friends, and who show themselves allied to
Him in community of purpose and life. For it
is our part to prepare ourselves, and to approach
the gracious and liberal mind,^ and forthwith we
receive from it the most bountiful gifts. Accord-
ingly, since the learning which I possess for the
discussion of themes like these does not meet
the requirements of my desire and purpose, for
I confess myself to be an unlearned man, I have
sent to you, as I have already said more than
once, in the hope of obtaining from your hand
the amplest solution to this question. May it be
well with you, incomparable and honourable
father !

41. On receiving this epistle, Archelaus was
astonished at the man's boldness. But in the
meantime, as the case called for the transmis-
sion of a speedy reply, he immediately sent off
a letter with reference to the statements made
by Diodorus. That epistle ran in the following
terms : ^ —

Archelaus sends greeting to the presbyter
Diodorus, his honourable son.

The receipt of your letter has rejoiced me
exceedingly, my dearly beloved friend. I have
been given to understand, moreover, that this
man, who made his way to me before these days,
and sought to introduce a novel kind of knowl-
edge here, different from what is apostolic and
ecclesiastical, has also come to you. To that
person, indeed, I gave no place : for presently,
when we held a disputation together, he was
confuted. And I could wish now to transcribe
for your behoof all the arguments of which I
made use on that occasion, so that by means of


' Luke xvi. 16.

- Reading " praeparare et proximos fieri benignae ac diviti menti "
for " pra;paret proximus fieri benignae hac," etc., as it stands in the
Codex Casinensis. Routh suggests " praeparare proximos fieri be-
nignae ac diviti menti et continue . . . consequemur " = to take care
to draw near to the gracious and liberal mind, and then we shall forth-
with receive steadily from it, etc.

3 This epistle is edited not only from the Codex Casinensis, but
also by Valesius from the Codex Bobiensis. The most important
varieties of reading shall therefore be noted.


these you might get an idea of what that man's
faith is. But as that could be done only with
leisure at my disposal, I have deemed it requisite,
in view of the immediate exigency, to write a
short reply to you with reference to what you
have written me on the subject of the statements
advanced by him. I understand, then, that his
chiefs effort was directed to prove that the law
of Moses is not consonant with the law of Christ ;
and this position he attempted to found on the
authority of our Scriptures. Well, on the other
hand, not only did we establish the law of Moses,
and all things which are written in it, by the
same Scripture ; but we also proved that the
whole Old Testament agrees with the New Tes-
tament, and is in perfect harmony with the same,
and that they form really one texture, just as a
person may see one and the same robe made
up of weft and warp together.s For the truth
is simply this, that just as we trace the purple
in a robe, so, if we may thus express it, we can
discern the New Testament in the texture of the
Old Testament ; for we see the glory of the
Lord mirrored in the same.^ We are not there-
fore to cast aside the mirror,^ seeing that it
shows us the genuine image of the things them-
selves, faithfully and truly ; but, on the contrary,
we ought to honour it all the more. Think you,
indeed, that the boy who is brought by his pjeda-
gogue to the teachers of learning^ when he is
yet a very little fellow, ought to hold that peda-
gogue in no honour 9 after he has grown up to
manhood, simply because he needs his services '°
no longer, but can make his course without any
assistance from that attendant to the schools,
and quickly find his way to the lecture-rooms?
Or, to take another instance, would it be right
for the child who has been nourished on milk at
first, after he has grown to be capable of receiv-
ing stronger meats, then injuriously to spurn the
breasts of his nurse, and conceive a horror of
them ? Nay, rather he should honour and cher-
ish them, and confess himself a debtor to their
good services. We may also make use, if it
please you, of another illustration. A certain
man on one occasion having noticed an infant


■* Summum studium. But the Codex Bobiensis reads suuiii
sindzitin.

s Reading " ex subtegmine atque stamine," etc., with the Codex
Bobiensis, instead of " subtemine et, quae stamine," etc., as it is given
in the Codex Casinensis. [A beautiful anticipation of Augustine's
dictum, " The New is veiled in the Old, the Old unveiled in the
New." 1

* We read here " gloriam enim Domini in eodem speculamur."
The Codex Bobiensis is vitiated here, giving gloriam uiit Domini,
which was changed by Valesius into gloriam Jesu, etc.

^ Reading, with the Codex Bobiensis, " speculum, cum nobis
ipsam imaginem," etc., instead of " speculum nobis per ipsam imagi-
nem," etc.

^ [Here is the literal use of the word " paedagogue," with which
Clement took liberties. Vol. ii. p. 209, note 3, this series.] Adopt-
ing "qui ad doctores a paedagogo," instead of "qui a doctore iis a
paedagogo."

9 " Dehonorare," or, as in the Codex Bobiensis, " dehonestare."
'° Reading " opera ejus non indiget." But the Codex Casinensis
gives " ore ejus," etc.


2l6


THE DISPUTATION WITH MANES.


exposed on the ground and already suffering ex-
cessively, picked it up, and undertook to rear it
in his own house until it should reach the age
of youth, and sustained all the toils and anxie-
ties which are wont to fall to the lot of those
who have to bring up children. After a time,
however, it happened that he who was the child's
natural father came seeking the boy, and found
him with this person who had brought him up.'
What ought this boy to do on learning that this
is his real father? For I speak, of course, of a
boy of the right type. Would he not see to it,
that he who had brought him up should be rec-
ompensed with liberal gifts ; and would he not
then follow his natural father, having his proper
inheritance in view ? ^ Even so, then, I think
we must suppose that that distinguished servant
of God, Moses, in a manner something like this,
found 3 a people afflicted by the Egyptians ; and
he took this people to himself, and nurtured
them in the desert like a father, and instructed
them like a teacher, and ruled them as a magis-
trate. This people he also preserved against the
coming of him whose people they were. And
after a considerable period the father '^ did come,
and did receive his sheep. Now will not that
guardian be honoured in all things by him to
whom he delivered that flock ; and will he not
be glorified by those who have been preserved by
him? Who, then, can be so senseless, my
dearly beloved Diodorus, as to say that those are
aliens to each other who have been allied with
each other, who have prophesied in turn for
each other, and who have shown signs and won-
ders which are equal and similar, the one to the
other, and of like nature with each other ; 5 or
rather, to speak in truth, which belong wholly to
the same stock the one with the other? For, in-
deed, Moses first said to the people : " A Prophet
will the Lord our God raise up unto you, like unto
me." ^ And Jesus afterwards said : " For Moses
spake of me." ^ You see ^ how these twain give
the right hand to each other, although 9 the one
was the prophet and the other was the beloved
Son,'° and although in the one we are to recog-
nise the faithful servant, but in the other the
Lord Himself. Now. on the other hand, I might
refer to the fact, that one who of old was minded
to make his way to the schools without the
pedagogue was not taken in by the master.


' The Codex Bobiensis reads here, " accidit vero post tempus ut
is qui . . . requireret," etc. The other codex has, " accedit vero
post tempus is qui . . . requirere."

2 Reading /r^ r^j/^rf« with Codex Bobiensis. The other codex
gives prospcctu.

3 Reading invenisse . The Codex Casinensis gives ■vetiisse.
^ Routh suggests pastor, the shepherd, for pater.

5 Reading cognata, with Codex Bobiensis, instead of cog?izta.
^ Deut. xviii. i8.
7 John v. 46.

^ We adopt the reading vidcs, instead of the faulty utide of the
Codex Casinensis.

9 Reading quamvis for qnum.
'^ See Heb. iii. 5, 6.


For the master said : " I will not receive him
unless he accepts the psedagogue." And who
the person is, who is spoken of under that figure,
I shall briefly explain. There was a certain rich
man," who lived after the manner of the Gen-
tiles, and passed his time in great luxury every
day ; and there was also another man, a poor
man, who was his neighbour, and who was una-
ble to procure even his daily bread. It hap-
pened that both these men departed this life,
that they both descended into the grave," and
that the poor man was conveyed into the place
of rest, and so forth, as is known to you. But,
furthermore, that rich man had also five brothers,
living as he too had lived, and disturbed by no
doubt as to lessons which they had learned at
home from such a master. The rich man then
entreated that these should be instructed in the
superior doctrine together and at once.'^ But
Abraham, knowing that they still stood in need
of the pasdagogue, said to him : " They have
Moses and the prophets." For if they received
not these, so as to have their course directed by
him, i.e., Moses, as by a pedagogue, they would
not be capable of accepting the doctrine of the
superior master.

42. But I shall also offer, to the best of my
ability, some expositions of the other words re-
ferred to ; that is to say, I shall show that Jesus
neither said nor did aught that was contrary to
Moses. And first, as to the word, " An eye for
an eye, and a tooth for a tooth," '■* — that is the
expression of justice. And as to His injunction,
that a man, when struck on the one cheek,
should offer the other also, that is the expres-
sion of goodness. Well, then, are justice and
goodness opposed to each other ? Far from it !
There has only been an advance from simple
justice to positive goodness. And again, we
have the saying, " The workman is worthy of
his hire." 's But if a person seeks to practise
any fraud therein, it is surely most just '^ that
what he has got possession of by fraud should
be required of him, most especially when the hire
is large. Now this I say, that when the Egyp-
tians afflicted the children of Israel by the task-
masters who were set over them in the process
of making bricks, Moses required and exacted
the whole at once, with penalties, within one
moment of time. But is this, then, to be called
iniquity? Far from it ! Surely it is the absti-


■t Luke xvi. ig, etc.

'2 hifernutn. [Sheol, rather, or Hades.'\

'3 The reading of the Codex Casinensis is, " rogavit dives simul
uno tempore ut edisceret majorem doctrinam." But the other codex
gives, "uno tempore discere majorem doctrinam ab Abrah.im" =
entreated that he might learn the superior doctrine of Abraham.
For edisceret we may read with Routh ediscereni.

I* Matt. V. 32.

IS Matt. X. 10.

'6 The Codex Casinensis gives, " exige ab eo ilia quse fraudem in-
terceperat; " the other codex gives, " et exigi ab eo iila qua; fraude
interceperat." The correct reading probably would be, " exigi ab
eo ilia quEe per fraudem interceperat."


THE DISPUTATION WITH MANES.


21^


nence ' of goodness, indeed, when one makes
but a moderate use of what is really necessary,
and gives up all that goes beyond that. Let us
look, again, at the fact that in the Old Testa-
ment we find the words, " I make the rich man
and the poor man," ^ whereas Jesus calls the
poor blessed. 3 Well, in that saying Jesus did
not refer to those who are poor simply in worldly
substance, but to those who are poor in spirit,
that is to say, who are not inflamed •* with pride,
but have the gentle and lowly dispositions of
humility, not thinking of themselves more than
they ought to think. 5 This question, however,
is one which our adversary has not propounded
correctly. For here I perceive that Jesus also
looks on willingly at the gifts of the rich men,
when they are put into the treasury.^ All too
little, at the same time, is it 7 if gifts are cast
into ^ the treasury by the rich alone ; and so
there are the two mites of the poor widow which
are also received with gladness ; and in that
offering verily something is exhibited that goes
beyond what Moses prescribed on the subject
of the receipt of moneys. For he received
gifts from those who had ; but Jesus receives
them even from those who have not. But this
man says, further, that it is written, that " except
a man shall forsake all that he hath, he cannot
be my disciple." ^ Well, I observe again, that
the centurion, a man exceedingly wealthy and
well dowered with worldly influence, possessed
a faith surpassing that of all Israel ; '° so that,
even if there was any one who had forsaken all,
that man was surpassed in faith by this centu-
rion. But some one may now reason with us
thus : It is not a good thing, consequently, to
give up riches. Well, I reply that it is a good
thing for those who are capable of it ; but, at the
same time, to employ" riches for the work of
righteousness and mercy, is a thing as accepta-
ble as though one were to give up the whole at
once. Again, as to the assertion that the Sab-
bath has been abolished, we deny that He has
abolished it plainly ; '- for He was Himself also
Lord of the Sabbath. '3 And this, the law's rela-
tion to the Sabbath, was like the servant who has


' We adopt the conjecture of Valesius, viz., abstiiientia. The
Codex Bobiensis gives absentia.

^ Prov. xxii. 2.

3 Matt. V. 3.

■* Reading znJJamjnaniur. It may perhaps be injlantur =
puffed up.

5 Rom. xii. 3.

* Mark xii. 41.

^ Reading et pariim hoc est, with Codex Bobiensis, instead of
the et pmtperiim hoc est of Codex Casinensis. We may also render
It as = " but it is far from being the case that gifts are cast," etc.

* The Codex Bobiensis reads inferuntur ; the other codex gives
offeriintur, offered.

9 Luke .\iv. 33.

'° Matt. viii. 10.

" The text gives sed abuti, and the Codex Bobiensis has sed et
abuti. But the reading ought probably to be sed et iiti, or sed etiani
uti. Routh, however, notices that abutor is found with the sense of
utor.

I- Plane.

'3 Matt. .\ii. 8.


charge of the bridegroom's chamber, and who
prepares the same with all carefulness, and does
not suffer it to be disturbed or touched by any
stranger, but keeps it intact against the time of
the bridegroom's arrival ; so that when he is
come, the same may be used as it pleases him-
self, or as it is granted to those to use it whom
he has bidden enter along with him. And the
Lord Jesus Christ Himself gave His testimony
to what we affirm, when He said with His heav-
enly voice, " Can ye make the children of the
bride-chamber fast so long as the bridegroom is
with them? " '•» And again, He did not actually
reject circumcision ; but we should rather say
that He received in Himself and in our stead
the cause of circumcision, '5 relieving us by what
He Himself endured, and not permitting us to
have to suffer any pain to no purpose.'*^ For what,
indeed, can it profit a man to circumcise himself,
if nevertheless he cherishes the worst of thoughts
against his neighbour? He desired, according-
ly, rather to open up to us the ways of the fullest
life by a brief path,'^ lest perchance, after we had
traversed lengthened courses of our own, we
should find our day prematurely closing upon us
in night, and lest, while outwardly indeed we
might appear splendid to men's view, we should
inwardly be comparable only to ravening wolves,'^
or be hkened to whited sepulchres. "^ For far
above any person of that type of character is to
be placed the man who, although clad only in
squalid and threadbare attire, keeps no evil hid-
den in his heart against his neighbour. For it
is only the circumcision of the heart that brings
salvation ; and that merely carnal circumcision
can be of no advantage to men, unless they
happen also to be fortified with the spiritual cir-
cumcision. Listen also to what Scripture has to
say on this subject : " Blessed are the pure in
heart, for they shall see God."^° What need,
therefore, is there for me to labour aiid suffer,
seeing that I have been made acquainted with
the compendious way of life,^' and know that it
shall be mine if only I can be pure in heart?
And that is quiie in accordance with the truth
which we have learned now, to wit, that if one
prevails in the keeping of die two command-
ments, he fulfils the whole law and the prophets.^^
Moreover Paul, the chief of the apostles, after
all these sayings, gives us yet clearer instruction
on the subject, when he says, " Or seek ye a


'■* Mark ii. 19. [I have slightly accommodated the translation to
this text.]

'5 [n semetipsuin causam circumcisionis excepit.

'6 [From Job (ii. 10) to St. Paul (Heb. iv. 15 and vi. to 8) Scrip-
ture abounds in this teaching. Comp. Lam. iii. 33.]

'7 The Codex Bobiensis gives, " vise compendiosum nobis tramitem
demonstrare." We adopt the reading, " vise spatia compendioso nobis
tramite demonstrare."

" Matt. vii. 15.

'9 Matt, xxiii. 27.

2° Matt. v. 8.

^' Co7iipendia via.

22 Matt. vii. 12.


2l8


THE DISPUTATION WITH MANES.


proof of that Christ who speaketh in me?"'
What have I then to do with circumcision, see-
ing that I may be justified in uncircumcision ?
For it is written : " Is any man circumcised? let
him not become uncircumcised. Or is any in
uncircumcision? let him not be circumcised.
For neither of these is anything, but only the
keeping of the commandments of God." ^ Con-
sequently, as circumcision is incompetent to
save any, it is not greatly to be required, espe-
cially when we see that if a man has been called
in uncircumcision, and wishes then to be cir-
cumcised, he is made forthwith a transgressor ^
of the law. For if I am circumcised, I also ful-
fil the commandments of the law with the view
of being in a position to be saved ; but if I am
uncircumcised, and remain in uncircumcision,
much more in keeping the commandments shall
I have life. For I have received the circum-
cision of the heart, in the spirit, and not that of
the letter in the mere ink,'^ in which former there
is praise, not of men, but of God. 5 Wherefore
let no charge of this kind be brought against
me. For just as the man of wealth, who pos-
sesses great treasures of gold and silver, so that
he gets everything which is necessary for the
uses of his house made of these precious metals,
has no need to display any vessel of earthen-
ware in anything belonging to his family, and
yet it does not follow from this circumstance that
the productions of the potter, or the art of mak-
ing vessels of pottery,^ are to be held in abhor-
rence by him ; so also I, who have been made
rich by the grace of God, and who have ob-
tained the circumcision of the heart, cannot by
any means ^ stand in need of that most profit-
less fleshly circumcision, and yet, for all that, it
does not follow that I should call it evil. Far be
it from me to do so ! If, however, any one
desires to receive still more exact instruction on
these matters, he will find them discussed with
the greatest fulness in the apostle's first epistle.*^
43. I shall speak now with the utmost brevity
of the veil of Moses and the ministration of
death. For I do not think that these things at
least can introduce very much to the disparage-
ment of the law. The text in question,*? then,
proceeds thus : " But if the ministration of death.


' 2 Cor. xiii. 3.

2 I Cor. vii. 18, 19.

3 Reading " praevaricator " instead of " praedicator." The sense
would seem strictly to reqviire, a debtor to the law.

■* Atrameiitum.

S Rom. ii. 29.

^ The Codex Bobiensis gives, " figuli opus aufers aut fictilium."
The Codex Casinensis has, " figuli opus et ars aut fictilium." We
adopt " figuli opus aut ars fictilium."

^ Adopting " nequaquam " for " nee quemquam."

^ By this he means the Epistle to the Romans, to which the first
place among the epistles of Paul was assigned from the most ancient
times. In Epiphanius, under heresy 42, it is alleged as an offence
against Marcion, that he put the Epistle to the Romans in the fourth
place among Paul's epistles. See a note in Migne. [Again, this
expression is a note of genuine antiquity.]

9 Reading " propositus " for " propheticus."


engraven '° in letters on the stones, was made in
glory, so that the children of Israel could not
stedfastly behold the face of Moses for the glory
of his countenance ; which glory was to be done
away ; " " and so on. Well, this passage at any
rate acknowledges the existence of a glory on the
countenance of Moses, and that surely is a fact
favourable to our position. And even although
it is to be done away, and although there is a
veil in the reading of the same, that does not
annoy me or disturb me, provided there be glory
in it still. Neither is it the case, that whatever
is to be done away is reduced thereby under all
manner of circumstances to a condition of dis-
honour.'^ For when the Scripture speaks of glory,
it shows us also that it had cognizance '^ of dif-
ferences in glory. Thus it says : " There is one
glory of the sun, and another glory of the moon;
and another glory of the stars : for one star dif-
fereth from another star in glory." '•* Although,
then, the sun has a greater glory than the moon,
it does not follow that the moon is thereby re-
duced to a condition of dishonour. And even
thus, too, although my Lord Jesus Christ excelleth
Moses in glory, as the lord excelleth the servant,
it does not follow from this that the glory of
Moses is to be scorned. For in this way, too,
we are able to satisfy our hearers, as the nature
of the word itself carries the conviction 's with it,
in that we affirm what we allege on the authority
of the Scriptures themselves, or verily make the
proof of our statements all the clearer also by
illustrations taken from them. Thus, although
a person kindles a lamp in the night-time, after
the sun has once risen he has no further need of
the paltry light of his lamp, on account of that
effulgence of the sun which sends forth its rays
all the world over ; and yet, for all that, the man
does not throw his lamp contemptuously away,
as if it were something absolutely antagonistic to
the sun ; but rather, when he has once found out JL
its use, he will keep it with all the greater care- ^
fulness. Precisely in this way, then, the law of
Moses served as a sort of guardian to the people,
like the lamp, until the true Sun, who is our
Saviour, should arise, even as the apostle also
says to us : " And Christ shall give thee hght." '^
We must look, however, to what is said further
on : " Their minds were blinded : for until this
day remaineth the same veil in the reading of
the Old Testament ; it is untaken away, because


'° The Codex Casinensis hdiS /ormaiiim ; the other codex gives
yirmaiimt.

" 2 Cor. iii. 7.

'- The text gives, "neque vero omnigene in ignobilitatem redigi-
tur," etc. The Codex Bobiensis has, " neque vero omni genere in
nobilitate."

'3 Reading " scisse se differentias gloriae," etc. Codex Bobiensis
gives scz's esse, etc. = yoii knoiv that there are differences.

'■* I Cor. XV. 21.

'S Sicitt et verbi ij>siits iiatiira persuadet. Reading " natura
persuadet." But the Codex Bobiensis gives demonstrat, demott-
strates.

16 Eph. V. 14.


THE DISPUTATION WITH MANES.


219


it is done away in Christ.' For even unto this
day, when Moses is read, the veil is upon their
heart. Nevertheless, when it shall turn to the
Lord, the veil shall be taken away. Now the
Lord is that Spirit."- What, then, is meant by
this ? Is Moses present with us even unto this
day? Is it the case that he has never slept, that
he has never gone to his rest, that he has never
departed this life ? How is it that this phrase
" unto this day " is used here ? Well, only mark
the veil, which is placed, where he says it is
placed, on their hearts in their reading. This,
therefore, is the word of censure upon the chil-
dren of Israel, because they read Moses and yet
do not understand him, and refuse to turn to the
Lord ; for it is He that was prophesied of by
Moses as about to come. This, then, is the veil
which was placed upon the face of Moses,^ and
this also is his testament ; ■♦ for he says in the
law : 5 "A prince shall not be wanting from
Judah, nor a leader from his thighs,*^ until He
come whose he is ; ^ and He will be the expecta-
tion of the nations : who shall bind ^ His foal
unto the vine, and His ass's colt unto the choice
vine ; He shall wash His garments in wine, and
His clothes in the blood of grapes ; His eyes
shall be suffused ^ with wine, and His teeth white
with milk ; " and so on. Moreover, he indicated
who He was, and whence He was to come. For
he said : " The Lord God will raise up unto you
a Prophet from among your brethren, like unto
me : unto Him hearken ye." '° Now it is plain
that this cannot be understood to have been said
of Jesus the son of Nun." For there is nothing
of this circumcision '^ found in him. After him,
too, there have still been kings from Judah ; and
consequently this prophecy is far from being
applicable to him. And this is the veil which is
on Moses ; for it was not, as some among the un-
learned perhaps fancy, any piece of linen cloth,
or any skin that covered his face. But the


' No7i rirvelatur quia in Christo destruitur.

^ 2 Cor. iii. 14-17.

3 Ex. xxxiv. 33; 2 Cor. iii. 13.

* The text is, " hoc est velamen, quod erat positum super faciem
Moysi, quod est testamentuni ejus," etc.

5 Gen. xlix. 10-12.

* The reading in the text is, " non deficiet princeps ex Juda, neque
dux de femoribus ejus usquequo veniat," etc. Codex Bobiensis coin-
cides, only giving " de femore ejus." On the whole quotation, which
is given in forms so diverse among the old versions and fathers, see
Novatian, De Triji., ch. 9 [vol. v. p. 618], and Cyprian, Adv.
yudceos, i. 21 [vol. v. p. 513].

^ The text gives, " veniat, cujus est," etc. Prudentius Maranus
on Justin's Apology, i. § 32 [vol i. p. 173, this series], thinks this was
originally an error of transcription for ctii jiis est, which reading
would correspond very much with the ip aTroKcirai of some of the most
ancient authorities. See Cotelerius on the Constitut. A postal., i. i,
and the note in Migne.

^ Qui alligabit. But Codex Casinensis has " quia alligabit," and
Codex Bobiensis " qui alligavit."

9 Suffusi oculi. Codex Bobiensis gives " effusi oculi." See, on
the whole, Grabe's Dissert. De variis vitiis LXX. interpret., 19,
p. 36.

'° Deut. xviii. 15.

n We adopt the reading " Jesu Nave." But the Codex Bobiensis
gives "Jesu Mane." .See a discussion on this name by Cotelerius on
the Epistle of Barnabas, ch. 12. [Vol. i. p. 145, this series.]

'^ For circumcisionis Routh suggests circnmstationis, which
might perhaps be taken as = these surroundings do not suit him.


apostle also takes care to make this plain to us,
when he tells us that the veil is put on in the
reading of the Old Testament, inasmuch as they
who are called Israel from olden time still look
for the coming of Christ, and perceive not that
the princes have been wanting from Judah, and
the leaders from his thighs ; as even at present
we see them in subjection to kings and princes,
and paying tribute to these, without having any
power left to them either of judgment or of pun-
ishment, such as Judah certainly had, for after
he had condemned Thamar, he was able also to
justify her.'3 " But you will also see your life
hang (in doubt) before your eyes." '■*

44. Now this word also has the veil. For up
to the time of Herod they did appear to retain
a kingdom in some sort ; and it was by Augustus
that the first enrolment took place among them,
and that they began to pay tribute, and to be
rated. '5 Now it was also from the time when
our Lord Jesus Christ began to be prophesied
of and looked for that there began to be princes
from Judah and leaders of the people ; and
these, again, failed just at the approach of His
advent. If, then, the veil is taken away which
is put on in that reading of theirs, they will un-
derstand the true virtue of the circumcision ;
and they will also discover that the generation
of Him whom we preach, and His cross, and all
the things that have happened in the history of
our Lord, are those very matters which had been
predicted of that Prophet. And I could wish,
indeed, to examine every such passage of Scrip-
ture by itself, and to point out its import, as it is
meet that it should be understood.'^ But as it
is another subject that is now urgent, these pas-
sages shall be discussed by us at some season of
leisure. For at present, what I have already
said may be sufficient for the purpose of show-
ing, that it is not without reason that the veil
is (said to be) put upon the heart of certain
persons in the reading of the Old Testament.
But those who turn to the Lordsh all have the
veil taken away from them. What precise force
all these things, however, may possess, I leave to
the apprehension of those who have sound in-
telligence. Let us come now again to that word
of Moses, in which he says : " The Lord your
God shall raise up a Prophet unto you, of your
brethren, like unto me." In this saying I per-
ceive a great prophecy delivered by the servant
Moses, as by one cognizant '? that He who is to


'3 Gen. xxxviii. 26. We read " justificare." But the Codex Casi-
nensis gives "justificari" = he (p\ she") could be justified.

'■* The text is, " sed et videbitis vitam vestram pendentem ante
oculos vestros." The reference is apparently to Deut. xxviii. 66.

'5 Censnm dare.

■6 Reading" sermonem,et ostendereut intelligidignum est." The
Codex Bobiensis gives a mutilated version: " sermonem, ut intelligi,
dignum est."

'^ Reading " Moysiscientis," which is the emendation of Valesius.
But Codex Casinensis gives " scientibus," and Codex Bobiensis has
" scientcs."


220


THE DISPUTATION WITH MANES.


come is indeed to be possessed of greater au-
thority than himself, and nevertheless is to suffer
like things with him, and to show like signs and
wonders. For there, Moses after his birth was
placed by his mother in an ark, and exposed be-
side the banks of the river ; ' here, our Lord
Jesus Christ, after His birth by Mary His mother,
was sent off in flight into Egypt through the
instrumentality of an angel.- There, Moses led
forth his people from the midst of the Egyptians,
and saved them ; ^ and here, Jesus, leading forth
His people from the midst of the Pharisees,
transferred them to an eternal salvation.'* There,
Moses sought bread by prayer, and received it
from heaven, in order that he might feed the
people with it in the wilderness ; 5 here, my Lord
Jesus by His own power satisfied'' with five
loaves five thousand men in the wilderness. ^
There, Moses when he was tried was set upon
the mountain and fasted forty days ; ^ and here,
my Lord Jesus was led by the Spirit into the
wilderness when He was tempted of the devil,
and fasted in like manner forty days.9 There,
before the sight of Moses, all the first-born
of the Egyptians perished on account of the
treachery of Pharaoh ; '° and here, at the time
of the birth of Jesus, every male among the Jews
suddenly perished by reason of the treachery of
Herod." There, Moses prayed that Pharaoh and
his people might be spared the plagues ; '^ and
here, our Lord Jesus prayed that the Pharisees
might be pardoned, when He said, " Father, for-
give them, for they know not what they do." '^
There, the countenance of Moses shone with the
glory of the Lord, so that the children of Israel
could not stedfastly look upon his face, on ac-
count of the glory of his countenance ; '■* and
here, the Lord Jesus Christ shone like the sun,'5
and His disciples were not able to look upon
His face by reason of the glory of His counte-
nance and the intense splendour of the light.
There, Moses smote down with the sword those
who had set up the calf ; '^ and here, the Lord
Jesus said, " I came to send a sword upon the
earth, and to set a man at variance with his
neighbour," '7 and so on. There, Moses went
without fear into the darkness of the clouds that
carry water ; '^ and here, the Lord Jesus walked

1 Ex. ii.

2 Matt. ii. 13.

3 Ex. xiv.

■* Mark viii. 15.

5 Ex. xvi.

^ Adopting " satiavit." The Codex Bobiensis gives " saturavit."

7 Matt, xiv,

^ Ex. xxxiv.

9 Matt. iv. 2.
'° Ex. xii.
'' Matt. ii. 16.
'- Ex. viii.
'3 Luke xxiii. 34.
^* Ex. xxxiv. 35.
'S Matt. xvii. 2.
'f" Ex. xxxii.
17 Matt. X. 34.
*^ Ex. xxiv. 18.


with all power upon the waters. '^ There, Moses
gave his commands to the sea ; ^° and here, the
Lord Jesus, when he was on the sea,^' rose and
gave His commands to the winds and the sea.^^
There, Moses, when he was assailed, stretched
forth his hands and fought against Amalek ; ^^
and here, the Lord Jesus, when we were assailed
and were perishing by the violence of that erring
spirit who works now in the just,^'* stretched forth
His hands upon the cross, and gave us salvation.
But there are indeed many other matters of this
kind which I must pass by, my dearly beloved
Diodorus, as I am in haste to send you this little
book with all convenient speed ; and these omis-
sions of mine you will be able yourself to supply
very easily by your own intelligence. Write me,
however, an account of all that this servant of
the adversary's cause may do hereafter. May
the Omnipotent ^5 God preserve you whole in
soul and in spirit !

45. On receipt of this letter, Diodorus made
himself master of its contents, and then entered
the lists against Manes. This he did too with
such spirit, that he was commended greatly by
all for the careful and satisfactory demonstration
which he gave of the fact that there is a mutual
relationship between the two testaments, and
also between the two laws.^'' Discovering also
more arguments for himself, he was able to bring
forward many points of great pertinency and
power against the man, and in defence of the
truth. He also reasoned in a conclusive manner
against his opponent on verbal grounds.^^ For
example, he argued with him in the following
manner : — Did you say that the testaments are
two? Well, then, say either that there are two
old testaments, or that there are two new testa-
ments. For you assert that there are two un-
begottens ^^ belonging to the same time, or rather
eternity ; and if there are in this way two, there
should be either two old testaments or two new
testaments. If, however, you do not allow this,
but affirm, on the contrary, that there is one old
testament and that . there is also another new
testament, that will only prove again that there
is but one author for both ; and the very sequence
will show that the Old Testament belongs to Him
to whom also the New Testament pertains. We
may illustrate this by the case of a man who


'9 Matt. xiv. 25.
20 Ex. xiv.

2' Reading " in mari." But the Codex Bobiensis has /« «awi'= off
a ship.

22 Matt. viii. 26.

23 Ex. .xvii.

24 The text gives in justis. But the Codex Bobiensis has in isti\
= in those men. The true reading may be in injustis = in the
unrighteous. See Eph. ii. z.

25 But the Codex Casinensis gives " Deus omnium " = the God of
all.

26 [See p. 215, supra.\

27 Ex nominibus. The Codex Bobiensis offers the extraordinary
reading, ex navibus.

28 Ingenita.


THE DISPUTATION WITH MANES.


22 1


says to some other individual,' Lease me your
old house. For by such a mode of address does
he not pronounce the man to be also the owner
of a new house ? Or, on the other hand, if he
says to him, Show me ^ your new house ; does
he not by that very word designate him also as
the possessor of an old house? Then, again,
this also is to be considered, that since there are
two beings, having an unbegotten nature, it is
also necessary from that to suppose each of them
to have (what must be called) an old testament,
and thus there will appear to be two old testa-
ments ; if indeed you affirm that both these beings
are ancient, and both indeed without a beginning.^
But I have not learned doctrine like that ; neither
do the Scriptures contain it. You, however, who
allege that the law of Moses comes from the
prince of evil, and not from the good God, tell
me who those were who withstood Moses to the
face — I mean Jamnes and Mambres ? •* For
every object that withstands, withstands not itself,
but some other one, either better or worse ; as
Paul also gives us to understand when he writes
in the following terms in his second Epistle to
Timothy : " As Jamnes and Mambres withstood
Moses, so have these also resisted the truth :
men of corrupt mind, reprobate concerning the
faith. But they shall proceed no further : for
their folly is manifest unto all men, as theirs
also was." 5 Do you observe how he compares
Jamnes and Mambres to men of corrupt mind,
and reprobate concerning the faith ; while he
likens Moses, on the other hand, to the truth?
But the holy John, the greatest of the evangelists,
also tells us of the giving and diffusing of grace
for grace ; ^ for he indicates, indeed, that we
have received the law of Moses out of the ful-
ness of Christ, and he means that for that one
grace this other grace has been made perfect in
us through Jesus Christ. It was also to show
this to be the case that our Lord Jesus Christ
Himself spake in these terms : " Do not think
that I will accuse you to the Father : there is
one that accuseth you, even Moses, in whom ye
hope. For had ye believed Moses, ye would
indeed have believed me : for he wrote of me.
But if ye believe not his writings, how shall ye
believe my words? "? And besides all these
words, there are still many other passages that
might be adduced both from the Apostle Paul
and from the Gospels, by which we are able to

■ We read, with the Codex Bobiensis, " dicat homini, Loca mihi,"
etc. The Codex Casinensis has the meaningless reading, " homini
diviti," etc.

^ Freest a.

3 The text of this obscure passage runs thus: " Quia ex quo duo
sunt, ingenitam habentes naturam, ex eo necesse est etiam habere
unumquemque ipsorum vetus Testamentum. et fient duo Vetera Testa-
menta; si tamen ambos antiquoset sine initio esse dicis." The Codex
Bobiensis gives a briefer but evidently corrupt reading: "ex quo duo
sunt ingenita habentes naturam ipsorum Testamentum, et fient," etc.

^ Ja7>inem dico et Mambrein. [So in P'ulg., except " Jannes."]

5 2 Tim. iii. 8, 9.

* Gratiam gratia prtEstare et differre. John i. 16.

' John v. 45-47.


prove that the old law belongs to no other one
than that Lord to whom also the new testament
appertain^, and which it would suit us very well
to set forth, and to make use of in a satisfactory
manner.^ Now, however, the evening prevents
us from doing so ; for the day is drawing to its
close, and it is right that we should now bring
our disputation to an end. But an opportunity
will be given you to-morrow to put questions to
us on any points you are pleased to take up.
And after these words they went their way.^

46. Next morning, however, Archelaus sud-
denly made his appearance at this residence ■" in
which Diodorus was staying, before any one was
yet stirring abroad. Manes accordingly, all un-
conscious of the fact that Archelaus was now on
the spot again, challenged Diodorus publicly to
engage in a disputation with him ; his intention
being to crush him with a verbal display, because
he perceived that he was a man of a simple na-
ture, and not very deeply learned in questions
concerning the Scriptures. For he had now had
a taste of the doctrine of Archelaus. When,
therefore, the multitudes hUd again collected in
the place usually set apart for the disputation,
and when Manes had just begun to reason, all
on a sudden Archelaus appeared among them,
and embraced Diodorus, and saluted him with
an holy kiss. Then truly were Diodorus, and all
those who were present, filled with wonder at the
dispensation of divine providence which thus
provided that Archelaus should arrive among
them at the very time when the question was
just raised ; for in reality, as must be confessed,
Diodorus, with all his religiousness, had been
somewhat afraid of the conflict. But when Manes
caught sight of Archelaus, he at once drew back
from his insulting attitude ; and with his pride
cast down not a little, he made it quite plain that
he would gladly flee from the contest. The
multitude of hearers, however, looked upon the
arrival of Archelaus as something like the advent
of an apostle, because he had shown himself so
thoroughly furnished, and so prompt and ready
for a defence of the truth by speech. Accord-
ingly, after demanding silence from the people by
a wave of his right hand, — for no inconsiderable
tumult had arisen, — Archelaus began an address
in the following terms : — Although some amongst
us have gained the honour of wisdom and the
meed of glory, yet this I beg of you, that you
retain in your minds the testimony of those
things which have been said before my arrival."

8 The Codex Bobiensis gives, " exponere et a Patre ut convenit."
For these meaningless words Valesius proposed to read, " exponere
et aperire ut convenit." The Codex Casinensis, however, offers the
satisfactory reading, " exponere et aptare convenit."

9 Here ends the section edited by Valesius.

'o Cnstelluin. [Note, infra, the " holy kiss."]

" The text runs: " tametsi prudentiam, gloriam etiam, nostrorum
nonnuUi assecuti sunt, tamen hoc vos deprecor ut eorum quas ante
me dicta sunt, testimonium reservetis." Routh suggests prudetitia
= Although by their prudence some have gained glory, etc.


222


THE DISPUTATION WITH MANES.


For I know and am certain, brethren, that I now
take the place of Diodorus, not on account of
any impossibihties attaching to him,' but because
I came to know this person here at a previous
time, when he made his way with his wicked de-
signs into the parts where I reside, by the favour
of Marcenus,= that man of illustrious name, whom
he endeavoured to turn aside from our doctrine
and faith, with the object, to wit, of making him
an effective supporter of this impious teaching.
Nevertheless, in spite of all his plausible ad-
dresses, he failed to move him or turn him aside
from the faith in any one particular. For this
most devout Marcellus was only found to be like
the rock on which the house was built with the
most solid foundations; and when the rain de-
scended, and the floods and the winds burst in
and beat upon that house, if stood firm : for it
had been built on the most solid and immove-
able foundations. 3 And the attempt thus made
by this person who is now before you, brought
dishonour rather than glory upon himself. More-
over, it does not seem to me that he can be very
excusable if he proves to be ignorant of what is
in the future ; for surely he ought to know before-
hand those who are on his own side : certainly
he should have this measure of knowledge, if it
be true indeed that the Spirit of the Paraclete
dwells in him. But inasmuch as he is really a
person blinded with the darkness of ignorance,
he ran in vain when he journeyed to Marcellus,
and he did but show himself to be like the star-
gazer,'* who busies himself with describing things
celestial, while all the time he is ignorant of what
is passing in his own home. But lest it should
appear as if I were setting aside the question in
hand by speaking in this strain, I shall now re-
frain from such discourse. And I shall also give
this man the privilege of taking up any point
which may suit him best as a commencement to
any treatment of the subject and the question.
And to you, as I have said already, I only address
the request that ye be impartial judges, so as to
give to him who speaks the truth the proper
honour and the palm.

47. Then Manes, after silence had been se-
cured among all, thus began his address : Like
others, Archelaus, you too smite me with the
most injurious words, notwithstanding that my
sentiments on the subject of God are correct,
and that I hold also a proper conception of
Christ ; and yet the family of the apostles is
rather of the character that bears all things and
endures all things, even although a man may


' Pro ipsins iinpossibilitatc. But Routh suggests that the zwz-
possibilitate is just an inexact translation of the a.hvvo.ria. = impo-
tentia, incapacity, which may have stood in the Greek text.

^ Reading " INIarcelli viri ilhistris gratia." The Codex Casinensis
has, " viri in legis gratia."

^ Matt. vii. 24.

* The text gives " similis facere astrologo," for which Routh pro-
poses " similis factus est," etc.


assail them with revilings and curses. If it is
your intention to persecute me, I am prepared
for it ; and if you wish to involve me in punish-
ment, I shall not shrink from it ; yea, if you
mean even to put me to death, I am not afraid :
" For we ought to fear Him only who is able to
destroy both soul and body in hell." s Arche-
laus said : Far be that from me ! Not such is
my intention. For what have you ever had to
suffer at my hands, or at the hands of those who
think with us, even when you were disparaging
us and doing us injury, and when you were speak-
ing in detraction of the traditions of our fathers,
and when it was your aim to work the death of
the souls of men that were well established in
the truth, and that were kept with the most con-
scientious carefulness ; for which, in truth, the
whole wealth of the world would not serve as a
sufficient compensation?^ Nevertheless, what
ground have you for assuming this position?
What have you to show ? Tell us this, — what
signs of salvation have you to bring before us?
For the bare bravado of words will not avail to
satisfy the multitude here present, neither will it
be enough to qualify them for recognising which
of us holds the knowledge of the truth the more
correctly. Wherefore, as you have got the op-
portunity of speaking first, tell us first to what
particular head of the subject you wish us to
direct the disputation. Manes said : If you do
not offer a second time an unfair resistance to
the positions which shall be stated with all due
propriety by us, I shall speak with you ; but if
you mean to show yourself still in the character
which on a former occasion I perceived you to
take up, I shall address myself to Diodorus, and
shall keep clear of your turbulence. Archelaus
said : I have already expressed my opinion that
we shall be simply abusing the occasion by the
mere bandying of empty words. If any one on
our side is found to offer an unfair resistance,
leave that to the decision of the judges. But
now, tell us what you have got to advance.
Manes said : If you do not mean a second time
merely to gainsay the positions which are stated
with all due correctness by me, I shall begin.
Archelaus said: " If not this," and " if not that,"
are ways of speaking which mark out an ignorant
man. You are ignorant, therefore, of what is in
the future. But as to this particular thing which
you do declare to be still future, to gainsay or
not to gainsay is a matter in my own power.
How, then, will that argument about the two
trees stand, in which you place your trust as in a
buckler of the most approved strength? For if
I am of the contrary side, how do you require
my obedience ? And if, on the other hand, there


5 Matt. X. 28.

6 The text is, " quibus utique repensari non possunt,"
Routh proposes repcnsare.


THE DISPUTATION WITH MANES.


223


is in me the disposition of obedience, how are
you so greatly alarmed lest I should gainsay you ?
For you maintain that evil remains evil always,
and that good remains good always, in utter
ignorance of the force of your words. Manes
said : Have I employed you as the advocate of
my words, so that you may determine also the
intelligence that may suit my knowledge ? And
how will you be able to explain what belongs to
another person, when you cannot make what
pertains to yourself clear? But if Diodorus
now admits himself to be vanquished, my rea-
sonings will then be addressed to you. If, how-
ever, he still stands out, and is prepared to speak,
I beg you to give over and cease from interfering
with the substantiating of the truth. For you
are a strange sheep ; nevertheless hereafter you
will be introduced into the number of the same
flock, as the voice of Jesus ' also intimates, —
that Jesus, namely, who appeared in the form of
man indeed, and yet was not a man. Archelaus
said: Are you not, then, of opinion that He
was born of the Virgin Mary? Manes said:
God forbid that I should admit that our Lord
Jesus Christ came down to us through the natu-
ral womb of a woman ! For He gives us His
own testimony that He came down from the
Father's bosom ; ^ and again He says, " He that
receiveth me, receiveth Him that sent me ; " ^
and, " I came not to do mine own will, but the
will of Him that sent me ; " ■* and once more,
" I am not sent but unto the lost sheep of the
house of Israel." 5 And there are also innu-
merable other passages of a similar import, which
point Him out as one that came, and not as one
that was born. But if you are greater than He,
and if you know better than He what is true,
how do we yet believe Him? Archelaus said :
Neither am I greater than He, for I am His ser-
vant ; nor can I be even the equal of my Lord,
for I am His unprofitable servant ; I am a dis-
ciple of His words, and I believe those things
which have been spoken by Him, and I affirm
that they are unchangeable. Manes said: A
certain person somewhat like you once said to
Him, " Mary Thy mother, and Thy brethren,
stand without ;" ^ and He took not the word
kindly, hni rebuked the person who had uttered
it, saying, " Who is my mother, and who are my
brethren?" And He showed that those who
did His will were both His mothers and His
brethren. If you, however, mean to say that
Mary was actually His mother, you place your-
self in a position of considerable peril. For,
without any doubt, it would be proved on the


■ Reading " sicut vox Jesu." The Codex Casinensis gives, " sicut
vos Jesu." Routh suggests servator.
^ John i 18, iii, 13.
3 Matt. X. 40.
•* John vi. 38.
5 Matt. XV. 24.
' JSIatt. xii. 47.


same principles that He had brethren also by
her. Now tell me whether these brethren were
begotten by Joseph or by the same Holy Spirit.
For if you say that they were begotten by the
same Holy Spirit, it will follow that we have had
many Christs. And if you say that these were
not begotten by the same Holy Spirit, and yet
aver that He had brethren, then without doubt
we shall be under the necessity of understanding
that, in succession to the Spirit and after Gabriel,
the most pure and spotless virgin ^ formed an
actual marriage connection with Joseph. But if
this is also a thing altogether absurd — I mean
the supposition that she had any manner of inter-
course with Joseph — tell me whether then He
had brethren. Are you thus to fix the crime of
adultery also on her, most sagacious Marcellus ? ^
But if none of these suppositions suits the posi-
tion of the Virgin undefiled, how will you make
it out that He had brothers ? And if you are un-
able to prove clearly to us that He had brethren,
will it be any the easier for you to prove Mary to
be His mother, in accordance with the saying
of him who ven*;ured to write,^ " Behold, Thy
mother and Thy brethren stand without? " Yet,
although that man was bold enough to address
Him thus, no one can be mightier or greater
than this same person Himself who shows us His
mother or His brethren. Nay, He does not deign
even to hear it said that He is David's son.'° The
Apostle Peter, however, the most eminent of all
the disciples, was able to acknowledge Him on
that occasion, when all were putting forth the
several opinions which they entertained respect-
ing Him : for he said, "Thou art the Christ, the
Son of the living God ; " " and immediately He
names him blessed, addressing him thus : " For
my heavenly Father hath revealed it unto thee."
Observe what a difference there is between these
two words which were spoken by Jesus. For to
him who had said, " Behold, Thy mother stands
without," He replied, "Who is my mother, or
who are my brethren?" But to him who said,
" Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God,"
He makes the return of a beatitude and bene-
diction. Consequently, if you will have it that
He was born of Mary, then it follows that no less
than Peter, He is Himself thus proved to have
spoken falsely. But if, on the other hand, Peter
states what is true, then without doubt that for-
mer person was in error. And if the former was
in error, the matter is to be referred back to the


7 The text gives, " Virgo castissima et immaculata ecclesia," =
the most pure virgin and spotless church. But the word " ecclesia "
is probably an erroneous addition by the hand, of the scribe. Or, as
Routh hints, there may be an allusion, in the word ecclesia, to the
beginning of the twelfth chapter of the Apocalypse. [See Pearson,
On the Creed, art. iii. p. 290.]

' From this it may perhaps be gathered that Marcellus had now
come along with Archelaus to the residence of Diodorus,

9 Scribere ausus est. Compare (note i) p. 224, iti/ra.

'° Matt. xxii. 42. We read Daviciis esse for David Jesse.

" Matt. xvi. 16.


224


THE DISPUTATION WITH MANES.


writer.' We know, therefore, that there is one
Christ, according to the Apostle Paul, whose
words, as in consonance at least ^ with His ad-
vent, we believe.

48. On hearing these statements, the multi-
tudes assembled were greatly moved, as if they
felt that these reasonings gave the correct ac-
count of the truth, and that Archelaus could
have nothing to urge against them ; for this was
indicated by the commotion which arose among
them. But when the crowd of auditors became
quiet again, Archelaus made answer in the fol-
lowing manner : No one, truly, shall ever be able
to prove himself mightier than the voice of our
Lord Jesus Christ, neither is there found any
name equal to His, as it is written : " Wherefore
God hath exalted Him, and given Him a name
which is above every name." ^ Nor, again, in
the matter of testimony can any one ever be
equal to Him ; and accordingly I shall simply
adduce the testimonies of His own voice in an-
swer to you, — first of all, indeed, with the view
of solving those difficulties which have been
enunciated by you, so that you may not say, as
is your wont to do, that these are matters which
are not in harmony with the Person Himself.-*
Now, you maintain that the man who brought
the word to Jesus about His mother and His
brethren was rebuked by Him as if he was in
error, as the writer was in error.5 Well, I affirm
that neither was this person rebuked who brought
Him the message about His mother and His
brethren, nor was Peter only named blessed
above him ; but each of these two parties re-
ceived from Him the answer that was properly
called forth by their several utterances, as the
discourse will demonstrate in what follows. When
one is a child, he thinks as a child, he speaks as
a child ; but when he becomes a mature man,
those things are to be done away which are
proper for a child : ^ in other words, when one
reaches forth unto those things which are before,
he will forget those which are behind. 7 Hence,
when our Lord Jesus Christ was engaged in
teaching and healing the race of men, so that all
pertaining to it might not utterly perish together,
and when the minds of all those who were listen-
ing to Him were intently occupied with these
interests, it made an interruption altogether in-
opportune when this messenger came in and put
Him in mind of His mother and His brethren.
What then? Ought He, now,^ yourself being


1 The text gives, " Quod si prior fefellit, causa ad scriptorem reji-
cienda est." [i.e., to the copyist; in this case the corrupier]

2 CoHsonanitbus diiiitaxat.

3 Phil. ii. 9.
* Sibi ipsi.

5 Seciindjim id quod scriptoretn fefellit . [i.e , on that sup-
position.]

'' I Cor. xiii. ii.

^ Phil. iii. 13.

' Reading " debuitne etiam " for the bad version of the Codex
Casinensis, " debuit et etiam."


judge,^ to have left those whom He was healing
and instructing, and gone to speak with His
mother and His brethren ? Would you not by
such a supposition at once lower the character
of the Person Himself? When, again, He chose
certain men who were laden and burdened with
sins for the honour of discipleship,'° to the num-
ber of twelve, whom He also named His apostles,
He gave them this injunction, Leave father and
mother, that you may l)e made worthy of me ; "
intending by this that thenceforward the memory
of father or mother should no more impair the
stedfastness of their heart. And on another
occasion, when a different individual chose to
say to Him, " I will go and bury my father," He
answered, " Let the dead bury their dead." '^
Behold, then, how my Lord Jesus Christ edifies
His disciples unto all things necessary, and de-
livers His sacred words to every one, in due
accordance with what is meet for him. And just
in the same way, too, on this other occasion,
when a certain person came in with the incon-
siderate message about His mother. He did not
embrace the occurrence as an opportunity for
leaving His Father's commission unattended to
even for the sake of having His mother with
Him. But in order to show you still more clearly
that this is the real account of the matter, let me
remind you that Peter, on a certain season, sub-
sequent to the time of his receiving that declara-
tion of blessedness from Him, said to Jesus,
" Be it far from Thee, Lord : '^ this shall not be
unto Thee." ^^ This he said after Jesus had an-
nounced to him that the Son of man must go up
to Jerusalem, and be killed, and rise again the
third day. '5 And in answer then to Peter He
said : " Get thee behind me, Satan ; for thou
savourest not the things that be of God, but
those that be of men." '^ Now, since it is your
opinion that the man who brought the message
about His mother and His brethren was rebuked
by Jesus, and that he who said a little before,
"Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God,"
obtained the word of blessing, mark you that
Jesus (may be said to have) rather preferred
that person to whom He condescended to give
the more gracious and indulgent answer ; where-
as Peter, even after that benediction, now got
no appellation expressive of indulgence addressed
to him, by reason of his having failed carefully
to observe the nature of the announcement that


9 The text gives, " se ipso judicante," for which " te ipso," etc.,
may be substituted.

'° In the Codex Casinensis the sentence stands in this evidently
corrupt form; " cum enim peccatis bonus et gravatus ad discipulatum
diligit." We adopt the emendation given in Migne: "cum enim
peccatis onustos et gravatos ad discipulatum delegit."

" Matt. X. 37.

t- Luke ix. 59, 60.

'3 Propitius csto, Dovtine.

'•• Matt. xvi. 22. [Possibly the first words by which Satan fell.]

'5 Matt. xvi. 21.

'6 Matt. xvi. 23. [Satan seems to have rebelled against man's
creation.]


THE DISPUTATION WITH MANES.


225


was made to him. For the error of that mes-
senger was at once corrected by the tenor of the
reply ; but the dulness of this apostle's appre-
hension was condemned with a severer rebuke.
And from this you may perceive that the Lord
Jesus, observing what was proper and opportune
with regard to the interrogations thus addressed
to Him, gave to each the reply that was worthy
of it, and suited to it. But supposing that, as
you say, Peter was pronounced blessed on the
ground of his having said what was true, and
that that messenger was reproved on account of
the error he committed, tell me then why it is,
that when the devils confessed Him, and said,
"We know Thee, who Thou art, the holy God," '
He rebuked them, and commanded them to be
silent ? - Why was it not the case, if He does
indeed take pleasure in the testimonies borne to
Him by those who confess Him, that He recom-
pensed them also with benedictions, as He did
to Peter when he gave utterance to the truth ?
But if that would be an absurd supposition, it
only remains that we must understand the words
spoken by Him always in accordance with the
place, the time, the persons, the subjects, and
the due consideration of the circumstances. ^ For
only this method will save us from falling into
the error of pronouncing rashly on His sayings,
and thus making ourselves liable to merited
chastisement : and this will also help me to
make it more and more intelligible to you, that
the man who brought the tidings of His mother
was much rather the person honoured."* How-
ever, in forgetfulness of the subject which was
proposed to us for discussion, you have turned
off to a different theme. Nevertheless hsten to
me for a brief space. For if you choose, indeed,
to consider those words somewhat more care-
fully, we shall find that the Lord Jesus displayed
great clemency in the case of the former of these
two parties ; and this I shall prove to you by
illustrations suited to your capacity. A certain
king who had taken up arms, and gone forth to'
meet an enemy, was earnesdy considering and
planning how he might subdue those hostile and
foreign forces. And when his mind was oc-
cupied with many cares and anxieties, after he
had forced his way among his adversaries, and
when, further, as he began afterwards to make
captives of them, the anxious thought was now
also pressing upon him as to how he might secure
the safety and interests of those who had toiled
with him, and borne the burden of the war,5 a

■ Luke iv. 34, reading sanctjis Dens, [i.e., not the received text.]

^ Reading silere. The Codex Casinensis gives siiitre, which may
be meant for sinere = give over.

3 Pro accidentium salute.

* We have adopted Migne'.s arrangement of these clauses. Routh,
however, puts them thus : A 7id that it may be made more intelli-
gible to you, exz., . . . {for ill forget/ulness,e:\.c., you have turned
off, etc.), listen to me now for a brief space.

5 Reading "pondus belli toleraverant," instead of the " pondus
bellico tolerarant " of the Codex Casinensis.


certain messenger broke inopportunely in upon
him, and began to remind him of domestic mat-
ters. But he was astonished at the man's bold-
ness, and at his unseasonable suggestions, and
thought of delivering such a fellow over to death.
And had that messenger not been one who was
able to appeal to his tenderest affections in bring-
ing the news that it was well with those at home,
and that all went on prosperously and success-
fully there, that punishment might have been his
instant and well-merited doom. For what else
should be a king's care, so long as the time of
war endures, than to provide for the safety of
the people of his province, and to look after
military matters ? And even thus it also was that
that messenger came inopportunely in upon my
Lord Jesus Christ, and brought the report about
His mother and His brethren unseasonably, just
when He was fighting against ills which had
assailed the very citadel of the heart, and when
He was healing those who for a long time had
been under the power of diverse infirmities, and
when He had now put forth His utmost effort to
secure the salvation . of all. And truly that man
might have met with a sentence like that pro-
nounced on Peter, or even one severer still. But
the hearing of the name of His mother and His
brethren drew forth His clemency.

49. But in addition to all that has been said
already, I wish to adduce still further proof, so
that all may understand what impiety is contained
in this assertion of yours. For if your allegation
is true, that He was not born, then it will follow
undoubtedly that He did not suffer ; for it is not
possible for one to suffer who was not also born.
But if He did not suffer, then the name of the
cross is done away with. And if the cross was
not endured, then Jesus did not rise from the
dead. And if Jesus rose not from the dead, then
no other person will rise again. And if no one
shall rise again, then there will be no judgment.
For it is certain that, if I am not to rise again,
I cannot be jutlged. But if there is to be no
judgment, then the keeping of God's command-
ments will be to no purpose, and there will be no
occasion for abstinence : nay, we may say, " Let
us eat and drink, for to-morrow we shall die." ^
For all these consequences follow when you deny
that He was born of Mary. But if you acknowl-
edge that He was born of Mary, then His pas-
sion will necessarily follow, and His resurrection
will be consequent on His passion, and the judg-
ment on His resurrection : and thus the injunc-
tions of Scripture will have their proper value ^
for us. This is not therefore an idle question,
but there are the mightiest issues involved in this
word. For just as all the law and the prophets
are summed up in two words, so also all our hope


^ I Cor. XV. 32.
^ Salva.


226


THE DISPUTATION WITH MANES.


ES made to depend on the birth by the blessed
Mary. Give me therefore an answer to these
several questions which I shall address to you.
How shall we get rid of these many words of
the apostle, so important and so precise, which
are expressed in terms like the following : " But
tvhen the good pleasure of God was with us, He
sent His Son, made of a woman ; " ' and again,
" Christ our passover is sacrificed for us ; " ^ and
once more, " God hath both raised up the Lord,
and will raise up us together with Him by His
own power? "3 And there are many other pas-
sages of a similar import ; as, for example, this
which follows : " How say some among you,-*
that there is no resurrection of the dead ? For
if there be no resurrection of the dead, then is
not Clirist risen : and if Christ be not risen, then
is our preaching vain. Yea, and we shall be
found false witnesses of God ; who have testified
against God that He raised up Christ : whom He
raised not up. For if the dead rise not, then is
not Christ risen : and if Christ be not raised,
your 5 faith is vain ; ye are yet in your sins. Then
they also which are fallen asleep in Christ are
perished. If in this life only we have hope in
Christ, we are more miserable than all men. But
now is Christ risen from the dead, the beginning^
of them that sleep ; " ^ and so on. Who, then,
I ask, can be found so rash and audacious as
not to make his faith fit in with these sacred
words, in which there is no qualification^ nor
any dubiety? Who, I ask you, O foolish Gala-
tian, has bewitched you, as those were bewitched
" before whose eyes Jesus Christ was evidently
set forth, crucified ? " ^ From all this I think
that these testimonies should suffice in proof of
the judgment, and the resurrection, and the pas-
sion ; and the birth by Mary is also shown to be
involved naturally and at once in these facts.
And what matters it though you refuse to acqui-
esce in this, when the Scripture proclaims the fact
most unmistakeably? Nevertheless I shall again
put a question to you, and let it please you to
give me an answer. When Jesus gave His testi-
mony concerning John, and said, " Among them
that are born of women there hath not risen a
greater than John the Baptist : notwithstanding,


' Gal. iv. 4. The reading is, "cum autem fuit Dei voluntas in
nobis." The Vulgate, following the ordinary Greek text, gives, " at
ubi venit plenitudo temporis." And so Irenseus, TertuUian, Cyprian,
etc. [This should have been in the margin of the Revised Version.]

^ I Cor. V. 7.

^ I Cor. vi. 14. The text here inserts the words cum illo, which
are found neither in the Greek, nor in the Vulgate, nor in Irenseus,
AdT. HcEres.,\. 6, 7 [vol. i. pp. 530, 532, this series], nor in Ter-
tuUian, Adv. Marc, v. 7, etc. [vol. iii. p. 443, this series]. Accord-
ing to Sabatier, however, they are found in Jerome, E/. ad A maud.

* Reading in vobis. But the Codex Casinensis seems to give
in nobis, amongst us.

s But the Codex Casinensis seems to make it /ides nostra, our
faith.

b Initium.

7 I Cor. XV. 12-20.

^ Distinctio.

9 Gal. iii. I. The word in the text is rescriptiis est. The Vul-
gate %v/C5 pmscrijiius est. The Vetus Itala %\ves proscriptus est.


he that is less '° in the kingdom of heaven is
greater than he," " tell me what is meant by there
being a greater than he in the kingdom of heaven.
Was Jesus less in the kingdom of heaven than
John ? I say, God forbid ! Tell me, then, how
this is to be explained, and you will certainly
surpass yourself. Without doubt the ?neaning
is, that Jesus was less than John among those
that are born of woman ; but in the kingdom of
heaven He is greater than he.'- Wherefore tell
me this too, O Manichseus : If you say that Christ
was not born of Mary, but that He only appeared
like a man, while yet He was not really a man,
the appearance being effected and produced by
the power that is in Him, tell me, I repeat, on
whom then was it that the Spirit descended like
a dove ? Who is this that was baptized by John?
If He was perfect, if He was the Son, if He was
the Power, the Spirit could not have entered into
Him ; '3 just as a kingdom cannot enter within a
kingdom. And whose, too, was that voice which
was sent forth out of heaven, and which gave
Him this testimony, "This is my beloved Son, in
whom I am well pleased ?"'4 Come, tell me;
make no delay ; who is this that acquires '5 all
these things, that does all these things ? Answer
me : Will you thus audaciously adduce blasphemy
for reason, and will you attempt to find a place
for it?""'

50. Manes said : No one, certainly, who may
be able to give a reply to what has just been
alleged by you need fear incurring the guilt of
blasphemy, but should rather be deemed thor-
oughly worthy of all commendation. For a true
master of his art,'^ when any matters are brought
under his notice, ought to prepare his reply with
due care, and make all clearly to understand the
points that are in question or under doubt ; and
most especially ought he to do so to uninstructed
persons. Now since the account of our doc-
trine does not satisfy you, be pleased, like a
thorough master of your art, to solve this ques-
tion also for me in a reasonable manner. For
to me it seems but pious to say that the Son of
God stood in need of nothing whatsoever in the


'° Minor.

" Matt. xi. II.

'2 It would seem that Archelaus read the passage in Matthew as
meaning, notwithstanding, he that is less, is, in the kingdom of
henzicn, greater iha7t he. Thus, Jie that is less is understood to be
Jesiis in His natural relations. [A very lean and hungry procnl-
a?«i^/i!' of the author.]

'3 Routh appends a note here which may be given. It is to thisJ
effect: I am afraid that Archelaus has not expressed with sufficientj
correctness the mystery of the Divine Incarnation, in this passage as]
well as in what follows; although elsewhere he lias taught that thej
Lord Jesus was conceived by divine power, and in ch. xxxiv. has!
called the Virgin Mary Dei genctrix, Weoroico?. For at the time of J
the Saviour's baptism the Holy Spirit was not given in His first com-l
munication with the Word of God (which Word, indeed, had been!
united with the human nature from the time of the conception itself),!
but was only received by the Christ avQawnivw; and o\.Kovot>.iKui^^
and for the sake of men. See Cyril of Alexandria, De Rectd FideA
xxxiv. vol. V 2, p. 153, editio A uberii. [Routh, R.S., vol. v. p. 178.JI

'* Matt. iii. 17.

15 Parat.

'6 Inferre coneris.

•7 Arti/ex.


THE DISPUTATION WITH MANES.


227


way of making good His advent upon earth ;
and that He in no sense required either the dove,
or baptism, or mother, or brethren, or even may
hap a father, — which father, however, according
to your view, was Joseph ; but that He de-
scended altogether by Himself alone, and trans-
formed Himself, according to His own good
pleasure, into the semblance of a. man, in accord-
ance with that word of Paul which tells us that
" He was found in fashion as a man." ' Show
me, therefore, what thing He could possibly
heed who was able to transform Himself into
all manner of appearances. For when He chose
to do so. He again transformed this human fash-
ion ^ and mien into the hkeness of the sun. But
if you gainsay me once more, and decline to
acknowledge that I state the faith correctly,
listen to my definition of the position in which
you stand. For if you say that He was only
man as born of Mary,^ and that He received
the Spirit at His baptism, it will follow that He
will be made out to be Son by increase ^ and not
by nature. If, however, I grant you to say that
He is Son according to increase, s and that He
was made as a man, your opinion is that He is
really a man, that is to say, one who is flesh and
blood. ^ But then it will necessarily follow that
the Spirit also who appeared like a dove was
nothing else than a natural dove. For the two
expressions are the same, — namely, "as a man"
and "like ^ a dove ; " and consequently whatever
may be the view you take of the one passage
which uses the phrase "■ as a man," you ought to
hold that same view ^ also of this other passage
in which the expression "like a dove " is used. It
is a clear matter of necessity to take these things
in the same way. for only thus can we find out
the real sense of what is written concerning Him
in the Scriptures. Archelaiis said: As you
cannot do so much for yourself, like a thorough
master of your art, so neither should I care to
put this question right and with all patience to
make it clear, and to give the evident solution
of the difficulty ,9 were it not for the sake of
those who are present with us, and who listen to
us. For this reason, therefore, I shall also ex-
plain the answer that ought to be given to this
question as it may be done most appropriately.
It does not seem to you, then, to be a pious
thing to say that Jesus had a mother in Mary ;


I Phil. ii. 7.

^ Homincm.

3 Hotninctit euiii tantuinmodo ex Maria,

* Or, effect, per prof cctu>7t.

S Effect, [i.e., progressively.]

*> Routh puts this interrogatively = Is it then your position that
He really is a man, that is to say, one who is flesh and blood? Well,
but if so, then it will follow, etc.

^ Or, as.

^Reading " sicut homo, hac opinione," for the " sicut homo ac
opinione " of the Codex Casinensis.

9 The Codex Casinensis reads, " banc quaestionem diffigenter
aptare tarn manifestarem atque manifeste dissolverem." We iollov/
the emendation, " banc qusestionem diligenter aptatam manifestarem,"
etc.


and you hold a similar view on certain other
positions which you have now been discussing
in terms which I, for my part, altogether shrink
from repeating. '° Now, sometimes a master of
any art happens to be compelled by the igno-
rance of an opponent both to say and to do
things which time would make him decline ; "
and accordingly, because the necessity is laid
upon me, by consideration for the multitude
present, I may give a brief answer to those
statements which have been made so erroneously
by you. Let us suppose, now, your allegation
to be, that if we understand Jesus to be a man
made of Mary after the course of nature, and
regard him consequently as having flesh and
blood, it will be necessary also to hold that the
Holy Spirit was a real dove, and not a spirit.
Well, then, how can a real dove enter into a real
man, and abide in him ? For flesh cannot enter
into flesh. Nay rather, it is only when we ac-
knowledge Jesus to be a true man, and also hold
him who is there said to be like a dove to be
the Holy Spirit, that we shall give the correct
account according to reason on both sides. For,
according to right reason, it may be said that the
Spirit dwells in a man, and descends upon him,
and abides in him ; and these, indeed, are things
which have happened already in all due compe-
tence, and the occurrence of which is always
possible still, as even you yourself adtyiit, inas-
miich as you did aforetime profess to be the
Paraclete of God, you flint,'^ as I may call you,
and no man, so often forgetful of the very things
which you assert. For you declared that the
Spirit whom Jesus promised to send has come
upon you ; and whence can He come but by
descending from Heaven? And if the Spirit
descends thus on the man worthy of Him, then
verily must we fancy that real doves descended
upon you? Then truly should we rather dis-
cover in you the thieving dove-merchant,'^ who
lays snares and lines for the birds. For surely
you well deserve to be made a jest of with words
of ridicule. However, I spare you, lest per-
chance I appear to ofiend the auditors by such
expressions, and also most especially because it
is beside my purpose to throw out against you
all that you deserve to hear said about you. But
let me return to the proper subject. For I am
mindful of that transformation of thine,'"* in vir-
tue of which you say that God has transformed


'° [A signuin vereciindiig which rebukes the awful inquisitive-
ness concerning the conception of Mary which disgraced the late
pontiff, Pius IX. To what blasphemous pruriency of thought and
expression has not such an invasion of decency given rise! See St.
Bernard, Opp., torn. i. p. 392. He rebukes the heresy as profane.]

" The text gives teinpus recusat. Routh proposes tempus re-
quirit = which the occasion requires.

'- This is a purely conjectural reading, " ut dicam silex," etc. The
Codex Casinensis gives, " ut dicam dilere non homo." But Routh, in
reference to ch. xv., throws out the idea that we sliould read delire^
thou dotard, or, lunatic. [P. 190, supra, as if Manes = navi/co^.J

'3 Columbarium furcm.

'■« The text gives suce. Routh suggests tute.


221


THE DISPUTATION WITH MANES.


Himself into the fashion of a man or into that
of the sun, by which position you think to prove
that our Jesus was made man only in fashion and
in appearance ; which assertion may God save
any of the faithful from making. Now, for the
rest, that opinion of yours would reduce the
whole matter to a dream, so far as we are con-
cerned, and to mere figures ; and not that only,"
but the very name of an advent would be done
away : for He might have done what He desired
to do, though still seated in heaven, if He is,
as you say, a spirit, and not a true man. But it
is not thus that " He humbled Himself, and
took the form of a servant ; " ^ and I say this of
Him who was made man of Mary. For what ?
Might not we, too, have set forth things like
those with which you have been dealing, and
that, too, all the more easily and the more
broadly ? But far be it from us to swerve one
jot or one tittle from the truth. For He who
was born of Mary is the Son, who chose of His
own accord to sustain this ^ mighty conflict, —
namely, Jesus. This is the Christ of God, who
descended upon him who is of Mary. If, how-
ever, you refuse to believe even the voice that
was heard from heaven, all that you can bring
forward in place of the same is but some rash-
ness of your own ; and though you were to
declare yourself on that, no one would believe
you. For forthwith Jesus was led by the Spirit
into the v/ilderness to be tempted by the devil ;
and as the devil had no correct knowledge of
Him, he said to Him, " If thou be the Son of
God." 4 Besides, he did not understand the
reason of this bearing of the Son of God by
Mary, who preached the kingdom of heaven,
whose was also indeed a great tabernacle, s and
one that could not have been prepared by any
other : ^ whence, too. He who was nailed to the
cross, on rising again from the dead, was taken
up thither where Christ the Son of God reigned ;
so that when He begins to conduct His judg-
ment, those who have been ignorant of Him
shall look on Him whom they pierced.^ But in
order to secure your credence, I propose this
question to you : Why was it, that although His
disciples sojourned a whole year with Him, not
one of them fell prostrate on his face before
Him, as you were saying a little ago, save only
in that one hour when His countenance shone


I The text is, " non solum autem, sed adventus nomen delebitur."
It may perhaps be = and not the foundation, but the name, of an
advent would be done away.

^ Phil. ii. 7.

3 The text gives " qtio magnum," etc., for which we adopt " qitod
magnum," etc.

■* Matt. iv. 3.

3 Or perhaps, = which was also, gnod erat tabernacuhtin, etc.

* The Codex Casinensis gives, " Ignorabat autem propter qui
genuisset FiHum Dei pra;dicabat regnum coslorum, qui erat," etc.
We follow generally the emendations adopted in Migne: " Ignorabat
autem propter quid genuisset Filium Dei, qui praedicabat regnum
coelorum, quod erat habitaculum magnum," etc. Routh would read
" genitus esset Filius Dei," etc.

^ John xix. 37.


like the sun ? Was it not by reason of that tab-
ernacle which had been madey^r Him of Mary?
For just as no other had the capacity sufficient
for sustaining the burden of the Paraclete except
only the disciples and the blessed Paul, so also
no other was able to bear the Spirit who de-
scended from heaven, and through whom that
voice of the Father gave its testimony in these
terms, "This is my beloved Son," ^ save only
He who was born of Mary, and who is above all
the saints, — namely, Jesus. But now give us
your answer to those matters which I bring for-
ward against you. If you hold that He is man
only in mien and form, how could He have been
laid hold of and dragged off to judgment by
those who were born of man and woman — to
wit, the Pharisees — seeing that a spiritual body
cannot be grasped by bodies of grosser capaci-
ties? But if you, who as yet have made no
reply to the arguments brought before you, have
now any kind of answer to offer to the word and
proposition I have adduced, proceed, I pray
you, and fetch me at least a handful or some
fair modicum of your sunlight.^ But that very
sun, indeed, inasmuch as it is possessed of a
more subtle body, is capable of covering and
enveloping you ; while you, on the other hand,
can do it no injury, even although you were to
trample it under foot. My Lord Jesus, how-
ever, if He was laid hold of, was laid hold of as
a man by men. If He is not a man, neither
was He laid hold of. If He was not laid hold
of, neither did He suffer, nor was He baptized.
If He was not baptized, neither is any of us bap-
tized. But if there is no baptism, neither will
there be any remission of sins, but every man
will die in his own sins. Majies said : Is bap-
tism, then, given on account of the remission of
sins? Archelaus said : Certainly. Manes said:
Does it not follow, then, that Christ has sinned,
seeing that He has been baptized ? Archelaus
said: God forbid ! Nay, rather, He was made
sin for us, taking on Him our sins.'° For this
reason He was born of a woman, and for this
reason also He approached the rite of baptism, in
order that He might receive the purification of this
part," and that thus the body which He had taken
to Himself might be capable of bearing the Spirit,
who had descended in the form of a dove.

51. When Archelaus had finished this speech,
the crowds of people marvelled at the truth of
his doctrine, and expressed their vehement com-
mendations of the man with loud outcries, so that
they exerted themselves most energetically, and
would have kept him from his return.'- There-


8 Matt. iii. 17.

9 Pngilluin plenum solis mihi affer aut modiuvi plenuni.
'° 2 Cor. V. 21.

" Partis.

12 The text is, " et ultra ei non sinerent ad propria remeare."
Routh suggests ultra for ultra.


THE DISPUTATION WITH MANES.


229


after, however, they withdrew. After some time,
again, when they were gathered together, Arche-
laus persuaded them to accede to his desire, and
Hsten quietly to the word. And among his audi-
tors were not only those who were with Diodorus,
but also all who were present from his province
and from the neighbouring districts. When si-
lence, then, was secured, Archelaus proceeded
to speak to them of Manes in the following
manner : You have heard, indeed, what is the
character of the doctrine which we teach, and
you have got some proof of our faith ; for I
have expounded the Scriptures before you all,
precisely in accordance with the views which I
myself have been able to reach in studying them.
But I entreat you now to hsten to me in all silence,
while I speak with the utmost possible brevity,
with the view of giving you to understand who
this person is who has made his appearance
among us, and whence he comes, and what
character he has, exactly as a certain man of the
name of Sisinius, one ' of his comrades, has indi-
cated the facts to me ; which individual ^ 1 am
also prepared, if it please you, to summon in
evidence of the statements I am about to make.
And, in truth, this person did not decline to
affirm the very same facts which we now adduce,^
even when Manes was present ; for the above-
mentioned individual became a believer of our
doctrine, as did also another person who was
with me, named Turbo. Accordingly, all that
these parties have conveyed in their testimony
to me, and also all that we ourselves have dis-
covered in the man, I shall not suffer to be kept
back from your cognizance.

Then, indeed, the multitudes became all the
more excited, and crowded together to listen to
Archelaus ; for, in good sooth, the statements
which were made by him offered them the great-
est enjoyment. Accordingly, they earnestly urged
him to tell them all that he pleased, and all that
he had on his mind ; and they declared them-
selves ready to listen to him there and then,
and engaged to stay on even to the evening,
and until the lights should be lit.

Stimulated therefore by their heartiness, Arche-
laus began his address with all confidence in the
following terms : — My brethren, you have heard,
indeed, the primary causes •* relating to my Lord
Jesus, — I mean those which are decided out of
the law and the prophets ; and of the subsidiary
causes also relating to my Lord Jesus Christ, our
Saviour, you are not ignorant. And why should
I say more? From the loving desire for the
Saviour we have been called Christians, as the


' Reading units, instead of " vos, comitibus," etc.

^ Reading " quern etiam " instead of "qu^e etiam."

3 The Codex Casinensis gives, " ipse quidem me dicere recusavit,"
etc. We adopt the correction in Migne, " sed ne ipse quidem dicere
recusavit," etc.

■* Superiores quidetn cansas Doiitini, etc.


whole world itself attests, and as the apostles
also plainly declare. Yea, further, that best
master-builder of His, Paul himself,^ has laid
our foundation,^ that is, the foundation of the
Church, and has put us in trust of the law, or-
daining ministers, and presbyters,'' and bishops
in the same, and describing in the places severally
assigned to that purpose, in what manner and
with what character the ministers of God ought
to conduct themselves, of what repute the pres-
byters ought to be possessed, and how they
should be constituted, and what manner of per-
sons those also ought to be who desire the ofhce
of bishop.^ And all these institutions, which
were once settled well and rightly for us, preserve
their proper standing and order with us to this
day, and the regular administration of these rules
abides amongst us still. But as to this fellow,
Manes by name, who has at present burst boast-
fully forth upon us from the province of Persia,
and between whom and me a disputation has
now for the second time been stirred, I shall tell
you about his lineage, and that, too, in all ful-
ness ; and I shall also show you most lucidly the
source from which his doctrine has descended.
This man is neither the first nor the only origi-
nator of this type of doctrine. But a certain
person belonging to Scythia, bearing the name
Scythianus,9 and living in the time of the apostles,
was the founder and leader of this sect, just as
many other apostates have constituted themselves
founders and leaders, who from time to time,
through the ambitious desire of arrogating posi-
tions of superior importance to themselves, have
given out falsehoods for the truth, and have per-
verted the simpler class of people to their own
lustful appetencies, on whose names and treach-
eries, however, time does not permit us at pres-
ent to descant. This Scythianus, then, was the
person who introduced this self-contradictory
dualism ; and for that, too, he was himself
indebted to Pythagoras, as also all the other
followers of this dogma have been, who all up-
hold the notion of a dualism, and turn aside from
the direct course of Scripture : but they shall not
gain any further success therein.

52. No one, however, has ever made such
an unblushing advance in the promulgation of
these tenets as this Scythianus. For he intro-
duced the notion of a feud between the two
unbegottens, and all those other fancies which
are the consequences of a position of that kind.
This Scythianus himself belonged to the stock of

5 Reading " sed et optimus architectus ejus, fundamentum," etc.
The Codex Casinensis has the corrupt lection, " sed et optimos archi-
tectos ei fundamentum," etc. [Had this been said of Peter ?]

*> Cf. I Cor. lii. 10. [Had this been said of Peter, what then?]

'' Cf Acts xiv. 23.

^ Cf. I Tim. iii. i. [Clement, cap. xliv., vol. i. p. 17, this series.]

9 Various other forms are found for this name Scythianus. Thus
we find Scutianus and Excutianus, — forms which may have arisen
through mere clerical errors. The Codex Reg Alex. Vat. gives
Stutianus. [But see Routh, R.S., vol. v. p, i85.]


2;;o


THE DISPUTATION WITH MANES.


the Saracens, and took as his wife a certain cap-
tive from the Upper Thebaid, who persuaded
him to dwell in Egypt rather than in the deserts.
And would that he had never been received by
that province, in which, as he dwelt in it for a
period, he found the opportunity for learning
the wisdom of the Egyptians ! ' for, to speak
truth, he was a person of very decided talent,
and also of very liberal means, as those who
knew him have likewise testified in accounts
transmitted to us. Moreover, he had a certain
disciple named Terebinthus,^ who wrote four
books for him. To the first of these books he
gave the title of the Mysteries, to the second
that of the Heads,^ to the third that of the Gos-
pel, and to the last of all that of the Treasury^
He had these four books, and this one disciple
whose name was Terebinthus. As, then, these
two persons had determined to reside alone by
themselves for a considerable period, Scythianus
thought of making an excursion into Judea,
with the purpose of meeting with all those who
had a reputation there as teachers ; but it came
to pass that he suddenly departed this life soon
after that, without having been able to accom-
plish anything. That disciple, moreover, who
had sojourned with him had to flee, 5 and made
his way toward Babylonia, a province which at
present is held ^ by the Persians, and which is
distant now a journey of about six days and
nights from our parts. On arriving there, Tere-
binthus succeeded in giving currency to a won-
derful account of himself, declaring that he was
replete with all the wisdom of the Egyptians,
and that he was really named now, not Terebin-
thus, but another Buddas,^ and that this desig-
nation had been put upon him. He asserted
further that he was the son of a certain virgin,
and that he had been brought up by an angel ^


' This seems the general idea meant to be conveyed. The text,
which is evidently corrupt, runs thus: " in qua cum eum habitaret,
cum yEgyptiorum sapientiam didicisset." The Codex Reg. Alex,
Vat. reads, " in qua cum habitarei et yEgyptiorum," etc. In Migne it
is proposed to fill up the lacunae thus: "in qua cum diu habitaret,
depravatus est, cum iEgyptiorum sapientiam didicisset." Routh sug-
.gests, " in qua cum ea habitaret," etc.

^ The Codex Casinensis reads 7'f7'<5(7«fw for TVr^iJzw^//?^;;?. But
in Cyril of Jerusalem, in his Catcchesis, 6, as well as in others, we
regularly find TepSifeoi'j Terbinihum, or Terebiiithicm, given as
the name of the disciple of Scythianus. The form Tereventus is
also given; and the Codex Reg. Alex. Vat. has Tcrybeneus. The
statement made here as to these books being written by Terebinthus
is not in accordance with statements made by Cyril and others, who
seem to recognise Scythianus alone as the author. As to the name
Terebinthus itself, C. Ritter, in his Die Stupa's, etc., p. 29, thinks
that it is a Graecized form of a predicate of Buddha, viz., Tcrc-Jiintic,
Lord of the Hindoos. Others take it simply to be a translation of

the Hebrew H/X, the terebinth. See a note on this subject in

Neander's Clutrch Hist.,\\. 166 (Bohn). [Routh, ut supra, p. 187.]
3 Capituloruvt.

* Thesaiiriis.

S The Code.x Reg. Alex. Vat. inserts here, " omnibus quaecunque
ejus fuerant congregatis" = gathering together all that was his.

* Reading " habetur." But Codex Reg. Alex. Vat. gives kabi-
iaiiir, is inhabited.

7 The Codex Casinensis gives, " sed aliud cujusdam homine."
We adopt " sed alium Buddam nomine," with which the narratives of
Cyril, Epiphanius, and others agree. Routh proposes " alio Buddam
nomine " = by another name, Buddas. [Buddha is a title, not a name.]

^ The text gives " natum esse, simul et ab angelo." The Codex
Reg. Alex. Vat. reads, " natum sc esse simulabat et ab angelo."


on the mountains. A certain prophet, however,
of the name of Parcus, and Labdacus the son
of Mithras,'' charged '° him with falsehood, and
day after day unceasingly they had keen and
elevated contentions" on this subject. But why
should I speak of that at length ? Although he
was often reproved, he continued, nevertheless,
to make declarations to them on matters which
were antecedent to the world,'- and on the sphere,
and the two luminaries ; and also on the ques-
tion whither and in what manner the souls de-
part, and in what mode they return again into
the bodies ; and he made many other assertions
of this nature, and others even worse than these,
— as, for instance, that war was raised with God
among the elements,'^ that the prophet himself
might be believed. However, as he was hard
pressed for assertions like these, he betook him-
self to a certain widow, along with his four books :
for he had attached to himself no disciple in
that same locality, with the single exception of
an old woman who became an intimate of his.'''-
Then, '5 on a subsequent occasion, at the earhest
dawn one morning, he went up to the top '^ of a
certain house, and there began to invoke certain
names, which Turbo has told us only the seven
elect have learned. He ascended to the house-
top, then, with the purpose of engaging in some
religious ceremony, or some art of his own ; and
he went up alone, so as not to be detected by
any one : '^ for he considered that, if he was
convicted of playing false with, or holding of
little account, the religious beliefs of the people,
he would be liable to be punished by the real
princes of the country. And as he was revolv-
ing these things then in his mind, God in His
perfect justice decreed that he should be thrust
beneath earth by a spirit ; ^^ and forthwith he was
cast down from the roof of the house ; and his
body, being precipitated lifeless to the ground,
was taken up in pity by the old woman men-
tioned above, and was buried in the wonted
place of sepulture.

53. After this event all the effects which he
had brought with him from Egypt remained in
her possession. And she rejoiced greatly over his
death, and that for two reasons : first, because
she did not regard his arts with satisfaction ; and
secondly, because she had obtained such an in-

9 On these Persian priests, see Epiphanius on this heresy, num. 3.

'° Reading arguebant, with Routh, for arguebat.

" Animosa exaggeratio.

'- Ante seculuiii.

'3 Or, in the origins of things, in principiis.

'"* Particeps ejus.

'5 Reading tunc for nunc.

^^ Sotarium quoddam excelsjim.

'7 The Codex Casinensis gives, " ut inde ab aliquo convinci pos-
sit." But the Codex Reg. Alex. Vat. reads, " ut ne ab aliquo," etc.
We adopt, therefore, " ne ab aliquo," etc., taking the idea to be, as is
suggested in Migne, that Manes went up alone, because he feared
that, if observed by Parcus and Labdacus, the priests of Mithras, he
might expose himself to punishment at the hands of the Persian rulers
for an offence against their religion. \Manes here seems put for
Terebinthus. ]

'^ Sub terras eum detrudi per spiritum.


THE DISPUTATION WITH MANES.


231


heritance, for it was one of great value.' But as
she was all alone, she bethought herself of hav-
ing some one to attend her ; and she got for
that purpose a boy of about seven years of age,
named Corbicius,- to whom she at once gave his
freedom, and whom she also instructed in letters.
When this boy had reached his twelfth year the
old woman died, and left to him all her posses-
sions, and among other things tliose four books
which Scythianus had written, each of them con-
sisting of a moderate number of lines.^ When
his mistress was once buried, Corbicius began to
make his own use of all the property that had
been left him. Abandoning the old locality, he
took up his abode in the middle of the city,
where the king of Persia had his residence ; and
there altering his name, he called himself Manes
instead of Corbicius, or, to speak more correctly,
not Manes, but Mani : ^ for that is the kind of
inflection employed in the Persian language.
Now, when this boy had grown to be a man of
well-nigh sixty years of age, 5 he had acquired
great erudition in all the branches of learning
taught in those parts, and I might almost say
that in these he surpassed all others. Neverthe-
less he had been a still more diligent student of
the doctrines contained in these four books ; and
he had also gained three disciples, whose names
were Thomas, Addas, and Hermas. Then, too,
he took these books, and transcribed^ them in
such wise that he introduced into them much
new matter which was simply his own, and which
can be likened only to old wives' fables. Those
three disciples, then, he thus had attached to
him as conscious participants in his evil coun-
sels ; and he gave, moreover, his own name to
the books, and deleted the name of their former
owner, as if he had composed them all by him-
self. Then it seemed good to him to send his
disciples, with the doctrines which he had com-
mitted to writing in the books, into the upper
districts of that province, and through various
cities and villages, with the view of securing fol-
lowers. Thomas accordingly determined to take
possession of the regions of Egypt, and Addas
those of Scythia, while Hermas alone chose to
remain with the man himself. When these,
then, had set out on their course, the king's son
was seized with a certain sickness ; and as the
king was very anxious to see him cured, he pub-
lished a decree offering a large reward, and en-
gaging to bestow it upon any one who should


^ But the Codex Reg. Alex. Vat. reads, " erat enim multum pe-
cunise arida " — for she had a great greed for money.

^ But Cyril, Epiphanius, and others, make the name Cubricus
(Kou^ptKo?).

3 Versiium.

* This may express with sufficient nearness the original, "nee
Manem sed Manes."

5 The Codex Casinensis gives sexaginta regularly The Codex
Reg. Alex. Vat. reads septiiaginta, seventy.

<> Transfert eos. It may be also " translated them."


prove himself capable of restoring the prince.^
On the report of this, all at haphazard, like the
men who are accustomed to play the game of
cubes, which is another name for the dice,*^ Manes
presented himself before the king, declaring that
he would cure the boy. And when the king
heard that, lie received him courteously, and
welcomed him heartily. But not utterly to weary
my hearers with the recital of the many things
which he did, let me simply say that the boy
died, or rather was bereft of life, in his hands.
Then the king ordered Manes to be thrust into
prison, and to be loaded with chains of iron
weighing half a hundredweight. 9 Moreover, those
two disciples of his who had been sent to incul-
cate his doctrine among the different cities were
also sought for with a view to punishment. But
they took to flight, without ever ceasing,'° how-
ever, to introduce into the various localities
which they visited that teaching of theirs which
is so ahen to the faith, and which has been in-
spired only by Antichrist.

54. But after these events they returned to
their master, and reported what had befallen
them ; and at the same time they got an account
of the numerous ills which had overtaken him.
When, therefore, they got access to him, as I
was saying," they called his attention to all the
sufferings they had had to endure in each several
region ; and as for the rest, they urged it upon
him that regard ought now to be had to the
question of safety ; '^ for they had been in great
terror lest any of the miseries which were in-
flicted on him should fall to their own lot. But
he counselled them to fear nothing, and rose to
harangue them. And then, while he lay in
prison, he ordered them to procure copies of the
books of the law of the Christians ; for these dis-
ciples who had been despatched by him through
the different communities were held in execra-
tion by all men, and most of all by those with
whom the name of Christians was an object of
honour. Accordingly, on receiving a small sup-
ply of money, they took their departure for those
districts in which the books of the Christians
were published ; '^ and pretending that they were
Christian messengers, '•♦ they requested that the
books might be shown them, with a view to their


'' The text gives, " edictum proposuit in vita," etc. For in vita
it is proposed to read invitaiis ; and that is confirmed by the Codex
Reg. Alex. Vat.

8 We adopt the reading, "qui cubum, quod nomen est tali, ludere
solent." The text gives, qui cibum quod nomen est tale eludere
Solent." The Codex Reg. Alex Vat. seems to read, " qui cubum
quod nomen est aleae ludere solent."

9 Ferri talcnto.

'° The text gives, "quique fugientes licet nunquam cessarunt," etc.
Codex Reg. Alex. Vat. has, " licet nunquam cessarent," etc.

" Reading "dicebam." But the Codex Casinensis gives "dice-
bant," and the Codex Reg. Alex. Vat. has "deccbat" — as became
them.

'2 Reading " converti ad salutem," for " convent!," etc., as it is
given in the Codex Casinensis.

'3 Coitscribebantur. [Note this concerning the Christian books.]

''' Nuntios. But Codex I^eg. Alex. Vat. gives " novitios," novices.


232


THE DISPUTATION WITH MANES.


acquiring copies. And, not to make a lengthened
narrative of this, they thus got possession of all
the books of our Scriptures, and brought them
back with them to their master, who was still in
prison. On receiving these copies, that astute
personage set himself to seek out all the state-
ments in our books that seemed to favour his
notion of a dualism ; which, however, was not
really his notion, but rather that of Scythianus,
who had promulgated it a long time before him.
And just as he did in disputing with me, so then
too, by rejecting some things and altering others
in our Scriptures, he tried to make out that they
advanced his own doctrines, only that the name
of Christ was attached to them there. That
name, therefore, he pretended on this account
to assume to himself, in order that the people in
the various communities, hearing the holy and
divine name of Christ, might have no temptation
to execrate and harass ' those disciples of his.
Moreover, when they^ came upon the word
which is given us in our Scriptures touching the
Paraclete, he took it into his head that he him-
self might be that Paraclete ; for he had not
read with sufficient care to observe that the Para-
clete had come already, — namely, at the time
when the apostles were still upon earth. Ac-
cordingly, when he had made up these impious
inventions, he sent his disciples also to proclaim
these fictions and errors with all boldness, and
to make these false and novel words known in
every quarter. But when the king of Persia
learned this fact, he prepared to inflict condign
punishment upon him. Manes, however, re-
ceived information of the king's intention, having
been warned of it in sleep, and made his escape
out of prison, and succeeding in taking to flight,
for he had bribed his keepers with a very large
sum of money. Afterwards he took up his resi-
dence in the castle of Arabion ; and from that
place he sent by the hand of Turbo the letter
which he wrote to our Marcellus, in which letter
he intimated his intention of visiting him. On
his arrival there, a contest took place between
him and me, resembling the disputation which
you have observed and listened to here ; in
which discussion we sought to show, as far as it
was in our power, that he was a false prophet.
I may add, that the keeper of the prison who
had let him escape was punished, and that the
king gave orders that the man should be sought
for and apprehended wherever he might be found.
And as these things have come under my own
cognizance, it was needful that I should also
make the fact known to you, that search is be-
ing made for this fellow even to the present day
by the king of Persia.

' The text gives " fatigarent." But Codex Reg. Alex. Vat. gives
" fugarent " — expel.

2 The text gives " invenientes." The Codex Reg. Alex. Vat.
more correctly has " inveniens " — when he came upon.


55. On hearing this, the multitude wished to
seize Manes and hand him over to the power of
those foreigners who were their neighbours, and
who dwelt beyond the river Stranga,^ especially
as also some time before this certain parties had
come to seek him out ; who, however, had to
take their leave again without finding any trace
of him, for at that time he was in flight. How-
ever, when Archelaus made this declaration,
Manes at once took to flight, and succeeded in
making his escape good before any one followed
in pursuit of him. For the people were detained
by the narrative which was given by Archelaus,
whom they heard with great pleasure ; ■♦ never-
theless some of them did follow in close pursuit
after him. But he made again for the roads by
which he had come, and crossed the river, and
effected his return to the castle of Arabion. 5
There, however, he was afterwards apprehended
and brought before the king, who, being inflamed
with the strongest indignation against him, and
fired with the desire of avenging two deaths upon
him, — namely, the death of his own son, and
the death of the keeper of the prison, — gave
orders that he should be flayed and hung before
the gate of the city, and that his skin should
be dipped in certain medicaments and inflated ;
his flesh, too, he commanded to be given as a
prey to the birds.^ When these things came
under the knowledge of Archelaus at a later
period, he added an account of them to the for-
mer discussion, so that all the facts might be
made known to all, even as I, who have writ-
ten ^ the narrrative of ^ these matters, have ex-
plained the circumstances in what precedes. And
all the Christians, therefore, having assembled,
resolved that the decision should be given against
him, transmitting that as a sort of epilogue to
his death which would be in proper consonance
with the other circumstances of his life. Be-
sides that, Archelaus added words to the follow-
ing effect : — My brethren, let none of you be
incredulous in regard to the statements made by
me : I refer to the assertion that Manes was not
himself the first author of this impious dogma,
but that it was only made public by him in cer-
tain regions of the earth. For assuredly that
man is not at once to be reckoned the author
of anything who has simply been the bearer of
it to some quarter or other, but only he has a
right to that credit who has been the discoverer
of it. For as the helmsman who receives the


3 But Codex Reg. Alex. Vat. reads " Stracmn fluvium."

^ The text gives, " evadere potuit dum nemo eum insequeretur.
Sed populus, cura Archelai quem libenter audiebant relatione tenere-
tur," etc. The Codex Reg. Alex. Vat. reads, "evadere potuit dum
ne eum insequeretur is populus, et Archelai quem libenter audiebant
relatione tenerentur." Routh suggests, " dum eum nemo insequere-
tur, sed populus Archelai," etc.

5 The same Codex Vat. reads Adrabion here.

^ The Codex Reg. Alex. Vat. ends with these words.

7 [See p. 177, stcpra. A fair discussion as to authenticity.]

^ Inscripsi,


THE DISPUTATION WITH MANES.


233


ship which another has built, may convey it to
any countries he pleases, and yet he remains one
who has had nothing to do with the construction
of the vessel, so also is this man's position to be
understood. For he did not impart its origin to
this matter really from the beginning ; but he
was only the means of transmitting to men what
had been discovered by another, as we know on
the evidence of trustworthy testimonies, on the
ground of which it has been our purpose to
prove to you that the invention of this wicked-
ness did not come from Manes,' but that it ori-
ginated with another, and that other indeed a
foreigner, who appeared a long time before him.
And further, that the dogma remained unpub-
lished for a time, until at length the doctrines
which had thus been lying in obscurity for a cer-
tain period were brought forward publicly by him
as if they were his own, the title of the writer
having been deleted, as I have shown above.
Among the Persians there was also a certain
promulgator of similar tenets, one Basilides,^ of
more ancient date, who lived no long time after
the period of our apostles. This man was of a
shrewd disposition himself, and as he observed
that at that time all other subjects were pre-
occupied, he determined to affirm that same
dualism which was maintained also by Scythianus.
And as, in fine, he had nothing to advance which
was properly his own, he brought the sayings of
others before his adversaries.^ And all his books
contain some matters at once difficult and ex-
tremely harsh. The thirteenth book of his Trac-
tates, however, is still extant, which begins in the
following manner : " In writing the thirteenth


' Codex Casinensis reads, " non ex Manen originem mali hujus
Manes esse." We adopt the conjecture, " non ex Mane originem
mali hujus manasse."

- The following note on this Basilides may be given from Migne:
— Although Eusebius {Hist. Ecc/ts., iv. 7) tells us that the Basilides
who taught heresy shortly after the times of the apostles was an Alex-
andrian, and opened schools of error in Egypt, the Basilides men-
tioned here by Archelaus may still be one and the same person with
that Alexandrian, notwithstanding thai it is said that he taught his
heresy among the Persians. For it may very well be the case that
Basilides left Alexandria, and made an attempt to infect the Persians
also with his heretical dogmas. At the same time, there is no mention
among ancient authorities, so far as I know, of a Persian Basilides.
The Alexandrian Basilides also wrote twenty-four books on the Gos-
pel, as the same Eusebius testifies; and these do not appear to be
different from those books of Tractates which Archelaus cites, and
from the Exegetics, from the twenty-third book of which certain pas-
sages are given by Clement of Alexandria in the fourth book of his
Stroniateis. It is not clear, however, whether that Gospel on which
Basilides wrote was the Gospel of the Apostles, or another which he
made up for himself, and of which mention is made in Origen's first
Homily on Luke, in Jerome's prologue to his Commentary on Mat-
thew, and in Ambrose's prologue to the Gospel of Luke." We may
add that Gieseler {Studien und Kritiken, i. 1830, p. 397) denies
that the person meant here is Basilides the Gnostic, specially on ac-
count of the peculiar designation, Basilides guidam antiquior.
But his objections are combated by Baur and Neander. See the
Church History of the latter, ii. p. 50, ed. Bohn.

3 The text is, " aliis diclis proposuit adversariis." Perhaps we
may read, " aliorum dicta," etc.


book of our Ty-actates, the wholesome word fur-
nished us with the necessary and fruitful word." ^
Then he illustrates how it, the antagonism be-
tween good and evil, is produced under the figures
of a rich principle and a poor principle, of which
the latter is by nature without root and without
place, and only supervenes upon things. 5 This
is the only topic ^ which the book contains.
Does it not then contain a strange ^ word ; ^ and,
as certain parties have been thus minded, will
ye not also all be offended with the book itself,
which has such a beginning as this? But Basil-
ides, returning to the subject after an introduc-
tion of some five hundred Hnes,^ more or less,
proceeds thus : " Give up this vain and curious
variation,'" and let us rather find out what in-
quiries the foreigners" have instituted on the
subject of good and evil, and what opinions they
have been led to adopt on all these subjects.
For certain among them have maintained that
there are for all things two beginnings,'- to which
they have referred good and evil, holding that
these beginnings are without beginning and un-
generate ; that is to say, that in the origins of
things there were light and darkness, which ex-
isted of themselves, and which were not merely
declared to exist.'^ While these subsisted by
themselves, they led each its own proper mode
of life, such as it was its will to lead, and such as
was competent to it ; for in the case of all things,
what is proper to any one is also in amity with
the same, and nothing seems evil to itself. But
after they came to know each other, and after
the darkness began to contemplate the light,
then, as if fired with a passion for something
superior to itself, the darkness pressed on to
have intercourse with the light."


* The text is, " necessarium sermonem uberemque salutaris sermo
prsestavit." May it be= the word of salvation furnished the word
which was requisite, etc.?

5 The text is, " per parvulam divitis et pauperis naturam sine ra-
dice et sine loco rebus super\'enientem unde pullulaverit indicat."
The reading seems defective. But the general intention of this very
obscure and fragmentary sentence appears to be as given above. So
Neander understands it as conveying a figurative description of the
two principles of light and darkness, expressed in the Zoroastrian
doctrine immediately cited, — the rich being the good principle, and
the poor the evil. He also supposes the phrase " without root and
without place " to indicate the " absoluteness of the principle, that
springs up all at once, and mixes itself up with the development of
existence." — See Church History, ii. 51 (Bohn). Routh confesses
his inability to understand what can be meant by the ierm parvulam,
and suggests pa raiolaj/i.

6 Caput.

7 Aliu»i.

^ Routh adopts the interrogative form here, so as to-make the con-
nection stand thus: But is this the only topic which the book con-
tains? Does it not also contain another discussion, etc.?
9 Versibus.

'o Varictate.

'' By the barbarihcre are evidently meant the Persians.

'^ Principles.

'3 The text is, "non quae esse dicebantur." Routh proposes,
" non quae factse, or genitse, esse dicebantur," = which were not de-
clared to have been made.


234


THE DISPUTATION WITH MANES.


A FRAGMENT OF THE SAME DISPUTATION.'


The fragfnenf is introduced by Cyril in t)ie
following terms : — He, i.e., Manes, fled from
prison and came into Mesopotamia ; but there
he was met by that buckler of righteousness/
Bishop Archelaus. And in order to bring him
to the test in the presence of philosophical
judges, this person convened an assembly of
Grecian auditors, so as to preclude the possi-
bility of its being alleged that the judges were
partial, as might have been the case had they
been Christians. Then the matter proceeded as
we shall noiv indicate : —

1. Archelaus said to Manes : Give us a state-
ment now of the doctrines you promulgate. —
Thereupon the man, whose mouth was like an
open sepulchre,^ began at once with a word
of blasphemy against the Maker of all things,
saying : The God of the Old Testament is the
inventor of evil, who speaks thus of Himself:
"I am a consuming fire."-* — But the sagacious
Archelaus completely undid this blasphemy.
For he said : If the God of the Old Testament,
according to your allegation, calls Himself a fire,
whose son is He who says, " I am come to send
fire upon the earth? " s If you find fault with
one who says, " The Lord killeth and maketh
alive," ^ why do you honour Peter, who raised
Tabitha to life,? but also put Sapphira to death ? *^
And if, again, you find fault with the one be-
cause He has prepared a fire,^ why do you not
find fault with the other, who says, " Depart from
me into everlasting fire?"'° If you find fault
with Him who says, " I, God, make peace, and
create evil," " explain to us how Jesus says, " I
came not to send peace, but a sword." '^ Since
both persons speak in the same terms, one or
other of these two things must follow : namely,
either they are both good '^ because they use the
same language ; or, if Jesus passes without cen-
sure though He speaks in such terms, you must
tell us why you reprehend Him who employs a
similar mode of address in the Old Testament.

2. Then Manes made the following reply to
him : And what manner of God now is it that


' From Cyril of Jerusalem, Catechescs, vi. § 27-29. [And see
the Introductory Notice, p. 175.]

2 Reading on-Aoi' SiKaiocrDu;?. Others read ottAo) = Archelaus
met him with the buckler of righteousness.

3 Ps. V. 9.

■♦ Deut. IV. 24.

5 Luke xii. 49.

^ I Sam. ii. 5.

^ Acts ix. 40.

^ Acts V. 10.

9 Deut. xxxii. 22.
'° Matt. XXV. 41.
" Isa. xlv. 7.

'^ Matt. X. 34. Various of the MSS. add, iv:\ Ty\v yy\v, upon the
earth.

'3 The text gives .■<aAoi. Routh seems to prefer icaKoi, evil.


blinds one? For it is Paul who uses these
words : "In whom the God of this world hath
blinded the minds of them which believe not,
lest the light of the Gospel should shine in
them." '■♦ But Archelaus broke in and refuted
this very well, saying : Read, however, a word
or two of what precedes that sentence, namely,
" But if our Gospel be hid, it is hid in them that
are lost." You see that it is hid in them that
are lost. " For it is not meet to give the holy
things to dogs." 's And furthermore, is it only
the God of the Old Testament that has blinded
the minds of them who believe not? Nay, has
not Jesus Himself also said : " Therefore speak
I to them in parables : that seeing, they may not
see?" '^ Is it then because He hated them that
He desired them not to see ? Or is it not on
account of their unworthiness, since they closed
their own eyes ? For wherever wickedness is a
matter self-chosen, there too there is the absence
of grace. " For unto him that hath shall be
given, but from him that hath not shall be taken
away even that which he seemeth to have." '?

3. But even although '^ we should be under
the necessity of accepting the exegesis advo-
cated by some, — for the subject is not alto-
gether unworthy of notice, — and of saying thus,
that He hath actually blinded the minds '9 of
them that believe not, we should still have to
afiirm that He hath blinded them for good, in
order that they may recover their sight to behold
things that are holy. For it is not said that He
hath blinded their soul,^° but only that He hath
blinded the minds of them that believe not.
And that mode of expression means something
like this : Blind the whorish mind of the whore-
monger, and the man is saved ; blind the rapa-
cious and thievish mind of the thief, and the
man is saved. But do you decline to under-
stand the sentence thus? Well, there is still
another interpretation. For the sun blinds those
who have bad sight ; and those who have watery
eyes are also blinded when they are smitten by
the light : not, however, because it is of the na-
ture of the sun to blind, but because the eye's
own constitution ^' is not one of correct vision.
And in like manner, those whose hearts are
afflicted with the ailment of unbelief are not
capable of looking upon the rays of the glory


'^ 2 Cor. iv. 4.

'5 Matt. vii. 6.

'6 Matt. xiii. 13.

■7 Matt. XXV. 29.

'^ For ei 6e 6ei ki

'9 vo^/iiaTa, thoughts,

•^t UTTOO'TaO't?.


The text is, 'ivo. ^Aeffovre? /u.rj ^nenuxri.
u)9, etc., various codices read ei Se 6t)cai'co5, etc.


ELUCIDATIONS.


235


of the Godhead. And again, it is not said, " He
hath bhnded their minds lest they should hear
the Gospel," but rather "lest the light of the
glory of the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ
should shine unto them." For to hear the Gos-
pel is a thing committed ' to all ; but the glory
of the Gospel of Christ is imparted only to the
sincere and genuine. For this reason the Lord
spake in parables to those who were incapable
of hearing, but to His disciples He explained
these parables in private. For the illumination
of the glory is for those who' have been enlight-


* €<f>UTai.


ened, while the bhnding is for them who believe
not. These mysteries, which the Church now
declares to you who are transferred from the
hsts of the catechumens, it is not her custom to
declare to the Gentiles. For we do not declare
the mysteries touching the Father, and the Son,
and the Holy Spirit to a Gentile ; neither do we
speak of the mysteries plainly in presence of
the catechumens ; but many a time we express
ourselves in an occult manner, so that the faith-
ful who have intelligence may apprehend the
truths referred to, while those who have not that
intelligence may receive no hurt.


ELUCIDATIONS.
I.

(Spotless virgin, etc., p. 223 and note 7.)

Oh that " foolish and unlearned questions " had been avoided, as the Scripture ' bids ! Surely,
we should be as decent about the conjugal relations of the Blessed Virgin as we are socially in all
such matters. Pearson, as in the note, says all that should be said on such a subject. Photius,
in his thirtieth epistle, expounds the text Matt. i. 25. But it did not rest there. Let it rest here.

11.

(Get thee behind me, Satan, p. 224 and note 13.)

I adopt the views of those who reverently suppose that when it was said, " Let us make man,"
etc., Lucifer conceived rebellion, and said, " This be far from Thee, Lord ; " fearing the creature
made in God's own image might outshine himself. Hence our Lord applies the epithet " Satan "
to Peter when he ventures to use similar language. Possibly there lurks a reference to this in
such language as Job iv. 18. I have previously referred to the Messias and Anti-Messias of
the Rev. Charles Ingham Black (London, 1854), in which this view is singularly well argued. It
is well to halt, however, with a confession, that, while it seems intimated in Holy Scripture,
it cannot be proved as revealed. Hence let us reverently say what is said by the Psalmist in
Ps. cxxxi. I, and confess what is written in Deut. xxix. 29. I go so far, only because the words
on which this note is a comment seem to authorize inquiry as to the force of " Satan " just there.
I state what seems the reference, but go no farther. Compare Dan. iv, 35.


III.

(I shrink from repeating, p. 227 and note 10.)

The delicacy of feeling here expressed is most honourable to the sentiment of the Church at
this period. Not till St. Bernard's day was it hinted,^ even in the West, that the Blessed Virgin
was conceived without taint of original sin ; and he rebukes the innovators with a holy indignation.^
It shocks him that questions were thus raised as to her parents, their amplexus maritales, etc.

' 2 Tim. ii. 23; Tit. iii. 9.

^ St. Bernard, Opp., torn. i. Compare note 10, p. 227, supra. See the Abb^ Laborde on the Impossibility, etc., translated by the
editor of this series, ed. Bahimore, 1855.
3 Save only by Mohammed.


236 ELUCIDATIONS.


IV.

(In presence of the catechumens, p. 235.)

Here is testimony to the catechumen system of the primitive Church which appears to me not
inconsistent with the period to which it is assigned. No doubt this gradual instruction of the
disciple is based upon the example of our Lord Himself, who spoke in parables,' and taught "as
they were able to hear it." But the disciplina arcani was designed chiefly to protect the Church
from the profaneness of the heathen, and it fell into desuetude after the Council of Nice.


GENERAL NOTE.


As I have not infrequently treated the rise of the great Alexandrian school as an outcrop from
the learinng and piety of ApoUos, I take this space to record my reasons: i. Apart from the
question in formal shape, I hold that the character and influence of this brilliant Alexandrian
w//i-^ have operated upon Alexandrian converts. 2. But the frequent employment by the Alex-
andrians of the expressions (Acts xviii. 24) used concerning him by St. Luke, almost textually,
confirms my suspicion that they had his high example always before them. 3. The catechetical
school was certainly established in Alexandria from apostolic times. ^ By whom more probably
than by ApoUos ? 4. St. Mark's connection with Alexandria rests on no scriptural evidence, yet
it is credited. 5. That of Apollos is narrated in Scripture, and I can conceive of nothing so
probable as that, remembering his own instruction by Aquila and Priscilla (Acts xviii, 26), he
should have founded catechetical schools for others. 6. All this is conjectural, indeed, but
it agrees with known facts. 7. The silence of Clement and the rest is an objection quite as fatal
to the claims of St. Mark. 8. The unanimity of the Alexandrians, from Pantaenus downward, in
assigning to St. Paul the authorship of the Epistle to the Hebrews, while it was so much debated
elsewhere, suggests that they had early evidence on this point. 9. Clement's testimony about
St. Luke convinces me that Apollos had no claim to it, but had testified to the Alexandrians that
the Apostle was the author, and St. Luke his inspired amanuensis, by whom the words were not
servilely taken down, but reported in idioms of his own : whether out of St. Paul's " Hebrew "
or not, is another question. 10. Apollos disappears from history about a.d. 64, o?2 his way hotne-
ward^^ bearing the Epistle to Titus, and (who can doubt ?) a copy of that to the Hebrews, written
the previous year. All these facts agree with my conjectures that Apollos closed his labours in
his native city.

' Matt. xiii. 34; Mark iv. 33.

2 See vol. ii. p. 342, Elucidation II., this series. Note also, in the same volume, what is said, pp. 166-167.

3 Lewin, St. Paul, vol. ii. p. 340.


ALEXANDER.


[TRANSLATED BY THE REV. JAMES B. H. HAWKINS, M.A., OXON.]


INTRODUCTORY NOTICE

TO

ALEXANDER. BISHOP OF LYCOPOLIS.'


[a.d. 301.] To the following account, translated from Galland, I prefix only the general date
of Alexander's episcopate. He was succeeded in the bishopric of Lycopolis by the turbulent
Meletius, of whose schism we need not say anything here. But his early relations with the heresy
of Manes, and his subsequent orthodoxy (in all which he was a foreshadowing of Augustine),
render his treatise on the Manichsean opinions especially valuable.

CoMBEFis conjectured that Alexander was called AvkottoXiVt/s, as having been born at Lycus,
a city of the Thebaid, and so by race an Egyptian, and to his opinion both Cave and Fabricius
are inclined. But this conjecture is plai»ly uncertain, if we are to trust Photius, in his Epitome
De Manichizis, which Montfaucon has edited.^ For in this work Photius, whilst speaking of the
authors who wrote against those heretics, makes mention also of Alexander as bishop of the city
of Lycus, ore 7-^5 ttoAco); Atjkwj/ 'AA.efav8po§ rous dp^tepariKOws vofxovi eyKe^etptcrynevo?.^ So that it
is no easy matter to state whether our author was called AukottoXitt/?, because he was born either
at Lycopolis in the Thebaid, or at another Lycopolis in Lower Egypt, which Stephanus places
close to the sea in the Sebennytic nome, or whether he was not rather called Au/coTroAtrr;?, as
having held the bishopric of Lycopolis. The unwonted manner of speaking employed by Photius
need not delay the attention of any one, when he makes Alexander to have been Archbishop of
Lycopolis ; for it is established that the Bishop of Alexandria alone was Archbishop and Patriarch
of the whole Egyptian diocese. Epiphanius ■* certainly says, when speaking of Meletius,5 the
schismatical Bishop of Lycopolis, e8o«ei Se 6 MeXT^rtos raiv Kara tt;v KlyvivTov -rrporjKOiv, koX Sevre-
peuwv T(3 IleTpa) tw t^s AAe^avSpeta? Kara TrjV ap)(ie.Tn(TKOTrr]v. And to the same purpose he says
elsewhere, MeAr^rtos, 6 T17S P^Llyv-n-rov airo ©j^^aiSos Sokwv etvai Koi avros d/>;(t€7rtcr/co7ros. But however

these matters are understood, it is admitted that Alexander came just before Meletius in the See
of Lycopolis, and we know that he occupied the episcopal chair of that city in the beginning of
the fourth century, in which order Le Quien places him among the Lycopolitan prelates, on the
authority of Photius.

' Translated from Gallandi, Vei. Pair. Biblioth. The reverend translator is styled in the Edinburgh edition, " Curate of Ilminster,
Somerset."

- Cf. Combef., Auctar. Noviss., part ii. p. 2; Cav., Dissert, de. Script. EccL, incert. aetat. p. 2; Fabricius, Bill. Gr., tom. v.
p. 287; Montfaucon, Bibl. CoisL, p. 349, seqg.

3 Photius, Epist. de Manich., Bibliotheca Coisliniatia, p. 354.

* Epiph., Heer., Ixviii. n. i, Ixix. n. 2; Le Quien, Oriens Christiamts, tom. ii. p. 597.

5 Meletius of Lycopolis, a schismatical bishop of the third and fourth centuries. Athanasius tells us that Meletius, who was Bishop
of Lycopolis in Upper Egypt at the time of the persecution under Diocletian and his successors, yielded to fear and sacrificed to idols: and
being subsequently deposed, on this and other charges, in a Synod over which Peter, Bishop of Alexandria, presided, determined to separate
from the Church, and to constitute with his followers a separate community. Epiphanius, on the other hand, relates that both Peter and
Meletius, being in confinement for the faith, differed concerning the treatment to be used toward those who, after renouncing their Christian
profession, became penitent, and wished to be restored to the communion of the Church. The Meletians afterwards co-operated with the
Arians in their hostility to Athanasius. — See Art. Meletius, in Smith's Biograph. Diet. — Tr.

239


240 INTRODUCTORY NOTICE.

In the time of Constantine, the Eastern and Western Empire were each divided into seven
districts, called dioceses,' which comprised about one hundred and eighteen provinces;^ each
province contained several cities, each of which had a district ^ attached to it. The ecclesiastical
rulers of the dioceses were called patriarchs, exarchs, or archbishops, of whom there were four-
teen ; the rulers of the provinces were styled metropolitans, i.e., governors of the /AiyrpoTroAis or
mother city, and those of each city and its districts were called bishops. So that the division
which we now call a diocese, was in ancient times a union of dioceses, and a parish was a com-
bination of modern parishes. ■♦

But however it be, whether Alexander was called A^'kottoAiVt^s from his birthplace, or from his
episcopal See, this is certain and acknowledged, that he of good right claims for himself a place
among ecclesiastical writers, for he has given us an elaborate treatise against the Manichsean
tenets ; and he is therefore styled by Allatius auctor eruditissimits et ^iko(jo^iKWTa.To<i, and his
work libellus aureus. Allatius wrote out and brought to light two passages from it, while as yet
it was lying hid in the libraries. From the inscription of the work, we learn that Alexander was
first a pagan ; and afterwards, having given up the religion of the Greeks, became an adherent of
the Manichaean doctrines, which he says that he learnt from those who were on terms of familiar
intercourse with the heresiarch, aTro rwv yi/wpt^wv toG dvSpos ; ^ so that he would seem to be not
far wrong in his conjecture who would place our author at no very distant date from the times
of Manes himself. From the errors of this sect he was divinely reclaimed, and, taking refuge in
the Church, he exposed the scandals attaching to the heresiarch, and solidly refuted his unwhole-
some dogmas. From having been an adherent of the sect himself, he has given us more informa-
tion concerning their tenets than it was in the power of others to give, and on that account his
treatise seems to be held in much estimation.^

3 napoiKia,

* [More simply, the Church's system naturally kept to the lines of the civil divisions. A dioscese was, in fact, a patriarchate ; a
province was presided over by a metropolitan ; a parish was what we call a diocese. Before Constanline's time these arrangements
existed for convenience, but were not invested with worldly consequence. Neale adopts this twofold spelling {diceccse and diocese) in his
Alexandra, vol. i. p. xiv.

5 Cf. Alex., De Manich. placit., cap. 2.

'' This treatise of Alexander was first published by Combefis, with a Latin version, in the Auciarium novissimum, Bibl. S. S.
Pairum, Ps. ii. p. 3. It is published also by Gallandi, Bibl. Patrum, vol. iv. p. 73.


OF THE MANICH^ANS.^


CHAP. I. THE EXCELLENXE OF THE CHRISTIAN

PHILOSOPHY ; THE ORIGIN OF HERESIES AMONGST
CHRISTMNS.

The philosophy of the Christians is termed
simple. But it bestows very great attention to
the formation of manners, enigmatically insinu-
ating words of more certain truth respecting
God ; the principal of which, so far as any
earnest serious purpose in those matters is con-
cerned, all will have received when they assume
an efficient cause, very noble and very ancient,
as the originator of all things that have existence.
For Christians leaving to ethical students matters
more toilsome and difficult, as, for instance, what
is virtue, moral and intellectual ; and to those
who employ their time in forming hypotheses
respecting morals, and the passions and affec-
tions, without marking out any element by which
each virtue is to be attained, and heaping up, as
it were, at random precepts less subtle — the
common people, hearing these, even as we learn
by experience, make great progress in modesty,
and a character of piety is imprinted on their
manners, quickening the moral disposition which
from such usages is formed, and leading them
by degrees to the desire of what is honourable
and good.2

But this being divided into many questions by
the number of those who come after, there arise
many, just as is the case with those who are
devoted to dialectics,^ some more skilful than
others, and, so to speak, more sagacious in han-
dling nice and subtle cpiestions ; so that now
they come forward as parents and originators of
sects and heresies. And by these the formation
of morals is hindered and rendered obscure ;
for those do not attain unto certain verity of
discourse who wish to become the heads of the
sects, and the common people is to a greater
degree excited to strife and contention. And


' A treatise on their tenets by Alexander of Lycopolis, who first
turned from paganism to the Manichaean opinions.

^ [Note the />-<Tr//crt/ character of Christian ethics, which he so
justly contrasts with the ethical philosophy of the heathen. This has
beeii finely pointed out by the truly illustrious William Wilberforce
m h\s, Practical View, cap. ii. (Latin note), p. 25, ed. London, 1815.]

^ iv -015 epiCTTLfcoi^. The philosophers of the Megarean school,
who were devoted to dialectics, were nicknamed oi 'EptcrTi/coi. See
Oiog. Laertius.


there being no rule nor law by which a solution
may be obtained of the things which are called
in question, but, as in other matters, this ambi-
tious rivalry running out into excess, there is
nothing to which it does not cause damage and
injury.

CHAP. II. THE AGE OF ?iIANICH^US, OR -iM.^NES ;

HIS FIRST DISCIPLES ; THE TWO PRINCIPLES ;
1MANICH.BAN M.\TTER.

So in these matters also, whilst in novelty of
opinion each endeavours to show himself first
and superior, they brought this philosophy, which
is simple, almost to a nullity. Such was he whom
they call Manichaeus,-^ a Persian by race, my in-
structor in whose doctrine was one Papus by
name, and after him Thomas, and some others
followed them. They say that the man lived
when Valerian was emperor, and that he served
under Sapor, the king of the Persians, and having
offended him in some way, was put to death.
Some such report of his character and reputation
has come to me from those who were intimately
acquainted with him. He laid down two prin-
ciples, God and Matter. God he called good,
and matter he affirmed to be evil. But God
excelled more in good than matter in evil. But
he calls matter not that which Plato calls it,5
which becomes everything when it has received
quality and figure, whence he terms it all-embra-
cing— the mother and nurse of all things; nor
what Aristotle'' calls an element, with which
form and privation have to do, but something
beside these. For the motion which in individ-
ual things is incomposite, this he calls matter.
On the side of God are ranged powers, like
handmaids, all good ; and likewise, on the side
of matter are ranged other powers, all evil.
Moreover, the bright shining, the light, and the
superior, all these are with God ; while the


* Manes, or Manichseus, lived about ad. 240. He was a Persian
by birth, and this accounts for the Parseeism which can be detected
in his teaching. He was probably ordained a priest, but was after-
wards expelled from the Christian community, and put to death by
the Persian government. His tenets spread considerably, and were
in early youth embraced by St. Augustine. [See Coti/ess., iii. 6.]

S Plato, TimiFiis, 51.

* In substance, but not in words, Aristotle, Met., Book A 4
(1070' b).

241


242


OF THE MANICH^ANS.


obscure, and the darkness, and the inferior are
with matter. God, too, has desires, but they
are all good ; and matter, likewise, which are all
evil.


CHAP. III.


THE F.'^NCIES OF MANICH^US
CERNING MATTER.


CON-


It came to pass on a time that matter con-
ceiv^ed a desire to attain to the superior region ;
and when it had arrived there, it admired the
brightness and the light which was with God.
And, indeed, it wished to seize on for itself the
place of pre-eminence, and to remove God from
His position. God, moreover, deliberated how
to avenge Himself upon matter, but was desti-
tute of the evil necessary to do so, for evil does
not exist in the house and abode of God. He
sent, therefore, the power which we call the soul
into matter, to permeate it entirely. For it will
be the death of matter, when at length hereafter
this power is separated from it. So, therefore, by
the providence of God, the soul was commingled
with matter, an unlike thing with an unlike. Now
by this commingling the soul has contracted evil,
and labours under the same infirmity as matter.
For, just as in a corrupted vessel, the contents
are oftentimes vitiated in quality, so, also the
soul that is in matter suffers some such change,
and is deteriorated from its own nature so as to
participate in the evil of matter. But God had
compassion upon the soul, and sent forth an-
other power, which we call Demiurge ' that is,
the Creator of all things ; and when this power
had arrived, and taken in hand the creation of
the world, it separated from matter as much
power as from the commingling had contracted
no vice and stain, and hence the sun and moon
were first formed ; but that which had contracted
some slight and moderate stain, this became the
stars and the expanse of heaven. Of the matter
from which the sun and the moon was separated,
part was cast entirely out of the world, and is
that fire in which, indeed, there is the power of
burning, although in itself it is dark and void of
light, being closely similar to night. But in the
rest of the elements, both animal and vegetable,
in those the divine power is unequally mingled.
And therefore the world was made, and in it the
sun and moon who preside over the birth and
death of things, by separating the divine virtue
from matter, and transmitting it to God.

CHAP. TV. — THE MOON'S INCREASE AND WANE ;
THE MANICH^AN TRIFLING RESPECTING IT ;
THEIR DREAMS ABOUT MAN AND CHRIST ; THEIR
FOOLISH SYSTEM OF ABSTINENCE.

He ordained this, forsooth, to supply to the
Demiurge,^ or Creator, another power which


^ ^Tjfitovpyb?.


might attract to the splendour of the sun ; and
the thing is manifest, as one might say, even to
a blind person. For the moon in its increase
receives the virtue which is separated from mat-
ter, and during the time of its augmentation
comes forth full of it. But when it is full, in its
wanings, it remits it to the sun, and the sun goes
back to God. And when it has done this, it
waits again to receive from another full moon a
migration of the soul to itself, and receiving this
in the same way, it suffers it to pass on to God.
And this is its work continually, and in every
age. And in the sun some such image is seen,
as is the form of man. And matter ambitiously
strove to make man from itself by mingling to-
gether all its virtue, so that it might have some
portion of soul. But his form contributed much
to man's obtaining a greater share, and one be-
yond all other animals, in the divine virtue. For
he is the image of the divine virtue, but Christ is
the intelligence. Who, when He had at length
come from the superior region, dismissed a very
great part of this virtue to God. And at length
being crucified, in this way He furnished knowl-
edge, and fitted the divine virtue to be crucified
in matter. Because, therefore, it is the Divine
will and decree that matter should perish, they
abstain from those things which have life, and
feed upon vegetables, and everything which is
void of sense. They abstain also from marriage
and the rites of Venus, and the procreation of
children, that virtue may not strike its root
deeper in matter by the succession of race ; nor
do they go abroad, seeking to purify themselves
from the stain which virtue has contracted from
its admixture with matter.

CHAP. V. — THE WORSHIP OF THE SUN AND MOON
UNDER GOD ; SUPPORT SOUGHT FOR THE MAN-
ICH-«ANS IN THE GRECIAN FABLES ; THE AU-
THORITY OF THE SCRIPTURES AND FAITH
DESPISED BY THE MANICH^ANS.

These things are the principal of what they
say and think. And they honour very especially
the sun and moon, not as gods, but as the way
by which it is possible to attain unto God. But
when the divine virtue has been entirely sepa-
rated off, they say that the exterior fire will fall,
and burn up both itself and all else that is left
of matter. Those of them who are better edu-
cated, and not unacquainted with Greek liter-
ature, instruct us from their own resources.
From the ceremonies and mysteries, for in-
stance : by Bacchus, who was cut out from the
womb, is signified that the divine virtue is di-
vided into matter by the Titans, as they say;
from the poet's fable of the battle with the
Giants, is indicated that not even they were
ignorant of the rebellion of matter against God,
I indeed will not deny, that these things are not


OF THE MANICH/EANS.


243


sufficient to lead away the minds of those who
receive words without examining them, since the
deception caused by discourse of this sort has
drawn over to itself some of those who have pur-
sued the study of philosophy with me ; but in
what manner I should approach the thing to
examine into it, I am at a loss indeed. For
their hypotheses do not proceed by any legiti-
mate method, so that one might institute an
examination in accordance with these ; neither
are there any principles of demonstrations, so
that we may see what follows on these ; but
theirs is the rare discovery of those who are
simply said to philosophize. These men, taking
to themselves the Old and New Scrijitures, though
they lay it down that these are divinely inspired,
draw their own opinions from thence ; and then
only think they are refuted, when it happens
that anything not in accordance with these is
said or done by them. And what to those who
philosophize after the manner of the Greeks, as
respects principles of demonstration, are inter-
mediate propositions ; this, with them, is the
voice of the prophets. But here, all these things
being eliminated, and since those matters, which
I before mentioned, are put forward without any
demonstration, and since it is necessary to give
an answer in a rational way, and not to put for-
ward other things more plausible, and which
might prove more enticing, my attempt is rather
troublesome, and on this account the more ardu-
ous, because it is necessary to bring forward
arguments of a varied nature. For the more
accurate arguments will escape the observation
of those who have been convinced beforehand
by these men without proof, if, when it comes
to persuasion, they fall into the same hands.
For they imagine that they proceed from like
sources. There is, therefore, need of much and
great diligence, and truly of God, to be the guide
of our argument.

CHAP. VI. — THE TWO PRINCIPLES OF THE MANI-
CH.EANS ; THEMSELVES CONTROVERTED ; THE
PYTHAGOREAN OPINION RESPECTING FIRST PRIN-
CIPLES ; GOOD AND EVIL CONTRARY ; THE VIC-
TORY ON THE SIDE OF GOOD.

They lay down two principles, God and Mat-
ter. If he (Manes) separates that which comes
into being from that which really exists, the sup-
position is not so faulty in this, that neither does
matter create itself, nor does it admit two con-
trary qualities, in being both active and passive ;
nor, again, are other such theories proposed con-
cerning the creative cause as it is not lawful to
speak of. And yet God does not stand in need
of matter in order to make things, since in His
mind all things substantially exist, so far as the
possibility of their coming into being is con-
cerned. But if, as he seems rather to mean, the


unordered motion of things really existent under
Him is matter, first, then, he unconsciously sets
up another creative cause (and yet an evil one),
nor does he perceive what follows from this,
namely, that if it is necessary that God and mat-
ter should be supposed, some other matter must
be supposed to God ; so that to each of the
creative causes there should be the subject mat-
ter. Therefore, instead of two, he will be shown
to give us four first principles. Wonderful, too,
is the distinction. For if he thinks this to be
God, which is good, and wishes to conceive of
something opposite to Him, why does he not, as
some of the Pythagoreans, set evil over against
Him? It is more tolerable, indeed, that two
principles should be spoken of by them, the
good and the evil, and that these are continually
striving, but the good prevails. For if the evil
were to prevail, all things would perish. Where-
fore matter, by itself, is neither body, nor is it
exactly incorporeal, nor simply any particular
thing ; but it is something indefinite, which, by
the addition of form, comes to be defined ; as,
for instance, fire is a pyramid, air an octahedron,
water an eikosahedron, and earth a cube ; how,
then, is matter the unordered motion of the ele-
ments? By itself, indeed, it does not subsist,
for if it is motion, it is in that which is moved ;
but matter does not seem to be of such a nature,
but rather the first subject, and unorganized, from
which other things proceed. Since, therefore,
matter is unordered motion, was it aUvays con-
joined with that which is moved, or was it ever
separate from it? For, if it were ever by itself,
it would not be in existence ; for there is no
motion without something moved. But if it was
always in that which is moved, then, again, there
will be two principles — that which moves, and
that which is moved. To which of these two,
then, will it be granted that it subsists as a pri-
mary cause along with God ?

CHAP. VII. MOTION VINDICATED FROM THE CHARGE

OF IRREGULARITY ; CIRCULAR ; STRAIGHT ; OF GEN-
ERATION AND CORRUPTION ; OF ALTERATION, AND
QUALITY AFFECTING SENSE.

There is added to the discourse an appendix
quite foreign to it.' For you may reasonably
speak of motion not existing. And what, also,
is the matter of motion ? Is it straight or cir-
cular? Or does it take place by a process of
change, or by a process of generation and cor-
ruption? The circular motion, indeed, is so or-
derly and composite, that it is ascribed to the
order of all created things ; nor does this, in the
Manichsean system, appear worthy to be im-
pugned, in which move the sun and the moon,
whom alone, of the gods, they say that they


TO araKTOV.


244


OF THE MANICH^ANS.


venerate. But as regards that which is straight :
to this, also, there is a bound when it reaches
its own place. For that which is earthly ceases
entirely from motion, as soon as it has touched
the earth. And every animal and vegetable
makes an end of increasing when it has reached
its limit. Therefore the stoppage of these things
would be more properly the death of matter,
than that endless death, which is, as it were,
woven for it by them. But the motion which
arises by a process of generation and corruption
it is impossible to tliink of as in harmony with
this hypothesis, for, according to them, matter is
unbegotten. But if they ascribe to it the motion
of alteration, as they term it, and that by which
we suffer change by a quality affecting the sense.
It IS worth while to consider how they come to
say this. For this seems to be the principal
thing that they assert, since by matter it comes to
pass, as they say, that manners are changed, and
that vice arises in the soul. For in altering, it
will always begin from the beginning ; and, pro-
ceeding onwards, it will reach the middle, and
thus will it attain unto the end. But when it
has reached the end, it will not stand still, at
least if alteration is its essence. But it will again,
by the same route, return to the beginning, and
from thence in like manner to the end ; nor will
it ever cease from doing this. As, for instance,
if a and y suffer alteration, and the middle is /5,
a by being changed, will arrive at /S, and from
thence will go on to y. Again returning from
the extreme y to ft, it will at some time or other
arrive at a ; and this goes on continuously. As
in the change from black, the middle is dun, and
the extreme, white. Again, in the contrary di-
rection, from white to dun, and in like manner
to black ; and again from white the change be-
gins, and goes the same round.

CHAP. VIII. — IS MAITER WICKED? OF GOD AND
MATIER.

Is matter, in respect of alteration, an evil
cause? It is thus proved that it is not more
evil than good. For let the beginning of the
change be from evil. Thus the change is from
this to good through that which is indifferent.
But let the alteration be from good. Again the
beginning goes on through that which is indiffer-
ent. Whether the niotion be to one extreme or
to the other, the method is the same, and this is
abundandy set forth. All motion has to do with
quantity ; but quality is the guide in virtue and
vice. Now we know that these two are generi-
cally distinguished. But are God and matter
alone principles, or does there remain anything
else which is the mean between these two ? For
if there is nothing, these things remain uninter-
mingled one with another. And it is well said,
that if the extremes are intermingled, there is a


necessity for some thing intermediate to connect
them. But if something else exists, it is neces-
sary that that something be either body or incor-
poreal, and thus a third adventitious principle
makes its appearance. First, therefore, if we
suppose God and matter to be both entirely in-
corporeal, so that neither is in the other, except
as the science of grammar is in the soul ; to un-
derstand this of God and matter is absurd. But
if, as in a vacuum, as some say, the vacuum is
surrounded by this universe ; the other, again, is
without substance, for the substance of a vacuum
is nothing. But if as accidents, first, indeed,
this is impossible ; for the thing that wants sub-
stance cannot be in any place ; for substance is,
as it were, the vehicle underlying the accident.
But if both are bodies, it is necessary for both
to be either heavy or light, or middle ; or one
heavy, and another light, or intermediate. If,
then, both are heavy, it is plainly necessary that
these should be the same, both among light
things and those things which are of the middle
sort ; or if they alternate, the one will be alto-
gether separate from the other. For that which
is heavy has one place, and that which is middle
another, and the light another. To one belongs
the superior, to the other the inferior, and to the
third the middle. Now in every spherical figure
the inferior part is the middle ; for from this to
all the higher parts, even to the topmost super-
ficies, the distance is every way equal, and, again,,
all heavy bodies are borne from all sides to it.
Wherefore, also, it occurs to me to laugh when I
hear that matter moving without order, — for this
belongs to it by nature, — came to the region of
God, or to light and brightness, and such-like.
But if one be body, and the other incorporeal,
first, indeed, that which is body is alone capable
of motion And then if they are not inter-
mingled, each is separate from the other accord-
ing to its proper nature. But if one be mixed
up with the other, they will be either mind or
soul or accident. For so only it happens that
things incorporeal are mixed up with bodies.

chap. ix. — the ridiculous fancies of the mani-
chyeans about the motion of maiter towards
god ; god the author of the rebellion of
matter in the manich^an sense j the long-
ing of matter for light and brightness
good ; divine good none the less for being
communicated'.

But in what manner, and from what cause, was
matter brought to the region of God? for to it
by nature belong the lower place and darkness,
as they say ; and the upper region and light are
contrary to its nature. ^Vherefore there is then
attributed to it a supernatural motion ; and some-
thing of the same sort happens to it, as if a man
were to throw a stone or a lump of earth up-


OF THE MANICHyEANS.


245


wards ; in this way, the thing being raised a
httle by the force of the person throwing, when
it has reached the upper regions, falls back again
into the same place. Who, then, hath raised
matter to the uj)per region ? Of itself, indeed,
and from itself, it would not be moved by that
motion which belongs to it. It is necessary,
then, that some force should be applied to it for
it to be borne aloft, as with the stone and the
lump of earth. But they leave nothing else to
it but God. It is manifest, therefore, what fol-
lows from their argument. That God, according
to them, by force and necessity, raised matter
aloft to Himself But if matter be evil, its
desires are altogether evil. Now the desire of
evil is evil, but the desire of good is altogether
good. Since, then, matter has desired brightness
ancl light, its desire is not a bad one ; just as it
is not bad for a man living in vice, afterwards to
come to desire virtue. On the contrary, he is
not guiltless who, being good, comes to desire
what is evil. As if any one should say that God
desires the evils which are attaching to matter.
For the good things of God are not to be so
esteemed as great wealth and large estates, and
a large quantity of gold, a lesser portion of
which remain with the owner, if one effect a
transfer of them to another. But if an image
of these things must be formed in the mind, I
think one would adduce as examples wisdom and
the sciences. As, therefore, neither wisdom suf-
fers diminution nor science, and he who is en-
dowed with these experiences no loss if another
be made partaker of them ; so, in the same way,
it is contrary to reason to think that God grudges
matter the desire of what is good ; if, indeed,
with them we allow that it desires it.

•CHAP. X. — THE MYTHOLOGY RESPECTING THE
GODS ; THE DOGMAS OF THE MANICH^ANS RE-
SEMBLE THIS : THE HOMERIC ALLEGORY OF THE
BATTLE OF THE GODS ; ENVY AND EMULATION
EXISTING IN GOD ACCORDING TO THE MANI-
CILEAN OPINION ; THESE VICES ARE TO BE
FOUND IN NO GOOD MAN, AND ARE TO BE
ACCOUNTED DISGRACEFUL.

Moreover, they far surpass the mythologists in
fables, those, namely, who either make Coelus
suffer mutilation, or idly tell of the plots laid for
Saturn by his son, in order that that son might
attain the sovereignty ; or those again who make
Saturn devour his sons, and to have been cheated
of his purpose by the image of a stone that was
presented to him. For how are these things
which they put forward dissimilar to those?
When they speak openly of the war between
God and matter, and say not these things either
in a mythological sense, as Homer in the Iliad ; '


' Horn , //., XX. 23-54.


when he makes Jupiter to rejoice in the strife
and war of the gods with each other, thus ob-
scurely signifying that the world is formed of
unequal elements, fitted one into another, and
either conquering or submitting to a conqueror.
And this has been* advanced by me, because I
know that people of this sort, when they are at
a loss for demonstration, bring together from all
sides passages from poems, and seek from them
a support for their own opinions. Which would
not be the case with them if they had only read
what they fell in with with some reflection. But
when all evil is banished from the company of
the gods, surely emulation and envy ought es-
pecially to have been got rid of. Yet these men
leave these things with God, when they say that
God formed designs against matter, because it
felt a desire for good. But with which of those
things which God possessed could He have
wished to take vengeance on matter? In truth,
I think it to be more accurate doctrine to say
that God is of a simple nature, than what they
advance. Nor, indeed, as in the other things, is
the enunciation of this fancy easy. For neither
is it possible to demonstrate it simply and with
words merely, but with much instruction and
labour. But we all know this, that anger and
rage, and the desire of revenge upon matter, are
passions in him who is so agitated. And of such
a sort, indeed, as it could never happen to a
good man to be harassed by them, much less
then can it be that they are connected with the
Absolute Good.

CHAP. XI. THE TRANSMITTED VIRTUE OF THE

MANICH^ANS ; THE VIRTUES OF MATTER MIXED
WITH EQUAL OR LESS AMOUNT OF EVIL.

To other things, therefore, our discourse has
come round about again. For, because they
say that God sent virtue into matter, it is worth
our while to consider whether this virtue, so far
as it pertains to good, in respect of God is less,
or whether it is on equal terms with Him. For
if it is less, what is the cause ? For the things
which are with God admit of no fellowship with
matter. But good alone is the characteristic of
God, and evil alone of matter. But if it is on
equal terms with Him, what is the reason that
He, as a king, issues His commands, and it in-
voluntarily undertakes this labour? Moreover,
with regard to matter, it shall be inquired
whether, wath respect to evil, the virtues are alike
or less. For if they are less, they are altogether
of less evil. By fellowship therefore with the
good it is that they become so. For there being
two evils, the less has plainly by its fellowship
with the good attained to be what it is. But
they leave nothing good around matter. Again,
therefore, another question arises. For if some
other virtue, in respect of evil, excels the matter


246


OF THE MANICH^ANS.


which is prevaiHng, it becomes itself the presid-
ing principle. For that which is more evil will
hold the sway in its own dominion.

CHAP. XII. THE DESTRUCTION OF EVIL BY THE

IMMISSION OF VIRTUE REJECTED ; BECAUSE FROM
IT ARISES NO DIMINUTION OF EVIL ; ZENO'S
OPINION DISCARDED, THAT THE WORLD WILL BE
BURNT UP BY FIRE FROM THE SUN.

But that God sent virtue into matter is asserted
without any proof, and it altogether wants prob-
ability. Yet it is right that this should have its
own explanation. The reason of this they assert,
indeed, to be that there might be no more evil,
but that all things should become good. It was ^
necessary for virtue to be intermingled with evil, ^
after the manner of the athletes, who, clasped j
in a firm embrace, overcome their adversaries, in |
order that, by conquering evil, it might make it j
to cease to exist. But I think it far more digni- j
fied and worthy of the excellence of God, at
the first conception of things existent, to have ]
abolished matter. But I think they could not j
allow this, because that something evil is found ,
existing, which they call matter. But it is not j
any the more possible that things should cease j
to be such as they are, in order that one should
admit that some things are changed into that
which is worse. And it is necessary that there
should be some perception of this, because these
present things have in some manner or other
suffered diminution, in order that we might have
better hopes for the future. For well has it been
answered to the opinion of Zeno of Citium, who
thus argued that the world would be destroyed
by fire : " Everything which has anything to burn
will not cease from burning until it has consumed
the whole ; and the sun is a fire, and will it not
burn what it has?" Whence he made out, as
he imagined, that the universe would be de-
stroyed by fire. But to him a facetious fellow is
reported to have said, " But I indeed yesterday,
and the year before, and a long time ago, have
seen, and now in like manner do I see, that no
injury has been experienced by the sun ; and it
is reasonable that this should happen in time
and by degrees, so that we may believe that at
some time or other the whole will be burnt up.
And to the doctrine of Manichseus, although it
rests upon no proof, I think that the same answer
is apposite, namely, that there has been no dim-
inution in the present condition of things, but
what was before in the time of the first man,
when brother killed brother, even now continues
to be ; the same wars, and more diverse desires.
Now it would be reasonable that these things, if
they did not altogether cease, should at least be
diminished, if we are to imagine that they are
at some time to cease. But while the same


things come from them, what is our expectation
of them for the future ?

CHAP. XIII. EVIL BY NO MEANS FOUND IN THE

STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS ; ALL THE EVILS
OF LIFE VAIN IN THE MANICH.EAN OPINION,
WHICH BRING ON THE EXTINCTION OF LIFE ;
THEIR FANCY HAVING BEEN ABOVE EXPLAINED
CONCERNING THE TRANSPORTATION OF SOULS
FROM THE MOON TO THE SUN.

But what things does he call evil? As for
the sun and moon, indeed, there is nothing lack-
ing ; but with respect to the heavens and the
stars, whether he says that there is some such
thing, and what it is, it is right that we should
next in order examine. But irregularity is ac-
cording to them evil, and unordered motion, but
these things are always the same, and in the same
manner ; nor will any one have to blame any of
the planets for venturing to delay at any time in
the zodiac beyond the fixed period ; nor again
any of the fixed stars, as if it did not abide in
the same seat and position, and did not by cir-
cumvolution revolve equally around the world,
moving as it were one step backward in a hun-
! dred years. But on the earth, if he accuses the
i roughness of some spots, or if pilots are offended
at the storms on the sea ; first, indeed, as they
think, these things have a share of good in them.
For should nothing germinate upon earth, all the
animals must presently perish. But this result
will send on much of "the virtue which is mter-
mingled with matter to God, and there will be a
necessity for many moons, to accommodate the
great multitude that suddenly approaches. And
the same language they hold with respect to the
sea. For it is a piece of unlooked-for luck to
perish, in order that those things which perish
may pursue the road which leads most quickly
to God. And the wars which are upon the earth,
and the famines, and everything which tends to
the destruction of life, are held in very great
honour by them. For everything which is the
cause of good is to be had in honour. But these
things are the cause of good, because ot the
destruction which accompanies them, if they
transmit to God the virtue which is separated
from those who perish.

CHAP. XIV. NOXIOUS ANIMALS WORSHIPPED BY

THE EGYPTIANS ; MAN BY ARTS AN EVIL-DOER ;
LUST AND INJUSTICE CORRECTED BY LAWS AND
DISCIPLINE ; CONTINGENT AND NECESSARY THINGS
IN WHICH THERE IS NO STAIN.

And, as it seems, we have been ignorant that
the Egyptians rightly worship the crocodile and
the lion and the wolf, because these animals
being stronger than the others devour their prey,
and entirely destroy it ; the eagle also and the


I


OF THE MANICH^ANS.


247


hawk, because they slaughter the weaker ani-
mals both in the air and upon the earth. But
perhaps also, according to them, man is for this
reason held in especial honour, because most of
all, by his subtle inventions and arts, he is wont
to subdue most of the animals. And lest he
himself should have no portion in this good, he
becomes the food of others. Again, therefore,
those generations are, in their opinion, absurd,
which from a small and common seed produce
what is great ; and it is much more becoming,
as they think, that these should be destroyed by
God, in order that the divine virtue may be
quickly liberated from the troubles incident to
living in this world. But what shall we say with
respect to lust, and injustice, and things of this
sort, Manichaeus will ask. Surely against these
things discipline and law come to the rescue.
Discipline, indeed, using careful forethought that
nothing of this sort may have place amongst
men ; but law inflicting punishment upon any
one who has been caught in the commission of
anything unjust. But, then, why should it be
imputed to the earth as a fault, if the husband-
man has neglected to subdue it? because the
sovereignty of God, which is according to right,
suffers diminution, when some parts of it are
productive of fruits, and others not so ; or when
it has happened that when the winds are sweep-
ing, according to another cause, some derive
benefit therefrom, whilst others against their will
have to sustain injuries ? Surely they must neces-
sarily be ignorant of the character of the things
that are contingent, and of those that are neces-
sary. For they would not else thus account
such things as prodigies.

CHAP. XV. THE LUST AND DESIRE OF SENTIENT

THINGS ; DEMONS ; ANIMALS SENTIENT ; SO ALSO
THE SUN AND THE MOON AND STARS ; THE
PLATONIC DOCTRINE, NOT THE CHRISTIAN.

Whence, then, come pleasure and desire?
For these are the principal evils that they talk
of and hate. Nor does matter appear to be
anything else. That these things, indeed, only
belong to animals which are endowed with sense,
and that nothing else but that which has sense
perceives desire and pleasure, is manifest. For
what perception of pleasure and pain is there in
a plant? What in the earth, water, or air? And
the demons, if indeed they are living beings
endowed with sense, for this reason, perhaps,
are delighted with what has been instituted in
regard to sacrifices, and take it ill when these
are wanting to them ; but nothing of this sort
can be imagined with respect to God. There-
fore those who say, ^' Why are animals affected
by pleasure and pain?" should first make the
complaint, " Why are these animals endowed
with sense, or why do they stand in need of


food?" For if animals were immortal, they
j would have been set free from corruption and
I increase ; such as the sun and moon and stars,
although they are endowed with sense. They are,
however, beyond the power of these, and of such
a complaint. But man, being able to perceive and
to judge, and being potentially wise, — for he has
the power to become so, — when he has received
what is peculiar to himself, treads it under foot.

CHAP. XVI. BECAUSE SOME ARE WISE, NOTHING

PREVENTS OTHERS FROM BEING SO ; VIRTUE IS
TO BE ACQUIRED BY DILIGENCE AND STUDY ;
BY A SOUNDER PHILOSOPHY MEN ARE TO BE
CARRIED ONWARDS TO THE GOOD ; THE COM-
MON STUDY OF VIRTUE HAS BY CHRIST BEEN
OPENED UP TO ALL.

In general, it is worth while to inquire of these
men, " Is it possible for no man to become good,
or is it in the power of any one?" For if no
man is wise, what of Manichaeus himself? I pass
over the fact that he not only calls others good,
but he also says that they are able to make others
such. But if one individual is entirely good,
what prevents all from becoming good.? For
what is possible for one is possible also for all.
And by the means by which one has become vir-
tuous, by the same all may become so, unless they
assert that the larger share of this virtue is inter-
cepted by such. Again, therefore, first, AVhat
necessity is there for labour in submitting to dis-
cipline (for even whilst sleeping we may become
virtuous), or what cause is there for these men
rousing their hearers to hopes of good? For
even though wallowing in the mire with harlots,
they can obtain their proper good. But if dis-
cipline, and better instruction and diligence in
acquiring virtue, make a man to become virtuous,
let all become so, and that oft-repeated phrase
of theirs, the unordered motion of matter, is
made void. But it would be much better for
them to say that wisdom is an instrument given
by God to man, in order that by bringing round
by degrees to good that which arises to them,
from the fact of their being endowed with sense,
out of desire or pleasure, it might remove from
them the absurdities that flow from them. For
thus they themselves who profess to be teachers
of virtue would be objects of emulation for their
purpose, and for their mode of life, and there
would be great hopes that one day evils will
cease, when all men have become wise. And
this it seems to me that Jesus took into consid-
eration ; and in order that husbandmen, carpen-
ters, builders, and other artisans, might not be
driven away from good. He convened a common
council of them altogether, and by simple and
easy conversations He both raised them to a
sense of God, and brought them to desire what
was good.


248


OF THE MANICH^ANS.


CHAP. XVII. THE MANICH.EAN IDEA OF VIRTUE

IN MATTER SCOUTED ; IF ONE VIRTUE HAS BEEN
CREATED IMMATERIAL, THE REST ARE ALSO
IMMATERIAL ; MATERL'iL \^IRTUE AN EXPLODED
NOTION.

Moreover, how do they say, did God send
divine virtue into matter? For if it always was,
and neither is God to be understood as existing
jM-ior to it, nor matter either, then again, accord-
ing to Manichaeus, there are three first principles.
Perhaps also, a little further on, there will appear
to be many more. But if it be adventitious, and
something which has come into existence after-
wards, how is it void of matter? And if they
make it to be a part of God, first, indeed, by
this conception, they assert that God is compos-
ite and corporeal. But this is absurd, and im-
possible. And if He fashioned it, and is without
matter, I wonder that they have not considered,
neither the man himself, nor his disciples, that if
(as the orthodox say, the things that come next
in order subsist while God remains) God created
this virtue of His own free-will, how is it that He
is not the author of all other things that are made
without the necessity of any pre-existent matter?
The consequences, in truth, of this opinion are
evidently absurd ; but what does follow is put
down next in order. Was it, then, the nature of
this virtue to diffuse itself into matter ? If it was
contrary to its nature, in what manner is it inter-
mingled with it? But if this was in accordance
with its nature, it was altogether surely and always
with matter. But if this be so, how is it that
they call matter evil, which, from the beginning,
was intermingled with the divine virtue? In
what manner, too, will it be destroyed, the divine
virtue which was mingled with it at some time
or other seceding to itself? For that it pre-
serves safely what is good, and likely to be pro-
ductive of some other good to those to whom it
is present, is more reasonable than that it should
bring destruction or some other evil upon them.

CHAP. XVIII. DISSOLUTION AND INHERENCE AC-
CORDING TO THE MANICHiEANS ; THIS IS WELL
PUT, AD HOMINEM, WITH RESPECT TO MANES,
WHO IS HIMSELF IN MATTER.

This then is the wise assertion which is made
by them — namely, that as we see that the body
perishes when the soul is separated from it, so
also, when virtue has left matter, that which is
left, which is matter, will be dissolved and per-
ish. First, indeed, they do not perceive that
nothing existent can be destroyed into a non-
existent. For that which is non-existent does
not exist. But when bodies are disintegrated,
and experience a change, a dissolution of them
takes place ; so that a part of them goes to
earth, a part to air, and a part to something else.


Besides, they do not remember that their doc-
trine is, that matter is unordered motion. But
that which moves of itself, and of which motion
is the essence, and not a thing accidentally be-
longing to it — how is it reasonable to say that
when virtue departs, that which was, even before
virtue descended into it, should cease to be?
Nor do they see the difference, that every body
which is devoid of soul is immoveable. For
plants also have a vegetable soul. But motion
itself, and yet unordered motion, they assert to
be the essence of matter. But it were better,
that just as in a lyre which sounds out of tune,
by the addition of harmony, everything is brought
into concord ; so the divine virtue when inter-
mixed with that unordered motion, which, ac-
cording to them, is matter, should add a certain
order to it in the place of its innate disorder,
and should always add it suitably to the divine
time. For I ask, how was it that Manichseus
himself became fitted to treat of these matters,
and when at length did he enunciate them?
For they allow that he himself was an admixture
of matter, and of the virtue received into it.
Whether therefore being so, he said these things
in unordered motion, surely the opinion is faulty ;
or whether he said them by means of the divine
virtue, the dogma is dubious and uncertain ; for
on the one side, that of the divine virtue, he
participates in the truth ; whilst on the side of
unordered motion,. he is a partaker in the other
part, and changes to falsehood.

CHAP. XIX. THE SECOND VIRTUE OF THE MANI-

CH/EANS BESET WITH THE FORMER, AND WITH
NEW ABSURDITIES J VIRTUE, ACTIVE AND PASSIVE,
THE FASHIONER OF MATTER, AND CONCRETE
WITH IT ; BODIES DIVIDED BY MANICaEUS INTO
THREE PARTS.

But if it had been said that divine virtue both
hath adorned and does adorn matter, it would
have been far more wisely said, and in a manner
more conducing to conciliate faith in the doc-
trine and discourses of Manichaeus. But God
hath sent down another virtue. What has been
already said with respect to the former virtue,
may be equally said with respect to this, and all
the absurdities which follow on the teaching
about their first virtue, the same may be brought
forward in the present case. But another, who
will tolerate ? For why did not God send some
one virtue which could effect everything? If
the human mind is so various towards all things,
so that the same man is endowed with a knowl-
edge of geometry, of astronomy, of the carpen-
ter's art, and the like, is it then impossible for
God to find one such virtue which should be
sufficient for him in all respects, so as not to
stand in need of a first and second? And why


OF THE MANICH^ANS.


has one virtue the force rather of a creator
and another that of the patient and recipient'
so as to be well fitted for admixture with matter'
For I do not again see here the cause of good
order, and of that excess which is contrary to it.
If It was evil, it was not in the house of God
For smce God is the only good, and matter the
only evil, we must necessarily say that the other
things are of a middle nature, and placed as it
were in the middle. But there is found to be a
different framer of those things which are of a
middle nature, when they say that one cause is
creative, and another admixed with matter ? Per-
haps, therefore, it is that primary antecedent
cause which more recent writers speak of in the
book Trepl Twv SLafjiopwv. But when the creative
virtue took in hand the making of the world
then they say that there was separated from mat-
ter that which, even in the admixture, remained
in Its own virtue, and from this the sun and the
moon had their beginning. But that which to a
moderate and slight degree had contracted vice
and evil, this formed the heaven and the con-
stellations. Lastly came the rest encompassed
within these, just as they might happen, which
are admixtures of the divine virtue and of
matter.


249


CHAP. XX. — THE DIVINE VIRTUE IN THE VIEW OF
THE SAME MANICH^US CORPOREAL AND DIVISI-
BLE ; THE DIVINE VIRTUE ITSELF MATTER WHICH
BECOMES EVERYTHING; THIS IS NOT FITTING.

I, indeed, besides all these things, wonder
that they do not perceive that they are making
the divme virtue to be corporeal, and dividina
It, as It were, into parts. For why, as in th?
case of matter, is not the divine virtue also passi-
ble and divisible throughout, and from one of
Its parts the sun made, and from another the
moon? For clearly this is what they assert to
belong to the divine virtue ; and this is what we
said was the property of matter, which by itself I
IS nothing, but when it has received form and
qualities, everything is made which is divided
and distinct. If, therefore, as from one subject
the divme virtue, only the sun and the moon
iiave their beginning, and these things are differ-
ent, why was anything else made? But if all
things are made, what follows is manifest, that
divme virtue is matter, and that, too, such as is
made into forms. But if nothing else but the
sun and moon are what was created by the divine
J'lrtue, then what is intermixed with all things is
the sun and moon ; and each of the stars is the
.un and moon, and each individual animal of
:hose who live on land, and of fowls, and of
:reatures amphibious. But this, not even those
vho exhibit juggling tricks would admit, as I
nink, IS evident to every one. '


CHAP XXI. — SOME PORTIONS OF THE VIRTUE HAVE
GOOD IN THEM, OTHERS MORE GOOD; IN THE
SUN AND THE MOON IT IS INCORRUPT, IN OTHER
THINGS DEPRAVED; AN IMPROBABLE OPINION.

But if any one were to apply his mind to what
follows, the road would not appear to be plain
and straightforward, but more arduous even than
hat which has been passed. For they say that
he sun and moon have contracted no stain from
their admixture with matter. And now they can-
not say how other things have become deterio-
rated contrary to their own proper nature. For
If, when It was absolute and by itself, the divine
virtue was so constituted that one portion of it
was good, and another had a greater amount of
goodness in it, according to the old -tale of the
centaurs, who as far as the breast were men, and
m the lower part horses, wh^ch are both good
animals, but the man is the better of the two •
, so also in the divine virtue, it is to be under-
stood that the one portion of it is the better and
the more excellent, and the other will occupy the
second and inferior place. And in the same way
with respect to matter, the one portion possesses'
as It were, an excess of evil ; while others again

^'n u Ti'^' ^'''^ ^^""''^ ^'^^t other the language
will be different.' For it is possible to conceive
tfiat froni the beginning the sun and moon, by a
more skilful and prudent judgment, chose for
themselves the parts of matter that were less evil
for the purposes of admixture, that they might
remain in their own perfection and virtue ; but
in the lapse of time, when the evils lost their
force and became old, they brought out so much
of the excess in the good, while the rest of its
parts fell away, not, indeed, ' without foresight
and yet not with the same foresight, did each
object share according to its quantity in the evil
that was in matter. But since, with respect to
this virtue, nothing of a different kind is asserted
by them but it is to be understood throughout
to be alike and of the same nature, their argu-
ment is improbable ; because in the admixture
part remains pure and incorrupt, while the other
I has contracted some share of evil.

CHAP. XXII.— THE LIGHT OF THE MOON FROM
THE SUN; THE INCONVENIENCE OF THE OPIN-
ION THAT SOULS ARE RECEIVED IN IT" THE
TWO DELUGES OF THE GREEKS.

Now, they say that the sun and the moon hav-
ing by degrees separated the divine virtue from
matter, transmit it to God. But if they had only
to a slight degree frequented the schools of the
astronomers, it would not have happened to
them to fall into these fancies, nor would they


somet™gfs^\'ft1n\"-'|f'°"'"^^^^^^^^


Possibly


250


OF THE MANICHyEANS.


have been ignorant that the moon, which, ac-
cording to the opinion of some, is itself without
hght, receives its light from the sun, and that its
configurations are just in proportion to its dis-
tance from the sun, and that it is then full moon
when it is distant from the sun one hundred and
eighty degrees. It is in conjunction when it is
in the same degree with the sun. Then, is it
not wonderful how it comes to pass that there
should be so many souls, and from such diverse
creatures? For there is the soul of the world
itself, and of the animals, of plants, of nymphs,
and demons, and amongst these are distinguished
by appearance those of fowls, of land animals,
and animals amphibious ; but in the moon one
like body is always seen by us. And what of
the continuity of this body? When the moon
is half-full, it appears a semicircle, and when it
is in its third quarter, the same again. How
then, and with what figure, are they assumed
into the moon ? For if it be light as fire, it is
probable that they would not only ascend as far
as the moon, but even higher, continually ; but
if it be heavy, it would not be possible for them
at all to reach the moon. And what is the rea-
son that that which first arrives at the moon is
not immediately transmitted to the sun, but waits
for the full moon until the rest of tne souls ar-
rive ? When then the moon, from having been
full, decreases, where does the virtue remain dur-
ing that time ? until the moon, which has been
emptied of the former souls, just as a desolated
city, shall receive again a fresh colony. For a
treasure-house should have been marked out in
some part of the earth, or of the clouds, or in
some other place, where the congregated souls
might stand ready for emigration to the moon.
But, again, a second question arises. What then
is the cause that it is not full immediately? or
why does it again wait fifteen days ? Nor is this
less to be wondered at than that which has been
said, that never within the memory of man has
the moon become full after the fifteen days.
Nay, not even in the time of the deluge of Deu-
calion, nor in that of Phoroneus, when all things,
so to speak, which were upon the face of the
earth perished, and it happened that a great
quantity of virtue was separated from matter.
And, besides these things, one must consider the
productiveness of generations, and their barren-
ness, and also the destruction of them ; and since
these things do not happen in order, neither
ought the order of the full moon, nor the times
of the waning moon, to be so carefully ob-
served.

CHAP. XXIII. THE IMAGE OF MATTER IN THE SUN,

AFTER WHICH MAN IS FORMED ; TRIFLING FAN-
CIES ; IT IS A MERE FANCY, TOO, THAT MAN
IS FORMED FROM MATTER ; MAN IS EITHER A


COMPOSITE BEING, OR A SOUL, OR MIND AND
UNDERSTANDING.

Neither is this to be regarded with slight at-
tention. For if the divine virtue which is in
matter be infinite, those things cannot diminish
it which the sun and moon fashion. For that
which remains from that finite thing which has
been assumed is infinite. But if it is finite, it
would be perceived by the senses in intervals
proportionate to the amount of its virtue that
had been subtracted from the world. But all
things remain as they were. Now what under-
standing do these things riot transcend in their
incredibleness, when they assert that man was
created and formed after the image of matter
that is seen in the sun? For images are the
forms of their archetypes. But if they include
man's image in the sun, where is the exemplar
after which his image is formed ? For, indeed,
they are not going to say that man is really man,
or divine virtue ; for this, indeed, they mix up
with matter, and they say that the image is seen
in the sun, which, as they think, was formed
afterwards from the secretion of matter. Neither
can they bring forward the creative cause of all
things, for this they say was sent to preserve
safety to the divine virtue ; so that, in their opin-
ion, this must be altogether ascribed to the sun ;
for this reason, doubtless, that it happens by his
arrival and presence that the sun and moon are
separated from matter.

Moreover, they assert that the image is seen
in the sun ; but they say that matter fashioned
man. In what manner, and by what means?
For it is not possible that this should fashion
him. For besides that, thus according to them,
man is the empty form of an empty form, and
having no real existence, it has not as yet been
possible to conceive how man can be the product
of matter. For the use of reason and sense be-
longs not to that matter which they assume.
Now what, according to them, is man ? Is he
a mixture of soul and body ? Or another thing,
or that which is superior to the entire soul, the
mind? But if he is mind, how can the moref
perfect and the better part be the product of^
that which is worse ; or if he be soul (for this
they say is divine virtue), how can they, when
they have taken away from God the divine virtue, i
subject this to the creating workmanship of mat- J
ter? But if they leave to him body alone, let
them remember again that it is by itself immov-
able, and that they say that the essence of matter
is motion. Neither do they think that anythins
of itself, and its own genius, is attracted to mat-
ter. Nor is it reasonable to lay it down, that
what is composed of these things is the product
of this. To think, indeed, that that which is
fashioned by any one is inferior to its fashioner


OF THE MANICH^ANS.


251


seems to be beyond controversy. For thus the
world is inferior to its Creator or Fashioner, and
the works of art inferior to the artificer. If then
man be the product of matter, he must surely be
inferior to it. Now, men leave nothing inferior
to matter ; and it is not reasonable that the
divine virtue should be commingled with matter,
and with that which is inferior to it. But the
things which they assert out of indulgence, as it
were, and by way of dispensation, these they do
not seem to understand. For what is the reason
of their thinking that matter has bound the image
of God to the substance of man ? Or, why is not
the image sufficient, as in a mirror, that man
should appear? Or, as the sun himself is suf-
ficient for the origination and destruction of all
things that are made, hath he imitated an image
in the work of their creation? With which of
those things which he possessed ? Was it with
the divine virtue which was mingled with it, so
that the divine virtue should have the office of
an instrument in respect of matter? Is it by
unordered motion that he will thus give matter
a form? But all like things, in exquisite and
accurate order, by imitating, attain their end.
For they do not suppose that a house, or a ship,
or any other product of art, is effected by dis-
order ; nor a statue which art has fashioned to
imitate man.

CHAP. XXIV. CHRIST IS MIND, ACCORDING TO

THE MANICHi^ANS ; WHAT IS HE IN THE VIEW
OF THE CHURCH? INCONGRUITY IN THEIR IDEA
OF CHRIST ; THAT HE SUFFERED ONLY IN APPEAR-
ANCE, A DREAIM OF THE MANICH.^ANS ; NOTHING
IS ATTRIBUTED TO THE WORD BY WAY OF FICTION.

Christ, too, they do not acknowledge ; yet
they speak of Christ, but they take some other
element, and giving to the Word, designating
His sacred person, some other signification than
that in which it is rightly received, they say that
He is mind. But if, when they speak of Him as
that which is known, and that which knows, and
wisdom as having the same meaning, they are
found to agree with those things which the
Church doctors say of Him, how comes it then
that they reject all that is called ancient history?
But let us see whether they make Him to be
something adventitious and new, and which has
come on from without, and by accident, as the
opinion of some is. For they who hold this
opinion say, as seems very plausible, that about
the seventh year, when the powers of perception
became distinct, He made His entrance into the
body. But if Christ be mind, as they imagine,
then will He be both Christ and not Christ. For
before that mind and sense entered, He was not.
But if Christ, as they will have it, be mind, then
into Him already existing does the mind make
its entrance, and thus, again, according to their


opinion, will it be mind. Christ, therefore, is
and is not at the same time. But if, according
to the more approved sect of them, mind is all
things which are, since they assume matter to
be not produced, and coeval so to speak with
God, this first mind and matter they hold to be
Christ ; if, indeed, Christ be the mind, which is
all things, and matter is one of those things
which are, and is itself not produced.

They say it was by way of appearance, and in
this manner, that the divine virtue in matter was
affixed to the cross ; and that He Himself did
not undergo this punishment, since it was impos-
sible that He should suffer this ; which assertion
Manichseus himself has taken in hand to teach
in a book written upon the subject, that the
divine virtue was enclosed in matter, and again
departs from it. The mode of this they invent.
That it should be said, indeed, in the doctrine
of the Church, that He gave Himself up for the
remission of sins, obtains credit from the vulgar,
and appears likewise in the Greek histories,
which say that some " surrendered themselves to
death in order to ensure safety to their country-
men." And of this doctrine the Jewish history
has an example, which prepares the son of Abra-
ham as a sacrifice to God.' But to subject
Christ to His passion merely for the sake of dis-
play, betrays great ignorance, for the Word is
God's representative, to teach and inform us of
actual verities.

CHAP. XXV. THE MANICH.^AN ABSTINENCE FROM

LIVING THINGS RIDICULOUS ; THEIR MADNESS IN
ABHORRING MARRIAGE ; THE MYTHOLOGY OF THE
GIANTS J TOO ALLEGORICAL AN EXPOSITION.

They abstain also from living things. If, in-
deed, the reason of their abstinence were other
than it is, it ought not to be too curiously inves-
tigated. But if they do so for this reason, that
the divine virtue is more or less absent or pres-
ent to them, this their meaning is ridiculous.
For if plants be more material, how is it in
accordance with reason to use that which is
inferior for food and sustenance ? or, if there be
more of the divine virtue in them, how are things
of this sort useful as food, when the soul's faculty
of nourishing and making increase is more cor-
poreal? Now in that they abstain from marriage
and the rites of Venus, fearing lest by the suc-
cession of the race the divine virtue should dwell
more in matter, I wonder how in thinking so
they allow of themselves? For if neither the
providence of God suffices, both by generations
and by those things which are always and in the
same manner existent, to separate off the divine
virtue from matter, what can the cunning and
subtlety of Manichaeus effect for that purpose ?

' Gen. xxii. i.


252


ELUCIDATION.


For assuredly by no giant's co-operation does
assistance come to God, in order by the re-
moval of generations to make the retreat of the
divine virtue from matter quick and speedy.
But what the poets say about the giants is mani-
festly a fable. For those who lay it down about
these, bring forward such matters in allegories,
by a species of fable hiding the majesty of their
discourse ; as, for instance, when the Jewish his-
tory relates that angels came down to hold ' in-
tercourse with the daughters of men ; for this
saying signifies that the nutritive powers of the
soul descended from heaven to earth. But the
poets who say that they, when they had emerged
m full armour from the earth, perished immedi-
ately after they stirred up rebellion against the
gods, in order that they might insinuate the frail
and quickly-perishing constitution of the body,
adorn their poetry in this way for the sake of
refreshing the soul by the strangeness of the
occurrence. But these, understanding nothing
of all this, wheresoever they can get hold of a
paralogism from whatsoever quarter it comes,
greedily seize on it as a God-send, and strive
with all their arts to overturn truth by any means.


CHAP. XXVI.


THE MUCH-TALKED-OF FIRE OF


THE MANICH/EANS ; THAT FIRE MATTER ITSELF.

That fire, endowed indeed with the power of
burning, yet possessing no light, which is out-
side the world, in what region has it place?
For if it is in the world, why does the world
hitherto continue safe? For if at some time or
other it is to destroy it, by approaching it, now
also it is conjoined with it. But if it be apart
from it, as it were on high in its own region,
what will hereafter happen to make it descend
upon the world ? Or in what way will it leave
its own place, and by what necessity and vio-
lence ? And what substance of fire can be con-
ceived without fuel, and how can what is moist
serve as fuel to it, unless what is rather physio-
logically said about this does not fall within the
province of our present disquisition? But this

' Gen. vi. 2.


is quite manifest from what has been said. For
the fire existing outside the world is just that
which they call matter, since the sun and the
moon, being the purest of the pure, by their
divine virtue, are separate and distinct from that
fire, no part of them being left in it. This fire
is matter itself, absolutely and J>er se, entirely re-
moved from all admixture with the divine virtue.
Wherefore when the world has been emptied of
all the di\'ine virtue which is opposed to it, and
again a fire of this sort shall be left remaining,
how then shall the fire either destroy anything,
or be consumed by it? For, from that which is
like, I do not see in what w^ay corruption is to
take place. For what matter will become when
the divine virtue has been separated from it,
this it was before that the divine virtue was com-
mingled with it. If indeed matter is to perish
when it is bereft of the divine virtue, why did it
not perish before it came in contact with the
divine virtue, or any creative energy? Was it
in order that inatter might successively perish,
and do this ad infinitum? And what is the use
of this ? For that which had not place from the
first volition, how shall this have place from one
following? or what reason is there for God to
put off things which, not even in the case of a
man, appears to be well ? For as regards those
who deliberate about what is impossible, this is
said to happen to them, that they do not wish
for that which is possible. But if nothing else,
they speak of God transcending substance, and
bring Flim forward as some new material, and
that not such as inteUigent men always think to
be joined with Him, but that which investigation
discovers either to be not existing at all, or to
be the extreme of all things, and which can with
difficulty be conceived of by the human mind.
For this fire, devoid of light, is it of more force
than matter, which is to be left desolate by divine
virtue, or is it of less? And if it is of less, how
will it overcome that which is of more ? but if
it is of more, it will be able to bring it back to
itself, being of the same nature ; yet will it not
destroy it, as neither does the Nile swallow up
the streams that are divided off from it.


ELUCIDATION.

If anything could be more dreary than the Manich?ean heresy itself, it may be questioned
whether it be not the various views that have been entertained concerning our author. I
have often remarked the condensation of valuable information given by Dr. Murdock in his notes
upon Mosheim, but he fails to get in the half that needs to be noted.' He tells us that '' Alex-
ander of Lycopolis flourished probably about a.d. 350." He adds, " Fabricius supposes that he


' Mosheim, E. H., vol, i. p 383, note 5, Murdock's edition, New York, 1844. His references to Lardner in this case do not accord
with my copy.


ELUCIDATION. 253


was first a Pagan and a Manichee, and afterwards a Catholic Christian. Cave is of the same
opinion. Beausobre thinks he was a mere pagan."- Lardner thinks he was a Gentile, but well
acquainted with the Manichees and other Christians,- and that he had some knowledge of the
Old and New Testaments, to which he occasionally refers. He speaks with respect of Christ and
the Christian philosophy, and appears to have been "a learned and candid man." Of an eminent
Christian bishop, all this seems \'ery puzzling ; and I feel it a sort of duty to the youthful student
to give the statements of the learned Lardner in an abridged form, with such references to the
preceding pages as may serve in place of a series of elucidations.

According to this invaluable critic, the learned are not able to agree concerning Alexander.
Some think he was a Christian, others believe that he was a heathen. Fabricius, who places him
in the fourth century, holds to this latter opinion ; ^ all which agrees with our Cave.'* Photius
makes him Archbishop of Nicopolis.5 Tillemont thinks'' he was a pagan philosopher, who wrote
to persuade his friends to prefer "the doctrine of the churches" to that of Manes. Combefis,
his editor,^ thinks him very ancient, because he appears to have learned the principles of this
heresy from the immediate disciples of the heretic. Beausobre,^ the standard authority, is of
like opinion, and Mosheim approves his reasoning.

Nothing in his work, according to Lardner, proves that our author wrote near the beginning
of the fourth century, and he decides upon the middle of that century as his epoch.

Alexander gives a very honourable character to the genuine Christian philosophy, and asserts
its adaptation to the common people, and, indeed, to all sorts of men.' He certainly is not mute
as to Christ. His tribute to the Saviour is, if not affectionate, yet a just award to Him.'° By the
" council of all together," he intends the College of the Apostles," made up of fishermen and publi-
cans and tent-makers, in which he sees a design of the blessed Jesus to meet this class, and, in
short, all classes. It is clear enough that Alexander has some knowledge of Christ, some knowl-
edge of the received doctrine of the churches,'- or orthodox Christians ; and he appears to blame
the Manichees for not receiving the Scripture of the Old Testament. '-

He argues against their absurd opinion that Christ was " Mind ; " '^ also that, though crucified.
He did not suffer : '^ and he affirms '^ that it would be more reasonable to say, agreeably to the
ecclesiastical doctrine, that " He gave Himself for the remission, of sins." He refers to the sacri-
fice of Isaac,'^ and to the story of Cain and Abel ; '^ also to the mysterious subject of the angels and
the daughters of men.'-* Like an Alexandrian theologian, he expounds this, however, against the
literal sense, as an allegory.

My reader will be somewhat amused with the terse summing-up of Lardner : " I am rather
inclined to think he was a Gentile. . . . He was evidently a learned and rational man. His ob-
servations concerning the Christian philosophy deserve particular notice. To me this work of
Alexander appears very curious."

' Histoire des Manicheetis (Lardner's reference), pp. 236-237.

2 Credib., vol. viL p. 574, ed. London, 1829.

3 Lardner's reference is: Bib. G., lib. v. c. i, torn. 5, p. 290.

■* Long extract from Cave iibi szipra. He quotes the Latin of Cave's Diss, on JVriters of Uncertain Date.

5 Lardner's reference is to Photius, Contra Manich., i. cap. 11.

^ Lardner quotes from the Hist, des Manich., art. 16., Memoires, etc., torn. iv.

'' Reference defective. See Lardner, Credib., vol. iii. 269. Here will be found (p. 252) a learned examination of Archelaus, and
what amounts to a treatise on these Manichaeans.

^ For Beausobre's summary of .Alexander's deficiencies, see condensed statement in Lardner, vol. iii. p. 575.

9 Cap. i. p. 241, supra. A beautiful exordium. A recent writer, speakmg of Potamisena and Herais, virgin martyrs, and catechu-
mens of Origen, remarks, that " the number of young women of high character who appreciated the teachings of this great master, many
0/ ■whom were employed as copyists of his works, is creditable to the state of Christian society at that period" (Mahan, Church Hist.,
P" 237). It was to avoid scandal as well as temptation in his relations with these that he fell into his heroic mistake.

'° Cap. xxiv. p. 251, supra. Who can imagine that the author of this chapter is not a Christian? Observe what he says of " the
Word."

" Cap. xvi. p. 247.

'- Cap xxiv. p. 251.

'^ Note the reference to the Old and New Testaments entire, p. 243, supra.
'•♦ Cap. xxv. p. 252, supra.


PETER


[TRANSLATED BY THE REV. JAMES B. H. HAWKINS, M.A.]


INTRODUCTORY NOTICE


PETER. BISHOP OF ALEXANDRIA.


[a.d. 260 ' -300-31 1.] Entering upon the fourth century, we may well pause to reflect upon
what Alexandria has been to the Church of Christ, — the mother of churches, the mother of saints,
maintaining always the intellectual and even the ecclesiastical primacy of Christendom. " Ye are
the light of the world," said the great Enlightener to the Galileans of an obscure and despised
Roman province. But who could have prophesied that Egypt should again be the pharos of the
world, as it was in Moses? Who could have foreseen the " men of Galilee " taking possession of
the Alexandrian Library, and demonstrating the ways Of Providence in creating the Bible of the
Seventy, and in the formation of the Hellenistic Greek, for their ultimate use ? Who could have
imagined the Evangelist Mark and the eloquent Apollos to be the destined instruments for found-
ing the schools of Christendom, and shaping scientific theology? Who would not have looked
for all this in some other way, and preferably in Athens or in Rome ? But who would have ex-
pected the visit of God Incarnate to Nazareth, and not to Alexandria ?

In Peter's day Antioch was coming to be a school under the influence of Malchion's genius
and that of the bishops who withstood Paulus of Samosata. Malchion had taught there in the
" School of Sciences," and learning was once more to be made the handmaid of tme religion.
But Alexandria was still the seat of Christian illumination and the fountain of orthodoxy ; its very
ferment always clarifying its thought, and leaving " wine well refined," and pure from the lees.

To this subject I shall have occasion to refer again in an elucidation subjoined to the works
of Alexander (successor to Peter), in which, for a final view of the great Alexandrian school, I
shall gather up some fragments in brief outline. Here it may be enough to remark, that, until the
definite development of the school of Antioch {circa a.d. 350), I have regarded the whole Orient
as dominated and formed by the brain of the grand metropolis of Egypt and the Pentapolis. I
have considered the great Dionysius as really presiding in the Synod of Antioch, though absent in
the body, and have regarded Malchion as his voice in that council, which we must not forget was
presided over by Firmilian, a pupil of Origen, and a true Alexandrian disciple.

Peter's conflict with Meletius shall be noted in an elucidation. We shall see that the heresy
of Paulus as well as the Meletian schism are but chapters in one prolonged history, of which the
outcrop was Arianism. Now, as to Alexandria we owe the intrepid defenders of truth in all these
conflicts, we must not forget that they are to be judged by the product of their united testimony,
and not by their occasional individual isms and infirmities of mind and speech whfle they were
creating the theological dialect of Christendom and the formulas of orthodoxy.

Peter was able to maintain his canonical authority against the mischievous rebellion of Mele-
tius ; and the history of this schism is forcibly illustrative of those ap-)(ala. W-q which the Nicene
Synod recognised, confirming the primacy of Alexandria, and striving to suppress Meletianism by

I This first date is conjectural.

257


258 INTRODUCTORY NOTICE.

firm but moderate measures based upon the primitive maxims. Peter left a pure and holy mem-
ory to the Church, and sealed his testimony in martyrdom.

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTORY NOTICE.'

EuSEBius alone, of the more ancient writers, speaks in terms of the highest praise of Peter,
Bishop of Alexandria. He was, says he, a divine bishop, both for the sanctity of his life, and also
for his dihgent study and knowledge of the Holy Scriptures ; ^ and in another place he styles him
*' that excellent doctor of the Christian religion," who, indeed, during the whole period of his
episcopate, which he held for twelve years, obtained for himself the highest renown. He obtained
the bishopric of Alexandria next in succession to Theonas. He governed that church about three
years before the persecution broke out : ^ the rest of his time he spent in the exercise of a closer
discipline over himself, yet did he not in the meanwhile neglect to provide for the common interests
of the Church. In the ninth year of the persecution he was beheaded, and gained the crown of
martyrdom. So far we have the account of Eusebius, whom Dodwell ^ proves to have accurately
distributed the years of Peter's episcopate. After Peter had spent twelve years as bishop, and in
the ninth year of the persecution which broke out under Maximin, he was beheaded ; so that his
martyrdom falls in the year of our Lord 311 — as the Egyptians reckon on the 29th day of the
month Athyr, which answers to our 25 th of November, as Lequien,5 after Renaudot,^ has observed.

St. Peter wrote in the fourth year of the persecution, a.d. 306, some Canons Penitential with
reference to those who had lapsed. They are to be met with in every collection of Canons. In
the Pandecta Canonum of Bishojo Beveridge,^ they are accompanied by the notes of Joannes
Zonaras and Theodorus Balsamon. Upon these Penitential Canons, however, Tillemont ^ should
be consulted. Moreover, according to Renaudot,^ Echmimensis, Ebnapalus, Abulfaragius, and
other Oriental Christians of every sect, make use of the testimony of these Canons ; and in the
anonymous collections of them called Responsa, some fragments of other works of Peter are extant.
Some of these are praised by the Jacobites, in the work which they call Fides patrum. In
another work, entitled Unio pretiosus, occurs a homily of Peter on the baptism of Christ.

The fragments of the other writings of this holy martyr, which have been preserved by the
Greeks, are here appended to the Penitential Canons. For instance : (i) An extract from his
book De Dei kite, which is extant in the Acta Conciliorum Ephesini et Chalcedonejisis ; (2)
Another fragment from the homily De Adventu Salvatoris, cited by Leontius Byzantinus in his
first book against Nestorius and Eutyches ; (3) An epistle of the same prelate to the Alexandrine
Church recently published, together with some other old ecclesiastical monuments by Scipio
Maffei.'° Peter is said to have written this epistle after one addressed to Meletius, Bishop of
Lycopolis. In it, after interdicting the Alexandrians from commiKiion with Meletius, he says that
he will himself come in company with some wise doctors, and will examine into his tenets ; allud-
ing, most probably, to the synod held afterwards at Alexandria, in which Meletius was deposed
from his office. Athanasius says," respecting this synod, " Peter, who was amongst us as bishop
betore the persecution, and who died a martyr in the persecution, deposed in common council of
the bishops, Meletius, an Egyptian bishop, who had been convicted of many crimes." But with

' [After Gallandi, by the translator, the Rev. James B. H. Hawkins, M.A.]

2 Qixov enLo'KOTTMi' xpriixa, ^iov re kol apeTrj^ tvcxa Ka'i T^s T(o>' iepiof \6y<i>v <xvva<TK^<Tew;. Eusebius, Hist. Eccles., lib. ix. cap. 6;
lib. viii. cap. 13; lib. vii. cap. 32, towards the end.

3 Trpo xoO 6ttu-y)U,o{/ jpifjiv ou5' oAot? rjyqadfji€vo<; Tr}<; E«>cA7j(rta9.
* Dodwell, Dissert Sin^. ad. Pears., cap. 6, sec. 21, p. 74.

5 Lequien, Orieiis Christ, torn. ii. p. 397.
^ Renaudot, Hist. Patriarch. Alex., p. 60.

7 ^uvoSucbi/. Vol. ii. p. 8, fol., 0.\on., 1672.

8 Tillemont, Mem., torn. v. p. 430.

9 Renaudot, I.e., p. 61, seqq.

'° Maffei, Osservazione Letterarie, torn, iii p. 17.

" Athanasius, Apol. contra Arian, sue. 39, torn. i. p. 177.


INTRODUCTORY NOTICE. 259

respect to the time in which the mournful Meletian schism commenced, Maffei ' defends the opin-
ions of Baronius/ who connects it with the year a.d. 306, against Pagius and Montfaucon, both
from this epistle of Petrus Alexandrinus, and also from another of the four bishops, of which Peter
makes mention in his own; (4) A passage from the Sermo in Sanctum Pascha, or from some
other work of Peter's on the same subject, is given in the Diatriba de Paschate, prefixed to the
Chronicon Akxandrinutn S. Paschale, and published separately in the Uranologion of Petavius,
fol. Paris, 1630, p. 396.


• Maffei, I.e., p. 24.

2 Baronius, /4i^ /J«««/«, 306, sec. 44. [Elucidation I.]


THE GENUINE ACTS OF PETER.'


Were all the limbs of my body to be turned
into tongues, and all the joints of my limbs to
utter articulate sounds, it would noways be suffi-
cient to express who, how great and how good,
was our most blessed Father Peter, Archbishop
of Alexandria. Especially incongruous do I con-
sider it to commit to paper what perils he under-
went by tyrants, what conflicts he endured with
Gentiles and heretics, lest I should seem to
make these the subjects of my panegyric rather
than that passion to which he manfully sub-
mitted to make safe the people of God. Never-
theless, because the office of the narrator must
fail in narrating his inmost conversation and won-
derful deeds, and language is noways sufficient
for the task, I have considered it convenient to
describe only those exploits of his by which he
is known to have attained to the pontificate,-
and after Arius had been cut off from the unity
of the Church,3 to have been crowned with the
martyr's laurel. Yet this do I consider to be a
glorious end, and a spectacle of a magnificent
contest, sufficient for those who do not doubt of
a truthful narration, which is unstained by false-
hood. In commencing, therefore, our account
of the episcopate of this most holy man, let us
call to our aid his own language, in order that
we may make it co-operate with our own style.

Alexandria is a city of exceeding magnitude,
which holds the first place not only among the
Egyptians, but the Thebans also and the Libyans,
who are at no great distance from Egypt.^ A


' As interpreted by Anastasius Bibliothecarius. Apud Maium,
SpioiUgii, toni. iii. p. d-jx. I'hat Anasiasius Bibliothecarius trans-
lated from the Greek the Passion of St. Peter, Bishop of Alexandria,
is affirmed by Anastasius himself in his prologue. Ad Pnssionetit
Martyrum, mcccclxxx., published by Mabillon in the Museum
t-talicum, torn. i. part ii. p. 80: " Post iranslatam a me ad petitionem
sanctitatis tuae (he is addressing Peter, Bishop of Gavinum), pas-
sionem praecipui doctoris et martyris, Petri Alexandrina; urbis epis-
copi." And then an anonymous biographer of John viii , in Mura-
iori R. I. S., torn. iii. p. i. p. 269, confirms the same. Anastasius,
the librarian of the Roman church, translated from the Greek into
Latin the Passion of St. Peter, Archbishop of Alexandria. But it is
a matter of conjecture which of the different Passions of St. Peter
Anast.isius translated. Of the Acts of St. Peter, there are three dif-
ferent records: — (i) Ada 5'/«c^r^, which, according to Baronius,
are the most genuine. (2) A shorter Latin version, by Surius.
(3) A Greek version, by Combefis.

^ [Significant to find this term applied from Western thought to
this great bishopric by such a translator as Anastasius.]

_ 3 j^See p. 257, supra, and p. 263, infra, note 2. Not his final
rejection after the Nicene Council.]

* [He is here speaking of its civil importance only.]


cycle of two hundred and eighty-five years from
the incarnation of our Lord and Saviour Jesus
Christ had rolled round, when the venerable
Theonas, the bishop of this city, by an ethereal
flight, mounted upwards to the celestial kingdoms.
To him Peter, succeeding at the helm of the
Church, was by all the clergy and the whole
Christian community appointed bishop, the six-
teenth in order from Mark the Evangelist, who
was also archbishop of the city. He in truth,
like Phosphor rising among the stars, shining
forth with the radiance of his sacred virtues,
most magnificently governed the citadel of the
faith. Inferior to none who had gone before
him in his knowledge of Holy Scripture, he nobly
applied himself to the advantage and instruction
of the Church ; being of singular prudence, and
in all things perfect, a true priest and victim of
God, he watchfully laboured night and day in
every sacerdotal care.

But because virtue is the marl^ of the zealot,
" it is the tops of the mountains that are struck
by lightning," s he hence endured multifarious
conflicts with rivals. Why need I say more?
He lived in persecution almost the whole of his
life. Meanwhile he ordained fifty-five bishops.
Meletius lastly — in mind and name most black
^was made the schismatical bishop of the city
of Lycopolis, doing many things against the rule
of the canons, and surpassing even the bloody
soldiery in cruelty who, at the time of the Lord's
Passion, feared to rend His coat ; he was so hur-
ried on by giving the rein to his madness, that,
rending asunder the Catholic Church not only
in the cities of Egypt, but even in its villages,
he ordained bishops of his own party, nor cared
he aught for Peter, nor for Christ, who was in
the person of Peter. To him Arius, who was
yet a laic, and not marked with the clerical ton-
sure,^ adhered, and was to him and his family
most dear ; and not without reason : every ani-


S Hor., Od., ii. 10, 11.

* [Anastasius, more Romano, uses the Middle-Age terminol-
ogy as if it had existed in the Ante-Nicene period. So all the suc-
cessors of the apostles at Rome, including St. Peter himself, are
transformed into " Popes." We owe this abuse to the " False Decre-
tals," of which we treat hereafter. But why is exploded fiction and
demonstrated untruth perpetuated by enlightened historians? See
vol. V. p. 155.]

261


262


THE genuinp: acts of peter.


mal, as says the Scripture, loves its like. But
upon this coming to his knowledge, the man of
God being affected with grief, said that this
persecution was worse than the former. And
although he was in hiding, yet, so far as his
strength permitted, directing everywhere his ex-
hortations, and preaching up the unity of the
Church, he strengthened men to withstand the
ignorance and nefarious temerity of Meletius.
Whence it came to pass that not a few, being
influenced by his salutary admonitions, departed
from the Meletian impiety.

Nearly about the same time Arius, armed with
a viper's craft, as if deserting the party of Mele-
tius, fled for refuge to Peter, who at the request
of the bishops raised him to the honours of the
diaconate, being ignorant of his exceeding hypoc-
risy. For he was even as a snake suffused with
deadly poison. Yet neither can the imposition
of hands upon this false one be imputed as a
crime to this holy man, as the simulated magic
arts of Simon is not ascribed to Philip. Mean-
while, the detestable wickedness of the Meletians
increased beyond measure ; and the blessed
Peter, fearing lest the plague of heresy should
spread over the whole flock committed to his
care, and knowing that there is no fellowship
with light and darkness, and no concord betwixt
Christ and Belial, by letter separated the Mele-
tians from the communion of the Church. And
because an evil disposition cannot long be con-
cealed, upon that instant the wicked Arius, when
he saw his aiders and abettors cast down from
the dignity of the Church, gave way to sadness
and lamentation. This did not escape the notice
of this holy man. For when his hypocrisy was
laid bare, immediately using the evangelical
sword, " If thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out
and cast it from thee," ' and cutting off Arius
from the body of the Church as a putrid limb,
he expelled and banished him from the com-
munion of the faithful.

This done, the storm of persecution suddenly
abating, peace, although for a short time, smiled.
Then this most choice priest of the Lord shone
manifestly before the people, and the faithful
began to run in crowds to keep the memory of
the martyrs, and to assemble in congregations to
the praise of Christ. Whom this priest of the
divine law quickened with his holy eloquence,
and so roused and strengthened that the multi-
tude of believers increased continually in the
Church. But the old enemy of salvation of man
did not long remain quiet and look on these
things with favouring eyes. For on a sudden the
storm-cloud of paganism gave forth its hostile
thunder, and like a winter shower struck against
the serenity of the Church, and chased it away


in flight. But that this may be understood more
clearly, we must necessarily turn back to the
atrocities of Diocletian, that impious one, and
rebel against God, and also to Maximian Gale-
rius, who at that time, with his son Maximin,
harassed the regions of the East with his tyran-
nical sway.

For in the time of this man the fire of Chris-
tian persecution so raged, that not only in one
region of the universe, but even throughout the
whole world, both by land and by sea, the storm
of impiety gave forth its thunder. The imperial
edicts and most cruel decrees running hither
and thither, the worshippers of Christ were put
to death now openly, and now by clandestine
snares ; no day, no night, passed off free from the
effusion of Christian blood. Nor was the type
of slaughter of one kind alone ; some were slain
with diverse and most bitter tortures ; some again,
that they might want the humanity of kinsmen,
and burial in their own country, were transported
to other cHmes, and by certain new machinations
of punishment, and as yet to the age unknown,
were driven to the goal of martyrdom. Oh, the
horrible wickedness ! So great was their impiety
that they even upturned from their foundations
the sanctuaries of divine worship, and burned
the sacred books in the fire. Diocletian of exe-
crable memory having died, Constantinus Major
was elected to administer the kingdom, and in
the western parts began to hold the reins of
government.

In these days information was brought to Maxi-
min about the aforesaid archbishop,^ that he was
a leader and holding chief place among the
Christians ; and he, inflamed with his accustomed
iniquity, on the instant ordered Peter to be ap-
prehended and cast into prison. For which pur-
pose he despatched to Alexandria five tribunes,
accompanied with their bands of soldiers, who,
coming thither as they had been commanded,
suddenly seized the priest of Christ and com-
mitted him to the custody of a prison. Won-
derful was the devotion of the faithful ! AVhen
it was known that this holy man was shut up in
the dungeon of the prison, an incredibly large
number ran together, principally a band of monks
and of virgins, and with no material arms, but
with rivers of tears and the affection of pious
minds, surrounded the prison's circuit. ^ And as
good sons towards a good father, nay, rather as
the Christian members of a most Christian head,
adhered to him with all their bowels of com-
passion, and were to him as wafls, observing that


2 [PostNicene terminology, condemned even by the Gallicans,
as, e.g., Dupin. Alexandria, founded by St. Mark, wa.s virtually an
Apostolic See, though commonly called the Evangelic See.]

3 Thus watched the faithful at Milan around Ambrose, their bishop,
agamst whom the wrath of the Arian Empress Justina was directed,
according to the testimony of Augustine, who was an eye-witness.
Cf. Confess., lib. IX. cap. 7.


THE GENUINE ACTS OF PETER.


26'


no pagan might get an opportunity of access to
him. One indeed was the vow of all, one their
voice, and one their compassion and resolve to
die rather than see any evil happen to this holy
man. Now while the man of God was being
kept for a few days in the same stocks, with his
body thrust back, the tribunes made a suggestion
to the king concerning him, but he, after his
ferocious manner, gave his sentence for capitally
punishing the most blessed patriarch. And when
this got to the ears of the Christians, they all
with one mind began to guard the approaches
to the prison with groaning and lamentation, and
persistently prevented any Gentile from obtain-
ing access to him. And when the tribunes could
by no means approach him to put him to death,
they held a council, and determined that the I
soldiers should with drawn swords break in upon j
the crowd of people, and so draw him forth to I
behead him ; and if any one opposed, he should
be put to death.

Arius, in the meanwhile, having as yet been
endowed only with the dignity of a Levite,' and
fearing lest, after the death of so great a father,
he should noways be able to get reconciled to
the Church, came to those who held the chief
place amongst the clergy, and, hypocrite that he
was, by his sorrowful entreaties and plausible
discourse, endeavoured to persuade the holy
archbishop to extend to him his compassion,
and to release him from the ban of excommuni-
cation. But what is more deceptive than a
feigned heart? What more simple than a holy
composure ? There was no delay ; those who
had been requested went in to the priest of
Christ, and, after the customary oration, pros-
trating themselves on the ground, and with
groans and tears kissing his sacred hands, im-
plored him, saying : "Thee, indeed, most blessed
father, for the excellence of thy faith, the Lord
hath called to receive the martyr's crown, which
we noways doubt does quickly await thee.
Therefore do we think it right that, with thy
accustomed piety, thou shouldest pardon x'^rius,
and extend thy indulgence to his lamentations."

Upon hearing this the man of God, moved
with indignation, put them aside, and, raising
his hands to heaven, exclaimed : " Do ye dare
to supplicate me on behalf of Arius? Arius,
both here and in the future world, will always
remain banished and separate from the glory of
the Son of God, Jesus Christ our Lord." ^ He
thus protesting, all who were present, being
struck with terror, like men dumb, kept silence.

' [i.e., deacon; Isa. Ixvi. 21. So Clement of Rome, cap. xl. p.
14, vol. i., this series.]

2 The Acta Combefisiana add, " quemadmodum ille Dei Filium
a paterna gloria et substantia sequestravit," even as he has separated
the Son of God from the glory and substance of His Father. But
Arius had not as yet laid bare his heresy, but had been excluded from
the Church for joining in the Melelian schism, and a suspicious course
of action.


Moreover they suspected that he, not without
some divine notification,^ gave forth such a sen-
tence against Arius. But when the merciful
father beheld them silent and sad from com-
punction of heart, he would not persist in aus-
terity, or leave them, as if in contempt, without
satisfaction ; but taking Achillas and Alexander,
who amongst the priests appeared to be the
elders and the most holy, having one of them at
his right hand, and the other on his left, he
separated them a little from the rest, and at the
end of his discourse said to them : " Do not,
my brethren, take me for a man inhuman and
stern ; for indeed I too am living under the law
of sin ; but believe my words. The hidden
treachery of Arius surpasses all iniquity and
impiety, and not asserting this of mine own self,
have I sanctioned his excommunication. For
in this night, whilst I was solemnly pouring forth
my prayers to God, there stood by me a boy of
about twelve years, the brightness of whose face
I could not endure, for this whole cell in which
we stand was radiant with a great light. He
was clothed with a linen tunic '> divided into two
parts, from the neck to the feet, and holding in
his two hands the rents of the tunic, he applied
them to his breast to cover his nudity. At this
vision I was stupefied with astonishment. And
when boldness of speech was given to me, I ex-
claimed : Lord, who hath rent thy tunic ? Then
said he, Arius hath rent it, and by all means
beware of receiving him into communion ; be-
hold, to-morrow they will come to entreat you
for him. See, therefore, that thou be not per-
suaded to acquiesce : nay, rather lay thy com-
mands upon Achillas and Alexander the priests,
who after thy translation will rule my Church,
not by any means to receive him. Thou shalt
very quickly fulfil the lot of the martyr. Now
there was no other cause of this vision. So now
I have satisfied you, and I have declared unto
you what I was ordered. But what you will do
in consequence of this, must be your own care."
Thus much concerning Arius.

He continued: "Ye know too, beloved, and
ye know well, what has been the manner of my
conversation amongst you, and what conflicts I
have endured from the idolatrous Gentiles, who,
being ignorant of the Lord and Saviour, do not
cease in their madness to spread abroad the fame


3 [" The dying are wont to vaticinate; " but the prophetic charis-
mata (i Cor. xiv. 31) were not yet extinct in the Church, in all
probability, hence this conjecture was natural.]

■< KoAo^ioi' — this is the tunicle, tunica, tunicella, dalmatica. It
originally had no sleeves; it is said that wide sleeves were added in
the W'est about the fourth century; and the garment was then called
dalmatic, and was the deacon's vestment when assisting at the holy
communion; while that worn by sub-deacons, called by the Anglo-
Saxons " roc," and " tunicle " generally after the 13th centurj', was
of the same form, but smaller and less ornamented (Palmer, Orig.
Lit7irgicee, vol. ii. p. 314). The word, in its classical use, meant an
under-garment with its sleeves curtailed ((coAo^o?) — i.e., reaching
only half down to the elbow, or entirely without sleeves. [But the
reference here is clearly to St. John xix. 23; and the introduction of
the mediaeval dalmatic, to translate KoKo^iOv, is out of place.]


264


THE GENUINE ACTS OF PETER.


of a multitude of gods who are no gods. Ye
know likewise how, in avoiding the rage of my
persecutors, I wandered an exile from place to
place. For long time I lay in hiding in Meso-
potamia, and also in Syria amongst the Phoeni-
cians ; in either Palestine also I had for a long
time to wander ; and from thence, if I may so
say, in another element, that is, in the islands, I
tarried no short time. Yet in the midst of all
these calamities I did not cease day and night
writing to the Lord's flock committed to my
poor care, and confirming them in the unity of
Christ. For an anxious solicitude for them con-
stantly kept urging my heart, and suffered me
not to rest ; then only did I think it to' be more
tolerable to me when I committed them to the
Power above.

" Likewise also, on account of those fortunate
prelates, Phileus, I mean, Hesychius and The-
odorus, who of divine grace have received a
worthy vocation, what great tribulation agitated
my mind. For these, as ye know, for the faith
of Christ were with the rest of the confessors
wasted with diverse torments. And because in
such a conflict they were not only of the clergy
but of the laity also the standard-bearers and
preceptors, I on this account greatly feared lest
they should be found wanting under their long
affliction, and lest their defection, which is terri-
ble to speak of, should be to many an occasion
of stumbling and of denying the faith, for there
were more than six hundred and sixty confined
along with them within the precincts of a dun-
geon. Hence, although oppressed with great
labour and toil, I ceased not to write to them
with reference to all those predicted passages,'
exhorting them to earn the martyr's palm with
the power of divine inspiration. But when I
heard of their magnificent perseverance, and
the glorious end of the passion of them all, fall-
ing on the ground I adored the majesty of Christ,
who had thought fit to count them amongst the
throng of the martyrs.

" Why should I speak to you about Meletius
of Lycopolis? What persecutions, what treach-
ery, he directed against me, I doubt not but that
ye well know. Oh, the horrible wickedness ! he
feared not to rend asunder the holy Church,
which the Son of God redeemed with His pre-
cious blood, and to deliver which from the
tyranny of the devil He hesitated not to lay
down His life. This Church, as I have begun
to say, the wicked Meletius rending asunder,
ceased not to imprison in dungeons, and to
afflict holy bishops even, who have a litde before
us by martyrdom penetrated to the heavens. Be-
ware therefore of his insidious devices. P'or I,
as ye see, go bound by divine charity, preferring


• Of Scripture.


above all things the will of God. I know, in-
deed, that under their breath the tribunes whis-
per of my death with eager haste ; but I will
not from this circumstance open any communi-
cation with them, nor will I count my life more
precious than myself. Nay, rather, I am pre-
pared to finish the course which my Lord Jesus
Christ hath deigned to promise to me, and
faithfully render up to Him the ministry which
from Him I have received. Pray for me, my
brothers ; you will not see me longer living in
this life with you. Wherefore I testify before
God and your brotherhood, that before all of
you have I preserved a clean conscience. For
I have not shunned to declare unto you the
injunctions of the Lord, and I have refused not
to make known to you the things which will
hereafter be necessary.

" Wherefore take heed unto yourselves, and
the whole flock over which the Holy Ghost has
appointed you as overseers in succession — - thee
Achillas in the first place, and next to thee Alex-
ander. Behold with living voice I protest to
you, that after my death men will arise in the
Church speaking perverse thmgs,^ and will again
divide it, like Meletius, drawing away the people
after their madness. So I have told you before.
But I pray you, mine own bowels, be watchful ;
for ye must undergo many tribulations. For we
are no better than our fathers. Are ye ignorant
what things my father endured from the Gentiles,
he who brought me up, the most holy bishop
Theonas, whose pontifical ^ chair I have under-
taken to fill? Would that I had his manners
also ! Why too should I speak of the great
Dionysius his predecessor, who wandering from
place to place sustained many calamities from
the frantic Sabellius ? Nor will I omit to men-
tion you, ye most holy fathers and high priests
of the divine law, Heraclius and Demetrius,
for whom Origen, that framer of a perverse
dogma, laid many temptations, who cast upon
the Church a detestable schism, which to this
day is throwing it into confusion. But the grace
of God which then protected them, will, I be-
lieve, protect you also. But why do I delay you
longer, my very dear brethren, with the out-
pouring of my prolix discourse. It remains, that
with the last words of the Apostle •* who thus
prayed I address you : * And now I commend
you to God and the word of His grace, which
is powerful to direct both you and His flock.' "
When he had finished, falling on his knees, he
prayed with them. And his speech ended, Achil-
las and Alexander kissing his hands and feet


2 C/. t Tim. IV. I.

3 [Another anachronism, but noteworthy as applied to the See of
Alexandria. See p. 261, note 2. |

•» C/. St. Paul's farewell address to the elders at Miletus, Acts xx.
28. [Acts XX. 32 The whole of this aft'ecting address is borrowed
from the touching eloquence of St. Paul. J


THE GENUINE ACTS OF PETER.


265


and bursting into tears sobbed bitterly, specially
grieving at those words of his which they heard
when he said that they should henceforth see him
in this life no more. Then this most gentle
teacher going to the rest of the clergy, who, as I
have said, had come in to him to speak in behalf
of Arius, spake to them his last consoling words,
and such as were necessary ; then pouring forth
his prayers to God, and bidding them adieu, he
dismissed them all in peace.'

These things having thus ended, it was every-
where published far and wide that Arius had not
been cut off from the Catholic unity without a
divine interposition. But that contriver of de-
ceit, and disseminator of all wickedness, ceased
not to keep hidden his viper's poison in the
labyrinth of his bosom, hoping that he should
be reconciled by Achillas and Alexander. This
is that Arius the heresiarch, the divider of the
consubstantial and indivisible Trinity. This is
he who with rash and wicked mouth, was not
afraid to blaspheme the Lord and Saviour, be-
yond all other heretics ; the Lord, I say, and
Saviour, who out of pity for our human wander-
ings, and being sorely grieved that the world
should perish in deadly destruction and condem-
nation, deigned for us all to suffer in the flesh.
For it is not to be believed that the Godhead
which is impassible was subject to the passion.
But because the theologians and fathers have
taken care in better style to remove from Catho-
lic ears the blasphemies of this nature, and
another task is ours, let us return to our sub-
ject.

This most sagacious pontiffs then, perceiving
the cruel device of the tribunes, who, in order
to bring about his death, were willing to put to
the sword the whole Christian multitude that
was present, was unwilling that they should
together with him taste the bitterness of death,
but as a faithful servant imitating his Lord and
Saviour, whose acts were even as his words,
"The good Shepherd giveth His life for the
sheep," 3 prompted by his piety, called to him
an elder of those who there waited on his words,
and said to him : " Go to the tribunes who seek
to kill me, and say to them. Cease ye from all
your anxiety, lo ! I am ready and willing of mine
own accord to give myself to them." Bid them
come this night to the rereward of the house of
this prison, and in the spot in which they shall
hear a signal given on the wall from within, there
let them make an excavation, and take me and
do with me as they have been commanded. The


' [Acts XX. 38. The spirit of Ignatius and of Polycarp is here
clearly to be recognised in the fourth century. |

^ [Another anachronism; but, as appUed to the Alexandrian
primate, it is a concession to truth. The word was already used in
the West, but not exclusively with respect to the Apostolic Sees. See
vol. V p. 270, note i.]

^ John X. II.


elder, obeying the commands of this most holj
man, — for so great a father could not be con-
tradicted, — departed to the tribunes, and made
the intimation to them as he had been com-
manded. They, when they had received it, were
exceedingly rejoiced, and taking with them some
stonemasons, came about the dawn of the day
without their soldiers to the jjlace which had
been pointed out to them. The man of God
had passed the whole night as a vigil, without
sleep, in prayer and watchfulness. But when he
heard their approach, whilst all who were with
him were rapt in slumber, with a slow and gentle
step he descended to the interior part of the
prison, and according to the agreement made,
made a sound on the wall ; and those outside
hearing this, forcing an aperture, received this
athlete of Christ armed on all sides with no
brazen breastplate, but with the virtue of the
cross of the Lord, and fully prepared to carry
out the Lord's words who said, " Fear not them
which kill the body, but are not able to kill the
soul : but rather fear Him which is able to de-
stroy both soul and body in hell." ■* Wonderful
was the occurrence ! Such a heavy whirlwind of
wind and rain prevailed during that night, that
no one of those who kept the door of the prison
could hear the sound of the excavation. This
martyr most constant too, kept urging on his
murderers, saying. Do what ye are about to do,
before those are aware who are guarding me.

But they took him up and brought him to the
place called Bucolia, where the holy St. Mark
underwent martyrdom for Christ. Astonishing
is the virtue of the saints ! As they carried
him along, and beheld his great constancy and
strength of mind when in peril of death, on a
sudden a fear and trembling came upon them to
such a degree, that none of them could look
stedfastly into his face. Moreover, the blessed
martyr entreated them to allow him to go to the
tomb of St. Mark, for he desired to commend
himself to his patronage. 5 But they from con-
fusion, looking down on the ground, said, " Do
as you wish, but make haste." Therefore ap-
proaching the burial-place of the evangelist, he
embraced it, and speaking to him as if he were
yet alive in the flesh, and able to hear him, he
prayed after this manner : " O father most hon-
ourable, thou evangelist of the only-begotten
Saviour, thou witness of His passion, thee did
Christ choose, who is the Deliverer of us all, to
be the first pontiff and pillar of this See ; to
thee did He commit the task of proclaiming the
faith throughout the whole of Egypt and its
boundaries. Thou. I say, hast watchfully fulfilled
that ministry of our human salvation which was

* Matt. X. 28.

5 [Another anachronism. No such invocation of saints at this
period. See note 6, p. 261, sii/ra.]


266


THE GENUINE ACTS OF PETER.


intrusted to thee ; as the reward of this labour
thou hast doubtless obtained the martyr's palm.
Hence, not without justice, art thou counted
worthy to be saluted evangelist and bishop. Thy
successor was Anianus, and the rest in descending
series down to the most blessed Theonas, who
disciplined my infancy, and deigned to educate
my heart. To whom I, a sinner and unworthy,
have been beyond my deservings appointed as
successor by an hereditary descent. And, what
, is best of all, lo ! the largeness of the divine
bounty has granted me to become a martyr of
His precious cross and joyful resurrection, giving
to my devotion the sweet and pleasant odour of
His passion, that I should be made meet to pour
out unto Him the offering of my blood. And
because the time of making this offering is now
instant, pray for me that, the divine power assist-
ing me, I may be meet to reach the goal of this
agony with a stout heart and ready faith. I com-
mend also to thy glorious patronage the flock of
Christ's worshippers which was committed to my
pastoral care ; to thee, I say, I with prayers com-
mend it, who are approved as the author and
guardian of all preceding and subsequent occu-
piers of this pontifical chair, and who, holding
its first honours, art the successor not of man,
but of the God-man, Christ Jesus." Saying
these words,' he went back to a little distance
from the sacred tomb, and, raising his hands to
heaven, prayed with a loud voice, saying : " O
thou Only-begotten, Jesus Christ, Word of the
Eternal Father, hear me invoking Thy clemency.
Speak peace, I beseech Thee, to the tempest
that shakes Thy Church, and with the effusion
of my blood, who am Thy servant, make an end
to the persecution of Thy people." Then a cer-
tain virgin dedicated to God, who had her cell
adjoining to the tomb of the evangelist, as she
was spending the night in prayer, heard a voice
from heaven, saying : " Peter was the first of the
apostles, Peter is the last of the martyred bishops
of Alexandria."

Having ended his prayer, he kissed the tomb
of the blessed evangelist, and of the other pon-
tiffs who were buried there, and went forth to
the tribunes. But they seeing his face as it had
been the face of an angel, being terror-stricken,
feared to speak to him of his instant agony.
Nevertheless, because God does not desert those
who trust in Him, He willed not to leave His
martyr without consolation in the moment of so
great a trial. For lo ! an old man and an aged
virgin, coming from the smaller towns, were has-
tening to the city, one of whom was carrying
four skins for sale, and the other two sheets of
linen. The blessed prelate, when he perceived
them, recognised a divine dispensation with ref-


■ [Wholly apocryphal in all probability, or based on a mere
apostrophe. Such " patronage " was yet unknown.]


erence to himself. He inquired of them on the
instant, " Are ye Christians? " And they replied,
" Yes." Then said he, " Whither are ye going? "
And they replied, " To the market in the city to
sell these things that we are carrying." Then
the most merciful father answered, "■ My faithful
children, God has marked you out, persevere
with me." And they immediately recognising
him, said, " Sire, let it be as thou hast com-
manded." Then turning to the tribunes, he said,
" Come, do what ye are about to do, and fulfil
the king's command ; for the day is now on the
point of breaking." ^ But they, suffering violence
as it were on account of the wicked decree of
the prince, brought him to a spot opposite to
the sanctuary of the evangelist, into a valley
near the tombs. Then said the holy man,
" Spread out, thou aged man, the skins which
thou carriest, and thou too, O aged woman, the
linen sheets." ^ And when they had been spread
out, this most constant martyr, mounting upon
them, extended both his hands to heaven, and
bending his knees on the ground, and fixing his
mind upon heaven, returned his thanks to the
Almighty Judge "^ of the contest, and fortifying
himself with the sign of the cross, said, Amen.
Then loosening his omophorio7i 5 from his neck,
he stretched it forth, saying, " What is com-
manded you, do speedily."

Meanwhile the hands of the tribunes were
paralyzed, and looking upon one another in turn,
each urged his fellow to the deed, but they were
all held fast with astonishment and fear. At
length they agreed that out of their common
stock a reward for the execution should be ap-
pointed, and that the man who should venture
to perpetrate the murder should enjoy the re-
ward. There was no delay, each of them
brought forth five solidi.*^ But, as says the
heathen poet, —


^ [Gen. xxxii. 26.]

3 The Latin reads here: " Spread out, ye aged men, the skins
which ye are carrying."

■< ayuivo^eTT)! — the president of the Grecian games, the judge.

5 [Probably he wore ordinarily what afterwards became an
ecclesiastical ornament. So the casiila and other vestments were
retained by the clergy after they ceased to be commonly worn. Mar-
riott, Vestiar. Christian., p. 198.] The omophorion, which is worn
by every Eastern bishop, resembles the Latin pallium, except that it
is broader, and tied round the neck in a knot. Cf. following passage
from Neale's Introduction to the Translation of the Eastern
Liturgies : "But while the Gospel is being read, the bishop lays
aside his omophorion, thereby making profession of his service to the
Lord. For since it is the Lord who is represented as speaking by
the Gospel, and is, as it were. Himself present, the bishop at that
time ventures not to be arrayed with the symbol of His incarnation
— I mean the omophorion ; but taking it off from his shoulders, he
gives it lo the deacon, who holds it folded in his right hand, himself
standing near the bishop, and preceding the holy gifts. When he has
finished the liturgy, and comes to the communion, he again assumes
the oinophorio7t, manifesting that before this he was one of the min-
isters, and was afraid to put upon himself that holy garment. But
when the work is accomplished, and he goes on to elevate the bread,
and to divide it into parts, and to receive it himself, and distribute it
to others, it is necessary that he should put on all the sacred symbols
of his dignity; and since the omophorion is the principal vest of a
pontiff, he necessarily assumes that, and in that is partaker of the
most divine things." [All this unknown to antiquity.]

'' A solidus or aureus worth 25 denarii, denarius being S.^d. ; it
was worth 17s. 8jd.; five solidi, £\, 8s. 6jd. [More than $20. J


THE GENUINE ACTS OF PETER.


267


" Quid non mortalia pectora cogis,
Auri sacra fames ? " '

one of them, after the manner of the traitor
Judas, emboldened by the desire of money, drew
"his sword and beheaded the pontiff, on the 25th
day of November, after he had held the pontifi-
cate twelve years — three of which were before
the persecution, but the nine remaining were
passed by him under persecutions of diverse
kinds. The blood-money being instantly claimed
by the executioner, these wicked purchasers, or
rather destroyers, of man's life quickly returned,
for they feared the multitude of the people, since,
as I have said, they were without their military
escort. But the body of the blessed martyr, as
the fathers affirm who went first to the place of
execution, remained erect, as if instant in prayer,
until many people, coming together, discovered
it standing 2 in the same posture; so that what
was his constant practice whilst living, to this his
inanimate body testified. They found also the
aged man and woman watching with grief and
lamentation the most precious relic of the Church.
So, honouring him with a triumphal funeral, they
covered his body with the linen sheets ; but the
sacred blood which had been poured forth, they
collected reverently in a wallet.

In the meanwhile an innumerable multitude
of either sex, flocking together from the popu-
lous city, with groans and ejaculations asked
each other in turn, being ignorant, in what man-
ner this had happened. In truth, from the least
to the greatest, a very great grief was prevalent
amongst all. For when the chief men of the
city beheld the laudable importunity of the mul-
titude, who were busied in dividing his sacred
spoils to keep them as relics, they wrapped him up
the tighter in the skins and linen sheets. For the
most holy minister of God was always clothed in
sacerdotal vestments of a white colour ^ — that is,
with the tunic, the kolobion, and the omophorion.
Then there arose among them no small conten-
tion ; for some were for carrying the most sacred
limbs to the church which he had himself built,
and where he now rests, but others were endeav-
ouring to carry him to the sanctuary of the evan-
gelist, where he attained the goal of martyrdom ;
and since neither party would yield to the other,
they began to turn their religious observance into
a wrangling and a fight.-* In the meanwhile a
spirited body of senators of those who are en-

' Virgil, Aiti., book iii. 56: —
" O sacred hunger of pernicious gold,
What bands of faith can impious lucre hold ? " — Dryden.

2 [Here " standing" = continuing. He knelt, no doubt, to be
beheaded; but the corpse remained in this posture, A noble horse,
shot on the field of Antietam, remained on the field in an attitude of
raising himself from the ground, as I saw it myself]

3 [This may be credited. See Cyprian's /'«i\rjVi«. But the technical
names which follow seem an anachronism if terhnically understood.
I say this with no spirit of objection to these vestments, however.]

•♦ [See Kingsley's Hypatiu. In Cyril's time this might have hap-
pened: one trusts that for Peter's day this, too, is an anachronism.]


gaged in the public transport service, seeing what
had happened, for they were near the sea, pre-
pared a boat, and suddenly seizing upon the
sacred relics, they placed them in it, and scaling
the Pharos from behind, by a quarter which has
the name of Leucado, they came to the church
of the most blessed mother of God, and Ever-
Virgin Mary, which, as we began to say, he had
constructed in the western quarter, in a suburb,
for a cemetery of the martyrs. Thereupon the
throng of the jDeople, as if the heavenly treasure
had been snatched from them, some by straight
roads, and others by a more devious route, fol-
lowed with hasty steps. And when they at length
arrived there, there was no longer any altercation
where he was to be placed, but by a common
and unimpeachable counsel they agreed first to
place him in his episcopal chair, and then to
bury him.

And this, most prudent reader, I would not
have you regard as a wild fancy and superstition,
since, if you learn the cause of this novelty, you
will admire and approve of the zeal and deed of
the populace. For this blessed priest, when he
celebrated the sacrament of the divine mysteries,
did not, as is the ecclesiastical custom, sit upon
his pontifical throne, but upon its footstool un-
derneath, which, when the people beheld, they
disliked, and comj^lainingly exclaimed, " Thou
oughtest, O father, to sit upon thy chair ; " and
when they repeated this frequently, the minister
of the Lord rising, calmed their complaints with
tranquil voice, and again took his seat upon the
same stool. So all this seemed to be done by
him from motives of humility. But upon a cer-
tain great festival it happened that he was offer-
ing the sacrifice of the mass,5 and wished to do
this same thing. Thereupon, not only the people,
but the clergy also, exclaimed with one voice,
" Take thy seat upon thy chair, bishop." But
he, as if conscious of a mystery, feigned not to
hear this ; and giving the signal for silence, — for
no one dared pertinaciously to withstand him, —
he made them all quiet, and yet, nevertheless,
sat down on the footstool of the chair ; and the
solemnities of the mass^ having been celebrated
as usual, each one of the faithful returned to his
own home.

But the man of God sending for the clergy,
with tranquil and serene mind, charged them
with rashness, saying, " How is it that ye blush
not for having joined the cry of the laity, and
reproaching me ? Howbeit, since your reproach
flows not from the muddy torrent of arrogance,
but from the pure fountain of love, I will unfold

5 [Another anachronism, and Occidental also.]

6 J|See vol. v. p. 256, note 6, and p. 259, Elucidation II. Missa,
a Latm word, has clearly no place here save by the Roman rule of
reading modern rites into antiquity. Thus, m Raphael's picture
illustrating the story of 2 Mace. iii. 15, the Jewish high-priest is made
a Roman pontiff. Compare note 6, p. 261, supra.^


268


THE GENUINE ACTS OF PETER.


to yo>i the secret of this mystery. Very often
when I wish to draw near to that seat, I see a
virtue as it were sitting upon it, exceeding radiant
with the brightness of its Hght. Then, i^eing in
suspense between joy and fear, I acknowledge
that I am altogether unworthy to sit upon such
a seat, and if I did not hesitate to cause an oc-
casion of offence to the people, without doubt
I should not even venture to sit upon the stool
itself. Thus it is, my beloved sons, that I seem
to you, in this, to transgress the pontifical rule.'
Nevertheless, many times when I see it vacant,
as ye yourselves are witnesses, I refuse not to sit
upon the chair after the accustomed manner.
Wherefore do ye, now that ye are acquainted
with my secret, and being well assured that, if I
shall be indulged, I will sit upon the chair, for
I hold not in slight esteem the dignity of my
order, cease any further from joining in the ex-
clamations of the populace." This explanation
the most holy father, whilst he was yet alive, was
compelled to give to the clergy. The faithful
of Christ, therefore, remembering all this with
pious devotion, brought his sacred body, and
caused it to sit upon the episcopal throne. As
much joy and exultation arose then to heaven
from the people, as if they were attending him
alive and in the body. Then embalming him
with sweet spices, they wrapped him in silken
coverings ; what each one of them could be the
first to bring, this he accounted to himself as
greatest gain. Then carrying palms, the tokens
of victory, with flammg tapers, with sounding
hymns, and with fragrant incense, celebrating
the triumph of his heavenly victory, they laid
down the sacred relics, and buried them in the
cemetery which had been long ago constructed
by him, where too from henceforth, and even to
this day, miraculous virtues cease not to show
themselves. Pious vows, forsooth, are received
with a propitious hearing ; the health of the im-
potent is restored ; the expulsion of unclean
spirits testifies to the martyr's merits. These
gifts, O Lord Jesus, are Thine, whose wont it is
thus magnificently to honour Thy martyrs after
death : Thou who with the Father and the Holy
Consubstantial Spirit livest and reignest for ever-
more. Amen.

After this, how that wolf and framer of treach-


' [See note 2, p. 265, su/ra.^


ery, that is Arius, covered with a sheep's skin,
entered into the Lord's fold to worry and tor-
ment it, or in what manner he was enabled to
attain to the dignity of the priesthood, let us
employ ourselves in relating in brief.^ And this
not to annoy those who ventured to recall to the
threshing-floor of the Lord those tares of apos-
tacy and contagion that had been winnowed out
of the Church by a heavenly fan ; for these are
without doubt reckoned eminent for sanctity,
but thinking it a light thing to believe so holy a
a man, they transgressed the injunctions of the
divine command. What then? Do we repre-
hend them ? By no means. For as long as this
corruptible body weighs us down, and this earth-
ly habitation depresses the sense of our infirmity,
many are easily deceived in their imaginations,
and think that which is unjust to be just, that to
be holy which is impure. The Gibeonites who,
by the divine threatenings, were to be utterly
destroyed, having one thing in their wishes and
another in their voice and mien, were able
quickly to deceive Joshua, 3 that just distributor
of the land of promise. David * also, full of
prophetic inspiration, when he had heard the
words of the deceitful youth, although it was by
the inscrutable and just judgment of God, yet
acted very differently from what the true nature
of the case required. What also can be more
sublime than the apostles, who have not removed
themselves from our infirmity ? For one of them
writes, " In many things we offend all ; " 5 and
another, " If we say we have no sin, we deceive
ourselves, and the truth is not in us." ^ But
when we repent of these, so much the more
readily do we obtain pardon, when we have
sinned not willingly, but through ignorance or
frailty. And certainly offences of this sort come
not of prevarication, but of the indulgence of
compassion. But I leave to others to write an
apology for this ; let us pursue what is in hand.
After that magnificent defender of the faith,
Peter, worthy of his name, had by the triumph
of martyrdom, etc.

THE REST IS WANTING.


2 Achillas, the successor of Peter, admitted Arius to the priesthood.

3 C/. Joshua ix.

* Perhaps Absalom, or it may be Ziba, is referred to. (2 Sam.
xiv. 33, xvi. 3.)

5 Jas. iii. 2.

6 I John i. 8.


THE CANONICAL EPISTLE,'


COMMENTARIES OF THEODORE BALSAMON AND JOHN ZONARAS.


THE CANONS OF THE BLESSED PETER, ARCHBISHOP OF ALEXANDRIA, AS
THEY ARE GIVEN IN HIS SERMON ON PENITENCE.^


CANON I.

But since the fourth passover of the perse-
cution has arrived, it is sufficient, in the case of
those who have been appreliended and thrown
into prison, and who have sustained torments
not to be borne,-^ and stripes intolerable, and
many other dreadful afflictions, and afterwards
have been betrayed by the frailty of the flesh,
even though they were not at the first received
on account of their grievous fall that followed,
yet because they contended sorely and resisted
long ; for they did not come to this of their own
will, but were betrayed by the frailty of the flesh ;
for they show in their bodies the marks of Jesus,"!
and some are now, for the third year, bewailing
their fault : it is sufficient, I say, that from the
time of their submissive approach, other forty
days should be enjoined upon them, to keep
them in remembrance of these things ; those
forty days during which, though our Lord and
Saviour Jesus Christ had fasted. He was yet,
after He had been baptized, tempted of the
devil. And when they shall have, during these
days, exercised themselves much, and constant-
ly fasted, then let them watch in prayer, medi-
tating upon what was spoken by the Lord to him
who tempted Him to fall down and worship
him : " Get thee behind me, Satan ; for it is
written, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God,
and Him only shalt thou serve." 5

Balsamon. The present canons treat of those who
have in the persecution denied the faith, and are doing
penance. And the first canon ordains, that upon those

' (The Canonical Epistles of Basil have been heretofore men-
tioned. Vol. V. p. 572, elucidation.]

' These Canons of Peter of Alexandria are interesting as bearing
upon the controversy between Cyprian and the clergy of Carthage,
with regard to the treatment of the lapsed. They also bear upon the
subject-matter of the Novatian schism.

^ Another reading is ii'r]<eaTov<;, " which cannot be cured."

* The marks of Jesus, (TTiy/naTo. C/. Gal. vi. 17.

5 Matt. iv. 10.


who after many tonnents have sacrificed to the gods,
not being able by reason of frailty to persevere, and who
have passed three years in penitence, other forty days
should be enjoined, and that then they should be ad-
mitted into the Church. Observe these present canons
which lay down various and useful rules in favour of
those who have denied their God, and seek for repent-
ance, and concerning those who have of their own ac-
cord souglu martyrdom, and have lapsed, and then have
again confessed the faith, and other things of the like
nature. Consult also, for you will profitably do so,
manv canons of the Council of Ancyra.

ZoNARAS. Amongst those who in these turbulent
times denied the faith, the holy Peter makes a distinc-
tion, and says, that upon those who had been brought
before the tyrant, and thrown into prison, and who had
endured very grievous torments, and intolerable scour-
gings, and such as could be cured by no care or medicine
l^for «AOf signifies medical care, and uvr/Keaiov is the same
as immedicabile), and other dreadful afflictions, and after-
wards yielding, sacrificed to the gods, being betrayed as
it were by the weakness of the flesh, which could not
hold out under the j^ain unto the end, that for them the
time past should sufhce for punishment ; since, indeed,
says he, the fourth passover has now past since they
made this very grievous fall. And although perhaps at
first, when they approached in penitence, they were not
received, yet because they did not of their own free-will
proceed to sacrifice to the gods, and resisted long, and
bear about with them the marks of Jesus, that is to say,
the scars of the wounds which, in behalf of Christ, they
have endured, and the third year has now elapsed since
they first bewailed their fall, he decrees that, as an addi-
tional punishment, other forty days from the time that
they came asking to be admitted to communion should
be enjoined on them in the place of any further severity;
during which they should exercise a still greater degree
of penance, and should fast more earnestly, that is, with
more attentive care, keeping guard over themselves,
being watchful in prayer, meditating upon, that is, turn-
ing over perpetually m their minds, and saying in words,
the text quoted by the Lord against the tempter, " Get
thee behind me, Satan ; for it is written, Thou shalt
worship the Lord thy God, and Him only shalt thou
serve."

CANON II.

But in the case of those who, after that they
were thrown into prison, and in the dungeon,
as in a place besieged, endured afflictions and

269


270


THE CANONICAL EPISTLE.


nauseous odours, but afterwards, without the con-
flict of torments, were led captive, being broken
in spirit by poverty of strength, and a certain
blindness of the understanding, a year in addi-
tion to the foregoing time will suffice ; for they
gave themselves up to be afflicted for the name
of Christ, even though in their dungeon they
enjoyed much consolation from their brethren ;
which, indeed, they shall return many fold, de-
siring to be set free from that most bitter cap-
tivity of the devil, especially remembering Him
who said : " The spirit of the Lord is upon me,
because He hath anointed me to preach the
Gospel to the poor ; He hath sent me to heal
the broken-hearted, to preach deliverance to the
captives, and recovering of sight to the blind,
to set at liberty them that are bruised ; to preach
the acceptable year of the Lord, and the day of
recompense unto our God." '

Balsamon. This canon enacts that those who have
only been evil entreated in prison, and who without tor-
ment have lapsed, should be punished after the three
years with an additional year. For though they obtained
consolation, certain of the faithful ministering to them
the necessaries of life, yet they ought to obtain pardon,
as being those who have suffered severely for the faith.

ZONARAS. In the second order, he places those who
have only been thrown into prison, and evil entreated in
the dungeon, and yet, though harassed by no torments,
have offended ; upon whom, besides the time past, the
three years, namely, of which we have spoken, he pro-
poses to inflict the penalty of an additional year, since
they also, says he, have for Christ's name endured hard-
ness, even though it may be that they obtained some
consolation from the brethren whilst in prison. For it
is probable that the faithful, who were not in custody,
ministered to those in bonds the necessaries of life, and
brought to them some alleviation of their lot. Which
things, indeed, they shall return many fold; for those
consolations which they enjoyed in prison they shall
vex themselves with penance, and afflict themselves in
diverse ways, if they wish to be set free from the cap-
tivity of the devil, having become his captives and slaves
by their denial of Christ. He subjoins the words of the
prophet, taken from Isaiah, which he says that they
ought to keep in remembrance.

CANON III.

But as for those who have suffered none of
these things, and have shown no fruit of faith,
but of their own accord have gone over to wick-
edness, being betrayed by fear and cowardice,
and now come to repentance, it is necessary and
convenient to propose the parable of the unfruit-
ful fig-tree, as the Lord says : '' A certain man
had a fig-tree planted in his vineyard ; and he
came and sought fruit thereon, and found none.
Then said he unto the dresser of his vineyard,
Behold, these three years I come seeking fruit
on this fig-tree, and find none : cut it down ;
why cumbereth it the ground? And he answer-
ing, said unto him. Lord, let it alone this year
also, till I shall dig about it, and dung it. And


' Isa. Ixi. I, 2; Luke iv. 18, 19.


if it bear fruit, well ; and if not, then after that
thou shalt cut it down." Keeping this before
their eyes, and showing forth fruit worthy of re-
pentance, after so long an interval of time, they
will be profited.

Balsamon. Those who fifom fear only and timidity
deserted the faith, and then had an eye towards repent-
ance, the canon punishes with three years' exclusion,
according to the parable of the fig-tree in the Gospels.
For the Lord said. Three years I come to it seeking
fruit, and find none ; but the vine-dresser replies, Lord,
let it alone this year also.

Zon.aras. But those, he says, who having suffered
no hardness, have deserted from fear only and timidity,
in that they of their own accord have approached to
wickedness, and then looked towards repentance, their
case the parable of the fig-tree in the Gospels will exactly
suit. Let them keep this before their eyes, and show
forth for an equal period labours worthy of penitence,
and they shall be profited ; that is, after the fourth year.
For the Lord said, Three years I come to it seeking
fruit, and find none; and the vine-dresser answered,
Lord, let it alone this year also.

CANON IV.

To those who are altogether reprobate, and
unrepentant, who possess the Ethiopian's un-
changing skin,^ and the leopard's spots, it shall
be said, as it was spoken to another fig-tree,
" Let no fruit grow on thee henceforward for
ever ; and it presently withered away." ^ For in
them is fulfilled what was spoken by the Preacher :
"That which is crooked cannot be made straight ;
and that which is wanting cannot be numbered." ^
For unless that which is crooked shall first be
made straight, it is impossible for it to be adorned ;
and unless that which is wanting shall first be
made up, it cannot be numbered. Hence also,
in the end, will happen unto them what is spoken
by Esaias the prophet : " They shall look upon
the carcases of the men that have transgressed
against Me ; for their worm shall not die, neither
shall their fire be quenched ; and they shall be an
abhorring unto all flesh." 5 Since as by the same
also has been predicted, " But the wicked are
like the troubled sea, when it cannot rest, whose
waters cast up mire and dirt. There is no peace,
saith my God, to the wicked."^

Balsamon. What has been previously said of the
lapsed, has been said of the repentant. But against
those who are unrepentant, he brings forward the curs-
ing of another fig-tree, to which the Lord said, because
of" its unprofitableness, " No fruit grow on thee hence-
forward for ever."

ZoNARAS. What has been previously said of the
lapsed, has been said of the repentant. Against those
whom, from desperation or depraved opinion, are im-
penitent, and carry about with them perpetually the
inherent and indelible blackness of sin, as of an Ethio-
pian's skin, or the leopard's spots, he brings forward the
cursing of another fig-tree. To which the Lord said for


2 Jer. iii. 23.

3 Matt. xxi. 19.
■• Eccles. i. 15.
5 Isa. Ix-vi. 24.

^ Isa. Ivii. 20, 21.


THE CANONICAL EPISTLE.


271


its barrenness, "Let no fruit grow on thee henceforward
for ever. And he says that in them must be fulfilled
that word of the Preacher; "That which is crooked can-
not be made straight ; and that which is wanting cannot
be numbered." Then having explained these things, he
subjoins the words of Isaiah.

CANON V.

But upon those who have used dissimulation
like David, who feigned himself to be mad ' to
avoid death, being not mad in reality ; and those
who have not nakedly written down their denial
of the faith, but being in much tribulation, as boys
endowed with sagacity and prudence amongst
foolish children, have mocked the snares of their
enemies, either passing by the altars, or giving a
writing, or sending heathen to do sacrifice instead
of themselves, even though some of them who
have confessed have, as I have heard, pardoned
individuals of them, since with the greatest cau-
tion they have avoided to touch the fire with
their own hands, and to offer incense to the im-
pure demons ; yet inasmuch as they escaped the
notice of their persecutors by doing this, let a
penalty of six months' penance be imposed upon
them. For thus will they be the rather profited,
meditating upon the prophet's words, and say-
ing, " Unto us a child is born, unto us a Son is
given ; and the government shall be upon His
shoulder : and His name shall be called the
Messenger of My mighty counsel." ^ Who, as
ye know, when another infant in the sixth month ^
of his conception had preached before His
coming repentance for the remission of sins, was
himself also conceived to preach repentance.
Moreover, we hear both also preaching, in the
first place, not only repentance, but the kingdom
of heaven, which, as we have learned, is within
us ; ^ for the word which we believe is near us,
in our mouth, and in our heart ; which they, be-
ing put in remembrance of, will learn to confess
with their mouths that Jesus is the Christ ; be-
lieving in their heart that God hath __ raised him
from the dead, and being as those who hear, that
" with the heart man believeth unto righteous-
ness ; and with the mouth confession is made
unto salvation." 5

Balsamon. But if any have pretended to approach
the altars, or to write their denial of the faith, and have
not done this nakedly and openly, but by feigned arts
have illuded those who offered them violence, as David
did, who, when he was flying from Saul, and was amongst
strangers, feigned himself to be mad, and thus escaped
death. So they mocked the snares of their enemies, as
children endowed with wisdom and prudence mock fool-
ish children ; for they deceived the impious heathen, in
that they seemed to sacrifice, although they did not sac-
rifice, or perhaps they suborned heathens and infidels to
take their place, and by these means they thought that


■ Cf. I Sam. xxi. 13.

2 Isa. ix. 6.

3 Luke i. 76, 77.
* Luke xvii. 21.
5 Rom. X. 8-10.


they offered sacrifice ; for them, he says, a period of six
months will suffice for penance. For although they did
not sacrifice, yet because they promised to sacrifice, or
sent others to do so in their place, they are thought to
stand in need of repentance, even though some of those
who have given their testimony for the faith have par-
doned individuals of them. He compares them to chil-
dren, as not having manfully withstood the idolaters,
but to prudent children, because by artifice they avoided
doing sacrifice.

ZoNARAS. But if any have pretended to approach
the altars, or to write their denial of the faith, but have
not nakedly written down their abnegation, that is, not
manifestly, not openly ; but by a sort of trick have
cheated those who offered them violence ; as David,
who while he was flying from Saul, and had come
amongst strange people, feigned himself to be mad, and
in this Vk'ay avoided death. They mocked indeed, he
says, the insidious devices of their enemies ; as prudent
children, endowed with wisdom and sagacity, and those
who skilfully take counsel, deceive foolish children.
Now he compares those to prudent children by whom
the impious heathen were deceived, and those who
though they did not sacrifice, yet seemed to sacrifice,
prudent indeed, as having thus far avoided sacrificing ;
but children, in that they did not show forth a mature
and manly spirit, and did not nobly resist the worship-
pers of idols, but covenanted to sacrifice, even though
they suborned some in their places, heathens, forsooth,
and infidels, and when these sacrificed, they were con-
sidered to have sacrificed. For men of this sort, he
says, a period of si.x months will suffice for penance.
For although they did not sacrifice, yet because they
covenanted to sacrifice, or suborned others to do so, and
thus themselves appeared to have sacrificed, they were
judged to stand in need of repentance ; even though
some confessors might have pardoned individuals of
them ; for some of those who witnessed to the faith and
suffered for it, pardoned those who by an artifice, as has
been said, escaped offering sacrifice, and admitted them
to communion with the faithful, because they studiously
avoided offering sacrifice to demons. And on account
of the fixing of this term of six months, he calls to re-
membrance the annunciation made by Gabriel, in the
sixth month of the conception of the Forerunner, in
which the Lord was conceived. Then he subjoins the
words of the apostle.

CANON VI.

In the case of those who have sent Christian
slaves to offer sacrifice for them, the slaves in-
deed as being in their master's hands, and in a
manner themselves also in the custody of their
masters, and being threatened by them, and
from their fear having come to this pass and
having lapsed, shall during the year show forth
the works of penitence, learning for the future,
as the slaves of Christ, to do the will of Christ
and to fear Him, listening to this especially, that
" whatsoever good thing any man doeth, the
same shall he receive of the Lord, whether he
be bond or free." ^

Balsamon. The slaves who under the commands
and threatenings of their masters offered sacrifice, this
father punishes with a year's exclusion; yet he pardons
them as having acted under the orders of a master, and
does not inflict a heavy punishment upon them. But
yet since they are much more the servants of Christ,
even as they ought to fear Him more, he imposes on


6 Eph. vi. 8.


272


THE CANONICAL EPISTLE.


them a moderate punishment ; for, as says the great
Paul, "whatsoever good thing any man doeth, the same
shall he receive of the Lord, whether he be bond or
free."

ZoNARAS. Some have sent their own Christian ser-
vants, even against their will, to offer sacrifice in their
stead. These servants, therefore, although not of their
own free-will, but being compelled by their masters,
they offered sacrifice, this father ordains shall pass a
year in penance, and enjoins them to remember that,
being of the number of the faithful, they are the servants
of Christ, and that Him they ought rather to fear; for
"whatsoever any man doeth," says the great apostle,
" the same shall he receive, whether he be bond or
free."

CANON VII.

But the freemen shall be tried by penance
for three years, both for their dissimulation, and
for having compelled their fellow-servants to
offer sacrifice, inasmuch as they have not obeyed
the apostle, who would have the masters do the
same things unto the servant, forbearing threat-
ening ; ' knowing, says he, that our and their
Master is in heaven ; and that there is no re-
spect of persons with Him.^ Now, if we all have
one Master, with whom is no respect of persons,
since Christ is all and in all, in barbarian, Scyth-
ian, bond or free,^ they ought to consider what
they have done, wishing to preserve their own
lives. They have drawn their fellow-servapts to
idolatry who would have been able to escape,
had they given to them that which is just and
equal, as again says the apostle.

Balsamon. But upon the freemen, or the masters
of the servant compelled to sacrifice, he enjoins a pun-
ishment of three years, both because they pretended to
sacrifice, and seemed to assent to it; and also because
they compelled their fellow-servants to offer sacrifice,
and did not obey the apostle, who ordered them to
forbear threatening their servants, inasmuch as they
themselves, the maste-s, are the servants of God, and
fellow-servants with their own domestics And then
they have made haste to preserve their own lives, and
have driven their fellow-servants to idolatry who might
have escaped.

Zonaras. But upon the freemen, that is, the mas-
ters of the servants who were compelled to sacrifice, he
enjoins a penalty of three years, both because they pre-
tended to sacrifice, and altogether appeared to succumb;
and also because they compelled their fellow-servants
to offer sacrifice, and did not obey the apostle's injunc-
tion to forbear threatening their servants; since they
also, the masters, are the servants of God, and the fel-
low-servants of their own domestics. And they indeed
made haste to preserve their own lives, and drove their
fellow-servants, who might have escaped, to idolatry.

CANON VIII.

But to those who have been delivered up, and
have fallen, who also of their own accord have
approached the contest, confessing themselves
to be Christians, and have been tormented and
thrown into prison, it is right with joy and ex-
ultation of heart to add strength, and to com-

' Eph. vi. 9.
^ Rom. ii. II.
^ Col. iii. II.


municate to them in all things, both in prayer,
and in partaking of the body and blood of Christ,
and in hortatory discourse ; in order that con-
tending the more constandy, they may be counted
worthy of " the prize of their high calling." •* For
"seven tiines," he says, "a just man falleth, and
riseth up again," s which, indeed, if all that have
lapsed had done, they would have shown forth a
most perfect penitence, and one which pene-
trates the whole heart.

Balsamon. Some had had information laid against
them before the tyrant, and had been delivered up, or
themselves had of their own accord given themselves
up, and then being overcome by their torments, had
failed in their testimony. Afterwards repenting, and
acknowledging what was right and good, they confessed
themselves to be Christians, so that they were cast into
prison, and affiicted with torments. These this holy
man tliinks it right to receive with joy of heart, and to
confirm in the orthodox faith, and to communicate with,
both in prayers and in partaking of the sacraments, and
to exhort with cheering words, that they may be more
constant in the contest, and counted worthy of the
heavenly kingdom. And that it might not be thought
that they ought not to be received, because they had
lapsed, he brings forward the testimony of Scripture to
the effect that "seven times," that is, often, "the just
man falleth, and riseth up again." And, says he, if
all who have failed in their confession had done this,
namely, taken up their struggle again, and before the
tyrant confessed themselves to be Christians, they would
have shown forth a most perfect penitence. The sub-
ject, therefore, comprehended in this canon differs from
that contained in the first canon, for there indeed those
who by reason of their torment had lapsed, were not
converted so as to confess the faith before the tyrants ;
but here those who by reason of their torment have
lapsed, with a worthy penitence, confess the Lord before
the tyrants, wherefore they are ixckoned not to have
fallen.

Zonaras. But, says he, if any have had information
laid against them before the tyrants, and have been de-
livered up, or have of themselves given themselves up,
and being overcome by the violence of their torments
have failed in their testimony, not being able to endure
the distresses and afflictions with which in the dungeon
they were afflicted ; and afterwards taking up the con-
test anew, have confessed themselves to be Christians,
so that they have been again cast into prison and af-
flicted with.torments: such men this holy martyr judges
it reasonable that they should be joyfully received ; and
that they should be strengthened, that is, have strength,
spirit, and confidence added to them, in order that they
may confess the faith, and that they should be communi-
cated with in all things, both in prayer, and in partaking
of the sacraments, and that they should be exhorted
with loving words, to rouse themselves to give testimony
to the faith, that they may be more constant in the con-
test, and counted worthy of the heavenly kingdom. And
that it might not be thought by any that they ought not
to be received from the fact that they had lapsed, and
sacrificed to the idols, he brings forth this testimony
from Holy Scripture : " Seven times," that is, often, "the
just man falleth, and riseth up again." And, says he, if
all who have failed in their confession had done this,
that is, after their fall, taken up the contest afresh, and
confessed themselves to be Christians before the tyrants,
they would have given proof of a most perfect repent-
ance.


* Philipp. iii. 14.
5 Prov. xxiv. 16.


THE CANONICAL EPISTLE.


273


CANON IX.

With those also who, as it were from sleep,
themselves leap forth upon a contest which is
travailing long and likely to be protracted, and
draw upon themselves the temptations as it were
of a sea-fight, and the inundations of many
waves, or rather are for the brethren kindling
the coals of the sinners, with them also we must
communicate, inasmuch as they come to this in
the name of Christ, even though they take no
heed unto His words, when He teaches us " to
pray that we enter not into temptation;"' and
again in His prayer. He says to His Father,
" and lead us not into temptation, but deliver
us from evil."^ And perhaps also they know
not that the Master of the House and our Great
Teacher often retired from those who would lay
snares for Him, and that sometimes He walked
not openly because of them ; and even when the
time of His passion drew on, He delivered not
up Himself, but waited until they came to Him
with " swords and staves." He said to them
therefore, " Are ye come out, as against a thief,
with swords and staves, for to take Me ? " ^ And
they " delivered Him," He says, " to Pilate," ■♦
As it was with Him it happens to those who walk
keeping Him before them as an example, recol-
lecting His divine words, in which, confirming
us. He speaks of persecution : " Take heed unto
yourselves, for they will deliver you up to the
councils, and they will scourge you in their
synagogues." s Now, He says, they will deliver
you up, and not, ye shall deliver up yourselves ;
and " ye shall be brought before rulers and kings
for My sake," ^ but not, ye shall bring yourselves,
for He would have us pass from place to place
as long as there are those who persecute us for
His name's sake ; even as again we hear Him
saying, " But when they persecute you in this
city, flee ye into another." 7 For He would not
have us go over to the ministers and satellites of
the devil, that we might not be the cause to them
of a manifold death, inasmuch as thus we should
be compelling them both to be harsher, and to
carry out their deadly works, but He would have
us to wait, and to take heed to ourselves, to
watch and to pray, lest we enter into tempta-
tion." Thus first Stephen, pressing on His foot-
steps, suffered martyrdom, being apprehended
in Jerusalem by the transgressors, and being
brought before the council, he was stoned, and
glorified for the name of Christ, praying with
the words, " Lord, lay not this sin to their
charge." ^ Thus James, in the second place,


' Matt. xxvi. 41.

2 Matt. vi. 13.

3 Matt. xxvi. 55.
■* Matt, xxvii. 2.
5 Matt. X. 17.

^ Matt. X. i8.
7 Matt. X. 23.
^ Acts vii. 59.


being of Herod apprehended, was beheaded
with the sword. Thus Peter, the first of the
apostles, having been often apprehended, and
thrown into prison, and treated with igominy,
was last of all crucified at Rome. Likewise also,
the renowned Paul having been oftentimes de-
livered up and brought in peril of death, having
endured many evils, and making his boast in
his numerous persecutions and afflictions, in the
same city was also himself beheaded ; who, in
the things in which he gloried, in these also
ended his life ; and at Damascus he was let
down by night in a basket by the wall, and es-
caped the hands 9 of him who sought to take
him. For what they set before themselves, first
and foremost, was to do the work of an evan-
gelist, and to teach the Word of God, in which,
confirming the brethren, that they might con-
tinue in the faith, they said this also, " that we
must out of much tribulation enter into the
kingdom of God." '° For they sought not what
was profitable for them, but that which was
profitable for the many, that they might be
saved, and that tliey might be enabled to say
unto them many things conducing to this, that
they might act suitably to the Word of God,
" unless," as says the apostle, " the time should
fail me in speaking." ''

Balsamon. Those who have but just arisen from
sleep, and especially if they were weighed down with a
heavy and profound sleep, have no constant reason, but
one perturbed and unsteady. To such as these this
blessed martyr likens those who, not in due order, but
rashly and inconsiderately, thrust themselves upon the
contest, which is as it were in travail, and delayed and
protracted, inasmuch as it has not yet burst forth openly,
but meditates and delays, hesitating in truth to bring
forth the combatants, who bring temptation upon them-
selves, or draw it towards them. Now these especially
are, for the rest of the faithful, kindling the coals of the
sinners, that is to say, the punishment of the tyrants.
But although he reprehends those who act so, yet he
enjoins the faithful nevertheless to communicate with
them, because on account of Christ they have under-
gone the contest, even though they have ignored His
teaching , for He teaches them to pray that they may
not be tempted ; and He did not deliver up Himself, but
was delivered up; and we are not to go over to the tor-
mentors, that we may not be the cause of bringing upon
them the guilt of many murders, as those do who incite
them to inflict punishment upon the godly. The canon
brings forward different examples from Holy Scripture.

ZoNARAS. Those who have recently arisen from
sleep, especially if they were oppressed with a heavy
sleep, have no steady reason, but one inconstant and
perturbed. To men of this sort this holy martyr likens
those who rush upon the contest, that is, those who, not
in due course, but rashly and inconsiderately, intrude
themselves upon it. It is, as it were, in travail, and de-
layed and protracted, inasmuch as it has not yet burst
forth openly, but meditates and delays, and hesitates to
bring forth the combatants, who bring temptation upon
themselves, that is, draw it towards themselves, or
rather, for the rest of the faithful, kindle the coals of the


9 2 Cor. xi. 32, 33.
'° Acts xiv. 22.
" Heb. xi. 32.


274


THE CANONICAL EPISTLE.


sinners, the torments, namely, which are by the tyrants
inflicted. But although he finds fault with those who
act in this way, he nevertheless decrees that the faithful
must communicate with them, because in the name of
Christ they come forward to this, trusting, that is, in
Christ, or in His name demanding this trial for them-
selves, even though, perhaps, they are not obeying His
precepts ; for He taught them to pray that they might
not be tempted ; and they are ignoring the fact too that
the Lord retired from those who were laying snares for
Him, and was wont sometimes to walk not openly ;
neither did He give up Himself to His passion, but was
given up by others ; and He commanded His disciples,
when their enemies persecuted them, to fly from city to
city, and not of their own accord to give themselves up
to the tormentors, lest they should be the cause of bring-
ing the guilt of much blood upon their heads, irritating
them as it were to inflict punishment upon godly men.
And he brings forward the example of the apostles, of
Stephen, of James, and the chiefs of the order, Peter
\and Paul.

CANON X.

Whence it is not right either that those of the
clergy who have deserted of their own accord,
and have lapsed, and taken up the contest afresh,
should remain any longer in their sacred office,
inasmuch as they have left destitute the flock of
the Lord, and brought blame upon themselves,
which thing did not one of the apostles. For
when the blessed apostle Paul had undergone
many persecutions, and had shown forth the
prizes of many contests, though he knew that it
was far better to " depart, and to be with Christ,"
yet he brings this forward, and says, " Neverthe-
less to abide in the flesh is more needful for you." '
For considering not his own advantage but the
advantage of many, that they might be saved, he
judged it more necessary than his own rest to
remain with the brethren, and to have a care for
them ; who also would have him that teacheth
to be " in doctrine " ^ an example to the faith-
ful. Whence it follows that those who, contend-
ing in prison, have fallen from their ministry,
and have again taken up the struggle, are plainly
wanting in perception. For how else is it that
they seek for that which they have left, when in
this present time they can be useful to the breth-
ren? For as long as they remained firm and
stable, of that which they had done contrary to
reason, of this indulgence was accorded them.
But when they lapsed, as haWng carried them-
selves with ostentation,^ and brought reproach
upon themselves, they can no longer discharge
their sacred ministry ; and, therefore, let them
the rather take heed to pass their life in humility,
ceasing from vainglory. For communion is suf-
ficient for them, which is granted them with
diligence and care • for two causes ; both that
they should not seem to be afflicted with sorrow,
and hence by violence seize on their departure


' Philipp. i. 23, 24.

2 Tit. ii. 7. _

3 Cf. St. Paul's description of charity, i Cor. xiii. 4: "Charity
vaunteth not itself," oii Trepn-epeiierai.


from this world ; and also lest any of the lapsed
should have a pretext for being remiss by occa-
sion of the punishment. And these indeed will
reap more shame and ignominy than all others,
even as he who laid the foundation and was not
able to finish it ; for " all that pass by," He
says, " will begin to mock him, saying, " This
man laid the foundation, and was not able to
finish it,"

Balsamon. The father having spoken of those who
of their own accord went over to the contest of martyr-
dom, now also speaks of those of the clergy who are in
such a case, and he says, that if any clergyman hath of
his own accord sought the contest, and then, not being
able to bear the tortures, has fallen, but returning to
hitnself, has recanted his error, and before the tyrants
confessed himself a Christian, such a one shall no
longer discharge his sacred ministry, because he hath
deserted the Lord's flock, and because, having of his
own accord sought the contest, through not being able
to endure the torment, he hath brought reproach upon
himself. For to neglect the teaching of the people, and
to prefer their own advantage, this did not the apostles.
For the mighty Paul, after that he had endured many
torments, though he perceived that it was far better to
leave this life, yet chose rather to live and to be tor-
mented for the salvation and instruction of the people.
They are therefore altogether devoid of perception who
seek the sacred ministry from which they have fallen of
their own accord. For how is it that they seek for that
which they have left, when they are able in this season
of persecution, that is, to be useful to their brethren }
If indeed they had not fallen, of that which they had
done contrary to reason, their spontaneous flight for in-
stance, or their slackness in teaching and confirming the
brethren, of these things indulgence would be extended
to chem. But if from their own arrogance and conceit
they have lapsed, — for of such a nature is it rashly to
venture to expose themselves to torture, and not to be
able to endure it, and thus a triumph has been gained
over them, — they cannot any longer execute their sacred
office. Wherefore let them the rather take heed that
they perfect their confession by humility, ceasing from
the vainglory of seeking for the sacred ministry ; for
communion with the faithful is sufficient for them, which
is granted for two reasons, with diligent caution, and
just judgment. For if we say that we will not hold them
to be communicants, we shall both afflict them with
grief, giving our sentence as it were that they should
depart this life with violence ; and we shall cause others
also, who may have lapsed, and wish to return to what
is right, to be negligent and remiss in this respect, hav-
ing as a pretext, that they will not be admitted to com-
municate with the faithful, even though after their fall
they should confess the faith, who, if they are not con-
verted, will undergo more shame and ignominy than
others, even as he who laid the foundation, and did not
finish the building. For such a one do those resemble,
who, for Christ's sake indeed, have offered themselves
to be tormented, and having laid as it were a good foun-
dation, have not been able to perfect that which is good
by reason of their fall. Observe, then, that not even
confession for Christ's sake restores him who has once
lapsed and thus become an alien from his clerical office.

ZoNARAS. The father having spoken of those who
have of their own accord exposed themselves to the
contest of martyrdom, now begins to discourse about
those of the clergy who have done the same thing ; and
says that if any clergyman has of his own accord given
himself up, and then, not being able to endure the vio-
lence of the torment, has fallen, and again recollecting
himself has roused himself afresh to the contest, and
has confessed himself a Christian before the tyrants, a


THE CANONICAL EPISTLE.


275


man of this sort is not any longer to be admitted to the
sacred ministry. And the reason of this he subjoins ;
because he has forsaken the Lord's flock, and because
having of his own accord offered himself to the enemy,
and not having with constancy endured his torments,
he has brought reproach upon himself. But that they
should despise the instruction of the people, and prefer
their own advantage, this did not the apostles. For the
mighty Paul, though he had endured many torments, and
felt that it was better for him to leave this life, preferred
to live and to be tormented for the salvation and instruc-
tion of the people. Wherefore he demonstrates those
to be altogether devoid of perception who ask for the
sacred ministry from which they have voluntarily fallen.
For how is it, says he, that they ask for that which they
have left, when in a season of this sort, of raging perse-
cution forsooth, they can be of great assistance to the
brethren .-" As long as they were free from the charge
of having lapsed, they would have obtained pardon for
their action that was rashly undertaken, that, namely,
of voluntarily offering themselves to the adversary, or
their negligence in instructing the brethren. But since
they have fallen, inasmuch as they have acted ostenta-
tiously, they are not to be permitted any longer to dis-
charge their sacred functions. If, says he, that they had
not fallen they would have obtained pardon for their
action which was devoid of reason ; calling that action
devoid of reason, not only because they gave themselves
up to the enemy, but rather because they deserted the
Lord's flock, and did not remain to guard it, and to con-
firm the brethren who were harassed in this time of per-
secution. But if they have fallen, from the fact that
they have carried themselves vauntingly, and he here
calls pride and arrogance nepKepeia, because it is from
arrogance that they have put confidence in themselves,
and have put an end to the contest, and have brought
reproach upon themselves ; that is, by reason of their
fall, they have contracted a blemish and stain, it is not
lawful for them any longer to be occupied in the sacred
ministry. Wherefore let them study, says he, to perfect
their confession by humility, ceasing forsooth from all
vainglory. For in that they seek to be enrolled in the
sacred ministry, this proceeds from ambition and self-
seeking. For communion is sufficient for them, that the
faithful should communicate with them, and pray with
them, and that they should participate in the sacred
mysteries. And this should be granted with diligent
caution and care, both lest they should seem to be
afificted with grief, seizing on a dissolution of this life,
lest, that is, as he says, being overcome with grief, thev
should depart and get free from the body, that is, go out
from it, from the violence of the torment and afflictions
which they undergo in the prison ; and that none should
have the pretext of their punishment for carrying them-
selves dissolutely and cowardly in the contest of confes-
sion, and thus fall away. Who will the rather be put
to shame, according to the saying in the Gospel, " Who
could not finish after that he had laid the foundation." '
Moreover, let those apply their minds to what is in
this place brought forward by this great father and holy
martyr, who say that it is lawful for bishops to give up
their Sees, and to retain the dignity of the priesthood.
For if to the clergy who voluntarily offered themselves
to the contest of confession, and who, when tormented,
failed in constancy and yielded, and afterwards returned
to the contest, if to them indulgence is scarcely granted,
because they deferred to execute their ministerial duties;
nor, in the opinion of this divine father, is any thing
else objected to them but that they deserted the breth-
ren, when in adverse and turbulent times they might
have been useful in confirming them in the faith, and
that after that they had been counted worthy to bear
testimony to the faith, and carried about in their flesh
the marks of Christ ; how shall that chief priest and


pastor, who ought to lay down his life for the sheep,
when he has deserted the flock that was committed unto
him, and repudiated its care and administration, and as
far as in him lies given it over to the wolf, be thought
worthy to retain the dignity of the sacred ministry, and
not rather be judged worthy of the severest punish-
ments for deserting the people entrusted to his care ?
Nay, but he will demand a reward for this thing, or
rather he will himself supply it to himself : refusing that
which brings labour to them, namely, the office of teach-
ing and of correcting vice ; but embracing that which
gains for them honour and glory, making it their own,
keeping hold of it with their teeth as it were, and not
letting it go in the least. For if in the case of the clergy
it be called an action contrary to reason to desert the
people, and to go away from them to the contest in the '
cause of piety; how much more contrary to reason
shall it be judged for a bishop to desert his people, not
in order that he may contend in a contest, but that he
may deliver himself up to ease and indolence, and lay
aside and escape entirely from his cares for the salva-
tion of souls .'' The sixteenth canon also of the Seventh
Qlcumenical Council - gravely accuses those of folly
who decree that the dignity of the sacred ministry can
be retained by a bishop who has repudiated his bishop-
ric. For if according to the sentence of the aforesaid
canon, a bishop who has been absent from his See more
than six months, unless some one of the causes there
enumerated shall have intervened, has both fallen from
the episcopate and the highest dignity of the priesthood,
and is deprived of both ; how shall he who has repudi-
ated the episcopate, and refuses any longer to feed the
flock entrusted to him, and despises the care of it
through his desire of an easy life, be held to be of
the number of bishops ? For if he who has committed
the lesser fault, of leaving for more than six months the
people placed under him destitute of the care and ad-
ministration of a pastor, incurs the privation of the
episcopate and of his sacred dignity; he who offends
in a way greater and much more grievous, namely, in
deserting altogether the multitude which the grace of
the Holy Spirit has committed to him to be cared for
and guarded, shall deservedly be punished with greater
severity, and will pay the heavier penalty of losing, as
far as he is concerned, the flock of which he was ap-
I pointed shepherd by the great and chief Shepherd and
! High Priest. But those who decree the dignity of the
priesthood to him as a reward and honorarium for de-
clining his office, in my opinion make both themselves
j and him obno.xious to the judgment of God.

! CANON XI.

For those who first, when the persecution
waxed warm, leaped forth, standing around the
judgment-seat, and beholding the holy martyrs
who were hastening to the " prize of their high
calling," 3 then, fired with a holy zeal, gave them-
selves up to this, using much boldness, and es-
pecially when they saw those who were drawn
aside and lapsed, on their account they were
roused mightily within, and, as it were by some
inward voice, impelled to war down and subdue
the adversary who was exulting ; for this they
earnestly contended, that he might not seem " to
be wise in his own conceit," •* on account of those
things in which by reason of his subtlety they
appeared to be inferior to him, even though it


' A digression which follows is entirely directed against Muzalon.


2 [Not CEcumenical.]

3 Philipp. iii. 14.
■• Rom. xii. 16.


276


THE CANONICAL EPISTLE.


escaped his observation that he was overcome
by those who with constancy endured the tor-
ments of the lash and scourge, and the sharp
edge of the sword, the burning in the fire, and
the immersion in the water. To those also who
entreat that tlie prayers and supplications of
faith should be made either in behalf of those
who have been punished by imprisonment, and
have been delivered up by hunger and thirst, or
for those who out of prison have by the judges
been tortured with whippings and scourgings,
and afterwards have been overcome by the in-
firmity of the flesh, it is right to give our consent.
For to sympathize with the sorrow and affliction
of those who sorrow and mourn for those who
in the contest have been overcome by the great
strength of the evil-contriving devil, whether it
be for parents, or brethren, or children, hurts no
one. For we know that on account of the faith
of others some have obtained the goodness of
God, both in the remission of sins, and in the
health of their bodies, and in the resurrection of
the dead. Therefore, being mindful of the many
labours and distresses which for the name of
Christ they have sustained, since they have them-
selves also repented, and have bewailed that
which was done by them through their being
betrayed by the languor and mortification of the
body ; and since, besides this, they testify that
in their life they have as it were been aliens from
their city, let us pray together with them and
entreat for their reconcifiation, together with
other things that are befitting, through Him who
is " our Advocate with the Father, and makes
propitiation for our sins." " And if any man
sin," says he, " we have an Advocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ the righteous : and He is
the propitiation for our sins." '

Balsamon. The saint having said before that those
who of their own accord entered upon the contest and
lapsed, and did not repent nor recant their error, would
be covered with more shame, as being like men who did
not go on with the building beyond the foundation, that
is, did not perfect that which is good, now brings for-
ward a confirmation of this and other matters, saying,
Those who taking their stand in the fervour and vehe-
mence of the persecution, seeing the holy martyrs, and
with what divine zeal they contended to receive the
celestial crown, gave themselves up to martyrdom with
much boldness, and especially when they saw some
drawn aside, that is, led astray and deluded by the devil,
and lapsing or denying godliness ; wherefore being in-
wardly inflamed, and with hearts enkindled, as hearing
that they by this means should war down and subdue
the proud adversary the devil, were eager to undergo
martyrdom lest the devil should boast and seem "to be
wise in his own conceit," as having by his subtlety and
malice overcome those who of their own accord sought
martyrdom : even though it escaped him that he was
rather overcome by those combatants who bravely with-
stood the torments. Therefore to the faithful who pray
for those who are enduring punishment, and afflicted by
it, it is right to assent or to concur in this, which is also

' I John ii. I.


decreed ; and it can by no means be hurtful to sympa-
thize in their sorrow and affliction with the parents or
other relatives in behalf of those who have given their
testimony and undergone martyrdom, but have lapsed
by the arts and snares of the devil. For we know that
many have obtained the goodness and compassion of
God by the prayers of others. Therefore we will pray
for them that remission of their sins be granted them by
God ; and with the others who have lapsed, and have
afterwards recanted their error, and confessed godliness,
we will communicate, being mindful of those contests
which before their fall they sustained for God's sake,
and also of their subsequent worthy repentance, and
that they testify that on account of their sin they have
been as it were aliens from their city ; and we will not
only communicate with them, but pray also for their
reconciliation, together with other things that are con-
venient, either with the good works which ought to be
done by them — fasting, for instance, almsgiving, and
penance ; by which things He who is our Advocate
makes the Father propitious towards us. Then he
makes use of a passage of Holy Scripture, and this is
taken from the first catholic epistle of the holy apostle
and evangelist John.

ZoNARAS. The meaning of the present canon is as
follows : — Those, he says, who set in the fervour of the
persecution, that is, in its greatest height and most vehe-
ment heat, beheld the martyrdoms of the saints, and how
eagerly they hastened to receive the celestial crown, fired
with a holy emulation, gave themselves up to martyrdom,
leaping as it were into the contest with much boldness,
in imitation of the saints who suffered, and offered them-
selves readily for the confirming of the faith by their
testimony ; and on that account especially, because they
beheld many who were drawn aside, that is, led astray,
denying their faith. Whereupon they being inflamed,
that is, fired in heart, endeavoured to subdue the adver-
sary that was hostile to them, that he might not, as a
victor, exult over the godly. Although it escaped him
that he was rather conquered by them, many even unto
death showing forth constancy for the faith. They has-
tened, therefore, says he, to do this, but overcome by the
violence of their torments, by reason of the infirmity of
the flesh, being some of them evil entreated in prison,
and others punished by decree of the judges, and not
being able to endure their punishment. It is meet,
therefore, to s^-mpathize with those who mourn for their
sakes. Now they mourn, says he, some the lapse of
parents, others of brethren, and others of children. To
mourn, therefore, with those who bewail the lapsed,
hurts no one ; neither to join in prayer and grief with
those who pray for themselves, together with other things
that are reasonable, namely, that they who have lapsed
may show forth other things that are consistent with
penitence ; such as are fasting and tears and other hu-
miliations, and observe the punishment inflicted on them,
and, if their means allow, bestow money upon the ]50or;
by which means He who is the Advocate in our behalf
will render the Father propitious to us. Then he brings
forward a passage from Holy Scripture, which is taken
from the first epistle of the holy apostle and evangelist
John.

CANON XII.

Against those who have given money that they
might be entirely undisturbed by evil,- an accu-
sation cannot be brought. For they have sus-
tained the loss and sacrifice of their goods that
they might not hurt or destroy their soul, which
others for the sake of filthy lucre have not done ;
and yet the Lord says, " What is a man profited,
if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own

2 (caKt'a.


THE CANONICAL EPISTLE.


277


soul?"' and again, "Ye cannot serve God and
mammon." ^ In these things, then, they have
shown themselves the servants of God, inasmuch
as they have hated, trodden under foot, and de-
spised money, and have thus fulfilled what is
written : " The ransom of a man's life are his
riches." ^ For we read also in the Acts of the
Apostles that those who in the stead of Paul and
Silas were dragged before the magistrates at
Thessalonica, were dismissed with a heavy fine.
For after that they had been very burdensome
to them for his name, and had troubled the peo-
ple and the rulers of the city, " having taken
security," he says, ''of Jason, and of the others,
they let them go. And the brethren immediately
sent away Paul and Silas by night unto Berea." •*

Balsamon. After that the saint had finished his
discourse concerning those who of their own accord
had offered themselves to martyrdom, he said that those
were not to be reprehended who by a sum of money
paid down freed themselves from the afiliction of perse-
cution. For they preferred to make a sacrifice of their
money rather than of their souls. Then he confirms
this, and brings forward different Scripture examples
from the Acts of the Apostles concerning the blessed
apostle Paul and others.

ZoNARAS. But those, he says, are not to be repre-
hended who have paid money down, and thus escaped,
and maintained their piety, nor for this thing may any
one bring an accusation against them. For they have
preferred to lose their money rather than their souls,
and have shown that they wish to serve God and not
mammon ; that is, riches. And he brings forward the
words of Scripture, and the example, as in the Acts of
the Apostles, of the blessed apostle I^aul and others.
Now, when it is said that they have been undisturbed
by all evil,' it is to be so taken, either that they have
been left undisturbed, so far as the denial of the faith
is concerned, which overcomes all evil,' or he means ^
the afflictions of persecutions.

CANON XIII.

Hence neither is it lawful to accuse those who
have left all, and have retired for the safety of
their life, as if others had been held back by
them. For at Ephesus also they seized Gains
and Aristarchus instead of Paul, and rushed to
the theatre, these being Paul's companions in
travel,'' and he wishing himself to enter in unto
the people, since it was by reason of his having
persuaded them, and drawing away a great mul-
titude to the worship of the true God, that the
tumult arose. " The disciples suffered him not,"
he says. " Nay, moreover, certain of the chief
of Asia, who were his friends, sent unto him,
desiring him that he would not adventure him-
self into the theatre." But if any persist in con-
tending with them, let them apply their minds
with sincerity to him who says, " Escape for thy


' Matt. xvi. 26.

~ Matt. vi. 24.

3 Prov. xiii. 8.

* Acts xvii. 9, 10.

5 KaKia.

*" By KaKia^.

' Acts xix. 26-30.


life ; look not behind thee." ^ Let them recall
to their minds also how Peter, the chief of the
apostles, " was thrown into prison, and delivered
to four quaternions of soldiers to keep him ; " ^
of whom, when he had escaped by night, and
had been preserved out of the hand of the Jews
by the commandment of the angel of the Lord,
it is said, " As soon as it was day, there was no
small stir among the soldiers, what was become
of Peter. And when Herod had sought for him,
and found him not, he examined the keepers,
and commanded that they should be put to
death," '° on account of whom no blame is attrib-
uted to Peter ; for it was in their power, when
they saw what was done, to escape, just as also
all the infants in Bethlehem," and all the coast
thereof, might have escaped, if their parents had
known what was going to happen. These were
put to death by the murderer Herod, in order
to secure the death of one Infant whom he
sought, which Infant itself also escaped at the
commandment of the angel of the Lord, who
now began quickly to spoil, and to hasten the
prey, according to the name whereby he was
called ; as it is written, " Call his name Maher-
shalal-hash-baz : for before the child shall have
knowledge to cry, My father and my mother,
the riches of Damascus and the spoil of Samaria
shall be taken away before the king of Assyria." '^
The Magi then as now having been despoiled
and divided for a prey, humbly, and in the guise
of suppliants, adore the Child, opening their
treasures, and offering unto Him gifts most op-
portune and magnificent — gold, and frankin-
cense, and myrrh — as to a king, to God, and
to man ; whence they were no longer willing to
return to the Assyrian king, being forbidden to
do so by Providence. For " being warned of
God in a dream," he says, " that they should
not return to Herod, they departed into their
own country another way." '■'' Hence the blood-
thirsty " Herod, when he saw that he was
mocked of the wise men, was exceeding wroth,
and sent forth," he says, "and slew all the chil-
dren that were in Bethlehem, and in all the
coast thereof, from two years old and under,
according to the time that he had diligently
inquired of the wise men." '•* Together with
whom, having sought to kill another infant that
had been previously born, and not being able
to find him, he slew t//e child's father Zacharias
between the temple and the altar, the child
having escaped with his mother Elisabeth.'S


8 Gen. xix. 17.

9 Acts xii. 4.

'° Acts xii. 18, 19.
" Matt. ii. 13-16.

'2 Isa. viii. 3, 4. The literal meaning of the name Maher-shalal-
hash-baz is, " In speed spoil, booty hastens."
'3 Matt. ii. 11-13.
'■l Matt. ii. 16.
IS [Matt, xxiii. 35.]


2/8


THE CANONICAL EPISTLE.


Whence these men that have withdrawn them-
selves are not at all to be blamed.

Balsamon. But if any, says he, have left their good
and gone away, lest they should be detained and brought
into peril, as being those perhaps who might not be able
to persist in their confession to the end, on account of
the cruelty of their tormentors, they shall not be found
fault with, even though others have been detained on
their account. And he brings forward as an instance
on this score Gains and Aristarchus, who were detained
instead of Paul ; the soldiers who kept Peter ; the in-
fants who were massacred by Herod on account of
Christ ; and Zacharias, the father of the revered and
blessed forerunner.

ZoNARAS. But if any, says he, have left their pos-
sessions, and have gone away, lest being detained they
should be endangered, and because, perhaps, they would
not be able to persist in their confession unto the end,
on account of the cruelty of the tormentors, they are
not to be accused, even if others are detained and pun-
ished on their account. And, again, he brings forward
an example from the Acts of the Apostles, saying that
at Ephesus also Gains and Aristarchus were appre-
hended in the stead of Paul, and that Paul was not
blamed for this ; nor was Peter, when he was brought
forth out of prison by an angel, and escaped the danger,
and the soldiers who guarded him were on his account
punished. Then he cites another example from the
Gospel, namely, the infants who were put to death by
Herod ; on account of which, says he, our Lord was not
blamed. And when Elisabeth had taken to flight with
John, and had preserved him, his father Zacharias was
put to death, the child being demanded of him ; nor was
this imputed as a crime to John.

CANON XIV.

But if any have endured much violence and
the strong pressure of necessity, receiving into
their mouths iron and chains, and for their good
affection towards the faith have bravely borne the
burning of their hands that against their will had
been put to the profane sacrifice, as from their
prison the thrice-blessed martyrs have written to
me respecting those in Libya, and others their
fellow-ministers ; such, on the testimony of the
rest of their brethren, can be placed in the min-
istry amongst the confessors, as those who have
been mortified by many torments, and were no
longer able either to speak, or to give utterance,
or to move, so as to resist those who vainly of-
fered them violence. For they did not assent to
their impiety ; as I have again heard from their
fellow-ministers, they will be reckoned amongst
the confessors, as also he who hath after the ex-
ample of Timothy ordered his life, obeying him
who says, " Follow after righteousness, godliness,
faith, love, patience, meekness. Fight the good
fight of faith, lay hold on eternal life, whereunto
thou art also called, and hast professed a good
profession before many witnesses." '

Balsamon. Those who by the violence of the tyrant
seemed to eat meat that had been offered to idols, or to
drink wine from the Greek libations, — for it happened
sometimes that they were thrown upon the ground, and


^ I Tim. vi. II, 12.


hooks or pieces of iron put into their mouths to keep
them open, and then the tyrants poured wine down their
throats, or threw into them pieces of meat; or putting
hot coals into their hands, together with incense, they
compelled them to sacrifice, — if they were clergymen,
the canon decrees that they should each in his own de-
gree be ranked amongst the confessors ; but if laymen,
that they should be reckoned as martyrs, because they
did not these things of their own free-will, nor did they
at all assent to the action. As also amongst the con-
fessors are to be reckoned those who from the extremity
of the tortures lost their strength of body, and were no't
able to resist those who poured into their mouths the
wine of the libations. And next in order he speaks of
those who give the testimony of a good conscience, and
enumerates them amongst the confessors.

Zonaras. Those who chastised the blessed martyrs,
after many torments, in the case of some violently
poured into their mouths the wine of the libations, or
even crammed into their mouths some of the meat that
had been offered to idols, and putting incense into their
hands, they dragged them to the altars, and then vio-
lently seizing on their hands, they either sprinkled the
incense upon the altar, or placed hot coals together with
the incense into their hands, that, not being able to
bear the pain of the burning, they might drop the in-
cense together with the coals upon the altar ; for they
were constrained by them. Men of this sort, he affirms,
can rernain enrolled in the sacred ministry, or rather be
placed in the rank of confessors. For they did not by
their own choice either taste the libations, or place the
incense upon the altar, but being compelled by violence,
their reason not consenting to the action ; as also those
who from the e-xtremity of the suffering lost their bodily
vigour, so as neither to be able to speak or move, nor
to resist those who were violently pouring into their
mouths the wine of libations, these also are to be placed
amongst the confessors. And next in order he dis-
courses of those who give the testimony of a good
conscience, and places them also in the number of
confessors.

CANON XV.

No one shall find fault with us for observing
the fourth day of the week, and the preparation,^
on which it is reasonably enjoined us to fast
according to the tradition.^ On the fourth day,
indeed, because on it the Jews took counsel for
the betrayal of the Lord; and on the sixth,
because on it He himself suffered for us. But
the Lord's day we celebrate as a day of joy,
because on it He rose again, on which day we
have received it for a custom not even to bow
the knee.

Balsamon. Conformably to the sixty-fourth Apos-
tolical canon, which decrees that we are not to fast on
the Sabbath, with one exception, the great Sabbath ;
and to the sixty-ninth canon, which severely punishes
those who do not fast in the Holy Lent, and on every
fourth day of the week and day of preparation. Thus
also does the present canon decree.

Zonaras. Always, says he, are the fourth and sixth
days of every week to be kept as fasts ; nor will any
one find fault with us for fasting on them ; and the
reasons he subjoins. But on the Lord's day we ought
not to fast, for it is a day of joy for the resurrection of
the Lord, and on it, says he, we have received that we
ought not even to bow the knee. This word, therefore,


2 The sixth day, the day before the Hebrew Sabbath. — Tr.
[The Parasceve.^

3 [Stationary days. See Vol. ii. p. 33, note 6.]


THE CANONICAL EPISTLE.


279


is to be carefully observed, " we have received," and
"it is enjoined upon us according to the tradition."
For from hence it is evident that long-established cus-
tom was taken for law.' Moreover, the great Basil


- [Vol. V. pp. 382, 571, the notes.]


annexes also the causes for which it was forbidden to
bend the knee on the Lord's day, and from the Passover
to Pentecost. Read also the sixty-sixth and sixty-ninth
Apostolical canons.^


2 [So called. Vol. viii., this series. Elucidation II.]


NOTE BY THE AMERICAN EDITOR.

Here may be noted the historic fact that this terrible epoch of persecutions had driven many
to the deserts, where they dwelt as hermits.' It now introduced nionastuistn, in its earliest and
least objectionable forms, into Egypt, whence it soon spread into the Church at large. For a
favourable view of the character and life of St. Antony, see Neale's history ^ of this period ; but,
if he turns it into an indirect plea for the subsequent history of monasticism, we shall find in Canon
Kingsley's Hypatia a high-wrought testimony of an antagonistic character. Bingham,^ avoid-
ing the entanglements of primitive with mediaeval history, affords a just view of what may be said
of the rise of this mighty institution, based upon two texts ■* of Holy Scripture, proceeding from the
Incarnate Word Himself, which impressed themselves on the fervid spirit of Antony. Who can
wonder that fire and sword and ravening wolves predis[Dosed men and women to avoid the do-
mestic life, and the bringing of hapless families into existence as a prey to the remorseless cruelty
of the empire ? Far be it from me to forget what the world owes, directly and indirectly, to the
nobler and purer orders, — what learning must ever acknowledge as its debt to the Benedictines of
the West.5 But, on the other hand, after the melancholy episcopate of Cyril, we cannot but trace,
in the history of Oriental monasticism, not only the causes of the decay of Alexandrian scholarship
and influence, but of the ignominious fate of the Byzantine Empire, and of that paltry devotion
to images which seemed to invoke the retributions of a "jealous god," and which favoured the
rise of an impostor who found in his "abhorrence of idols" an excuse for making himself the
" Scourge of God."


' Luke i. 80, ix. 10; Gal. i. 17. But compare i Kings xix. 9.

2 Patriarchate, etc., vol. i. p. 107. Antony was born circa a.d. 251, died a.d. 356.

3 Antiqu., book vii. cap. i.

* Matt. xix. 21 and Matt. vi. 34.

5 Montalembert's Monks of the West is but a fascinating romance, but is well worthy of attention


FRAGMENTS FROM THE WRITINGS OF PETER.


I.- LETTER TO THE CHURCH AT ALEXAN-
DRIA.'

Peter, to the brethren beloved and estab-
hshed in the faith of God, peace in the Lord.
Since I have found out that Meletius acts in no
way for the common good, — for neither is he
contented with the letter of the most holy bish-
ops and martyrs, — but, invading my parish,^ hath
assumed so much to himself as to endeavour to
separate from my authority the priests,^ and
those who had been entrusted with visiting the
needy ; '* and, giving proof of his desire for pre-
eminence, has ordained in the prison several
unto himself; now, take ye heed to this, and
hold no communion with him, until I meet him
in company with some wise and discreet men,
and see what the designs are which he has
thought upon. Fare ye well.

n. — ON THE GODHEAD.s

Since certainly " grace and truth came by
Jesus Christ,"^ whence also by grace we are
saved, according to that word of the apostle,
" and that not of yourselves, nor of works, lest
any man should boast ; " 7 by the will of God,
" the Word was made flesh," ^ and " was found
in fashion as a man." 9 But yet He was not
left without His divinity. For neither " though
He was rich did He become poor " '° that He
might absolutely be separated from His power
and glory, but that He might Himself endure
death for us sinners, the just for the unjust, that
He might bring us to God, " being put to death
in the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit ; " and
afterwards other things. Whence the evangelist
also asserts the truth when he says, " The Word
was made flesh, and dwelt among us ; " then in-
deed, from the time when the angel had saluted


' From Gallandius.

2 [See p. 240, supra. But note, the parish was greater than the
diocese In ancient termipology.]

3 [Presbyters.]
* [Deacons.]

5 A fragment from his book, from the Acts of the Council of Ephe-
sus, 5. and vii. 2. — Galland.
^ John i. 17.
^ Eph. ii. 8, 9.
^ John i. 14.
9 Phil. ii. -J.
*° 2 Cor. viiL 9.

280


the virgin, saying, " Hail, thou that art highly
favoured, the Lord is with thee." Now when
Gabriel said, "The Lord is with thee," he meant
God the Word is with thee. For he shows that
He was conceived in the womb, and was to be-
come flesh ; as it is written, " The Holy Ghost
shall come upon thee, and the power of the
Highest shall overshadow thee ; therefore also
that holy thing which shall be born of thee
shall be called the Son of God ; " " and after-
wards other things. Now God the Word, in the
absence of a man, by the will of God, who
easily effects everything, was made flesh in the
womb of the virgin, not requiring the operation
of the presence of a man. For more effica-
cious than a man was the power of God over-
shadowing the virgin, together with the Holy
Ghost also who came upon her.

HL— ON THE ADVENT OF OUR SAVIOUR.'^

And He said unto Judas, " Betrayest thou the
Son of God with a kiss? " '3 These things and
the like, and all the signs which He showed,
and His miracles, prove that He is God made
man. Both things therefore are demonstrated,
that He was God by nature, and that He was
man by nature.

IV. — ON THE SOJOURNING OF CHRIST WITH US.'*

Both therefore is proved, that he was God by
nature, and was made man by nature.

v. — THAT UP TO THE TIME OF THE DESTRUC-
TION OF JERUSALEM, THE JEWS RIGHTLY
APPOINTED THE FOURTEENTH DAY OF THE
FIRST LUNAR MONTH.
L'S

I. Since the mercy of God is everywhere
great, let us bless Him, and also because He
has sent unto us the Spirit of truth to guide us
into all truth. For for this cause the month


" Luke i. 35.

'^ A fragment from the homily. Apud Leontium Byzant., lib. i.,
contra Nestor, et Eutych., tom. i. Thes. Canis., p. 550.

'3 Luke xxii. 48.

'■* A fragment from the homily. Ex Leontio Hierosolymitano, con-
tra Monophysitas, Ap. Mai. Script. Vet., tom. vii. p. 134.

'5 Apud Galland, Ex Chronica Paschal., p. i, seqq., edit. Venet.,
1729.


FRAGMENTS FROM THE WRITINGS OF PETER.


281


Abib was appointed by the law to be the begin-
ning of months, and was made known unto us
as the first among the months of the year ; both
by the ancient writers who hved before, and by
the later who hved after the destruction of Jeru-
salem, it was shown to possess a most clear and
evidently definite period, especially because in
some places the reaping is early, and sometimes
it is late, so as to be sometimes before the time
and sometimes after it, as it happened in the
very beginning of the giving of the law, before
the Passover, according as it is written, " But the
wheat and the rye were not smitten, for they
were not grown up." ' Whence it is rightly pre-
scribed by the law, that from the vernal equinox,
in whatsoever week the fourteenth day of the
first month shall fall, in it the Passover is to be
celebrated, becoming and conformable songs of
praise having been first taken up for its celebra-
tion. For this first month, says he, " shall be
unto you the beginning of months," ^ when the
sun in the summer-time sends forth a far stronger
and clearer light, and the days are lengthened
and become longer, whilst the nights are con-
tracted and shortened. Moreover, when the new
seeds have sprung up, they are thoroughly purged,
and borne into the threshing floor ; nor only this,
but also all the shrubs blossom, and burst forth
into flower. Immediately therefore they are
discovered to send forth in alternation various
and diverse fruits, so that the grape-clusters are
found at that time ; as says the lawgiver, " Now,
it was the time of spring, of the first ripe
grapes ; " ^ and when he sent the men to spy
out the land, they brought, on bearers, a large
cluster of grapes, and pomegranates also, and
figs. For then, as they say, our eternal God
also, the Maker and Creator of all things, framed
all things, and said to them, " Let the earth bring
forth grass, the herb yielding seed, and the fruit
tree yielding fruit after his kind, whose seed is
in itself upon the earth." Then he adds, " And
it was so ; and God saw that it was good." ^
Moreover, he makes quite clear that the first
month amongst the Hebrews was appointed by
law, which we know to have been observed by
the Jews up to the destruction of Jerusalem,
because this has been so handed down by the
Hebrew tradition. But after the destruction of
the city it was mocked at by some hardening
of heart, which we observing, according to the
law, with sincerity have received ; and in this,
according to the Word, when he speaks of the
day of our holy festivity, which the election hath
attained : but the rest have become hardened,^
as said the Scripture ; and after other things.


' Exod. ix. 32.

2 Exod. xii. 2.

3 Num. xii. 24.

* Gen. i. 11, 12. [As"m summer-time," probably.]
5 Rom. xi. 7. [" Our holy festivity " = Easter.]


2. And He says as follows : ''All these things
will they do unto you for My name's sake, be-
cause they know not Him that sent Me." ^ But
if they knew not Him who sent, and Him who
was sent, there is no reason to doubt but that
they have been ignorant of the Passover as pre-
scribed by the law, so as not merely to err in
their choice of the place, but also in reckoning
the beginning of the month, which is the first
amongst the months of the year, on the fourteenth
day of which, being accurately observed, after
the equinox, the ancients celebrated the Passover,
according to the divine command ; whereas the
men of the present day now celebrate it before
the equinox, and that altogether through negli-
gence and error, being ignorant how they cele-
brated it in its season, as He confesses who in
these things was described.

3. Whether therefore the Jews erroneously
sometimes celebrate their Passover according to
the course of the moon in the month Phamenoth,
or according to the intercalary month, every third
year in the month Pharmuthi,^ matters not to us.
For we have no other object than to keep the
remembrance of His Passion, and that at this
very time ; as those who were eye-witnesses of
it have from the beginning handed down, before
the Egyptians believed. For neither by observ-
ing the course of the moon do they necessarily
celebrate it on the sixteenth day of Phamenoth,
but once every three years in the month Phar-
muthi ; for from the beginning, and before the
advent of Christ, they seem to have so done.
Hence, when the Lord reproves them by the
prophet, He says, " They do always err in their
heart ; and I have sworn in My wrath that they
shall not enter into My rest." ^

4. Wherefore, as thou seest, even in this thou
appearest to be lying greatly, not only against
men, but also against God. First, indeed, since
in this matter the Jews never erred, as consorting
with those who were eye-witnesses and ministers,
much less from the beginning before the advent
of Christ. For God does not say that they did
always err in their heart as regards the precept
of the law concerning the Passover, as thou hast
written, but on account of all their other disobe-
dience, and on account of their evil and un-
seemly deeds, when, indeed. He perceived them
turning to idolatry and to fornication.

5. And after a few things. So that also in this
respect, since thou hast slumbered, rouse thyself
much, and very much, with the scourge of the
Preacher, being mindful especially of that pas-
sage where he speaks of " slipping on the pave-
ment, and with the tongue." 9 For, as thou


6 John XV. 21.

7 [Vol. ii. p. 333, note 4. Clement is always worth noting, for his
influence is thus traceable very widely in the early literature.]

^ Ps. xcv. 10, II.
9 Ecclus. XX. 18.


2b2


FRAGMENTS FROM THE WRITINGS OF PETER.


seest again, the charge cast by thee upon their
leaders is reflected back ; nay, and one may sus-
pect a great subsequent danger, inasmuch as we
hear that the stone which a man casts up on
high falls back upon his head. Much more reck-
less is he who, in this respect, ventures to bring
a charge against Moses, that mighty servant of
God, or Joshua, the son of Nun, who succeeded
him, or those who in succession rightly followed
them and ruled ; the judges, I mean, and the
kings who appeared, or the prophets whom the
Holy Spirit inspired, and those who amongst
the high-priests were blameless, and those who,
in following the traditions, changed nothing,
but agreed as to the observance of the Pass-
over in its season, as also of the rest of their
feasts.

6. And after other things. But thou oughtest
rather to have pursued a safer and more auspi-
cious course, and not to have written rashly and
slanderously, that they seem from the beginning,
and always, to have been in error about the Pass-
over, which you cannot prove, whatever charge
you may wish to bring against those who, at the
present time, have erred with -a grievous wander-
ing, having fallen away from the commandment
of the law concerning the Passover and other
things. For the ancients seem to have kept it
after the vernal equinox, which you can dis-
cover if you read ancient books, and those
especially which were written by the learned
Hebrews.

7. That therefore up to the period of the
Lord's Passion, and at the time of the last de-
struction of Jerusalem, which happened under
Vespasian, the Roman emperor, the people of
Israel, rightly observing the fourteenth day of
the first lunar month, celebrated on it the Pass-
over of the law, has been briefly demonstrated.
Therefore, when the holy prophets, and all, as
I have said, who righteously and justly walked
in the law of the Lord, together with the entire
people, celebrated a typical and shadowy Pass-
over, the Creator and Lord of every visible and
invisible creature, the only-begotten Son, and the
Word co-eternal with the Father and the Holy
Spirit, and of the same substance with them, ac-
cording to His divine nature, our Lord and God,
Jesus Christ, being in the end of the world born
according to the flesh of our holy and glorious
lady, Mother of God, and Ever- Virgin, and, *of
a truth, of Mary the Mother of God ; and being
seen upon earth, and having true and real con-
verse as man with men, who were of the same
substance with Him, according to His human
nature. Himself also, with the people, in the
years before His public ministry and during His
public ministry, did celebrate the legal and
shadowy Passover, eating the typical lamb. For
" I came not to destroy the law, or the prophets.


but to fulfil them," the Saviour Himself said in
the Gospel.

But after His public ministry He did not eat
of the lamb,' but Himself suffered as the true
Lamb in the Paschal feast, as John, the divine
and evangelist, teaches us in the Gospel written
by him, where he thus speaks : "Then led they
Jesus from Caiaphas unto the hall of judgment :
and it was early ; and they themselves went not
into the judgment-hall, lest they should be de-
filed, but that they might eat the passover." ^
And after a few things more. " When Pilate
therefore heard that saying, he brought Jesus
forth, and sat down in the judgment-seat, in a
place that is called the Pavement, but in the
Hebrew, Gabbatha. And it was the preparation
of the passover, and about the third hour,"^ as
the correct books render it, and the copy itself
that was written by the hand of the evangelist,
which, by the divine grace, has been preserved
in the most holy church of Ephesus, and is there
adored by the faithful. And again the same
evangelist says : " The Jews therefore, because
it was the preparation, that the bodies should
not remain upon the cross on the Sabbath-day
(for that Sabbath-day was an high day), besought
Pilate that their legs might be broken, and that
they might be taken away." ■* On that day,
therefore, on which the Jews were about to eat
the Passover in the evening, our Lord and Saviour
Jesus Christ was crucified, being made the victim
to those who were about to partake by faith of
the mystery concerning Him, according to what
is written by the blessed Paul : " For even Christ
our Passover is sacrificed for us ; " 5 and not as
some who, carried along by ignorance, confi-
dently affirm that after He had eaten the Pass-
over, He was betrayed ; which we neither learn
from the holy evangelists, nor has any of the
blessed apostles handed it down to us. At the
time, therefore, in which our Lord and God
Jesus Christ suffered for us, according to the
flesh. He did not eat of the legal Passover ; but,
as I have said. He Himself, as the true Lamb,
was sacrificed for us in the feast of the typical
Passover, on the day of the preparation, the
fourteenth of the first lunar month. The typical
Passover, therefore, then ceased, the true Pass-
over being present : " For Christ our Passover
was sacrificed for us," as has been before said,
and as that chosen vessel, the apostle Paul,
teaches.^


' [But compare Browne, On the Thirty-nine Articles, p. 717,
note 3, American edition, 1874.]

2 John xviii. 28.

3 John xix. 13, 14. And about the sixth hour is the reading of
our EngUsh version. According to St. Mark, the crucifixion took
place at the third hour (chap. xxv. 25). Eusebius, Theophylact, and
Severus (in the Catena, ed. Liicke, ii.) suppose that there has been
some very early erratum in our copies. See Alford's note on the
passage.

•* John xix. 31.

5 I Cor. V. 7.

'i [Compare Anatolius, p. 151, su/ra.]


ELUCIDATIONS.


283


Now it was the preparation, about the third
hour, as the accurate books have it, and the auto-
graph copy itself of the EvangeHst John, which
up to this day has by divine grace been preserved
in the most holy church of Ephesus, and is there
adored ^ by the faithful.

VI. — OF THE SOUL AND B0DY.3

The things which pertain to the divinity and
humanity of the Second Man from heaven, in
what has been written above, according to the
blessed apostle, we have explained ; and now we
have thought it necessary to explain the things
which pertain to the first man, who is of earth
and earthy, being about, namely, to demonstrate
this, that he was created at the same time one
and the same, although sometimes he is separately
designated as the man external and internal.
For if, according to the Word of salvation, He
who made what is without, made also that which
is within, He certainly, by one operation, and at
the same time, made both, on that day, indeed,
on which God said, " Let us make man in our
image, after our likeness ; " ■* whence it is mani-
fest that man was not formed by a conjunction
of the body with a certain pre-existent type.
For if the earth, at the bidding of the Creator,
brought forth the other animals endowed with
life, much rather did the dust which God took
from the earth receive a vital energy from the
will and operation of God.

VII. — FRAGMENT.'

Wretch that I am ! I have not remembered


' Apud Galland, Ex Clironico Paschal., p. 175, D.

^ [Adored, i.e., etymologically, — kissed.]

3 Kx Leonlii et Joannis Rer. Sacr., lib. ii. Apud Mai, Script.
Vet., torn. vii. p. 85. From his demonstration that the soul was not
pre-e.xistent to the body.

■♦ Gen. i. 26.

S Ex Leontio et Joanne I\er. Sacr., lib. ii. Apud Mai, Script.
Vet., torn. vii. p. 96.


that God observes the mind, and hears the
voice of the soul. I turned consciously to sin,
saying to myself, God is merciful, and will bear
with me ; and when I was not instantly smit-
ten, I ceased not, but rather despised His for-
bearance, and exhausted the long-suffering of
God.

VIII. — ON ST. MATTHEW.6

And in the Gospel according to Matthew, the
Lord said to him who betrayed Him : " Be-
trayest thou the Son of Man with a kiss?"
which Peter the Martyr and Archbishop of Alex-
andria expounding, says, this and other things
like, " All the signs which He showed, and the
miracles that He did, testify of Him that He is
God incarnate ; both things therefore are to-
gether proved, that He was God by nature, and
was made man by nature."


IX. — FROM A SERM0N.7

In the meanwhile the evangelist says with
firmness, "The Word was made flesh, and dwelt
among us." ^ From this we learn that the angel,
when he saluted the Virgin with the words,
" Hail, thou that art highly favoured, the Lord
is with thee," ^ intended to signify God the
Word is with thee, and also to show that He
would arise from her bosom, and would be
made flesh, even as it is written, "The Holy
Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of
the Highest shaU overshadow thee ; therefore
also that holy thing which shall be born of thee
shall be called the Son of God." "^


* From the Treatise of the Emperor Justinian against the Monoph-
ysites. Apud Mai, Script. Vet., vii. 306, 307.
^ Or, from a treatise on theology.
^ John i. 14.
9 Luke i. 28.
'° Luke i. 35.


ELUCIDATIONS,


(Meletian schism, p. 259.)

The date of the Meletian schism is very much in need of elucidation. I follow Neale, how-
ever, as follows : Athanasius places its origin a.d. 306 (according to Tillemont and Baronius) or
A.D. 301 ; the latter more probable, as demonstrated by the Benedictine editors. But the dates
are, perhaps, the least of the difficulties which encumber the whole matter. Somewhat distrust-
fully I have, after several efforts to construct an original elucidation, adopted the theory of Neale,
as a diligent and conscientious inquirer whose Oriental studies qualify him to utter almost a


284 ELUCIDATIONS.


decisive voice, albeit he never forgets his Occidentalism, and hence fails to speak with absolute
fidelity to the spirit of Catholic antiquity.

We know something of Lycopolis from the blessed Alexander ; it seems to have been a sort
of centre to the bishoprics of the Thebais. It was just the sort of centre, in a region sufficient for
a separate patriarchate, to suggest to an ambitious and unscrupulous prelate an effort at independ-
ency. Meletius, who succeeded the good Alexander, was just the man to set up for himself; a man
not unlikely to be stimulated by the bad example of Paul of Samosata, and by the ingenuity that
triumphed over the first council that called Paul to account. Bearing all this in mind, we may
accept Neale's conviction that Meletius had long been a scandal to the churches, and in the
time of persecution had lapsed, and sacrificed to idols. Peter summoned him to a council, by
which he was convicted and degraded ; whereupon he not only refused to submit, but arrogated
to himself the cathedra of Alexandria, and began to ordain other bishops, and, in short, to re-
organize its jurisdiction.' Owing, I think probable, to the exceptional and overgrown extent of
this enormous " patriarchate," as it was called a little later, the schism gained a considerable
following. The distance of Lycopolis from Lower Egypt must have favoured the attempt, and
Peter's recent accession made it easy for Meletius to circulate evil stories against him. The
schism, as usual, soon developed into heresy, which even the Nicene Synod failed to extinguish.
Arius had joined the first outbreak, but conformed for a time, and was ordained a deacon by
Achillas. His troublesome spirit, however, soon showed itself again after his ordination to the
priesthood ; and the remnant of the Meletians made common cause with him after his condemna-
tion at Nicaea. Of Peter's legitimate exercise of authority, and of the impurity and wickedness of
Meletius before his invasion of Alexandria, there is no reason to doubt ; but for the details, re-
course must be had to Neale.^ The famous Sixth Canon of Nice finds its explanation in this
rebellion ; but, incidentally, it defines the position of other great centres, which now began to
be known as patriarchates. Neale's remarks ^ on the excessive leniency of the council in settling
the case of Meletius, are specially to be noted.


II.

(Canonical Epistle, p. 279.)

The judgment of Dupin is so exceptionally eulogistic touching these canons, that I quote it,
as follows : "> —

" Of all the canons of antiquity concerning the discipline of the lapsed, there are none more
judicious or more equitable than those we have now described. There appear in them a
wisdom and prudence altogether singular in tempering the rigours of punishment by a reasonable
moderation, without which justice would be weakened. He examines carefully all the circum-
stances which might augment or diminish the quality of the crime ; and as he does not lengthen
out penance by methods too severe, so neither does he deceive the sinner by a facility too
remiss."

Like the famous Canonical Epistles of St. Basil, however, these are compilations of canons
accepted by the churches of his jurisdiction. Dupin says of those of Basils (yTo Amphi/ochius) ,
"■ They are not to be considered as the particular opinions of St. Basil, but as the lajvs of the
Church in his time ; and therefore they are not written in the form of personal letters, but after
the manner of synodical decisions."

' He reported to the Nicene Council that he had ordained twenty-eight bishops and eight priests or deacons.

2 Patriarchate of Alexandria, vol. i. pp. 91, 146.

3 Ibid., p. 146.

* Eccl. Hist. Cetit. IV., sub lit. " Peter of Alexandria."
5 Ibid., sub tit. " Basil."


THE ROMAN EMPERORS.


285


THE ROMAN EMPERORS.


In the study of these volumes a table is useful, such as I find it convenient to place here,
showing the Ante-Nicene succession of Caesars.


Augustus i

Tiberius 14

Caligula 37

Claudius 41

Nero 54

Galea 68

Otho 69

Vitellius 69

Vespasian 69

Titus 79

Domitian 81

Nerva 96

Trajan 98

Hadrian 117

Antoninus Pius 138

Marcus Aurelius 161

CoMMODus 180

Pertinax 192

DiDius JuLiANUs (Niger) 193

Septimius Severus 193

Caracalla (Geta) 211

Macrinus 217


23. Heliogabalus

24. Alexander Severus

25. Maximinus.

26. Gordian

27. PUPIENUS (BaLBINUS)

28. Gordian the Younger

29. Philip

30. Decius

31. Gallus (Volusianus)

32. Valerian

;^2- Gallienus

34. Claudius II

35. aurelian

36. Tacitus (Probus)

;^y. Florian

38. Carus (Carinus, Numerian)

39. Diocletian

40. Maximian (Galerius)

41. Constantius Chlorus .

42. Maximin

43. Constantine the Great (Licinius, etc.)


A.D.

218
222
235
235
23s
238
244
249
251
254
260
268
270
275
276
282
284
286
292
306
307


Suetonius includes Julius, and therefore his Twelve Ccesars end with Domitian, the last of
the Flavian family. With Nerva the " five good emperors " (so called) begin, but the " good
Aurelius" was a persecutor. St. John, surviving the cruelty of Domitian, lived and died under
Trajan.

The "vision of Constantine " is dated, at Treves, a.d. 312.

The Labarum became the Roman standard thenceforth.

The Dominical ordinance dates from Milan, June 2, a.d. 321.

He founds the city of Constantinople a.d. 324, convokes the Council of Nicsea a.d. 325.


ALEXANDER.

[TRANSLATED BY THE REV. JAMES B. H. HAWKINS, M.A.]


INTRODUCTORY NOTICE

TO

ALEXANDER. BISHOP OP ALEXANDRIA.


[a.d. 273 ' -313-326.] The records of the Ante-Nicene period, so far as Alexandria is con-
cerned, are complete in this great primate, the friend and patron of Athanasius, and, with him,
the master-spirit of the great Council of Nicsea. I have so arranged the " Fragments " of the
Edinburgh series in this volume as to make them a great and important integer in rounding out
and fulfilling the portraiture of the school and the See of Alexandria. The student will thus
have at hand the materials for a covetable survey of the Alexandrian Fathers, — their history, their
influence, and their immense authority in early Christendom. In an elucidation ^ I venture to
condense my thoughts upon some points which it has been the interest of unbelievers to misrep-
resent, and to colour for their own purposes. But, as the limitations of my editorial duty do not
allow me to enter upon a dissertation, I am thankful to refer the reader to the truly valuable
though by no means exhaustive work of Dr. Neale on The Patriarchate of Alexandria. His
statements are not, indeed, to be received with unreserving confidence ; for, in spite of his pure
and lofty purposes, his mind had been formed under the strong bias of a transient fashion in
divinity, and he always surveyed his subject from an Occidental if not from a Latin (I do not
mean a strictly Roman) point of vdew. To other popular historians I need not refer the student,
save, by anticipation, to the list of authorities which will be furnished in the concluding volume
of this series.-^

Let us reflect, then, upon the epoch to which we have now come. The intense sufferings,
labours, and intellectual as well as moral struggles, of the three heroic centuries, are closing, and
Alexander of Alexandria is the grand figure of the period. Diocletian is preparing to let loose
upon the sheep of Christ the ferocious wolves of the tenth persecution. Lucian is founding the
school of Antioch,^ revising the New Testament, and, in fact, the whole Bible of the Fathers,
for his labours included the version of the Seventy. Unhappily, the ambitious Arius, who calls him
master, has begun to trouble the evangelical See of St. Mark ; and Achillas, notwithstanding the
warnings of Peter, has laid hands upon him, and made him a presbyter. He aspires to be made
a bishop. But anon a boy is playing on the shore at Alexandria in whom a flaming genius for
the priesthood already manifests itself. Alexander, looking forth from his windows, sees him
" playing church " with his schoolmates, and actually dipping a young pagan in the sea, " in the
name of the Father," etc. No doubt something of the kind did occur, and thus was the boy
Athanasius brought to the notice of his bishop. But even Dupin rejects the rest of tb.e story.


' The first date is conjectural.

" Elucidation I.

■* For liberal references, consult Hagenbach, Text-Book 0/ the History 0/ Doctrine ; by all means using Professor Smith's edition,
New York, 1861.

■* For the matters touching the theology of the period, the student should prepare himself by consulting Waterland, History 0/ the
Athnnasian Creed (IVori-s, vol. iv., London), and Van Oosterzee, Christian Dogmatics, New York, 1874. I wonder that Professor
Smith could, so imreservedly, commend Hagenbach.

289


290 INTRODUCTORY NOTICE.


that Alexander decided the question of the boy-baptism in favour of its validity, as the latins
would have us believe. Anyhow, we have this miracle of precocity attending Alexander as his
deacon at the Council of Nicasa, and then soon after succeeding to his episcopal chair. Athana-
sius is the grandest figure of the primitive ages after the apostles fell asleep. Raised up to com-
plete their testimony to the eternal Logos, and to suffer like them, we soon behold him the noble
example of constancy against the new perils of the world's favour and the patronage of the
Ccesars. " Athanasius against the world " was in two senses his great encomium, and the epitome
of his glorious life and warfare. Not less was it " Athanasius /cr the world." Alas ! the majestic
school of Pantoenus and Clement soon after comes to its enigmatical decline. Some plants,
when they have borne their superlative flower and fruit, mysteriously decay. It was so, alas !
with the great Christian academy that not imi)robably owes its beginnings to Apollos.

TRANSLATOR'S INTRCDUC'TORY NOTICE.

Alexander was appointed successor to Achillas,' as Bishop of Alexandria, about a.d. 312.
The virtues of this prelate, which Kusebius has passed over entirely without mention, other eccle-
siastical writers have greatly extolled. For on all sides he is styled " the staunchest upholder of
evangelical doctrine," " the patron and protector of apostolic doctrine ; " and " that bishop of
divine faith, full of wisdom and of zeal enkindled by the Holy Spirit." He was the first to detect
and to condemn Arius ; ^ and taking his stand upon passages of Holy Scripture, as Theodoret
remarks,^ he taught that the Son of God was of one and the same majesty with the Father, and
had the same substance with the Father who begat Him.

At first he sought to bring back Arius from his heresy. But when he perceived that he openly
and obstinately taught his false doctrines, he assembled a first and then a second synod of the
bishops of Egypt, and degraded him from the order of the priesthood, + and cut him off from the
communion of the Church. 'This proving ineffectual, the Council of Nicsea was convened, in
which he was finally condemned. In combating the Arian heresy, Alexander endured, although
at a great age, many trials, and died shortly after the holding of the council.

' [Here given Achilles ; but I presen-e unity of usage in this respect, the rather as Achilles is the name of a contemporary heretic]

^ [i.e., in his great and final heresy. Of his former condemnation, see pp. 262-263, supra. ^

3 //. E., i. 2.

* [To which Achillas had admitted him. See p. 268, supra. In spite of the warnings, pp. 263-265, supra.}


EPISTLES' ON THE ARIAN HERESY


THE DP:P()srnoN of arius.


]._T() ALEXANDER, BISHOP OF THE CITV OF
CONSTANTINOPLE.

To fhe most reverend and like-niiiidcd brother,
Alexander, Alexander sends greetin^^ in the
Lord :

I. Thk ambitious and avaricious will of wicked
men is always wont to lay snares against those
churches which seem greater, by various pre-
texts attacking the ecclesiastical piety of such.
Vox incited by the devil who works in them, to
the lust of that which is set before them, and
throwing away all religious scruples, they trample
under foot the fear of the judgment of God.
Concerning which things, I who suffer, have
thought it necessary to show to your piety, in
order that you may be aware of such men, lest
any of them presume to set foot in your dioceses,
whether by themselves or by others ; for these
sorcerers know how to use hypocrisy to carry
out their fraud ; and to employ letters composed
and dressed out with lies, which are able to de-
ceive a man who is intent upon a simple and
sincere faith. Arius, therefore, and Achilles, -
having lately entered into a conspiracy, emulat-
ing the ambition of CoUuthus, have turned out
far worse than he. For CoUuthus, indeed, who
re]jrehends these very men, found some pretext
for his evil purpose ; but these, beholding his '
bartering of Christ, endured no longer to be
subject to the Church ; but building for them-
selves dens of thieves, they hold their assem-
blies in them unceasingly, night and day direct-
ing their calumnies against Christ and against
us. For since they call in fjuestion all pious
and apostolical doctrine, after the manner of
the Jews, they have constructed a workshop for
contending against Christ, denying the Godhead


■ [a.d. 321.] Apud. Theodoritum, Hist. EccL, booki. chap. 4.

- [See p. 290, note 1, supra.^

3 CoUuthus, being a presbyter of Alexandria, puffed up with arro-
gance and temerity, had acted as a bishop, and had ordained many
priests and deacons. But in the synod that was assembled at Alex-
andria all his acts of ordination were rescinded: and those who had
been ordained by him degraded to the rank of laymen. — Tk.


of our Saviour, and preaching that He is only
the equal of all others. And having collected
all the passages which speak of His plan of sal-
vation and His humiliation for our sakes, they
endeavour from these to collect the preaching
of their impiety, ignoring altogether the passages
in which His eternal Godhead and unutterable
glory with the Father is set forth. Since, there-
fore, they back up the impious opinion concern-
ing Christ, which is held by the Jews and Greeks,
in every possible way they strive to gain their
approval ; busying themselves about all those
things which they are wont to deride in us, and
daily stirring up against us seditions and perse-
cutions. And now, indeed, they drag us before
the tribunals of the judges, by intercourse with
silly and disorderly women, whom the}- have led
into error ; at another time they cast opprobrium
and infamy upon the Christian religion, their
young maidens disgracefully wandering about
every village and street. Nay, even Christ's
indivisible tunic, which His executioners were
unwilling to divide, these wretches have dared
to rend.'

2. And we, indeed, though we discovered
rather late, on account of their concealment,
their manner of life, and their unholy attempts,
by the common suffrage of all have s cast them
forth from the congregation of the Church which
adores the (iodhead of Christ. But they, run-
ning hither and thither against us, have begun
to betake themselves to our colleagues who are
of the same mind with us ; in appearance, in-
deed, pretending to seek for peace and concord,
but in reality seeking to draw over some of them
by fair words to their own diseases, asking long
wordy letters from them, in order that reading
these to the men whom they have deceived, they

■♦ [Perhaps a quotation, and hence a token of verity as to what is
narrated of Peter, p. 263, note 4, sitpra..'\

5 It is inferred from these words that this letter of Alexander was
written after the Synod of Alexandria in which Arius and his com-
panion were condemned. But Alexander convened two synods of
the bishops of Kgypt against Arius .ind his friends. — I'r.

291 ^


292


KriSTLES ON THK ARIAN HERESY.


may make them impenitent in the errors into
which they have fallen, and obdurate in impiety,
as if they had bishops thinking the same thing
and siding with them. Moreover, the things
which amongst us they have wrongly taught and
done, and on account of which they have been
expelled by us, they do not at all confess to
them, but they either pass them over in silence,
or throwing a veil over them, by feigned words
and writings they deceive them. Concealing,
therefore, their pestilent doctrine by their spe-
cious and flattering discourse, they circumvent
the more simple-minded and such as are open
to fraud, nor do they spare in the meanwhile to
traduce our piety to all. Hence it comes to pass
that some, subscribing their letters, receive them
into the Church, although in my opinion the
greatest guilt lies upon those ministers who ven-
ture to do this ; because not only does the apos-
tolic rule not allow of it, but the working of the
devil in these men against Christ is by this means
more strongly kindled. Wherefore without de-
lay, brethren beloved, I have stirred myself up
to show you the faithlessness of these men who
say that there was a time when the Son of God j
was not ; and that He who was not before, came j
mto existence afterwards, becoming such, when !
at length He was made, even as every man is
wont to be born. For, they say, God made all
things from things which are not, comprehend-
ing even the Son of God in the creation of all
things, rational and irrational. To which things
they add as a consequence, that He is of mutable
nature, and capable both of virtue and vice.
And this hypothesis being once assumed, that j
He is " from things which are not," they over- j
turn the sacred writings concerning His eternity,
which signify the immutability and the Godhead
of Wisdom and the Word, which are Christ.

3. We, therefore, say these wicked men, can
also be the sons of God even as He. For it is
written, " I have nourished and brought up chil-
dren." ' But when what follows was objected to
them, " and they have rebelled against me,"
wl|ich indeed is not applicable to the nature of
the Saviour, who is of an immutable nature ;
they, throwing off all religious reverence, say that
God, since He foreknew and had foreseen that
His Son would not rebel against Him, chose
Him from all. For He did not choose Him as
having by nature anything specially beyond His
other sons, for no one is by nature a son of God,
as they say ; neither as having any peculiar prop-
erty of His own ; but God chose Him who was
of a mutable nature, on account of the careful-
ness of His manners and His practice, which in
no way turned to that which is evil ; so that, if
Paul and Peter had striven for this, there would


have been no difference between their sonship
and His. .And to confirm this insane doctrine,
playing with Holy Scripture, they bring forward
what is said in the Psalms respecting Christ ■
" Thou iovest righteousness, and hatest wicked-
ness : therefore God, 'I'hy God, hath anointed
Thee with the oil of gladness above Thy fel-
lows." '

4. But that the Son of God was not made
" from things which are not," and that there was
no " time when He was not," ^ the evangelist
John sufficiently shows, when he thus writes con-
cerning Him : " The only-begotten Son, who is
in the bosom of the Father." •* P'or since that
divine teacher intended to show that the Father
and the Son are two things inseparable the one
from the other, he spoke of Him as being in the
bosom of the Father. Now that also the Word
of God is not comprehended in the number of
things that were created " from things which are
not," the same John says, " All things were made
by Him." For he set forth His proper person-
ality, saying, " In the beginning was the Word,
and the Word was with God, and the Word was
God. All things were made by Him ; and with-
out Him was not anything made that was made." 5
For if all things w^re made by Him, how comes
it that He who gave to the things which are
made their existence, at one time Himself was
not. For the Word which makes is not to be
defined as being of the same nature with the
things which are made ; since He indeed was in
the beginning, and all things were made by Him,
and fashioned " from things which are not."
Moreover, that which is seems to be contrary to
and far removed from those things which are
made " from things which are not." For that
indeed shows that there is no interval between
the Feather and the Son, since not even in thought
can the mind imagine any distance between them.
But that the world was created " from things
which are not," indicates a more recent a and'
later origin of substance, since the universe re-
ceives an essence of this sort from the Father
by the Son. When, therefore, the most pious
John contemplated the essence of the divine
Word at a very great distance, and as placed
beyond all conception of those things that are
begotten, he thought it not meet to speak of
His generation and creation ; not daring to
designate the Creator in the same terms as the
things that are made. Not that the Word is un-
begotten, for the Father alone is unbegotten, but
because the inexplicable subsistence of the only-
begotten Son transcends the acute comprehension
of the evangelists, and perhaps also of angels.


2 Ps. xlv. 7.

•3 [The two tests, oi criteria, of Arianisra. The Arians affir
(i) the formula ef o\ik. ovtoiv, and (2) the riv jtotc ore ovk r)y.]
■* John i. iS.


EPISTLES ON THE ARIAN HERESY.


293


5. Wherefore I do not think that he is to be
reclconed amongst the pious who presumes to
in(|uire into anything beyond these things, not
listening to this saying : " Seelc not out the things
that are too hard for thee, neither search the
things that are above thy strength." ' P'or if the
knowledge of many other things that are incom-
j)arably inferior to this, are hidden from human
comprehension, such as in the apostle Paul, " P2ye
hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered
into the heart of man, the things which God hath
prepared for them that love Him."- As also
God said to Abraham, that "he could not num-
ber the stars ; " ^ and that passage, " Who can
number the sand of the sea, and the drops of
rain."-* How shall anyone be able to investi-
gate too curiously the subsistence of the divine
VV'ord, unless he be smitten with frenzy? Con-
cerning which the Spirit of proi)hecy says, " Who
shall declare his generation ? " 5 And our Saviour
Himself, who blesses the pillars of all things in
the world, sought to unburden them of the knowl-
edge of these things, saying that to comprehend
this was quite beyond their nature, and that to
the Father alone belonged the knowledge of this
most divine mystery. " For no man," says He,
" knoweth the Son, but the Father ; neither know-
eth any man the Father, save the Son." ^ Of
this thing also I think that the Father spoke, in
the words, " My secret is to Me and Mine."

6. Now that it is an insane thing to think that
the Son was made from things which are not,
and was in being in time, the expression, " from
things which are not," itself shows, although these
stupid men understand not the insanity of their
own words. For the expression, " was not,"
ought either to be reckoned in time, or in some
place of an age. But if it be true that " all things
were made by Him," it is established that both
every age and time and all space, and that
"when" in which the "was not" is found, was
made by Him. And is it not absurd that He who
fashioned the times and the ages and the sea-
sons, in which that " was not " is mixed up, to
say of Him, that He at some time was not?
For it is devoid of sense, and a mark of great
ignorance, to affirm that He who is the cause of
everything is posterior to the origin of that thing.
For according to them, the space of time in
which they say that the Son had not yet been
made by the Father, preceded the wisdom of
(iod that fashioned all things, and the Scripture
speaks falsely according to them, which calls
Him "the First-born of every creature." Con-
formable to which, that which the majestically-


' Eccliis. iii. 22. [Compare the canonical eiiuivalent, Ps. cxxxi. i.]

^ 1 Cor. ii. g.

^ Cen. XV. 5.

* Eccliis. i. 2.

5 Isa. liii. 8.

t Malt. xl. 27.


speaking Paul says of Him : " Whom He hath
appointed heir of all things. By whom also He
made the worlds. But by Him also were all
things created that are in heaven, and that are
in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be
thrones or dominions, or principalities, or pow-
ers ; all things were created by Him, and for
Him ; and He is before all things." ^

7. Wherefore, since it appears that this hy-
pothesis of a creation from things which are not
is most impious, it is necessary to say that the
Father is always the Father. But He is the
Father, since the Son is always with Him, on ac-
count of whom He is called the Father. Where-
fore, since the Son is always with Him, the Father
is always perfect, being destitute of nothing as
regards good ; who, not in time, nor after an in-
terval, nor from things which are not, hath be-
gotten His only-begotten Son. How, then, is it
not impious to say, that the wisdom of God once
was not, which speaks thus concerning itself: "I
was with Him forming all things ; I was His de-
light ;" ^ or that the power of God once did not
exist ; or that His Word was at any time muti-
lated ; or that other things were ever wanting
from which the Son is known and the Father
expressed ? For he who denies that the bright-
ness of the glory existed, takes away also the
primitive light of which it is the brightness. And
if the image of God was not always, it is clear
also that He was not always, of which it is the
image. Moreover, in saying that the character
of the subsistence of God was not, He also is
done away with who is perfectly expressed by it.
Hence one may see that the Sonship of our
Saviour has nothing at all in common with the
sonship of the rest. For just as it has been
shown that His inexplicable subsistence excels
by an incomparable excellence all other things
to which He has given existence, so also His
Sonship, which is according to the nature of the
Godhead of the Father, transcends, by an in-
effable excellence, the sonship of those who have
been adopted by Him. For He, indeed, is of
an immutable nature, every way perfect, and
wanting in nothing ; but these, since they are
either way subject to change, stand in need of
help from Him. For what progress can the
wisdom of God make? What increase can the
truth itself and Ciod the Word receive? In what
respect can the life and the true light be made
better? And if this be so, how much more un-
natural is it that wisdom should ever be capable
of folly ; that the power of God should be con-
joined with infirmity ; that reason should be ob-
scured by unreason ; or that darkness should be
mixed up with the true light? And the apostle
says, on this place, " What communion hath light


' Col. i. t6, 17.

^ Prov. viii. 30 (LXX.).


194


EPISTLES ON THE ARIAN IIERF.SY.


with darkness? and what concord hath C'hrist
with Belial?" ' And Solomon says, that it is not
])0ssible that it should come to pass that a man
should comprehend with his understanding "the
way of a serpent upon a rock," which is Christ,
according to the opinion of Paul. But men and
angels, who are His creatures, have received His
blessing that they might make progress, exercis-
ing themselves in virtues and in the command-
ments of the law, so as not to sin. Wherefore
our Lord, since He is by nature the Son of the
Father, is by all adored. But these, laying aside
the spirit of bondage, when by brave deeds and
by j)rogress they have received the spirit of adop-
tion, being blessed by Him who is the Son by
nature, are made sons by adoption.

8. And His proper and peculiar, natural and
excellent Sonship, St. Paul has declared, who
thus s])eaks of God : " Who spared not His own
Son, but for us," who were not His natural sons,
" delivered Him up." ^ For to distinguish Him
from those who are not properly sons, He said
that He was His own Son. And in the Gospel
we read : " This is My beloved Son, in whom I
am well pleased." ^ Moreover, in the Psalms
the Saviour says : " The Lord hath said unto Me,
Thou art my Son." ■* Where, showing that He
is the true and genuine Son, He signifies that
there are no other genuine sons besides Himself.
And what, too, is the meaning of this : " From
the womb before the morning I begat thee"? 5
Does He not plainly indicate the natural sonship
of paternal bringing forth, which he obtained not
by the careful framing of His manners, not by
the exercise of and increase in virtue, but by
property of nature ? Wherefore, the only- begot-
ten Son of the Father, indeed, possesses an in-
defectible Sonship ; but the adoption of rational
sons belongs not to them by nature, but is pre-
pared for them by the probity of their life, and
by the free gift of God. And // is mutable as the
Scripture recognises : " P'or when the sons of
God saw the daughters of men, they took them
wives," ^ etc. And in another place : " I have
nourished and brought up children, but they
have rebelled against Me," ^ as we find God
speaking by the prophet Isaiah.

9. And though I could say much more, breth-
ren beloved, I jjurposely omit to do so, as deem-
ing it to be l)urdensome at great length to call
these things to the remembrance of teachers
who are of the same mind with myself. For
ye yourselves are taught of God, nor are ye ig-
norant that this doctrine, which hath lately
raised its head against the piety of the Church,


' 2 Cor. vi. 14, 15.

- Rom. viii. 32.

' .Matt. iii. 17.

4 Ps. .\i. 7.

s Ps. ex. 3 (LXX.).

'' Gen. vi. 2.

' Iba. i. 2,


is that of I'^bion and Artemas ; nor is it aught
else but an imitation of Paul of Samosata, bishop
of Antioch, who, by the judgment and counsel
of all the bishops, and in every i)lace. was sepa-
rated from the Church.'"* To whom Lucian suc-
ceeding, remained for many years separate from
the communion of three bishops.'-* And now
lately having drained the dregs of their impiety,
there have arisen amongst us those w^ho teach
this doctrine of a creation from things which are
not,'° their hidden sprouts, Arius and Achilles,
and the gathering of those who join in their
wickedness. And three bishops in Syria, having
been, in some manner, consecrated on account
of their agreement with them, incite them to
worse things. But let the judgment concerning
these be reserved for your trial. For they, re-
taining in their memory the words which came
to be used with respect to His saving Passion, •
and abasement, and examination, and what they
call His poverty, and in short of all those things
to which the Saviour submitted for our sakes,
bring them forward to refute His sujjreme and
eternal Godhead. But of those words which
signify His natural glory and nobility, and abid-
ing with the Father, they have become unmind-
ful. Such as this : " I and My Father are one," ' '
which indeed the Lord says, not as proclaiming
Himself to be the Father, nor to. demonstrate
that two persons are one ; but that the Son of
the Father most exactly preserves the expressed
likeness of the Father, inasmuch as He has by
nature impressed upon Him His similitude in
every respect, and is the image of the Father in
no way discrepant, and the expressed figure of
the primitive exemplar. Whence, also, to Philip,
who then was desirous to see Him, the Lord
shows this abundantly. For when he said,
" Show us the Father," '- He answered : " He
that hath seen Me, hath seen the Father," since
the Father w^as Himself seen through the spot-
less and living mirror of the divine image.
Similar to which is what the saints say in the
Psalms : " Li Thy light shall we see light." '^
Wherefore he that honoureth the Son, honoureth
the Father also ; " '^ and with reason, for every
impious word which they dare to speak against
the Son, has reference to the Father.

10. But after these things, brethren beloved,
what is there wonderful in that which I am about
to write, if I shall set forth the false calumnies
against me and our most pious laity ? For those
who have set themselves in array against the
Godhead of Christ, do not scruple to utter their
ungrateful ravings against us. Who will not


8 [a.d. 269.]

9 [By the canons three bishops were necessary to ordain one to
the episcopate, nor was communion wiili fewer than these Catholic]

'° [See p. 292, note 3, S7iJ>ra.\
" John X. 30.
'- John xiv. 8, 9.
'■' Ps. xxxvi. 9.


EPISTLES ON THE ARIAN HERESY.


295


either that any of the ancients should be com-
pared with them, or suffer that any of those
whom, from our earhest years, we have used as
instructors should be placed on a level with them.
Nay, and they do not think that any of all those
who are now our colleagues, has attained even
to a moderate amount of wisdom ; boasting them-
selves to be the only men who are wise and di-
vested of worldly possessions, the sole discoverers
of dogmas, and that to them alone are those
things revealed which have never before come
into the mind of any other under the sun. Oh,
the impious arrogance ! Oh, the immeasurable
madness ! Oh, the vainglory befitting those that
are crazed ! Oh, the pride of Satan which has
taken root in their unholy souls. The religious
perspicuity of the ancient Scriptures caused them
no shame, nor did the consentient doctrine of
our colleagues concerning Christ keep in check
their audacity against Him. Their impiety not
even the demons will bear, who are ever on the
watch for a blasphemous word uttered against
the Son.

1 1 . And let these things be now urged accord-
ing to our power against those who, with respect
to matter which they know nothing of, have, as
it were, rolled in the dust against Christ, and have
taken in hand to calumniate our piety towards
Him. For those inventors of stupid fables say,
that we who turn away with aversion from the im-
pious and unscriptural blasphemy against Christ,
of those who speak of His coming from Jhe
things which are not assert, that there are two
unbegottens. For they ignorantly affirm that one
of two things must necessarily be said, either
that He is from things which are not, or that
there are two unbegottens ; nor do those ignorant
men know how great is the difference between
the unbegotten Father, and the things which
were by Him created from things which are not,
as well the rational as the irrational. Between
which two, as holding the middle place, the only
begotten nature of God, the Word by which the
Father formed all things out of nothing, was
begotten of the true Father Himself. As in a
certain place the Lord Himself testified, saying,
" Every one that loveth Him that begat, loveth
Him also that is begotten of Him." '

12. Concerning Avhom we thus believ'e, even
as the Apostolic Church believes. In one P'ather
unbegotten, who has from no one the cause of
His being, who is unchangeable and immutable,
who is always the same, and admits of no increase
or diminution ; who gave to us the Law, the
prophets, and the Gospels ; who is Lord of the
patriarchs and apostles, and all the saints. And
in one Lord Jesus Christ, the only-begotten Son
of God ; not begotten of things which are not,

' John V. 1.


but of Him who is the Father ; not in a corpo-
real manner, by excision or division as Sabellius
and Valentinus thought, but in a certain inex-
plicable and unspeakable manner, according to
the words of the prophet cited above : " Who
shall declare His generation? " ^ Since that His
subsistence no nature which is begotten can in-
vestigate, even as the Father can be investigated
by none ; because that the nature of rational
beings cannot receive the knowledge of His di-
vine generation by the Father. But men who
are moved by the Spirit of truth, have no need
to learn these things from me, for in our ears
are sounding the words before uttered by Christ
on this very thing, '•' No man knoweth the Father,
save the Son ; and no man knoweth who the Son
is, save the Father." ^ That He is etjually with
the Father unchangeable and immutable, wanting
in nothing, and the perfect Son, and like to the
Father, we have learnt ; in this alone is He inferior
to the Father, that He is not unbegotten. For
He is the very exact image of the Father, and in
nothing differing from Him. For it is clear that
He is the image fully containing all things by
which the greatest similitude is declared, as the
Lord Himself hath taught us, when He says, " My
Father is greater than L" '' And according to
this we believe that the Son is of the Father,
always existing. " For He is the brightness of
His glory, the express image of His Father 's
person." 5 But let no one take that word always
so as to raise suspicion that He is unbegotten,
as they imagine who have their senses blinded.
For neither are the words, "He was," or " al-
ways," or " before all worlds," equivalent to
unbegotten. But neither can the human mind
employ any other word to signify unbegotten.
And thus I think that you understand it, and I
trust to your right purpose in all things, since
these words do not at all signify unbegotten. For
these words seem to denote simply a lengthen-
ing out of time, but the (iodhead, and as it were
the antiquity of the only-begotten, they cannot
worthily signify ; but they have been employed
by holy men, whilst each, according to his capa-
city, seeks to express this mystery, asking indul-
gence from the hearers, and pleading a reasonable
excuse, in saying. Thus far have we attained. But
if there be any who are expecting from mortal
lips some word which exceeds human capacity,
saying that those things have been done away
which are known in part, it is manifest that the
words, " He was," and " always," and " before all
ages," come far short of what they hoped. And
whatever word shall be employed is not equiva-
lent to unbegotten. Therefore to the unbegotten


2 Isa. liii. 8.

3 Matt. xi. 27.
■• John xiv. 28.
5 Heb. i. 3.


296


EPISTLES ON THE ARIAN HERESY.


Father, indeed, we ought to preserve His proper
dignity, in confessing that no one is the cause of
His being ; but to the Son must be allotted His
fitting honour, in assigning to Him, as we have
said, a generation from the P'ather without begin-
ning, and allotting adoration to Him, so as only
piously and properly to use the words, " He was,"
and " always," and " before all worlds," with re-
spect to Him ; by no means rejecting His God-
head, but ascribing to Him a similitude which
exactly answers in every respect to the Image
and Exemplar of the Father. But we must say
that to the Father alone belongs the property of
being unbegotten, for the Saviour Himself said,
"My Father is greater than I." ' And besides
the pious opinion concerning the Father and
the Son, we confess to one Holy Spirit, as the
divine Scriptures teach us ; who hath inaugurated
both the holy men of the Old Testament, and
the divine teachers of that which is called the
New. And besides, also, one only Catholic and
Apostolic Church, which can never be destroyed,
though all the world should seek to make war
with it ; but it is victorious over every most im-
pious revolt of the heretics who rise up against
it. For her Goodman hath confirmed our minds
by saying, " Be of good cheer, I have overcome
the world." - After this we know of the resur-
rection of the dead, the first-fruits of which was
our Lord Jesus Christ, who in very deed, and
not in appearance merely, carried a body, of
Mary, Mother of God, who in the end of the
world came to the human race to put away sin,
was crucified and died, and yet did He not thus
perceive any detriment to His divinity, being
raised from the dead, taken up into heaven, seated
at the right hand of majesty.

13. These things in part have I written in this
epistle, thinking it burdensome to write out each
accurately, even as I said before, because they
escape not your religious diligence. Thus do we
teach, thus do we preach. These are the apos-
tohc doctrines of the Church, for which also we
die, esteeming those but little who would com-
pel us to forswear them, even if they would force
us by tortures, and not casting away our hope in
them. To these Arius and Achilles opposing
themselves, and those who with them are the
enemies of the truth, have been expelled from
the Church, as being aliens from our holy doc-
trine, according to the blessed Paul, who says,
'■ If any man preach any other gospel unto you
than that ye have received, let him be accursed ;
even though he feign himself an angel from
heaven." ^ And also, "If any man teach other-
wise, and consent not to the wholesome words
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine


' John xiv. 28.
" John xvi. 33.

-' Cal i. 8, g


which is according to godliness ; he is proud,
knowing nothing,"-* and so forth. These, there-
fore, who have been anathematized by the
brotherhood, let no one of you receive, nor ad-
mit of those things which are either said or writ-
ten by them. For these seducers do always lie,
nor will they ever speak the truth. They go
about the cities, attempting nothing else but that
under the mark of friendship and the name of
peace, by their hypocrisy and blandishments,
they may give and receive letters, to deceive by
means of these a kw " silly women, and laden
with sins, who have been led captive by them," 5
and so forth.

14. These men, therefore, who have dared
such things against Christ ; who have partly in
public derided the Christian religion ; partly seek
to traduce and inform against its professors be-
fore the judgment-seats ; who in a time of peace,
as far as in them lies, have stirred up a persecu-
tion against us ; who have enervated the ineffable
mystery of Christ's generation ; from these, I say,
beloved and like-minded brethren, turning away
in aversion, give your suffrages with us against
their mad daring ; even as our colleagues have
done, who being moved with indignation, have
both written to us letters against these men, and
have subscribed our letter. Which also I have
sent unto you by my son Apion the deacon, be-
ing some of them from the whole of Egypt and
the Thebaid, some from Libya and Pentapolis.
There are others also from Syria, Lycia, Pam-
phylia, Asia, Cappadocia, and the other neigh-
bouring provinces. After the example of which
I trust also that I shall receive letters from you.
For though I have prepared many helps towards
curing those who have suffered injury, this is the
especial remedy that has been devised for healing
the multitudes that have been deceived by them,
that they may comply with the general consent
of our colleagues, and thus hasten to return to
repentance. Salute one another, together with
the brethren who are with you. I pray that ye
may be strong in the Lord, beloved, and that
I may profit by your lo\'e towards Christ.

11. -EPISTLE CATHOLIC*

To our beloved and mosi reverend fellow-minis-
ters of the Catholic Church in every place,
Alexander sends g^reting in the Lord:

I. Since the body of the Catholic Church is
one, 7 and it is commanded in Holy Scripture
that we should keep the bond of unanimity and
peace, it follows that we should write and signify
to one another the things which are done by each


* I Tim. vi. 3, 4.
5 2 Tim. iii. 4.

<> Taken from the Works of St. Athanasius, vol i. part i. p. 397.
seqq., edit. Benedic. Paris, 1698.
7 lEUicidation ll.'l


EPISTLES ON THE ARIAN HERESY.


297


of us ; that whether one member suffer or re-
joice we may all either suffer or rejoice with one
another. In our diocese, then, not so long ago,
there hav^ gone forth lawless men, and adversa-
ries of Christ, teaching men to apostatize ; which
thing, with good right, one might suspect and
call the precursor of Antichrist. I indeed wished
to cover the matter up in silence, that so perhaps
the evil might spend itself in the leaders of the
heresy alone, and that it might not spread to
other places and defile the ears of any of the
more simple-minded. But since Eusebius, the
present bishop of Nicomedia, imagining that
with him rest all ecclesiastical matters,' because,
having left Berytus and cast his eyes upon the
church of the Nicomedians, and no punishment
has been inflicted upon him, he is set over these
apostates, and has undertaken to write every-
where, commending them, if by any means he
may draw aside some who are ignorant to this
most disgraceful and Antichristian heresy ; it be-
came necessary for me, as knowing what is writ-
ten in the law, no longer to remain silent, but to
announce to you all, that you may know both
those who have become apostates, and also the
wretched words of their heresy ; and if Eusebius
write, not to give heed to him.

2. For he, desiring by their assistance to renew
that ancient wickedness of his mind, with respect
to which he has for a time been silent, pretends
that he is writing in their behalf, but he proves
by his deed that he is exerting himself to do
this on his own account. Now the apostates
from the Church are these : Arius, Achilles,-
Aithales, Carpones, the other Arius, Sarmates,
who were formerly priests ; Euzoius, Lucius, Ju-
lius, Menas, Helladius, and Gains, formerly dea-
cons ; and with them Secundus and Theonas,
who were once called bishops. And the words
invented by them, and spoken contrary to the
mind of Scripture, are as follows : —

" God was not always the Father ; but there
was a time when God was not the Father. The
Word of God was not always, but was made
' from things that are not ; ' for He who is God
fashioned the non-existing from the non-existing ;
wherefore there was a time when He was not.
For the Son is a thing created, and a thing made :
nor is He like to the Father in substance ; nor
is He the true and natural Word of the Father ;
nor is He His true Wisdom ; but He is one of
the things fashioned and made. And He is
called, by a misapplication of the terms, the
Word and Wisdom, since He is Himself made
by the proper Word of God, and by that wisdom
which is in God, in which, as God made all other
things, so also did He make Him. Wherefore,


He is by His very nature changeable and mu-
table, eiiually with other rational beings. The
Word, too, is alien and separate from the sub-
stance of God. The father also is ineffable to
the Son ; for neither does the Word perfectly
and accurately know the Father, neither can He
perfectly see Him. For neither does the Son
indeed know His own substance as it is. Since
He for our sakes was made, that by Him as by
an instrument God might create us ; nor would
He have existed had not God wished to make
us. Some one asked of them whether the Son
of God could change even as the devil changed ;
and they feared not to answer that He can ; for
since He was made and created. He is of muta-
ble nature."

3. Since those about Arius speak these things
and shamelessly maintain them, we, coming to-
gether with the Bishops of Egypt and the Libyas,
nearly a hundred in number, have anathematized
them, together with their followers. But those
about Eusebius have received them, earnestly
endeavouring to mix up falsehood with truth,
impiety with piety. But they will not prevail ;
for the truth prevails, and there is no communion
betwixt light and darkness, no concord between
Christ and Belial.^ For who ever heard such
things? or who, now hearing them, is not aston-
ished, and does not stop his ears that the pol-
lution of these words should not touch them ?
Who that hears John saying, " In the beginning
was the Word," "* does not condemn those who
say there was a time when He was not? Who
that hears these words of the Gospel, " the only-
begotten Son ; " 5 and, " by Him were all things
made," ^ will not hate those who declare He is
one of the things made ? For how can He be
one of the things made by Him ? or how shall He
be the only-begotten who, as they say, is reck-
oned with all the rest, if indeed He is a thing
made and created ? And how can He be made
of things which are not, when the Father says,
" My heart belched forth a good Word ; " ^ and.
" From the womb, before the morning have I
begotten Thee?"^ Or how is He unlike to the
substance of the Father, who is the perfect
image and briglitness of the Father, and who
says, " He tJiat hath seen Me hath seen the
Father?"'' And how, if the Son is the Word or
Wisdom and Reason of God, was there a time
when He was not? It is all one as if they said,
that there was a time when God was without
reason and wisdom. How, also, can He he
changeable and mutable, who says indeed by
Himself: " I am in the Father, and the Father


' [Imagining. Compare Hippolylus, vol. y pp. 156 and 158,
supra. This expression seems to have been a '.'jrt of formula.]
2 [See p. 290, note i, supra.]


3 2 Cor. vi. 14.
< John i. I.
S John i. 18.
* John i. 3.

7 Ps. xlv. I.

8 Ps. ex. 3; Heb.

9 John xiv. 9.


298


EPISTLES ON THE ARIAN HIiRESY.


in Me," ' and, " I and My Father are one ; " ^
and by the prophet, " I am the Lord, I change
not?" ^ P'or even though one saying may refer
to the Father Himself, yet it would now be more
aptly spoken of the Word, because when He
became man. He changed not ; but, as says the
apostle, " Jesus Christ, the same yesterday, to-
day, and for ever." ^ Who hath induced them
to say, that for our sakes He was made ; although
Paul says, "for whom are all things, and by whom
are all things? " 5

4. Now concerning their blasphemous asser-
tion who say that the Son does not perfectly
know the Father, we need not wonder : for
having once purposed in their mind to wage war
against Christ, they impugn also these words of
.His, "As the Father knoweth Me\ even so know
I the Father." ^ Wherefore, if the Father only
in part knoweth the Son, then it is evident that
the Son doth not perfectly know the Father.
But if it be wicked thus to speak, and if the
Father perfectly knows the Son, it is plain that,
even as the Father knoweth His own Word, so
also the Word knoweth His own Father, of whom
He is the Word.

5. By saying these things, and by unfolding
the divine Scriptures, we have often refuted
them. But they, chameleon-like, changing their
sentiments, endeavour to claim for themselves
that saying : " When the wicked cometh, then
cometh contempt." ^ Before them, indeed, many
heresies existed, which, having dared more than
was right, have fallen into madness. But these
by all their words have attempted to do away
with the Godhead of Christ, have made those
seem righteous, since they have come nearer to
Antichrist. Wherefore they have been excom-
municated and anathematized by the Church.^
And indeed, although we grieve at the destruc-
tion of these men, especially that after having
once learned the doctrine of the Church, they
have now gone back ; yet we do not wonder at
it ; for this very thing Hymenseus and Philetus
suffered,^ and before them Judas, who, though
he followed the Saviour, afterwards became a
traitor and an apostate. Moreover, concerning
these very men, warnings are not wanting to us,
for the Lord foretold : " Take heed that ye be
not deceived : for many shall come in My name,
saying, I am Christ ; and the time draweth near :
go ye not therefore after them." '° Paul, too,
having learnt these things from the Saviour,
wrote, " In the latter times some shall depart


from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits,
and doctrines of devils which turn away from
the truth." "

6. Since, therefore, our Lord and Saviour Jesus
Christ has thus Himself exhorted us, and by His
apostle hath signified such things to us ; we, who
have heard their impiety with our own ears, have
consistently anathematized such men, as I have
already said, and have declared them to be aliens
from the Catholic Church and faith, and we have
made known the thing, beloved and most hon-
oured fellow-ministers, to your piety, that you
should not receive any of them, should they
venture rashly to come unto you, and that you
should not trust Eusebius or any one else who
writes concerning them. For it becomes us as
Christians to turn with aversion from all who
speak or think against Christ, as the adversaries
of God and the destroyers of souls, and " not
even to wish them Godspeed, lest at any time
we become partakers of their evil deeds," '- as
the blessed John enjoins. Salute the brethren
who are with you. Those who are with me
salute you.

SIGNATORS.

PRESBYTERS OK ALEXANDRIA.

L CoUuthus, presbyter,'^ give my suffrage to
the things which are written, and also for the
deposition of Arius. and those who are guilty of
impiety with him.


' John xiv. 10.
^ John X. 30.
3 Mai. iii. 6. t
•» Heb. xiii. 8.
,5 Heb. xi. lo.

6 John X. 15.

7 Prov. xviii. 3.

* [See the signators to this decree in the subjoined fragment.]
9 2 Tim. ii. 17.
>o Luke xxi. 8.


Alexander, presbyter, in like

manner.
Dioscorus, presbyter, in like

manner.
Dionysius, presbyter, in like

manner.
Eusebius, presbyter, in like

manner.
Alexander, presbvter, in like

manner.
Nilaras, presbyter, in like

manner.


Ammonius, deacon, in like
manner.

Macarius, deacon.

Pistus, deacon, in like man-
ner.

Athanasius, deacon.

Eumenes, deacon.

Apollonius, deacon.

Olympius, deacon.

Aphthonius, deacon.

Athanasius, deacon."

Macarius, deacon, in like
manner.

Paulus, deacon.

Petrus, deacon.


Arpocration, ])resbyter, in

like manner.
Agathus, presbyter.
Nemesius, presbyter.
Longus, jiresbyter.
Silvanus, i)resbyter.
Perous, presbyter.
Apis, presbyter.
Proterius, presbyter.
Paulus, presbyter.
Cyrus, presbyter, in like

manner.


Ambytianus, deacon.
Gaius, deacon, in like

manner.
Alexander, deacon.
Dionysius, deacon.
Agathon, deacon.
Polybius, deacon, in like

manner.
Theonas, deacon.
Marcus, deacon.
Commodus, deacon.
Serapion, deacon.
Nilus, deacon.
Romanus, deacon, in like

manner.


" 1 Tim. iv. T.

'^ 2 John X.

■3 [.See p. 291, m- » 3, supra.\

'* [Note this n.-\me.'.


EPISTLES ON THE ARIAN HERESY.


299


PRESBYTERY OF MAREOTIS.


IV.


I, Apollonius, presbyter, give my suffrage to
the things which are written, and also for the
deposition of Arius, and of those who are guilty
of iniDietv with him.


EPISTLE TO ^GLON, BISHOP OF CYNOPO-
LIS, AGAINST THE ARIANS.=


Iiigenius, ])resbyter, in like

manner.
Ammonius, presbyter.
Tyrannus, presbyter.
Copres, ])resbyter.
Amnionas, presbyter.
Orion, ])resbyter.
Serenas, presbyter.
Didymus, presbyter.
Heracles, presbyter.


Dioscorus, presbyter.
Sostras, presbyter.
Theon, presbyter.
Koccon, presbyter.
Agathus, presbyter.
Achilles, presbyter.
Paulas, presbyter.
ThalelcEus, presbyter.
Dionysius, presbyter, in
like manner.


From a letter of St. Alexander, bishop ot
Ale.xandria, to yEglon, bishop of Cynopolis,
against the Arians.

1. Natural will is the free faculty of every in-
telligent nature as having nothing involuntary
which is in respect of its essence.

2. Natural operation is the innate motion of
all substance. Natural operation is the substan-
tial and notifying reason of every nature. Natu-
ral operation is the notifying virtue of every
substance.


rJEACONS.


Sarapion, deacon, in like
manner.

Justus, deacon, in like man-
ner.

Didymus, deacon.

Demetrius, deacon.

Maurus, deacon.

Alexander, deacon.

-Marcus, deacon.

Comon, deacon.

Tryphon, deacon.

Ammonius, deacon.


Didymus, deacon.
Ptollarion, deacf)n.
Seras, deacon.
Gaius, deacon.
Hierax, deacon.
Marcus, deacon.
Theonas, deacon.
Sarmaton, deacon.
Carpon, deacon.
Zoilus, deacon, in
manner.


v.-


ON THE SOUL AND BODY AND THE PAS-
SION OF THE LORD.3


like


III.— EPISTLE.i

Alexander, to the priests and deacons, of Alex- j
andria and Mareotis, being presetit to them
present, brethren beloved in the Lord, sends I
g7-eeti?ig :

Although you have been forward to subscribe i
the letters that I sent to those about Arius, ur-
ging them to abjure their impiety, and to obey !
the wholesome and Catholic faith ; and in this
manner have shown your orthodox purpose, and
your agreement in the doctrines of the Catholic
Church ; yet because I have also sent letters to
all our fellow- ministers in every place with re-
spect to the things which concern Arius and his
companions ; I have thought it necessary to call
together you the clergy of the city, and to sum-
mon you also of Mareotis ; especially since of
your number Chares and Pistus, the priests ;
Sarapion, Parammon, Zosimus, and Irenseus, the
deacons, have gone over to the party of Arius,
and ha\e preferred to be deposed with them ;
that you may know what is now written, and that
you should declare your consent in these matters,
and give your suffrage for the deposition of those
about Arius and Pistus. For it is right that you
should know what I have written, and that you
should each one, as if he had written it himself,
retain it in his heart.


■ Athanas., ibid., p. 396. On the deposition of Arius and his
followers by Alexander, archbishop of Alexandria.


1. The Word which is ungrudgingly sent down
from heaven, is fitted for the irrigation of our
hearts, if we have been prepared for His power,
not by speaking only, but by listening. For as
the rain without the ground does not produce
fruit, so neither does the Word fructify without
hearing, nor hearing without the Word. More-
over, the Word then becomes fruitful when we
pronounce it, and in the same way hearing, when
we listen. Therefore since the Word draws
forth its power, do you also ungrudgingly lend
your ears, and when you come to hear, cleanse
yourselves from all ill-will and unbelief. Two
very bad things are ill-will and unbelief, both of
which are contrary to righteousness ; for ill-will
is opposed to charity, and unbelief to faith; just
in the same way as bitterness is opposed to
sweetness, darkness to light, evil to good, death
to life, falsehood to truth. Those, therefore,
who abound in these vices that are repugnant
to virtue, are in a manner dead ; for the malig-
nant and the unbelieving hate charity and faith,
and they who do this are the enemies of God.

2. Since therefore ye know, brethren beloved,
that the malignant and the unbelieving are the
enemies of righteousness, beware of these, em-
brace faith and charity, by which all the holy
men who have existed from the beginning of
the world to this day have attained unto salva-
tion. And show forth the fruit of charity, not
in words only, but also in deeds, that is, in all
godly patience for God's sake. For, see ! the
Lord Himself hath shown His charity towards
us, not only in v/ords but also in deeds, since He

- Two fragments from an epistle. St. Maxim., Theological and
Polemical Works, vol. ii. pp. 152-155. Edit. Paris, 1675.

3 Many writings of the ancients, as Cardinal M«i has remarked,
may be disinterred from the Oriental manuscripts in the Vatican
library, some of which have been brought to light by that eminent
scholar. In an ."Arabic MS. he discovered a large p«tion of the fol-
lowing discourse by St. Alexander, the patriarch of Alexandria, which
he afterwards met with entire in the Syrian Vatican manuscript 368.
The Greek version being lost, Mai, with the assistance of the erudite
Maronites, Matthaeus Sciahuanus, and Franciscus Mehasebus, trans
lated the discourse into Latin, .ind his version has been chiefly fol-
lowed in the following translation. Of its genuineness there is no
doubt, and it is quite worthy of a place among his other writings.


;CH.^


i:risri.i:s on riii". aki w iii:ui:s\'.


hath given Himself up as the ]>riee of our sal
vation. Hesiiles. we were noi ere.ueil. like the
rest oi" llie worKl. In werd aloiu', but also 1>\
ileed. l'\>r I'.oil made the worKl to exist In- the
power oi' a sii\L;le woiil, but us lie proiluied In'
the elheaev alike ol His wonl aiul workiiii;.
For it was not enough tor (.unl to say. " Lei us
make man m our image, after our likeness," '
but deed I'ollowed wortl ; tor, taking the dust
from the ground. He tormed man out o( it, eon-
tormahle to His image and similitutle, and \n\o
him He breathed the breath ol' lite, so that
Ailam beeame ,i li\ iitg soul.

_^. lUit wlien man at'terwanis by his tall hail
inelined to ileath, it was neeessary that that form
should be reereated anew to salvation by the
same Artitieei. I'or tlie term indeed lay rotting
in the ground ; but that inspiration whieh had
been as the breath of Hie. was detained separate
from the body in a ilark plaee, whieh is ealleil
Hades. There was, theretore. a division of the
soul from the body ; it was banished iiJ inferos,
whilst the latter was resobed into ilust ; and
there was a great interval of separation between
them ; for the body, by the dissolution of the
flesh, beeomes eorrupt ; the soul being loosened
from it, its aetion eeases. For as when the king
is thrown into ehains, the eity falls to ruin ; or
as when the general is taken eaptive, the army is
seattered abroad ; or as when the helmsman is
shaken oiT, the vessel is submerged ; so when
the soul is bountl in ehains, its body goes to
l)ieees ; as the eity without its king, so its mem-
liers are dissolveil ; as is the ease with an army
when its general is lost, they are drowned in
death, even as hai^iH'ns to a \'essel when deprived
of its helmsman. The soul, theretore, goxerneil
the man, as long as the body sur\ived ; even as
the king governs the eity. the general the army,
the helmsmaii the shiji. But it was powerless to
rule it, tVom the time when it was immoveably
tied to it, and beeame immersed in error ; there-
tore it was that it deelined from the straight
path, autl tollowetl tempters, giving heed to
tornieation, idolatry, and shedding of blood ;
b\ whieh evil deeds it has destroyed the proper
manhood. Nay. but itself also being earried at
length to the lower regions, it was there detaineil
by the wiekeii tempter. Flse was it wont, as
the king restores the ruined eity, the general
eolleets the disjierseii arm\, the sailor repairs
the broken ship, e<^en so, I say, the soul used to
minister supplies to the body before that the
body was tlissolveil in the dust, being iiot as yet
itself bound fast with fetters. Rut after that the
soul beeame bomul, not with m-aterial fetters but
with sins, and thus was rendered im]Hitent to
act, then it lelt its b(Hl\ in the ground, and being


' Gtn, T. a6.


east down to the lower regions, it was made the
tocMstool of ileath, and despieable to all.

-1. M.m weitt forth trom parailise to a region
whii h w.is ttu' >mk o\ muighteousiu'ss, ibrniea
tion, adultery, and truel murder. \\u\ there he
Ibund his destruetion ; lor .ill things conspired \o
hir^ death, and worked the ruin o{ him who had
hardlv entered there. Meanwhile man wanted
some eonsolalion and assistance and rest. l''or
wJK'ii was it well with man? In his mother's
wcMub? Hut when he was shut up theiw he
dil'fered biU little (rom the cle.id. \\ hen he was
noinished with milk from the breast? Not even
then, indeed, did he teel anv jcn. Was it r.tther
whilst he w.is i cnning tci maluritv ? lUit then,
espeeially. d.mgers impended mc-r him (vom his
youthful lusts. Was u. l.isiU, wlu-n he grew old?
Nay. but then does he begin to groan, being
pressed down by the weight of old age. and the
expeetaticui of death. l""or what else is old age
but the expeetation oi death? \'erilv all tlie
inhabitaiits o\ earth do die, young men and old,
little eliildren and adults, for no age or bodilv
stature is exempt from death. Whv. then, is man
tormented by this exeeeding grief? I doubtless
the very aspeet oi death begets sadness ; t"or we
behold in a dead man the taee changed, the
figure de.ul. the body shrunk ui* with emaeia-
tion, the mouth silent, the skin ecild, the c-arease
prc^strate on the ground, the eyes sunken, the
limbs immo\eable, the flesh wasted a\\,i\, the
veins eongealed, the biMies whitened, the jomts
dissolved, all parts oi him redueed to dust, and
the man no longer existing. What, then, is
man? .\ llmver, 1 say, that is but tor a little
I time, whieh in his mother's womb is not appar-
, ent. in ycnith flmirishes. but whieh in c>ld .ige
I withers and departs in death.

5. Hut now. alter all this bondage {o death
and corruption oi the manhocnl. (lod hath \ isiti-d
His creature, which He tormed .il'ter His own
image and similitude: and this He huh done
that it might not tor ever be the sport oi death.
'Hierefore (lod sent dmvn trom he.iven His in-
corporeal Son to take tlesh upon Him m the
Virgin's vvomli : .md thus, equallv ,is thou, was
He made man ; to save lost m.m. and cc^lleet
all His scattered members, i'ov fhrist, wlun
He joined the manhood tc) His person, united
that which death by the separatic^n oi the bodv
had dispersed. I'hrist suflered th.it we sluMild
live for ever.

l'\ir else whv should (."hrisl have died? Had
He eommitteil anvihing worthy of death? Why
did He c-lc>the Himself in llesh who was in-
vested with glory? And since He was Ciod.
whv did He become man? .\nd since He
j reigned in heaven, whv did He come down to
j earth, and lu'comc incarnate in the virgin's
jwomb? Wh.it neccssitv, I ask, impelled l.".od


I'J'ISriJ'S ON Till': AIM AN \\\:\<\:'->V.


V) I


to I oinc (Ir)vvti tf) c'trtli, to ;i,.ssiit(ic (Icsli, t.o l<c
wr,i|)|M:fl in swiifl'llirif^ < lollies in ;i. tnatigcr-
< ni'llc, to \)(: nonrislicd witli llic inilk fnnn the
hrc.isl, lo rcrcivc iKiptisni Iroiii ;i servant, l<j |j(;
lihcd up iij)on the enws, to he ititerrcd in an
• •;irtlily se-pnlehn;, t(; rise a^^aiti the lliirfl day
Irorn the* de;id ? '

What neeessity, I s;i.y, imp'lli'l lliin to this?
1 1 is siiffieiently diseoverd th.it \\i- suffered
,li;itii<' for tii.-iii's sake, t<; set hun free from
(l<;ith ; .ind th.it He exclaimed, as in the words
o( the |)io|ihit, '' I have endiirefl ;is a travailing
uoni.iii." ■ III very deed did lie eridnre for(;iir
s;i.k(!s s(;rrou', i^iKJiiiiny, torment, even death
itself, ;i,nd hiiri;il. l''or thus lie says Himself by
the- |)ro|)het : "I went down into the deep,"''
Who made Him thus to go riovvn? 'i'he impious
people. I5elu*ld, ye sons of men, behold what
rccfjmpense [sniel made unto Ifim I She slew
her I'enefaetor, returtiin;^ evil ffjr good, afflir:-
tioii for joy, d(;;i,th for life. 'I'he-y slew by nail-
111^^ to the tree Iliin who li.'id bron^/jit. to life
i.lieir de.ul, had he.iled their tiiuimed, had made
their lepers clean, had given light to their blinrl.
liehold, ye sons of men ! behold, .ill ye per^ple,
tiie-se new wonders ! They sus[jetided Hun on
the tree, who stretches out the earth ; they
transfixed Him with nails who laid firm the
loundation of the world ; they circumscribed
llini who circumscribefl the heavens; they
liouiifl Him who absfjlves sinners; they gave
ilim vinegar to drink who hath rnufle them to
drink of righteousness; they icd Him with gall
v.'ho hath offered to them the HreafI of Life ;
they caused r;f;rrui>tion to cfune ufKjn His hands
;ind feet who healerl their h;itids and feet; they
violently clfjsed His eyes who restored sight to
them; they gave Him over to the tomb, who
raised their (lead to life both in the time before
His l'assi(m and also whilst He was hangilig on
the tree.

6. l''or when our Lord was suffering upon the
cross, the tombs were burst open, the infernal
r(;girm was disclosed, the souls leapt forth, the
dead returned to life, and many of them were [
seen in Jerusalem, whilst the mystery of the j
cross was being [perfected ; what time our Lord |
tranijjled upon fleath, dissolved the enmity, j
bound the strong man, and raised the trophy i
of the cross, His brnly being lifted up upon it,!
that the body might apjjear on high, and death
to be depressed under the foot of flesh. Then


' 'I'hc |Ki<tH;iec, as far as tf> " riiu: ajjain tl^ic third day from the
'Itad," in generally marked with inverted commas, and Mai remarlts
that It had tjcen already hroiiKlit lo li(;hl hy him under the name of
the same Alexander, in the S/'icite);. Roman., vol. iii, p. 6f/^,
amongst some extracts of the Fatner» from the Arabic Vatican Oxicx,
loi, in which is contained the (;elcbratcd Monophysit/: worl< entitled
t'ides I'atnim. It is established therefore th;it itiis disf;oiirH<; was
written in f/reel< by Alexander, and afwrwards translated not only
into the Syriac, but ulso into the Arabic lanjjiiage. [I have made thi»
passage into a paraj^raph distinct from the rest.]

' Tsa. xlii. 14

J Jonah ii. 4,


the heavenly power, wfmdered, tlie angels were
astonishefl, the elements treinbled, every crea-
ture w;i,s shaken whilst they IrxAetl on this new
mystery, ;ind the terrihc spectat le which was
being enaf:ted in the universe. Yet the entirt:
people, ;is unf;f>nscious of the mystery, exiilted
over ('hrist in derision ; although the earth was
rocking, the mountains, the valleys, anrl the sea
were shaken, ;md every r;reature (jf God was
stnitten with confusion. The lights of heaven
were afraifl, the sun fled away, the moon disap-
peared, the stars withdrew their shining, the flay
f:ame to end;''' the angel in astonishment de-
parted from the ternfjle after the rending u^ the
veil, and darkness t:f;ver<:fl the earth on which
its Lord had clf^sed His eyes. Meanwhile helh
was with light resplendent, for thither har] the-
star rlescended. 'i'he Lord, indc-erl, dirl not
descend into hell in His bofly but in His Spirit.
He ffjrsooth is working everytvhere, fr^r whilst
{le raiserl the dead by His borly, by His spirit
was He lil;erating their souls. I''or when the
body of the 1/ord was liung upon the cross, the
tombs, as we have said, were opened ; hell wa-s
unbarred, the fiead received their life, the sotils
were .sent back again into the world, and that
because the l/jrd had conrjuered hell, had
trodden down death, had coverefl the enemy
with shame ; therefore was it that the souls came
fortli from Hafles, and the fleari appeared upon
the earth.

7. Ye see, therefore, how great was the effect
of the death of <^.hrist, for no creature endurefl
His fall with equal mind, nor did the elements
His Passion, neither flid the earth retain His
bofly, nf)r hell His Sj^irit, All things were in
the J'assion of Christ disturbed and f:onvulsefl.
The 1/jrd exclaimed, as once before to La/.arus,
Come forth, ye dead, from yrjur tombs and your
secret places; for I, the Christ, give unto you
resurrection. For then the earth could not long
hold the body of our l/jrd that in it was buried ;
but it exclaimed, O my I/.>rd, [jardon mine in-
ifjuities, save me from Thy wrath, absolve rne
from the curse, for I have received the bloofi of
the righteous, and yet I have not covercfl the
bodies of men or Thine own body ! What is at
length this wonderful mystery? Why, O \A)Xf\,
diflst Thou f;ome down to earth, unless it was for
man's sake, who has been .scattercfl everywhere :
for in every place has Thy fair image been dis-
seminated? Nay 1 but if thou shouldestgive but
one little word, at the instant all bodies would
stand before Thee, Now, since 'I'hou hast corne
to earth, and hast sought for the members of
'J"hy fashioning, undertake for man ^ho is 'I'hine
own, receive that which is committed to Thee,

♦ [Vol. iii. 58, this dcricft. The patristic testimony is overwhelm-
ing and sufficient. .Sec Africanus, w. 136, Muprn, and a full liiscuit-
iiion f/f his statement in Kouth, /<. i'., ii, p. 477.]

5 Ha/Jc».


302


EPISTLES ON THE ARIAN HERESY.


recover Thine image, Thine Adam. Then the
Lord, the third day after His death, rose again,
thus bringing man to a knowledge of the Trinity.
Then all the nations of the human race were
saved by Christ. One submitted to the judg-
ment, and many thousands were absolved.
Moreover, He being made like to man whom
He had saved, ascended to the height of heaven,
to offer before His Father, not gold or silver, or
precious stones, but the man whom He had
formed after His own image and similitude ; and
the Father, raising Him to His right hand, hath
seated Him upon a throne on high, and hath
made Him to be judge of the peoples, the lead-
er of the angelic host, the charioteer of the
cherubim, the Son of the true Jerusalem, the
Virgin's spouse, and King for ever and ever.
Amen.

\I. — THE ADDITION IN THE CODE.X, WITH A
VARIOUS READING.

(lod, therefore, wishing to visit His own form
which He had fashioned after His own image
and similitude, hath in these last times sent into
the world His incorporeal and only Son, who
being in the Virgin's womb incarnate, was born
perfect man to raise erect lost man, re-collect-
ing His scattered members. For why else should
Christ have died? Was He capitally accused ?
And since He was God, why was He made man ?
Why did He who was reigning in heaven come
down to earth? Who compelled God to come
down to earth, to take flesh of the holy Virgin,
to be wrapped in swaddling clothes and laid in
a manger, to be nourished with milk, to be bap-
tized in the Jordan, to be mocked of the people,
to be nailed to the tree, to be buried in the
bosom of the earth, and the third day to rise
again from the dead ; in the cause of redemp-
tion to give life for life, blood for blood, to
undergo death for death? For Christ, by dy-
ing, hath discharged the del)t of death to which
man was obnoxious. Oh, the new and ineffable
mystery ! the Judge was judged. He who ab-
solves from sin was bound ; He was mocked
who once framed the world ; He was stretched
upon the cross who stretched out the heavens ;
He was fed with gall who gave the manna to be
bread ; He died who gives life. He was given


up to the tomb who raises the dead. The
powers were astonished, the angels wondered, the
elements trembled, the whole created universe
was shaken, the earth (juaked, and its founda-
tions rocked ; the sun fled away, the elements
were subverted, the light of day receded ; be-
cause they could not bear to look upon their
crucified Lord.' The creature, in amazement,
said, What is this novel mystery? The judge
is judged and is silent ; the invisible is seen
and is not confounded ; the incomprehensible is
grasped and is not indignant at it ; the immeas-
urable is contained in a measure and makes no
opposition ; the impassable suffers and tloes not
avenge its own injury ; the immortal dies and
complains not ; the celestial is buried and bears
it with an equal mind. What, I say, is this
mystery? The creature surely is transfixed with
amazement. But when our Lord rose from
death and trampled it down, when He bound
the strong man and set man free, then every
creature wondered at the Judge who for Adam's
sake was judged, at the invisible being seen, at
the impassable suffering, at the immortal dead,
at the celestial buried in the earth. For our
Lord was made man ; He was condemned that
He might impart compassion ; He was bound
that He might set free ; He was apprehended
that He might liberate; He suffered that He
might heal our sufferings ; He died to restore
life to us ; He was buried to raise us up. For
when our Lord suffered. His humanity suffered,
that which He had like unto man ; and He dis-
solves the sufferings of him who is His like, and
by dying He hath destroyed death. It was for
this cause that He came down upon earth, that
by pursuing death He might kill the rebel that
slew men. For one underwent the judgment,
and myriads were set free ; one was buried, and
myriads rose again. He is the Mediator be-
tween God and man ; He is the resurrection
and the salvation of all ; He is the Guide of the
erring, the Shepherd of men who have been set
free, the life of the dead, the charioteef of the
cherubim, the standard-bearer of the angels,
and the King of kings, to whom be glory for
ever and ever. Amen.

' Here, again, we have this fact insisted on. See p. 301, note 4.


ELUCIDATIONS.


303


ELUCIDATIONS.


(Some points, p. 289.)

That the theology of the great school of Alexandria had a character of its own, is most
apparent ; I should be the last to deny it. As its succession of teachers was like that of heredi-
tary descent in a family, a family likeness is naturally to be found in this school, from the great
Clement to the great Athanasius. It is a school that hands on the traditions in which Apollos
had been reared ; it not less reflects the Greek influences always dominant in the capital of the
Macedonian hero ; but it is a school in which the Gospel of Christ as the Light of the world
was always vciZ.^Q, predominant : and, while a most liberal view of human knowledge was inculcated
in it, yet the faith was always exalted as the mother and mistress of the true gnosis and of all
science. The wise men of this world were summoned with an unperial voice, from this eldest
seat and centre of Christian learning, to cast their crowns and their treasures at the feet of Jesus.
With a generous patronage Clement conceded all he could to the philosophy of the Greeks, and
yet sublimely rose above it to a sphere it never discovered, and looked down upon all merely
human intellect and its achievements like Uriel in the sun.

It was the special though unconscious mission of this school to prepare the way, and to shape
the thought of Christendom, for the great epoch of the (nominal) conversion of the empire, and
for the all-important synodical period, its logical consequence. It was in this school that the
technical formulas of the Church were naturally wrought out. The process was like that of the
artist who has first to make his own tools. He does many things, and resorts to many contriv-
ances, never afterwards necessary when once tlie tools are complete and his laboratory furnished
with all he wants for his work. To my mind, therefore, it is but a pastime of no practical worth
to contrast the idiosyncrasies of Clement with those of Origen, and to set up distinctions between
the Logos of this doctor and that.' The differences to be descried belong to the personal pecul-
iarities of great minds not yet guided to unity of diction by a scientific theology. The mai-vel is
their harmony of thought. Their ends and their antagonisms are the same. The outcome of
their mental efforts and their pious faith is seen in the result. Alexander was their product, and
Athanasius (bringing all their sheaves to the Church's garner, winnowed and harvested) is the
perpetual gnomon of the Alexandrian school. Its testimony, its prescription, its harmony and
unity, are all summed up in him.

It is extraordinary that many truly evangelical critics seem to see, in the subordination taught
by Origen,^ something not reconcileable with the Nicene orthodoxy. Even Bishop Bull is a sub-
ordinationist, and so are all the great orthodox divines. When Origen maintains the /Aomp^ta (the
Father as the root and source of the Godhead, as do all the Greeks^), and also a subordination
of the Son in the divine nvaui, he is surely consistent with the Athanasian doctrine ; ■* and, if he is
led to affirm a diversity of essence in connection with this subordination, he does it with such
limitations as should convince us that he, too, would have subscribed the ofioovaiov, in which
Alexandrians no whit inferior to him finally formulated the convictions and testimonies of their
predecessors. 5

' See, against Petavius and others, Dr. Holmes's learned note, vol. iii. p. 628, Elucidation I.

^ Vol. iv. p. 343, this series: also Elucidation H. p. 382.
On Tertullian's orthodoxy, see notes, vol iii. p. 600, etc.

* When we consider his refinements about the words substance, idea, image, etc., in the dispute with Celsus, while yet ihe.se terms
were not reduced to precision, we cannot but detect his effort to convey an orthodox notion. Observe Dr. Spencer's short but useful note,
vol. IV. p. 603, note 3.

-' See vol. iv. p. 382, Klucidations I., II., and HI.


304 ELUCIDATIONS.


II.

(Since the body of the Catholic Church is one, etc., p. 296.)

As SO shortly preceding the meeting of the Great Council, this letter is most important as a
clear testimony to the meaning the first council attached to that article of the Creed which
affirms "one holy Catholic and Apostolic Church." We must compare the Treatises of Cyprian
for the West, with this and the Letter of Firmilian ' for the East, as clearly elucidating the con-
temporary mind of the Church, and hence the meaning of those words which reflect their mind in
the Creed. To make any reflections of my own would be out of place, save only, negatively, as
I compare it with the modern creed of the Council of Trent (Pius IV,), which defines the
Catholic Church to be the communion which acknowledges the Church of Rome as " the mother
and mistress of churches."

The concluding section of this letter is decisive as to the absolute autojiomy of the Alexan-
drian dioecese.^ To all the other churches Alexander merely communicates his sentence, which
they are all bound to respect. Whether the Christian Church at this period reflected the Apos-
tolic Institutions is not the question, but merely what its theory was in the fourth century, and
how far East and West accorded with the theory of Cyprian.


' Vol. V. p. 390, this series. * See the force of this spelling, p. 240, supra.


METHODIUS.


[TRANSLATED BY THE REV. WILLIAM R. CLARK, M.A., VICAR OF ST. MARY MAGDALEN,

TAUNTON.]


INTRODUCTORY NOTICE

TO

METHODIUS.


[a.d. 260-312]. Considering the strong language in which Methodius is praised by ancient
writers, as well as by the modems, I feel that our learned translator has too hastily dismissed his
name and works in the biographical introduction below, Epiphanius makes great use of him in
his refutations of Origen ; and Dupin's critical and historical notice of him is prolonged and
highly discriminating, furnishing an abridgment of all his writings and of those vulgarly at-
tributed to him heretofore.' I have made into an elucidation some references which may be of
use to the student. In like manner, I have thrown into the form of notes and elucidations what
would be less pertinent and less useful in a preface. There are no facts to be added to what is
here given by the translator ; and remarks on the several works, which he has too sparingly an-
notated, will be more conveniently bestowed, perhaps, on the pages to which they immediately
refer. The following is the translator's brief but useful

INTRODUCTION.

Methodius, who is also called Eubulius,- was, first of all bishop, simultaneously of Olympus
and Patara, in Lycia, as is testified by several ancient writers. ^ He was afterwards removed,
according to St. Jerome, to the episcopal See of Tyre in Phoenicia, and at the end of the latest
of the great persecutions of the Church, about the year 312, he suffered martyrdom at Chalcis
in Greece. Some consider that it was at Chalcis in Syria, and that St. Jerome's testimony ought
to be thus understood, as Syria was more likely to be the scene of his martyrdom than (rreece,
as being nearer to his diocese. Others affirm that he suffered under Decius and Valerian ; but
this is incorrect, since he wrote not only against Origen long after the death of Adamantius, but
also against Porphyry, whilst he was alive, in the reign of Diocletian.

Methodius is known chiefly as the antagonist of Origen ; although, as has been pointed out,
he was himself influenced in no small degree by the method of Origen, as may be seen by his
tendency to allegorical interpretations of Holy Scripture. The only complete work of this writer
which has come down to us is his Banquet of the Ten Virgins, a dialogue of considerable power
and grace, in praise of the virginal life. His antagonism to Origen, however, comes out less in
this than in his works On the Restcrrection, an4 On Things Created. The treatise On Free Will
is, according to recent critics, of doubtful authorship, although the internal evidence must be said
to confirm the ancient testimonies which assign it to Methodius. His writings against Porphyry,
with the exception of some slight fragments, are lost, as are also his exegetical writings.^

■ [In Dr. Schaffs History (vol. ii. p. 809) is just such a notice and outline as would be appropriate here.]

^ St. Epiph., Hares., 64, sec. 63. [But this seems only his nam de plume, assumed in his fiction of the Baiiquet.\

3 St. Hieronymus, De viris illusi., c. 83.

* For the larger fragments wc are indebted to Epiphanius {Hares., 64) and Photius {Biblioiheca, 234-237).


3o8 INTRODUCTORY NOTICE.

Combefis published an edition of his works in 1 644 ; but only so much of the Banquet as
was contained in the Bibliotheca of Photius. In 1656 Leo Allatius published for the first time a
complete edition of this work at Rome from the Vatican MS. Combefis in 1672 pubhshed
an edition founded chiefly upon this ; and his work has become the basis of all subsequent
reprints.

The following translation has been made almost entirely from the text of Migne, which is
generally accurate, and the arrangement of which has been followed throughout. The edition of
Jahn in some places rearranges the more fragmentary works, especially that On the Resurrection ;
but, although his text was occasionally found useful in amending the old readings, and in improv-
ing the punctuation, it was thought better to adhere in general to the text which is best known.

A writer who was pronounced by St. Epiphanius ' to be " a learned man and a most valiant
defender of the truth," and by St. Jerome, disertissi?nus martyr,^ who elsewhere speaks of him as
one who nitidi co^npositique sermonis libros confecit,^ cannot be altogether unworthy the attention
of the nineteenth century.

' Epiph., Heef., 64, sec. 63. ovrjp Aoyio? koX <j<t)6Spa irepi t^s aAijflei'o? 6.yiavi,i7a.ft.evos. [Petavius renders this: " vir apprime doeCus
acerrimusque veritatis pntronus." ]

2 Hieron., Com. in Dan., c. 13.

3 Id., De vir ill., c. 83. Many more such testimonies will be found collected in the various editions of his works in Greek.


THE BANQUET OF THE TEN VIRGINS;'

OR,

CONCERNING CHASTITY.


PERSONS OF THE DIALOGUE: EUBOULIOS,^ GREGORION, ARETE; MARCELLA, THEOPH-
ILA, THALEIA, THEOPATRA, THALLOUSA, AGATHE, PROCILLA, THEKLA, TUSIANE,
DOMNINA.


INTRODUCTION.

PLAN OF THE WORK ; WAY TO PARADISE ; DESCRIP-
TION AND PERSONIFICATION OF VIRTUE ; THE
AGNOS A SYMBOL OF CHASTITY ; MARCELLA, THE
ELDEST AND FOREMOST AMONG THE VIRGINS OF
CHRIST.

EuBOULios. You have arrived most season-
ably, Gregorion, for I have just been looking for
you, wanting to hear of the meeting of Marcella
and Theopatra, and of the other virgins who were
present at the banquet, and of the nature of their
discourses on the subject of chastity ; for it is
said that they argued with such ability and power
that there was nothing lacking to the full con-
sideration of the subject. If, therefore, you have
come here for any other purpose, put that off to
another time, and do not delay to give us a
complete and connected account of the matter
of which we are inquiring.

Gregorion.3 I seem to be disappointed of
my hope, as some one else has given you intelli-
gence beforehand on the subject respecting which
you ask me. For I thought that you had heard
nothing of what had happened, and I was flatter-
ing myself greatly with the idea that I should be
the first to tell you of it. And for this reason I
made all haste to come here to you, fearing the
very thing which has happened, that some one
might anticipate me.


' [The idea, and some of the ideas borrowed from the Symposium
of Plato, but designed to furnish a contrast as strong as possible
between the swinish sensuality of false " philosophy " in its best estate,
and the heavenly chastity of those whom the Gospel renders " pure
in heart," and whose life on earth is controlled by the promise, " they
shall see God. "J

^ In Migne's ed. Eicboulion, but apparently with less authority;
and probably because the name is connected with that of Gregorion.
Euboulios is a man, and Gregorion a woman.

3 \_Gregoyion 3.r\i,\i^x% to the Diotiiiia of Socrates in Plato's Ban-
quet, and talks like a philosopher on these delicate subjects.]


Euboulios. Be comforted, my excellent friend,
for we have had no precise information respect-
ing anything which happened ; since the person
who brought us the intelligence had nothing to
tell us, except that there had been dialogues ;
but when he was asked what they were, and to
what purpose, he did not know.

Gregorion. Well then, as I came here for
this reason, do you want to hear all that was said
from the beginning ; or shall I pass by parts of
it, and recall only those points which I consider
worthy of mention?

Euboulios. By no means the latter ; but first,
Gregorion, relate to us from the veiy beginning
where the meeting was, and about the setting
forth of the viands, and about yourself, liow you
poured out the wine

" They in golden cups
Each other pledged, while towards broad heaven they
looked."''

Gregorion. You are always skilful in discus-
sions, and excessively powerful in argument —
thoroughly confuting all your adversaries.

Euboulios. It is not worth while, Gregorion,
to contend about these things at present ; but
do oblige us by simply telling us what happened
from the beginning.

Gregorion. Well, I will try. But first answer
me this : You know, I presume, Arete, 5 the
daughter of Philosophia?

Euboulios. Why do you ask ?

Gregorion. " We went by invitation to a
garden of hers with an eastern aspect, to enjoy
the fruits of the season, myself, and Procilla, and
Tusiane." I am repeating the words of Theo-


•• Hom., //., iv. 3, 4.

5 A personification of virtue, the daughter of philosophy,
of philosophy not falsely so called]

3°9


[i.e.,


lO


THE BANQUET OF THE TEN VIRGINS.


patra, for it was of her I obtained the informa-
tion. " We went, Gregorion, by a very rough,
steep, and arduous path : when we drew near to
the place," said Theopatra, " we were met by a
tall and beautiful woman walking along quietly
and gracefully, clothed in a shining robe as white
as snow. Her beauty was something altogether
inconceivable and divine. Modesty, blended
with majesty, bloomed on her countenance. It
was a face," she said, " such as I know not that
I had ever seen, awe-inspiring, yet tempered with
gentleness and mirth ; for it was wholly unadorned
by art, and had nothing counterfeit. She came
up to us, and, like a mother who sees her daugh-
ters after a long separation, she embraced and
kissed each one of us with great joy, saying, ' O,
my daughters, you have come with toil and pain
to me who am earnestly longing to conduct you
to the pasture of immortality ; toilsomely have
you come by a way abounding with many frightful
reptiles ; for, as I looked, I saw you often step-
ping aside, and I was fearing lest you should turn
back and slip over the precipices. But thanks
to the Bridegroom to whom I have espoused '
you, my children, for having granted an effectual
answer to all our prayers.' And, while she is
thus speaking," said Theopatra, " we arrive at
the enclosure, the doors not being shut as yet,
and as we enter we come upon Thekla and Agathe
and Marcella preparing to sup. And Arete im-
mediately said, ' Do you also come hither, and
sit down here in your place along with tliese your
fellows.' Now," said she to me, " we who were
there as guests were altogether, I think, ten in
number ; and the place was marvellously beauti-
ful, and abounding in the means of recreation.
The air was diffused in soft and regular currents,
mingled with pure beams of light, and a stream
flowing as gently as oil through the very middle
of the garden, threw up a most delicious drink ;
and the water flowing from it, transparent and
pure, formed itself into fountains, and these,
overflowing like rivers, watered all the garden
with their abundant streams ; and there were
different kinds of trees there, full of fresh fruits,
and the fruits that hung joyfully from their
branches were of equal beauty ; and there were
ever-blooming meadows strewn with variegated
and sweet-scented flowers, from which came a
gentle breeze laden with sweetest odour. And
the agnos ^ grew near, a lofty tree, under which
we reposed, from its being exceedingly wide-
spreading and shady."

EuBOULios. You seem to me, my good friend,
to be making a revelation of a second paradise. ^


' 2 Cor. xi. 2.

- " A tall tree like the willow, the branches of which were strewn
by matrons on their beds at the Thesmophoria, vitex agnuscastiis.
It was associated with the notion of chastity, from the likeness of its
name to <iyv6?." — Liddell and .Scott.

^ [Much of this work suggests a comparison with the Hennas
of vol ii., and Minucius Felix seems not infrequently reflected.]


Gregorion. You speak truly and wisely.
" When there," she said, " we had all kinds of
food and a variety of festivities, so that no delight
was wanting. After this Arete,"* entering, gave
utterance to these words : —

" ' Young maidens, the glory of my greatness,
beautiful virgins, who tend the undefiled meadows
of Christ with unwedded hands, we have now had
enough of food and feasting, for all things are
abundant and plentiful with us.s What is there,
then, besides which I wish and expect? That
each of you shall pronounce a discourse in praise
of virginity. Let Marcella begin, since she sits
in the highest place, and is at the same time the
eldest. I shall be ashamed of myself if 1 do
not make the successful disputant an object of
envy, binding her with the unfading flowers of
wisdom.'

" And then," I think she said, " Marcella
immediately began to speak as follows."

DISCOURSE I. — MARCELLA.

CHAP. I. THE DIFFICULTY AND EXCELLENCE OF

VIRGINITY ; THE STUDY OF DOCTRINE NECF^SSARY
FOR VIRGINS.

Virginity is something supernaturally great,
wonderful, and glorious ; and, to speak plainly
and in accordance with the Holy Scriptures, this
best and noblest manner of life alone is the root '^
of immortality, and also its flower and first-fruits ;
and for this reason the Lord promises that those
shall enter into the kingdom of heaven who have
made themselves eunuchs, in that passage ^ of
the Gospels in which He lays down the various
reasons for which men have made themselves
eunuchs. Chastity with men is a very rare thing,
and difficult of attainment, and in proportion to
its supreme excellence and magnificence is the
greatness of its dangers.**

For this reason, it requires strong and gener-
ous natures, such as, vaulting over the stream of
pleasure, direct the chariot of the soul upwards
from the earth, not turning aside from their aim,
until having, by swiftness of thought, lightly
bounded above the world, and taken their stand
truly upon the vault of heaven, they purely con-
template immortahty itself as it springs forth '='
from the undefiled bosom of the Almighty.

Earth could not bring forth this draught ;
heaven alone knew the fountain from whence it
flows ; for we must think of virginity as walking
indeed upon the earth, but as also reaching up


* [Virtue presides, and " to the pure all things are pure;" but
the freedoms of the converse must offend unless we bear in mind that
these are allegorical beings, not women in flesh and blood.]

S [See the oration on Simeon and Anna, cap. lo, infra.\

^ Lit. the udder.

7 Matt. ix. 12.

8 [I think evidence abounds, in the course of this allegory, that it
was designed to meet the painful discussions excited in the Church
by the fanatical cdnduct of Origen, vol. iv. pp. -.!25-226.]

9 Lit. " leaps out."


THE BANQUET OF THE TEN VIRGINS.


311


to heaven. And hence some who have longed
for it, and considering only the end of it, have
come, by reason of coarseness of mind, in-
effectually with unwashed feet, and have gone
aside out of the way, from having conceived no
worthy idea of the virginal manner of life. For
it is not enough to keep the body only undefiled,
just as we should not show that we think more
of the temple than of the image of the god ; but
we should care for the souls of men as being the
divinities of their bodies, and adorn them with
righteousness. And then do they most care for
them and tend them when, striving untiringly to
hear divine discourses, they do not desist until,
wearing the doors of the wise,' they attain to the
knowledge of the truth.

For as the putrid humours and matter of flesh,
and all those things which corrupt it, are driven
out by salt, in the same manner all the irrational
appetites of a virgin are banished from the body
by divine teaching. For it must needs be that
the soul which is not sprinkled with the words
of Christ, as with salt, should stink and breed
worms, as King David, openly confessing with
tears in the mountains, cried out, " My wounds
stink and are corrupt," ^ because he had not
salted himself with the exercises of self-control,
and so subdued his carnal appetites, but self-
indulgently had yielded to them, and became
corrupted in adultery. And hence, in Leviticus,^
every gift, unless it be seasoned with salt, is for-
bidden to be offered as an oblation to the Lord
God. Now the whole spiritual meditation of the
Scriptures is given to us as salt which stings in
order to benefit, and which disinfects, without
which it is impossible for a soul, by means of
reason, to be brought to the Almighty ; for " ye
are the salt of the earth,"-* said the Lord to the
apostles.

It is fitting, then, that a virgin should always
love things which are honourable, and be dis-
tinguished among the foremost for wisdom, and
addicted to nothing slothful or luxurious, but
should excel, and set her mind upon things
worthy of the state of virginity, always putting
away, by the word, the foulness of luxury, lest
in any way some slight hidden corruption should
breed the worm of incontinence ; for " the un-
married woman careth for the things of the
Lord," how she may please the Lord, " that she
may be holy both in body and in spirit," 5 says
the blessed Paul. But many of them who con-
sider the hearing of the word quite a secondary
matter, think they do great things if they give
their attention to it for a little while. But dis-
crimination must be exercised with respect to


' Ecclus. vi. 36.

2 Ps. xxxvii. 6 (LXX.), xxxviii. 5 (E. V.).
■^ Lev. ii. 13; Markix. 40.
■* Matt. V. 13.
5 I Cor. vii. 34.


these ; for it is not fitting to impart divine in-
struction to a nature which is careful about trifles,
and low, and which counterfeits wisdom. For
would it not be laughable to go on talking to
those who direct all their energy towards things
of little value, in order that they may complete
most accurately those things which they want to
bring to perfection, but do not think that the
greatest pains are to be taken with those neces-
sary things by which most of all the love of
chastity would be increased in them ?

CHAP. II. VIRGINITY A PLANT FROM HEAVEN, IN-
TRODUCED LATE ; THE ADVANCEMENT OF MAN-
KIND TO PERFECTION, HOW ARRANGED.

For truly by a great stretch of power the plant
of virginity was sent down to men from heaven,
and for this reason it was not revealed to the
first generations. For the race of mankind was
still very small in number ; and it was necessary
that it should first be increased in number, and
then brought to perfection. Therefore the men
of old times thought it nothing unseemly to take
their own sisters for wives, until the law coming
separated them, and by forbidding that which
at first had seemed to be right, declared it to be
a sin, calling him cursed who should " uncover
the nakedness " of his sister ; *" God thus merci-
fully bringing to our race the needful help in due
season, as parents do to their children. For they
do not at once set masters over them, but allow
them, during the period of childhood, to amuse
themselves like young animals, and first send
them to teachers stammering like themselves,
until they cast off" the youthful wool of the mind,
and go onwards to the practice of greater things,
and from thence again to that of greater still.
And thus we must consider that the God and
Father of all acted towards our forefathers. For
the world, while still unfilled with men, was like
a child, and it was necessary that it should first
be filled with these, and so grow to manhood.
But when hereafter it was colonized from end to
end, the race of man spreading to a boundless
extent, God no longer allowed man to remain in
the same ways, considering how they might now
proceed from one point to another, and advance
nearer to heaven, until, having attained to the
very greatest and most exalted lesson of virginity,
they should reach to perfection; that first they
should abandon the intermarriage of brothers
and sisters, and marry wives from other families ;
and then that they should no longer have many
wives, like brute beasts, as though born for the
mere propagation of the species ; and then that
they should not be adulterers ; and then again
that they should go on to continence, and from
continence to virginity, when, having trained


6 Lev. xviii. 19, xx. 17.


312


THE BANQUET OF THE TEN VIRGINS.


themselves to despise the flesh, they sail fear-
lessly into the peaceful haven of immortality.'

CHAP. III. —r BY THE CIRCUMCISION OK ABRAHAM,
MARRIAGE WITH SISTERS FORBIDDEN ; IN THE
TIMES OF THE PROPHEIS POLYGAMY PUT A STOP
TO ; CONJUGAL PURITY ITSELF BY DEGREES EN-
FORCED.

If, however, any one should venture to find
fault with our argument as destitute of Scripture
proof, we will bring forward the writings of the
prophets, and more fully demonstrate the truth
of the statements already made. Now Abra-
ham, when he first received the covenant of
circumcision, seems to signify, by receiving cir-
cumcision in a member of his own body, noth-
ing else than this, that one should no longer
beget children with one born of the same parent ;
showing that every one should abstain from in-
tercourse with his own sister, as his own flesh.
And thus, from the time of Abraham, the custom
of marrying with sisters has ceased ; and from
the times of the prophets the contracting of
marriage with several wives has been done away
with ; for we read, " Go not after thy lusts, but
refrain thyself from thine appetites ; " ^ for
'■■ wine and women will make men of under-
standing to fall away ; " ^ and in another place,
" Let thy fountain be blessed ; and rejoice with
the wife of thy youth," '^ manifestly forbidding a
plurality of wives. And Jeremiah clearly gives
the name of "fed horses " s to those who lust
after other women ; and we read, " The multi-
plying brood of the ungodly shall not thrive,
nor take deep rooting from bastard slips, nor
lay any fast foundation."^

Lest, however, we should seem prolix in col-
lecting the testimonies of the prophets, let us
again point out how chastity succeeded to mar-
riage with one wife, taking away by degrees the
lusts of the flesh, until it removed entirely the
inclination for sexual intercourse engendered by
habit. For presently one is introduced earnestly
deprecating, from henceforth, this seduction,
saying, " O Lord, Father, and Governor of my
life, leave me not to their counsels ; give me not
a proud look ; let not the greediness of the
belly, nor lust of the flesh, take hold of me." ^
And in the Book of Wisdom, a book full of all
virtue, the Holy Spirit, now openly drawing His
hearers to continence and chastity, sings on this

' [Contending with the worse than bestial sensuality of paganism,
and inured to the sorrows of martyr-ages, when Christian families
could not be reared in peace, let us not wonder at the high concep-
tions of these heroic believers, based on the words of Christ Himself,
and on the promise, " Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see
God."]

^ Ecclus. xviii. 30.

3 Ecclus. .\ix. 2.

* Prov. V. 18.

5 Jer. V. 8.

' Wisd. iv. 3.

'' Ecclus. xxiii. i, 4, 6.


wise, " Better it is to have no children, and to
have virtue, for the memorial thereof is immor-
tal ; because it is known with God and with men.
When it is present men take example at it ; and
when it is gone they desire it : it weareth a
crown and triumpheth for ever, having gotten
the victory, striving for undefiled rewards."**

CHAP. IV. CHRIST ALONE TAUGHT VIRGINITY,

OPENLY PREACHING THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN ;
THE LIKENESS OF GOD TO BE ATTAINED IN THE
LIGHT OF THE DIVINE VIRTUES.

We have already spoken of the periods of
the human race, and how, beginning with the
intermarriage of brothers and sisters, it went
on to continence ; and we have now left for us
the subject of virginity. Let us then endeavour
to speak of this as well as we can. And first
let us inquire for what reason it was that no one
of the many patriarchs and prophets and right-
eous men, who taught and did many noble things,
either praised or chose the state of virginity.
Because it was reserved for the Lord alone to
be the first to teach this doctrine, since He
alone, coming down to us, taught man to draw
near to God ; for it was fitting that He who was
first and chief of priests, of prophets, and of
angels, should also be saluted as first and chief
of virgins.'' For in old times man was not yet
perfect, and for this reason was unable to receive
perfection, which is virginity. For, being made
in the Image of God, he needed to receive that
which was according to His Likeness ; '° which
the Word being sent down into the world to
perfect, He first took upon Him our form, dis-
figured as it was by many sins, in order that
we, for whose sake He bore it, might be able
again to receive the divine form. For it is then
that we are truly fashioned in the likeness of
God, when we represent His features in a human
life, like skilful painters, stamping them upon
ourselves as upon tablets, learning the path which
He showed us. And for this reason He, being
God, was pleased to put on human flesh, so that
we, beholding as on a tablet the divine Pattern
of our life, should also be able to imitate Him
who painted it. For He was not one who,
thinking one thing, did another ; nor, while He
considered one thing to be right, taught another.
But whatever things were truly useful and right,
these He both taught and did.

CHAP. v. CHRIST, BY PRESERVING HIS FLESH IN-
CORRUPT IN VIRGINITY, DRAWS TO THE EXER-
CISE OF VIRGINITY ; THE SMALL NUMBER OF


* Wisd. iv. I, 2.

9 [This seems to me admirable. Our times are too little willing
to see all that Scripture teaches in this matter.]
'° A distinction common among the Fathers.


THE BANQUET OE THE TEN VIRGINS.


3^3


VIRGINS IN PROPORTION TO THK NUMBER OF
SAINTS.

What then did the Lord, who is the 'I nith and
the Light, take in hand when He came down
from heaven? He presented the flesh which
He had taken upon Him incorrupt in virginity,
so that we also, if we would come to the likeness '
of God and Christ, should endeavour to honour
virginity. For the likeness of God is the avoid-
ing of corruption. And that the Word, when
He was incarnate, became chief Virgin, in the i
same way as He was chief Shepherd and chief
Prophet of the Church, the Christ-possessed
John shows us, saying, in the Book of the Reve- 1
lation, " And I looked, and, lo, a Lamb stood i
on the mount Sion, and with Him an hundred j
forty and four thousand, having His name and j
His Father's name written in their foreheads. :
And I heard a voice from heaven, as the voice
of many waters, and as the voice of a great
thunder ; and I heard the voice of harpers harp-
ing with their harps : And they sung as it were
a new song before the throne, and before the ;
four beasts, and the elders : and no man could
learn that song but the hundred and forty and
four thousand, which were redeemed from the !
earth. These are they which were not defiled
with women ; for they are virgins. These are ^
they who follow the Lamb whithersoever He j
goeth ; " ' showing that the Lord is leader of
the choir of virgins. And remark, in addition
to this, how very great in the sight of God is
the dignity of virginity : " These were redeemed
from among men, being the first-fruits unto God
and to the Lamb. And in their mouth was
found no guile : for they are without fault," ^
he says, " and they follow the Lamb whitherso-
ever He goeth." And he clearly intends by this
to teach us that the number of virgins was, from
the beginning, restricted to so many, namely, a
hundred and forty and four thousand, while the
multitude of the other saints is innumerable.
For let us consider what he means when dis-
coursing of the rest. " I beheld a great multi-
tude, which no man could number, of all nations,
and kindreds, and people, and tongues." ^ It
is plain, therefore, as I said, that in the case of
the other saints he introduces an unspeakable
multitude, while in the case of those who are in
a state of virginity he mentions only a very small
number, so as to make a strong contrast with
those who make up the innumerable number.^

This, O Arete, is my discourse to you on the
subject of virginity. But, if I have omitted any-
thing, let Theophila. who succeeds me, supjily
the omission.


' Rev. xiv. 1-4.

* Rev. xiv. 4, 5.

3 Rev. vii. 9. ,

* [Compare Cyprian, vol. v. p. 475, this series.]


DISCOURSE II. — THEOPHILA.

CHAP. I. MARRIAGE NOT ABOLISHED BY THE

COMMENDATION OF VIRGINITY.

And then, she said, Theophila spoke : —
Since Marcella has excellently begun this dis-
cussion without sufficiently completing it, it is
necessary that I should endeavour to put a finish
to it. Now, the fact that man has advanced by
degrees to virginity, God urging him on from
time to time, seems to me to have been admira-
bly proved ; but I cannot say the same as to the
assertion that from henceforth they should no
longer beget children. For I think I have per-
ceived clearly from the Scriptures that, after He
had brought in virginity, the Word did not alto-
gether abolish the generation of children ; for
although the moon may be greater than the stars,
the light of the other stars is not destroyed by
the moonlight.

Let us begin v/ith Genesis, that we may give
its place of antiquity and supremacy to this
scripture. Now the sentence and ordinance of
God respecting the begetting of children 5 is con-
fessedly being fulfilled to this day, the Creator
still feshioning man. For this is (piite manifest,
that God, like a painter, is at this very time work-
ing at the world, as the Lord also taught, " My
Father worketh hitherto."^' But when the rivers
shall cease to flow and fall into the reser\'oir of
the sea, and the light shall be perfectly separated
from the darkness, — for the separation is still go-
ing on, — and the dry land shall henceforth cease
I to bring forth its fruits with creeping things and
I four-footed beasts, and the predestined number
' of men shall be fulfilled ; then from henceforth
I shall men abstain from the generation of children.
, But at present man must co-operate in the form-
' ing of the image of God, while the world exists
t and is still being formed ; for it is said, " Increase
I and multiply." 5 And we must not be offended
at the ordinance of the Creator, from which,
I moreover, we ourselves have our being. For the
i casting of seed into the furrows of the matrix is
j the beginning of the generation of men, so that
' bone taken from bone, and flesh from flesh, by
i an invisible power, are fashioned into another
man. And in this way we must consider that the
saying is fulfilled, " This is now bone of my bone,
! and flesh of my flesh." '

1 CHAP. II. GENERATION SOMETHING AKIN TO THE

FIRST FORMATION OF EVE FROM THE SIDE AND
N.'^TURE OF AD.'UI ; GOD THE CREATOR OF MEN
IN ORDINARY GENERATION.

And this perhaps is what was shadowed forth
by the sleep and trance of the first man, which

5 Gen. i. 28.

* e'cu5 anri, even until now. John v. 17.

^ Gen. ii. 23.


3H


THE BANQUET OF THE TEN VIRGINS.


prefigured the embraces of connubial love.
When thirsting for children a man falls into a
kind of trance,' softened and subdued by the
pleasures of generation as by sleep, so that again
something drawn from his flesh and from his
bones is, as I said, fashioned into another man.
For the harmony of the bodies being disturbed
in the embraces of love, as those tell us who
have experience of the marriage state, all the
marrow-like and generative part of the blood,
like a kind of liquid bone, coming together from
all the members, worked into foam and curdled,
is projected through the organs of generation
into the living body of the female. And proba-
bly it is for this reason that a man is said to
leave his father and his mother, since he is then
suddenly unmindful of all things when united to
his wife in the embraces of love, he is overcome
by the desire of generation, offering his side to
the divine Creator to take away from it, so that
the father may again appear in the son.

Wherefore, if God still forms man, shall we
not be guilty of audacity if we think of the gen-
eration of children as something offensive, which
the Almighty Himself is not ashamed to make
use of in working with His undefiled hands ;
for He says to Jeremiah, " Before I formed thee
in the belly I knew thee ; " ^ and to Job, " Didst
thou take clay and form a living creature, and
make it speak upon the earth ? " ^ and Job draws
near to Him in supplication, saying, " Thine
hands have made me and fashioned me." +
Would it not, then, be absurd to forbid marriage
unions, seeing that we expect that after us there
will be martyrs, and those who shall oppose the
evil one, for whose sake also the Word promised
that He would shorten those days ? s For if the
generation of children henceforth had seemed
evil to God, as you said, for what reason will
those who have come into existence in opposi-
tion to the divine decree and will be able to
appear well-pleasing to God? And must not
that which is begotten be something spurious,
and not a creature of God, if, like a counterfeit
coin, it is moulded apart from the intention and
ordinance of the lawful authority? And so we
concede to men the power of forming men.

CHAP. III. — AN AMBIGUOUS PASSAGE OF SCRIP-
TURE ; NOT ONLY THE FAITHFUL BUT EVEN
PRELATES SOMETIMES ILLEGITIMATE.

But Marcella, interrupting, said, " O Theoph-
ila, there appears here a great mistake, and
something contrary to what you have said ; and
do you think to escape under cover of the cloud


' Remark the connection, exo-Tacri? and efiVraTai.

2 Jer. i. 5.

3 Job xxxviii. 14 (LXX.).
* Job X. 8.

S Matt. xxiv. 22.


which you have thrown around you ? For there
comes that argument, which perhaps any one
who addresses you as a very wise person will
bring forward : What do you say of those who
are begotten unlawfully in adultery ? For you
laid it down that it was inconceivable and im-
possible for any one to enter into the world unless
he was introduced by the will of the divine
Ruler, his frame being prepared for him by God.
And that you may not take refuge behind a safe
wall, bringing forward the Scripture which says,
' As for the children of the adulterers, they shall
not come to their perfection,' ^ he will answer you
easily, that we often see those who are unlawfully
begotten coming to perfection like ripe fruit.

And if, again, you answer sophistically, ' O,
my friend, by those who come not to perfection
I understand being perfected in Christ-taught
righteousness ; ' he will say, ' But, indeed, my
worthy friend, very many who are begotten of
unrighteous seed are not only numbered among
those who are gathered into rtie flock of the
brethren, but are often called even to preside
over them. 7 Since, then, it is clear, and all tes-
tify, that those who are born of adultery do
come to perfection, we must not imagine that
the Spirit was teaching respecting conceptions
and births, but rather perhaps concerning those
who adulterate the truth, who, corrupting the
Scriptures by false doctrines, bring forth an
imperfect and immature wisdom, mixing their
error with piety.' And, therefore, this plea being
taken away from you, come now and tell us if
those who are born of adultery are begotten by
the will of God ; for you said that it was impos-
sible that the offspring of a man should be
brought to perfection unless the Lord formed it
and gave it life."

CHAP. IV. HUMAN GENERATION, AND THE WORK

OF GOD THEREIN SET FORTH.

Theophila, as though caught round the middle
by a strong antagonist, grew giddy, and with
difficulty recovering herself, replied, " You ask a
question, my worthy friend, which needs to be
solved by an example, that you may still better
understand how the creative power of God, per-
vading all things, is more especially the real
cause in the generation of men, making those
things to grow which are planted in the produc-
tive earth. For that which is sown is not to be
blamed, but he who sows in a strange soil by
unlawful embraces, as though purchasing a slight
pleasure by shamefully selling his own seed. For
imagine our birth into the world to be like some
such thing as a house having its entrance lying
close to lofty mountains ; and that the house ex-


^ Wisd. iii. 16.

' [Bastardy seems to have been regarded as washed out by bap-
tism, thousands of pagan converts having been born under this stain.]


THE BANQUET OF THE TEN VIRGINS.


315


tends a great way down, far from the entrance,
and that it has many holes behind, and that in
this part it is circular." "I imagine it," said
Marcella. " Well, then, suppose that a modeller
seated within is fashioning many statues ; im-
agine, again, that the substance of clay is in-
cessantly brought to him from without, through
the holes, by many men who do not any of
them see the artist himself. Now suppose the
house to be covered with mist and clouds, and
nothing visible to those who are outside but only
the holes." " Let this also be supposed," she
said. " And that each one of those who are
labouring together to provide the clay has one
hole allotted to himself, into which he alone has
to bring and deposit his own clay, not touching
any other hole. And if, again, he shall offi-
ciously endeavour to open that which is allotted
to another, let him be threatened with fire and
scourges.

" Well, now, consider further what comes after
this : the modeller within going round to the
holes and taking privately for his modelling the
clay which he finds at each hole, and having in
a certain number of months made his model,
giving it back through the same hole ; having
this for his rule, that every lump of clay which is
capable of being moulded shall be worked up
indifferently, even if it be unlawfully thrown by
any one through another's hole, for the clay has
done no wrong, and, therefore, as being blame-
less, should be moulded and formed ; but that
he who, in opposition to the ordinance and law,
deposited it in another's hole, should be pun-
ished as a criminal and transgressor. For the
clay should not be blamed, but he who did this
in violation of what is right ; for, through incon-
tinence, having carried it away, he secretly, by
violence, deposited it in another's hole." " You
say most truly."

CHAP. v. THE HOLY FATHER FOLLOWS UP THE

SAME ARGUMENT.

And now that these things are completed, it
remains for you to apply this picture, my wisest
of friends, to the things which have been already
spoken of; comparing the house to the invisible
nature of our generation, and the entrance ad-
jacent to the mountains to the sending down
of our souls from heaven, and their descent into
the bodies ; the holes to the female sex, and the
modeller to the creative power of God, which,
under the cover of generation, making use of
our nature, invisibly forms us men within, work-
ing the garments for the souls. Those who carry
the clay represent the male sex in the compari-
son ; when thirsting for children, they bring and
cast in seed into the natural channels of the
female, as those in the comparison cast clay into
the holes. For the seed, which, so to speak,


partakes of a divine creative power, is not to be
thought guilty of the incentives to incontinence ;
and art always works up the matter submitted to
it ; and nothing is to be considered as evil in
itself, but becomes so by the act of those who
used it in such a way ; for when properly and
purely made use of, it comes out pure, but if
disgracefully and improperly, then it becomes
disgraceful. For how did iron, which was dis-
covered for the benefit of agriculture and the
arts, injure those who sharpened it for murderous
battles? Or how did gold, or silver, or brass,
and, to take it collectively, the whole of the
workable earth, injure those who, ungratefully
towards their Creator, make a wrong use of them
by turning parts of them into various kinds of
idols ? And if any one should supply wool from
that which had been stolen to the weaving art,
that art, regarding this one thing only, manu-
factures the material submitted to it, if it will
receive the preparation, rejecting nothing of that
which is serviceable to itself, since that which is
stolen is here not to be blamed, being lifeless.
And, therefore, the material itself is to be wrought
and adorned, but he who is discovered to have
abstracted it unjustly should be punished. So,
in like manner, the violators of marriage, and
those who break the strings of the harmony of
life, as of a harp, raging with lust, and letting
loose their desires in adultery, should themselves
be tortured and punished, for they do a great
wrong stealing from the gardens of others the
embraces of generation ; but the seed itself, as
in the case of the wool, should be formed and
endowed with life.

CHAP. VL GOD CARES EVEN FOR ADULTEROUS

BIRTHS ; ANGELS GIVEN TO THEM AS GUARDIANS.

But what need is there to protract the argu-
ment by using such examples? for nature could
not thus, in a little time, accomplish so great a
work without divine help. For who gave to the
bones their fixed nature? and who bound the
yielding members with nerves, to be extended
and relaxed at the joints? or who prepared
channels for the blood, and a soft windpipe for
the breath ? or what god caused the humours to
ferment, mixing them with blood and forming
the soft flesh out of the earth, but only the Su-
preme Artist making us to be man, the rational
and living image of Himself, and forming it like
wax, in the womb, from moist slight seed ? or by
whose providence was it that the foetus was not
suffocated by damp when shut up within, in the
connexion of the vessels? or who, after it was
brought forth and had come into the light,
changed it from weakness and smallness to size,
and beauty, and strength, unless God Himself,
the Supreme Artist, as I said, making by His
creative power copies of Christ, and living pic-


3i6


THE BANQUET OF THE TEN VIRGINS.


tures? Whence, also, we have received from
the inspired writings, that those who are begotten,
even though it be in adultery, are committed to
guardian angels. But if they came into being
in opposition to the will and the decree of the
blessed nature of God, how should they be de-
livered over to angels, to be nourished with much
gentleness and indulgence ? and how, if they had
to accuse their own parents, could they confi-
dently, before the judgment seat of Christ, in-
voke Him and say, V Thou didst not, O Lord,
grudge us this common light ; but these appointed
us to death, despising Thy command?" " For,"
He says, " children begotten of unlawful beds are
witnesses of wickedness against their parents at
their trial." '

CHAP. VII. THE RATIONAL SOUL FROM GOD HIM-
SELF ; CHASTITY NOT THE ONLY GOOD, ALTHOUGH
THE BEST AND MOST HONOURED.

And perhaps there will be room for some to
argue plausibly among those who are wanting in
discrimination and judgment, that this fleshly
garment of the soul, being planted by men, is
shaped spontaneously apart from the sentence
of Ciod. If, however, he should teach that the
immortal being of the soul also is sown along
with the mortal body, he will not be believed ;
for the Almighty alone breathes into man the
undying and undecaying part, as also it is He
alone who is Creator of the invisible and inde-
structible. For, He says, He " breathed into his
nostrils the breath of life ; and man became a
living soul."- And those artificers who, to the
destruction of men, make images in human form,
not perceiving and knowing their own Maker,
are blamed by the Word, which says, in the Book
of Wisdom, a book full of all virtue,^ " his heart
is ashes, his hope is more vile than earth, and
his life of less value than clay ; forasmuch as he
knew not his Maker, and Him that inspired into
him an active soul, and breathed in a living
spirit ; " ^ that is, God, the Maker of all men ;
therefore, also, according to the apostle, He
" will have all men to be saved, and to come
unto the knowledge of the truth." 5 And now,
although this subject be scarcely completed, yet
there are others which remain to be discussed.
For when one thoroughly examines and under-
stands those things which happen to man accord-
ing to his nature, he will know not to despise the
procreation of children, although he applauds
chastity, and prefers it in honour. For although
honey be sweeter and more pleasant than other
things, we are not for that reason to consider


other things bitter which are mixed up in the
! natural sweetness of fruits. And, in support of
] these statements, I will bring forward a trust-
1 worthy witness, namely, Paul, who says, "So then
j he that giveth her^^ in marriage doeth well ; but
i he that giveth her not in marriage doeth bet-
ter." ^ Now the word, in setting forth that which
! is better and sweeter, did not intend to take
away the inferior, but arranges so as to assign to
I each its own proper use and advantage. For
I there are some to whom it is not given to attain
virginity ; and there are others whom He no
longer wills to be excited by procreations to lust,
and to be defiled, but henceforth to meditate
and to keep the mind upon the transformation
of the body to the likeness of angels, when they
" neither marry nor are given in marriage," * ac-
cording to the infallible words of the Lord ; since
it is not given to all to attain that undefiled state
of being a eunuch for the sake of the kingdom
of heaven,'' but manifestly to those only who are
able to preserve the ever-blooming and unfading
flower of virginity. For it is the custom of the
prophetic Word to compare the Church to a
flower-covered and variegated meadow, adorned
and crowned not only with the flowers of vir-
ginity, but also with those of child-bearing and
of continence ; for it is written, " Upon thy '°
right hand did stand the queen in a vesture of
gold, wrought about with divers colours." "

These words, O Arete, I bring according to
my ability to this discussion in behalf of the
truth.

And when Theoi)hila had thus spoken, Theo-
patra said that applause arose from all the virgins
approving of her discourse ; and that when they
became silent, after a long pause, llialeia arose,
for to her had been assigned the third place in
the contest, that which came after Theophila.
And she then, as I think, followed, and spoke.


DISCOURSE III. — THALEIA.

CHAP. I. PASSAGES OF HOLY SCRIFPURE '" COM-
PARED.

You seem to me, O Theophila, to excel all in
action and in speech, and to be second to none
in wisdom. For there is no one who will find
fault with your discourse, however contentious
and contradictory he may be. Yet, while every-
thing else seems rightly spoken, one thing, my
friend, distresses and troubles me, considering
that that wise and most spiritual man — I mean


Wisd
Gen


11. 7.


3 [This language sliows that it is not cited as Holy Scripture. It
confirms St. Jerome's testimony, Prolog, in Libros Salotno>ns.\
* Wisd. XV. lo, II.
J I Tim. ii. 4.


*> His virgin. [St. Paul was married, and then a widower, in the
opinion of many of the ancients. See Euseb., H. E.. iii. 30. |
'' I Cor. vii. 38.

8 Matt. xxii. 30.

9 Matt. xix. 12.

■° The bridegroom's.

" P.s. xlv. 10 (xliv. 10, LXX.).

'^ Gen. ii. 23, 24, and Eph. v. 28-32.


THE BANQUET OF THE TEN VIRGINS.


317


Paul — would not vainly refer to ('hrist and the
Church the union of the first man and woman,'
if the Scripture meant nothing higher than what
is conveyed by the mere words and the history ;
for if we are to take the Scripture as a bare rep-
resentation wholly referring to the union of man
and woman, for what reason should the apostle,
calling these things to remembrance, and guiding
us, as I opine, into the way of the Spirit, alle-
gorize the history of Adam and Eve as having a
reference to Christ and the Church? For the
passage in Genesis reads thus : " And Adam said.
This is now bone of my bones, and flesh of my
flesh : she shall be called Woman, because she
was taken out of man. Therefore shall a man
leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave
unto his wife: and they shall be one flesh." ^
But the apostle considering this passage, by no
means, as I said, intends to take it according to
its mere natural sense, as referring to the union
of man and woman, as you do ; for you, explain-
ing the passage in too natural a sense, laid down
that the Spirit is speaking only of conception
and births ; that the bone taken from the bones
was made another man, and that living creatures
coming together swell like trees at the time of
conception. But he, more spiritually referring
the passage to Christ, thus teaches : " He that
loveth his wife loveth himself. For no man
ever yet hated his own flesh, but nourisheth and
cherisheth it, even as the Lord the Church : for
we are members of His body, of His flesh, and
of His bones. For this cause shall a man leave
his father and mother, and shall be joined unto
his wife, and they two shall be one flesh. This
is a great mystery : but I speak concerning
Christ and the Church." ^

CHAP. II. — THE DIGRESSIONS OF THE APOSTLE
PAUL ; THE CHARACTER OF HIS DOCTRINE :
NOTHING IN IT CONTRADICTORY; CONDEM-
NATION OF ORIGEN, WHO WRONGLY TURNS
EVERYTHING INTO ALLEGORY.

Let it not disturb you, if, in discussing one
class of subjects, he, i.e., Paul, should pass over
into another, so as to appear to mix them up,
and to import matters foreign to the subject
under consideration, departing from the ques-
tion, as now for instance. For wishing, as it
seems, to strengthen most carefully the argument
on behalf of chastity, he prepares the mode of
argument beforehand, beginning with the more
persuasive mode of speech. For the character
of his speech being very various, and arranged
for the purpose of progressive proof, begins gen-
tly, but flows forward into a style which is loftier
and more magnificent. And then, again chan-


■ Eph. y. 32. [A forcible argument.]

^ Gen. ii. 23, 24.

5 Eph. V. 28-32. [Compare the next chapter, note 4.]


ging to what is deep, he sometimes finishes with
what is simple and easy, and sometim.es with
what is more difficult and delicate ; and yet in-
troducing nothing which is foreign to the subject
by these changes, but, bringing them all together
according to a certain marvellous relationship,
he works into one the question which is set forth
as his subject. It is needful, then, that I should
more accurately unfold the meaning of the apos-
tle's arguments, yet rejecting nothing of what
has been said before. For you seem to me, ()
Theophila, to have discussed those words of the
Scripture amply and clearly, and to have set
them forth as they are without mistake. For it
is a dangerous thing wholly to despise the literal
meaning,-* as has been said, and especially of
Genesis, where the unchangeable decrees of Ciod
for the constitution of the universe are set forth,
in agreement with which, even until now, the
world is perfectly ordered, most beautifully in
accordance with a perfect rule, until the Law-
giver Himself having re-arranged it, wishing to
order it anew, shall break up the first laws of
nature by a fresh disposition. But, since it is
not fitting to leave the demonstration of the
argument unexamined — and, so to speak, half-
lame — come let us, as it were completing our
pair, bring forth the analogical sense, looking
more deeply into the Scripture ; for Paul is not
to be despised when he passes over the literal
meaning, and shows that the words extend to
Christ and the Church.

CHAP. III. COMPARISON INSTITUTED BETWEEN

THE FIRST AND SECOND ADAM.

And, first, we must inquire if Adam can be
likened to the Son of God, when he was found
in the transgression of the Fall, and heard the
sentence, " Dust thou art, and unto dust shalt
thou return." 5 F"or how shall he be considered
"the first-born of every creature," ^ who, after
the creation of the earth and the firmament, was
formed out of clay? And how shall he be ad-
mitted to be " the tree of life " who was cast
out for his transgression, ^ lest " he should again
stretch forth his hand and eat of it, and live for
ever? " ^ For it is necessary that a thing which
is likened unto anything else, should in many
respects be similar and analogous to that of
which it is the similitude, and not have its con-
stitution opposite and dissimilar. For one who
should venture to compare the uneven to the
even, or harmony to discord, would not be con-


< This is the obvious English equivalent of the Greek text. — Tr.
[A singularly cautious testimony against Origen, whom our author
follows too closely in allegorizing interpretations of Scripture. Ori-
gen, having literalized so sadly in one case, seems to have erred ever
afterward in the other extreme. Here is a prudent caveat. \

5 Gen. iii. 19.

6 Col. i. 15.
' Rev. ii. 7.

^ Gen. iii. 22.


31"


THE BANQUET OF THE TEN VIRGINS.


sidered rational. But the even should be com-
pared to that which in its nature is even, although
it should be even only in a small measure ; and
the white to that which in its nature is white,
even although it should be very small, and should
show but moderately the whiteness by reason of
which it is called white. Now, it is beyond all
doubt clear to every one, that that which is sin-
less and incorrupt is even, and harmonious, and
bright as wisdom ; but that that which is mortal
and sinful is uneven and discordant, and cast
out as guilty and subject to condemnation.

CHAP. IV. SOME THINGS HERP: HARD AND TOO

SLIGHTLY TREATED, AND APPARENTLY NOT SUF-
FICIENTLY BROUGHT OUT ACCORDING TO THE
RULE OF THEOLOGY.

Such, then, I consider to be the objections
urged by many who, despising, as it seems, the
wisdom of Paul, dislike the comparing of the
first man to Christ. For come, let us consider
how rightly Paul compared Adam to Christ, not
only considering him to be the type and image,
but also that Christ Himself became the very
same thing,' because the Eternal Word fell upon
Him. For it was fitting that the first-born of
God, the first shoot, the only-begotten, even the
wisdom of God, should be joined to the first-
formed man, and first and first-born of mankind,
and should become incarnate. And this was
Christ, a man filled with the pure and perfect
Godhead, and God received into man. For it
was most suitable that the oldest of the ^ons
and the first of the Archangels, when about to
hold communion with men, should dwell in the
oldest and the first of men, even Adam. And
thus, when renovating those things which were
from the beginning, and forming them again of
the Virgin by the Spirit, He frames the same ^
just as at the beginning. When the earth was
still virgin and untilled, God, taking mould,
formed the reasonable creature from it without
seed. 3

CHAP. v. — A PASSAGE OF JEREMIAH EXAMINED.

And here I may adduce the prophet Jeremiah
as a trustworthy and lucid witness, who speaks
thus : " Then I went down to the potter's house ;
and, behold, he wTought a work on the wheels.
And the vessel that he made of clay was marred
in the hand of the potter : so he made it again
another vessel, as seemed good to the potter to
make it." "♦ For when Adam, having been formed


' Namely, the second Adam.

^ Second Adam.

3 The obscurity of this chapter is indicated in the heading placed
over it by the old Latin translator. The general meaning, however,
will be clear enough to the theological reader. — Tr.

■* Jer. xviii. 3, 4.


out of clay, was still soft and moist, and not yet,
like a tile, made hard and incorruptible, sin
ruined him, flowing and dropping down upon
him like water. And therefore God, moistening
him afresh and forming anew the same clay to
His honour, having first hardened and fixed it in
the Virgin's womb, and united and mixed it with
the Word, brought it forth into life no longer
soft and broken ; lest, being overflowed again by
streams of corruption from without, it should be-
come soft, and perish as the Lord in His teach-
ing shows in the parable of the finding of the
sheep ; where my Lord says to those standing by,
" What man of you, having an hundred sheep, if
he lose one of them, doth not leave the ninety
and nine in the wilderness, and go after that
which is lost until he find it? and when he hath
found it, he layeth it on his shoulders rejoicing ;
and when he cometh home, he calleth together
his friends and neighbours, saying unto them.
Rejoice with me ; for I have found my sheep
which was lost."

CHAP. VI. THE WHOLE NUMBER OF SPIRITUAL

SHEEP ; MAN A SECOND CHOIR, AFTER THE
ANGELS, TO THE PRAISE OF GOD j THE PARABLE
OF THE LOST SHEEP EXPLAINED.

Now, since He truly was and is, being in the
beginning with God, and being God, 5 He is the
chief Commander and Shepherd of the heavenly
ones, whom all reasonable creatures obey and at-
tend, who tends in order and numbers the multi-
tudes of the blessed angels. For this is the equal
and perfect number of immortal creatures, divided
according to their races and tribes, man also be-
ing here taken into the flock. For he also was
created without corruption, that he might honour
the king and maker of all things, responding to
the shouts of the melodious angels which came
from heaven. But when it came to pass that, by
transgressing the commandment (of God), he
suffered a terrible and destructive fall, being thus
reduced to a state of death, for this reason the
Lord says that He came from heaven into (a
human) life, leaving the ranks and the armies
of angels. For the mountains are to be ex-
plained by the heavens, and the ninety and nine
sheep by the principalities and powers^ which
the Captain and Shepherd left when He went
down to seek the lost one. For it remained that
man should be included in this catalogue and
number, the Lord lifting him up and wrapping
him round, that he might not again, as I said, be
overflowed and swallowed up by the waves of
deceit. For with this purpose the Word as-
sumed the nature of man, that, having overcome
the serpent, He might by Himself destroy the


5 St. John i. I.

<> Eph. i. 21, iii. lo.


THE BANQUET OF THE TEN VIRGINS.


319


condemnation which had come into being along
with man's ruin. For it was fitting that the Evil
One should be overcome by no other, but by him
whom he had deceived, and whom he was boast-
ing that he held in subjection, because no other-
wise was it possible that sin and condemnation
should be destroyed, unless that same man on
whose account it had been said, " Dust thou art,
and unto dust thou shalt return," ' should be
created anew, and undo the sentence which for
his sake had gone forth on all, that " as in
Adam" at first "all die, even so" again "in
C'hrist," who assumed the nature a?id position
^Adam, should "all be made alive." ^


CHAP. VII. THE WORKS OF CHRIST, PROPER TO

GOD AND TO MAN, THE WORKS OF HIM WHO
IS ONE.

And now we seem to have said almost enough
on the fact that man has become the organ and
clothing of the Only-begotten, and what He was
who came to dwell in him. But the fact that
there is no moral inequality or discord ^ may
again be considered briefly from the beginning.
For he speaks well who says that that is in its
own nature good and righteous and holy, by par-
ticipation of which other things become good,
and that wisdom is in connection with'' God,
and that, on the other hand, sin is unholy and
unrighteous and evil. For life and death, cor-
ruption and incorruption, are two things in the
highest degree opposed to each other. For life
is a moral equality, but corruption an inequality ;
and righteousness and prudence a harmony, but
unrighteousness and folly a discord. Now, man
being between these is neither righteousness
itself, nor unrighteousness ; but being placed
midway between incorruption and corruption, to
whichever of these he may incline is said to par-
take of the nature of that which has laid hold
of him. Now, when he inclines to corruption,
he becomes corrupt and mortal, and when to
incorruption, he becomes incorrupt and im-
mortal. For, being placed midway between the
tree of life and the tree of the knowledge of
good and evil, of the fruit of which he tasted, s
he was changed into the nature of the latter,
himself being neither the tree of Hfe nor that
of corruption ; but having been shown forth as
mortal, from his participation in and presence
with corruption, and, again, as incorrupt and
immortal by connection with and participation
in life ; as Paul also taught, saying, " Corruption


■ Gen. iii. ig.

^ 1 Cor. XV. 22.

3 In Him.

< Here, as in the previous chapter, and in many other passages, I
have preferred the text of Jahfi to that of Migne, as being generally
the more accurate. — Tr.

5 Gen. ii. 9.


shall not inherit incorruption, nor death life," ^
rightly defining corruption and death to be that
which corrupts and kills, and not that which is
corrupted and dies ; and incorruption and life
that which gives life and immortality, and not
that which receives life and immortality. And
thus man is neither a discord and an inequality,
nor an equality and a harmony. But when he
received discord, which is transgression and sin,
he became discordant and unseemly : but when
he received harmony, that is righteousness, he
became a harmonious and seemly organ, in order
that the Lord, the Incorruption which conquered
death, might harmonize the resurrection with the
flesh, not suffering it again to be inherited by
corruption. And on this point also let these
statements suffice.


CHAP. VIII. THE BONES AND FLESH OF WISDOM ;

THE SIDE OUT OF WHICH THE SPIRITUAL EVE
IS FORMED, THE HOLY SPIRIT ; THE WOMAN
THE HELP-MEET OF ADAM ; VIRGINS BETROTHED
TO CHRIST.

For it has been already established by no con-
temptible arguments from Scripture, that the
first man may be properly referred to Christ
Himself, and is no longer a type and represen-
tation and image of the Only-begotten, but has
become actually Wisdom and the Word.

For man, having been composed, like water,
of wisdom and life, has become identical with
the very same untainted light which poured into
him. Whence it was that the apostle directly
referred to Christ the words which had been
spoken of Adam. For thus will it be most cer-
tainly agreed that the Church is formed out of
His bones and flesh ; and it was for this cause
that the Word, leaving His Father in heaven,
came down to be "joined to His wife ;" '' and
slept in the trance of His passion, and will-
ingly suffered death for her, that He might
present the Church to Himself gloriqus and
blameless, having cleansed her by the laver,'^
for the receiving of the spiritual and blessed
seed, which is sown by Him who with whispers
implants it in the depths of the mind ; and is
conceived and formed by the Church, as by a
woman, so as to give birth and nourishment to
virtue. For in this way, too, the command,
" Increase and multiply," ^ is duly fulfilled, the
Church increasing daily in greatness and beauty
and multitude, by the union and communion of
the Word, who now still comes down to us and
falls into a trance by the memorial of His pas-
sion : for otherwise the Church could not con-


^ I Cor. XV. 22.
herit incorruption."
7 Eph. V. 31.
* Eph. V. 26, 27.
9 Gen. i. 18.


The words are, " Neither doth corruption in-


320


THE banqup:t of the ten virgins.


ceive believers, and give them new birth by the
laver of regeneration, unless Christ, emptying
Himself for their sake, that He might be con-
tained by them, as I said, through the recapitu-
lation of His passion, should die again, coming
down from heaven, and being "joined to His
wife," the Church, should provide for a certain
power being taken from His own side, so that
all who are "built up in Him should grow up, even
those who are born again by the laver, receiving
of His bones and of His flesh, that is, of His
holiness and of His glory. For he who says
that the bones and flesh of Wisdom are under-
standing and virtue, says most rightly ; and that
the side ' is the Spirit of truth, the Paraclete, of
whom the illuminated ^ receiving are fitly born
again to incorruption. For it is impossible for
any one to be a partaker of the Holy Spirit, and
to be chosen a member of Christ, unless the
Word first came down upon him and fell into a
trance, in order that he, being filled ^ with the j
Spirit, and rising again from sleep with Him who I
was laid to sleep for his sake, should be able to :
receive renewal and restoration. For He may
fitly be called the side ' of the Word, even the
sevenfold Spirit of truth, according to the proph- '
et;* of whom God taking, in the trance of
Christ, that is, after His incarnation and pas- |
sion, prepares a help-meet for Him 5 — I mean ;
the souls which are betrothed and given in mar-
riage to Him. For it is frequently the case that
the Scriptures thus call the assembly and mass
of believers by the name of the Church, the
more perfect in their progress being led up to
be the one person and body of the Church.
For those who are the better, and who embrace
the truth more clearly, being delivered from the
evils of the flesh, become, on account of their
perfect purification and faith, a church and help-
meet of Christ, betrothed and given in marriage
to Him as a virgin, according to the apostle,'^' so
that receiving the pure and genuine seed of His
doctrine, they may co-operate with Him, help-
ing in preaching for the salvation of others.
And those who are still imperfect and beginning
their lessons, are born to salvation, and shaped,
as by mothers, by those who are more perfect,
until they are brought forth and regenerated
unto the greatness and beauty of virtue ; and so
these, in their turn making progress, having be-
come a church, assist in labouring for the birth
and nurture of other children, accomplishing in
the receptacle of the soul, as in a womb, the
blameless will of the Word.


CHAP. IX.


■ THE DISPENSATION OF GRACE IN PAUL
THE APOSTLE.


Now we should consider the case of the re-
nowned Paul, that when he was not yet perfect
in Christ, he was first born and suckled, Ananias
preaching to him, and renewing him in baptism,
as the history in the Acts relates. But when he
was grown to a man, and was built up, then
l)eing moulded to spiritual perfection, he was
made the help- meet and bride of the Word ; and
receiving and conceiving the seeds of fife, he
who was before a child, becomes a church and
a mother, himself labouring in birth of those
who, through him, believed in the Lord, until
Christ was formed and born in them also. For
he says, " My little children, of whom I travail
in birth again until Christ be formed in you ; " ^
and again, " In Christ Jesus I have begotten you
through the Gospel." "^

It is evident, then, that the statement respect-
ing Eve and Adam is to be referred to the
Church and Christ. For this is truly a great
mystery and a supernatural, of which I, from my
weakness and dulness, am unable to speak, ac-
cording to its worth and greatness. Neverthe-
less, let us attempt it. It remains that I speak
to you on what foflows, and of its signification.

I

; CHAP. X. — THE DOCTRINE OF THE SAME APOSTLE
CONCERNING PURITY.

Now Paul, when summoning all persons to
sanctification and purity, in this way referred
that which had been spoken concerning the first
man and Eve in a secondary sense to Christ and
the Church, in order to silence the ignorant,
now deprived of all excuse. For men who are
incontinent in consequence of the uncontrolled
impulses of sensuality in them, dare to force the
Scriptures beyond their true meaning, so as to
twist into a defence of their incontinence die
saying, " Increase and multiply ; " '' and the
other, "Therefore shall a man leave his father
and his mother ; " '° and they are not ashamed
to run counter to the Spirit, but, as though born
for this purpose, they kindle up the smouldering
and lurking passion, fanning and provoking it ;
and therefore he, cutting off very sharply these
dishonest follies and invented excuses, and hav-
ing arrived at the subject of instructing them
how men should behave to their wives, showing
that it should be as Christ did to the Church.
" who gave Himself for it, that He might sanc-
tify and cleanse it by the washing " of water by
the Word," " he referred back to Genesis, men-


1 Rib.

2 Commonly used by the Greek Fathers for the Baptized. [Fol-
lowing Holy Scripture, Heb. x. 32, and Calvin's Commentary, ad he.
Also his comment on Tit. iii. 5.]

3 Jahn's reading, dt-aTrATjcrSeis. Migne has a.va.T:\o.a6i\<i ,
moulded.

* Isa. xi. 2.

S Gen. ii. 18.

* 2 Cor. xi. 12.


7 Gal. iv. 19.

' I Cor. iv. 15.

9 Gen. ii. 18.

'° Gen. ii. 24. r t ■ ■

" [Laver (Gr. Aourpbi/). Compare Tit. iii. 5 and Calvin s com
ment. (9//., torn. ii. p 506, ed. 1667.1

'- Eph. v. 25, 26. [Baptismus = lavacrum animae. — Calvin, lb,
P- 350]


THE BANQUET OF THE TEN VIRGINS.


321


tioning the things spoken concerning the first
man, and explaining these things as bearing on
the subject before him, that he might take away
occasion for the abuse of these passages from
those who taught the sensual gratification of the
body, under the pretext of begetting children.

CHAP. XI. THE SAME ARGUMENT.

For consider, O virgins, how he,' desiring with
all his might that believers in Christ should be
chaste, endeavours by many arguments to show
them the dignity of chastity, as when he says,^
" Now, concerning the things whereof ye wrote
unto me : It is good for a man not to touch a
woman," thence showing already very clearly that
it is good not to touch ^ a woman, laying it down
and setting it forth unconditionally. But after-
wards, being aware of the weakness of the less
continent, and their passion for intercourse, he
permitted those who are unable to govern the
flesh to use their own wives, rather than, shame-
fully transgressing, to give themselves up to forni-
cation. Then, after having given this permission,
he immediately added these words,+ " that Satan
tempt you not for your incontinency ; " which
means, " if you, such as you are, cannot, on
account of the incontinence and softness of your
bodies, be perfectly continent, I will rather per-
mit you to have intercourse with your own wives,
lest, professing perfect continence, ye be con-
stantly tempted by the evil one, and be inflamed
with lust after other men's wives."

CHAP. XII. PAUL AN EXA^NIPLE TO WIDOWS, AND

TO THOSE WHO DO NOT LIVE WITH THEIR
WIVES.

Come, now, and let us examine more carefully
the very words which are before us, and observe
that the apostle did not grant these things un-
conditionally to all, but first laid down the reason
on account of which he was led to this. For,
having set forth that " it is good for a man not
to touch a woman," 2 he added immediately,
" Nevertheless, to avoid fornication, let every
man have his own wife "5 — that is, " on account
of the fornication which would arise from your
being unable to restrain your voluptuousness " —
and let every woman have her own husband. Let
the husband render unto the wife due benevo-
lence : and likewise also the wife unto the hus-
band. The wife hath not power of her own body,
but the husband : and likewise also the husband
hath not power of his own body, but the wife.
Defraud ye not one the other, except it be wth
consent for a time, that ye may give yourselves


« Paul.

" I Cor. vii. I. [All vulgar familiarity included.]

3 In the original the two words are different. In the quotation
Irom .St. Paul it is aTrreo-flai; here it is Trpocri/zaueij'. Nothing could
be gained by using two words in the translation. — Tr.

■♦ I Cor. vii. 5.

' I Cor. vii. 2.


to prayer ; ^ and come together again, that Satan
tempt you not for your incontinency. But I
speak this by permission, and not of command-
ment." 7 And this is very carefully considered.
'' By permission," he says, showing that he was
giving counsel, " not of command ;" for he re-
ceives command respecting chastity and the not
touching of a woman, \yw\. permission respecting
those who are unable, as I said, to chasten their
appetites. These things, then, he lays down con-
cerning men and women who are married to one
spouse, or who shall hereafter be so ; but we
must now examine carefully the apostle's lan-
guage respecting men who have lost their wives,
and women who have lost their husbands, and
what he declares on this subject.

" I say therefore," he goes on,^ " to the un-
married and widows, It is good for them if they
abide even as I. But if they cannot contain, let
them marry : for it is better to marry than to
burn." Here also he persisted in giving the pref-
erence to continence. For, taking himself as a
notable example, in order to stir them up to
emulation, he challenged his hearers to this state
of life, teaching that it was better that a man
who had been bound to one wife should hence-
forth remain single, as he also did.9 But if, on
the other hand, this should be a matter of diffi-
culty to any one, on account of the strength of
animal passion, he allows that one who is in such
a condition may, " by permission," contract a
second marriage ; not as though he expressed
the opinion that a second marriage was in itself
good,'° but judging it better than burning. Just
as though, in the fast which prepares for the
Easter celebration, one should off"er food to an-
other who was dangerously ill, and say, " In truth,
my friend, it were fitting and good that you
should bravely hold out like us, and partake of
the same things," for it is forbidden even to
think of food to-day ; but since you are held
down and weakened by disease, and cannot bear
it, therefore, ' by permission,' we advise you to
eat food, lest, being quite unable, from sickness,
to hold up against the desire for food, you per-
ish." Thus also the apostle speaks here, first
saying that he wished all were healthy and con-
tinent, as he also was, but afterwards allowing a
second marriage to those who are burdened with
the disease of the passions, lest they should be
wholly defiled by fornication, goaded on by the
itchings of tlie organs of generation to promis-
cuous intercourse, considering such a second
marriage far preferable to burning and indecency.


* E. V. "Fasting and prayer." As in the best mss., tjj ;ojo-Teia
/cai is wanting in the text.

7 I Cor. vii. 2-6.

5 I Cor. vii. 8, 9.

9 [See p. 316, supra (note), and also Eusebius, there cited. Per
contra, see Lewin, vol. i. 382, 386.]

'° KaAoi', It is the same word which is translated good in ver. i,
" It is good for a man."

" i.e., participate in the same ordinances, and in their fruits.


322


THE BANQUET OF THE TEN VIRGINS.


CHAP. XIII. THE DOCTRINE OF PAUL CONCERN-
ING VIRGINITY EXPLAINED.

I have now brought to an end what I have to
say respecting continence and marriage and chas-
tity, and intercourse with men, and in which of
these there is help towards progress in righteous-
ness ; but it still remains to speak concerning
virginity — if, indeed, anything be prescribed on
this subject. Let us then treat this subject also ;
for it stands thus : • " Now concerning virgins,
I have no commandment of the Lord : yet I
give my judgment, as one that hath obtained
mercy of the Lord to be faithful. I suppose
therefore that this is good for the present dis-
tress ; I say, that it is good for a man so to be.
Art thou bound unto a wife? seek not to be
loosed. Art thou loosed from a wife ? seek not
a wife. But and if thou marry, thou hast not
sinned ; and if a virgin marry, she has not sinned.
Nevertheless such shall have trouble in the flesh :
but I spare you." Having given his opinion
with great caution respecting virginity, and being
about to advise him who wished it to give his
virgin in marriage, so that none of those things
which conduce to sanctification should be of
necessity and by compulsion, but according to
the free purpose of the soul, for this is accepta-
ble to God, he does not wish these things to
be said as by authority, and as the mind of the
Lord, with reference to the giving of a virgin in
marriage ; for after he had said,^ " if a virgin
marry, she hath not sinned," directly afterwards,
with the greatest caution, he modified his state-
ment, showing that he had advised these things
by human permission, and not by divine. So,
immediately after he had said, " if a virgin mar-
ry, she hath not sinned," he added, "such shall
have trouble in the flesh : but I spare you." ^
By which he means : " I sparing you, such as
you are, consented to these things, because you
have chosen to think thus of them, that I may
not seem to hurry you on by violence, and com-
pel any one to this.^ But yet if it shall please
you who find chastity hard to bear, rather to
turn to marriage ; I consider it to be profitable
for you to restrain yourselves in the gratification
of the flesh, not making your marriage an occa-
sion for abusing your own vessels to unclean-
ness." Then he adds,+ " But this I say, brethren,
the time is short : it remaineth, that both they
that have wives be as though they had none."
And again, going on and challenging them to
the same things, he confirmed his statement,
powerfully supporting the state of virginity, and

' I Cor. vii. 25-28.

^ I Cor. vii. 28.

3 Which I recommend.

* I Cor. vii. 29. [Nobody can feel more deeply than I do the
immeasurable evils of an oi/oyced celibacy: nobody can feel more
deeply the deplorable state of the Church whicli furnishes only rare and
exceptional examples of voluntary celibacy for the sake of Christ.
On chastity, see Jer. Taylor's Hoiy Living, Works, i. p. 424.]


adding expressly the following words to those
which he had spoken before, he exclaimed,5 " I
would have you without carefulness. He that
is unmarried careth for the things that belong to
the Lord : ^ but he that is married careth for
the things that are of the world, how he may
please his wife. There is a difference also be-
tween a wife and a virgin. The unmarried
woman careth for the things of the Lord, that
she may be holy both in body and in spirit : but
she that is married careth for the things of the
world, how she may please her husband." Now
it is clear to all, without any doubt, that to care
for the things of the Lord and to please God, is
much better than to care for the things of the
world and to please one's wife. For who is
there so foolish and blind, as not to perceive in
this statement the higher praise which Paul ac-
cords to chastity? "And this," he says,^ "I
speak for your own profit, not that I may cast
a snare upon you, but for that which is comely."

CH.A.P. XIV. VIRGINITY A GIFT OF GOD : THE PUR-
POSE OF VIRGINITY NOT RASHLY TO BE ADOPTED
BY ANY ONE.

Consider besides how, in addition to the words
already quoted, he commends the state of vir-
ginity as a gift of God. Wherefore he rejects
those of the more incontinent, who, under the
influence of vain-glory, would advance to this
state, advising them to marry, lest in their time
of manly strength, the flesh stirring up the de-
sires and passions, they should be goaded on to
defile the soul. For let us consider what he lays
down : ^ " But if any man think that he behaveth
himself uncomely towards his virgin," he says,
" if she pass the flower of her age, and need so
require, let him do what he will, he sinneth not :
let him many ; " properly here preferring mar-
riage to " uncomeliness," in the case of those who
had chosen the state of virginity, but afterwards
finding it intolerable and grievous, and in word
boasting of their perseverance before men, out
of shame, but indeed no longer having the power
to persevere in the life of a eunuch. But for him
who of his own free wiU and purpose decides to
preserve his flesh in virgin purity, " having no
necessity," ^ that is, passion calling forth his loins
to intercourse, for there are, as it seems, differ-
ences in men's bodies ; such a one contending
and struggling, and zealously abiding by his pro-
fession, and admirably fulfilling it, he exhorts to
abide and to preser\'e it, according the highest
prize to virginity. For he that is able, he says,
and ambitious to preserve his flesh pure, does


5 I Cor. vii. 32-34.

* A clause is omitted here in the text.

7 I Cor. vii. 35.

^ I Cor. vii. 36. [On ■virginity , see Taylor, i. 426, ed. London,

9 I Cor. vu. 37.


THE BANQUET OF THE TEN VIRGINS.


323


better ; but he that is unable, and enters into
marriage lawfully, and does not indulge in secret
corruption, does well. And now enough has
been said on these subjects.

Let any one who will, take in his hand the
Epistle to the Corinthians, and, examining all
its passages one by one, then consider what
we have said, comparing them together, as to
whether there is not a perfect harmony and
agreement between them. These things, accord-
ing to my power, O Arete, I offer to thee as my
contribution on the subject of chastity.

EuBOULios. Through many things, O Grego-
rion, she has scarcely come to the subject, having
measured and crossed a mighty sea of words.

Gregorion. So it seems ; but come, I must
mention the rest of what was said in order, going
through it and repeating it, while I seem to have
the sound of it dwelling in my ears, before it
flies away and escapes ; for the remembrance
of things lately heard is easily effaced from the
aged.

EuEOULios. Say on, then ; for we have come
to have the pleasure of hearing these discourses.

Gregorion. And then after, as you observed,
Thaleia had descended from her smooth and un-
broken course to the earth, Theopatra, she said,
followed her in order, and spoke as follows.

DISCOURSE IV. —THEOPATRA.

CHAP. I. THE NECESSITY OF PRAISING VIRTUE,

FOR THOSE WHO HAVE THE POWER.

If the art of speaking, O virgins, always went
by the saniQ ways, and passed along the same
path, there would be no way to avoid wearying
you for one who persisted in the arguments
which had already been urged. But since there
are of arguments myriads of currents and ways,
God inspiring us " at sundry times and in di-
vers manners," ' who can have the choice of
holding back or of being afraid ? For he would
not be free from blame to whom the gift has
been given, if he failed to adorn that which is
honourable with words of praise. Come then,
we also, according to our gifts, will sing the
brightest and most glorious star of Christ, which
is chastity. For this way of the Spirit is very
wide and large. Beginning, therefore, at the
point from which we may say those things wiiich
are suitable and fitting to the subject before us,
let us from thence consider it.

CHAP. II. — THE PROTECTION OF CHASTITY AND
VIRGINITY DIVINELY GIVEN TO MEN, THAT THEY
MAY EMERGE FROM THE MIRE OF VICES.

Now I at least seem to perceive that nothing
has been such a means of restoring men to para-
dise, and of the change to incorruption, and of


reconciliation to God, and such a means of sal-
vation to men, by guiding us to life, as chastity.
And I will now endeavour to show why I think
so concerning these things, that having heard
distinctly the power of the grace already spoken
of, you may know of how great blessings it has
become the giver to us. Anciently, then, after
the fall of man, when he was cast out by reason
of his transgression, the stream of corruption
poured forth abundantly, and running along in
violent currents, not only fiercely swept along
whatever touched it from without, but also rush-
ing within it, overwhelmed the souls of men.
And they,^ continuously exposed to this, were
carried along dumb and stupid, neglecting to
pilot their vessels,^ from having nothing firm
to lay hold of. For the senses of the soul, as
those have said who are learned in these things,
when, being overcome by the excitements to
passion which foil upon them from without, they
receive the sudden bursts of the waves of folly
which rush into them, being darkened turn aside
from the divine course its whole vessel, which is
by nature easily guided. Wherefore God, pity-
ing us who were in such a condition, and were
able neither to stand nor to rise, sent down from
heaven the best and most glorious help, virginity,
that by it we might tie our bodies fast, like ships,
and have a calm, commg to an anchorage with-
out damage, as also the Holy Spirit witnesses.
For this is said in the hundred and thirty-sixth *
psalm, where the souls send joyfully up to God
a hymn of thanksgiving,5 as many as have been
taken hold of and raised up to walk with Christ
in heaven, that they might not be overwhelmed
by the streams of the world and the flesh.
Whence, also, they say that Pharaoh was a type
of the devil in Egypt, since he mercilessly com-
manded the males to be cast into the river,^
but the females to be preserved alive. For the
devil, ruling 7 from Adam to Moses over this
great Egypt, the world, took care to have the
male and rational offspring of the soul carried
away and destroyed by the streams of passions,
but he longs for the carnal and irrational off-
spring to increase and multiply.

CHAP. III. THAT PASSAGE OF DAVID EXPLAINED ; *

WHAT THE HARPS HUNG UPON THE WILLOWS
SIGNIFY ; THE WILLOW A SYMBOL OF CHASTITY ;
THE WILLOWS WATERED BY STREAMS.

But not to pass away from our subject, come,
let us take in our hands and examine this psalm,


' iroAu/iiepiis Ka\ woAuTpoTrios. Heb. i. i.


2 i.e., al \)ivxa-i.

3 The body.

■* Ps. cxxxvii. E. v., and in Heb. [Does not our author follow
the Hebrew here? I must tliink his reference here is to the cxxxvith
Psalm, as we have it. It is Eucharistic, and verses 10-16 seem to be
specially referred to.]

5 Or, Eucharistic hymn.

* Exod. i. 16.

' Rom. V. 14.

8 " By the waters of Babylon," etc. [He passes to the next psalm.]


324


THE BANQUET OF THE TEN VIRGINS.


which the pure and stainless souls sing to God,
saying : ' "By the rivers of Babylon there we
sat down ; yea, we wept, when we remembered
Zion. We hanged our harps upon the willows
in the midst thereof," clearly giving the name of
harps to their bodies which they hung upon the
branches of chastity, fastening them to the wood
that they might not be snatched away and
dragged along again by the stream of inconti-
nence. For Babylon, which is interpreted " dis-
turbance " or " confusion," signifies this life around
which the water flows, while we sit in the midst
of which the water flows round us, as long as
we are in the world, the rivers of evil always
beating upon us. Wherefore, also, we are always
fearful, and we groan and cry with weeping to
God, that our harps may not be snatched off by
the waves of pleasure, and slip down from the
tree of chastity. For everywhere the divine
writings take the willow as the type of chastity,
because, when its flower is steeped in water, if it
be drunk, it extinguishes whatever kindles sen-
sual desires and passions within us, until it
entirely renders barren, and makes every inclina-
tion to the begetting of children without effect,
as also Homer indicated, for this reason calling
the willows destructive of fruit.^ And in Isaiah
the righteous are said to " spring up as willows
by the water courses." ^ Surely, then, the shoot
of virginity is raised to a great and glorious
height, when the righteous, and he to whom it is
given to preserve it and to cultivate it, bedewing
it with wisdom, is watered by the gentlest streams
of Christ. For as it is the nature of this tree to
bud and grow through water, so it is the nature
of virginity to blossom and grow to maturity when
enriched by words, so that one can hang his
body "^ upon it.

CHAP. IV. THE AUTHOR GOES ON WITH THE IN-
TERPRETATION OF THE SAME PASSAGE.

If, then, the rivers of Babylon are the streams
of voluptuousness, as wise men say, which con-
fuse and disturb the soul, then the willows must
be chastity, to which we may suspend and draw
up the organs of lust which overbalance and
weigh down the mind, so that they may not be
borne down by the torrents of incontinence, and
be drawn like worms to impurity and corruption.
For God has bestowed upon us virginity as a
most useful and a serviceable help towards in-
corruption, sending it as an ally to those who
are contending for and longing after Zion, as the
psalm shows, which is resplendent charity and

' Ps. cxxxvii I, 2. [Here is a transition to Psalm cxxxvii., which
has been the source of a confusion in the former chapter. This psalm
is not Eucharistic, but penitential.]

- Odyss. K'. 510.

3 Isa. xliv. 4.

* op-yai'oi'. The word used for harp above, and here employed
with a double meaning. [" Body " here = man's physical system.]


the commandment respecting it, for Zion is in-
terpreted " The commandment of the watch-
tower." 5 Now, let us here enumerate the points
which follow. For why do the souls declare that
they were asked by those who led them captive
to sing the Lord's song in a strange land? Surely
because the Gospel teaches a holy and secret
song, which sinners and adulterers sing to the
Evil One. For they insult the commandments,
accomplishing the will of the spirits of evil, and
cast holy things to dogs, and pearls before swine,^
in the same manner as those of whom the
prophet says with indignation, " They read the
law 7 without;"* for the Jews were not to read
the law going forth out of the gates of Jerusalem
or out of their houses ; and for this reason the
prophet blames them strongly, and cries that
they were liable to condemnation, because, while
they were transgressing the commandments, and
acting impiously towards God, they were pre-
tentiously reading the law, as if, forsooth, they
were piously observing its precepts ; but they
did not receive it in their souls, holding it firmly
with faith, but rejected it, denying it by their
works. And hence they sing the Lord's song in
a strange land, explaining the law by distorting
and degrading it, expecting a sensual kingdom,
and setting their hopes on this alien world, which
the Word says will pass away,"^ where those who
carry them captive entice them with pleasures,
lying in wait to deceive them.

CHAP. V. — THE GIFTS OF VIRGINS, ADORNED WITH
WHICH THEY ARE PRESENTED TO ONE HUSBAND,
CHRIST.

Now, those who sing the Gospel to senseless
people seem to sing the Lord's song in a strange
land, of which Christ is not the husbandman ;
but those who have put on and shone in the
most pure and bright, and unmingled and pious
and becoming, ornament of virginity, and are
found barren and unproductive of unsettled and
grievous passions, do not sing the song in a
strange land ; because they are not borne thither
by their, hopes, nor do they stick fast in the lusts
of their mortal bodies, nor do they take a low
view of the meaning of the commandments, but
well and nobly, with a lofty disposition, they have
regard to the promises which are above, thirsting
for heaven as a congenial abode, whence God,
approving their dispositions, promises with an
oath to give them choice honours, appointing
and establishing them " above His chief joy ; "
for He says thus : '° " If I forget thee, O Jerusa-


5 In Hebrew the word means simply " a memorial."

6 Matt. vii. 6.

" i.e., To those without.

8 Amos iv. 5 (LXX.) . The E. V. is, *' Offer a sacrifice of thanks-
giving in the leaven."

9 I Pet. ii. 10.

'° Ps. cxxxvii. 5, 6.


THE BANQUET OF THE TEN VIRGINS.


325


lem, let my right hand forget her cunning. If I
do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to
the roof of my mouth ; if I prefer not Jerusalem
above my chief joy ; " meaning by Jerusalem, as
I said, these very undefiled and incorrupt souls,
which, having with self-denial drawn in the pure
draught of virginity with unpolluted lips, are
" espoused to one husband," to be presented
" as a chaste virgin to Christ " ' in heaven, " hav-
ing gotten the victory, striving for undefiled
rewards." - Hence also the prophet Isaiah pro-
claims, saying,^ " Arise, shine,'* for thy light is
come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon
thee." Now these promises, it is evident to
every one, will be fulfilled after the resurrection. 5
For the Holy Spirit does not speak of that well-
known town in Judea ; but truly of that heavenly
city, the blessed Jerusalem, which He declares
to be the assembly of the souls which God plainly
promises to place first, " above His chief joy,"
in the new dispensation, settling those who are
clothed in the most white robe of virginity in
the pure dwelling of unapproachable light ; be-
cause they had it not in mind to put off their
wedding garment — that is, to relax their minds
by wandering thoughts.

CHAP. VI. VIRGINITY TO BE CULTIVATED AND

COMMENDED IN EVERY PLACE AND TIME.

Further, the expression in Jeremiah,^ " That
a maid should not forget her ornaments, nor a
bride her attire," ^ shows that she should not
give up or loosen the band of chastity through
wiles and distractions. For by the heart are
properly denoted our heart and mind. Now the
breastband, the girdle which gathers together
and keeps firm the purpose of the soul to chas-
tity, is love to God, which our Captain and
Shepherd, Jesus, who is also our Ruler and Bride-
groom, O illustrious virgins, commands both you
and me to hold fast unbroken and sealed up
even to the end ; for one will not easily find
anything else a greater help to men than this
possession, pleasing and grateful to God. There-
fore, I say, that we should all exercise and hon-
our chastity, and always cultivate and commend
it.

Let these first-fruits of my discourse suffice for
thee, O Arete, in proof of my education and my
zeal. "And I receive the gift," she said that


' 2 Cor. xi. 2.

^ Wisd. iv. 2.

3 Isa. Ix. I.

* O Jerusalem.

5 Commentators have remarked the allusion to Phil. iii. ii. See
Migne's note. The thought of the marriage of the heavenly bride-
groom, Christ, to His virgin bride, the Church, at the second Advent,
when " the dead shall be raised," was obviously present to the mind
of the writer.

*" Jer. ii. 32. Theauthor, in quotingfrom the LXX., slightly alters
the text, so as to make it almost a command, instead of a question.
The original has eTriAtjtrcTai; in the text it is tn-iAafleaeat.

' Literally, breastband.


Arete replied, "and bid Thallousa speak after
thee ; for I must have a discourse from each one
of you." And she said that Thallousa, pausing
a little, as though considering somewhat with
herself, thus spoke.

DISCOURSE v. — THALLOUSA.

CHAP. I. THE OFFERING OF CHASTITY A GREAT

GIFT.^

I pray you. Arete, that you will give your as-
sistance now too, that I may seem to speak
something worthy in the first place of yourself,
and then of those who are present. For I am
persuaded, having thoroughly learnt it from the
sacred writings, that the greatest and most glori-
ous offering and gift, to which there is nothing
comparable, which men can offer to God, is the
life 9 of virginity. For although many accom-
plished many admirable things, according to
their vows, in the law, they alone were said to
fulfil a great vow who were willing to offer them-
selves of their free-will. For the passage runs
thus : " And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying.
Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto
them, when either man or woman shall separate
themselves . . . unto the Lord." '° One vows
to offer gold and silver vessels for the sanctuary
when he comes, another to offer the tithe of his
fruits, another of his property, another the best
of his flocks, another consecrates his being ; and
no one is able to vow a great vow to the Lord,
but he who has offered himself entirely to God.

CHAP. II. — Abraham's sacrifice of a heifer

THREE years OLD, OF A G(MT, AND OF A RAM
ALSO THREE YEARS OLD : ITS MEANING ; EVERY
AGE TO BE CONSECRATED TO GOD ; THE THREE-
FOLD WATCH AND OUR AGE.

I must endeavour, O virgins, by a true exposi-
tion, to explain to you the mind of the Scripture
according to its meaning." Now, he who watches
over and restrains himself in part, and in part is
distracted and wandering, is not wholly given up
to God. Hence it is necessary that the perfect
man offer up all, both the things of the soul and
those of the flesh, so that he may be complete
and not lacking. Therefore also God commands
Abraham,'^ " Take Me an heifer of three years
old, and a she goat of three years old, and a ram
of three years old, and a turtle dove, and a
young pigeon ; " which is admirably said ; for
remark, that concerning those things. He also
gives this command, Bring them Me and keep


8 [Compare vol. v. p. 587, this series.]

9 Lit. game or toil, a.9\ov.

'° Lit. shall greatly vow a vow to offer, with sacrifices of purifica-
tion, chastity to the Lord. Num vi. 1,2.

" There are two readings. The above rendering may fairly em-
brace them both.

i^ Gen. XV. 9. [Our author has in mind (the triad) i Thess. v. 23.]


i26


THE BANQUET OF THE TEN VIRGINS.


them free from the yoke, even thy soul unin-
jured, hke a heifer, and your flesh, and your
reason ; the last like a goat, since he traverses
lofty and precipitous places, and the other like
a ram, that he may in nowise skip away, and fall
and slip off from the right way. For thus shalt
thou be perfect and blameless, O Abraham, when
thou hast offered to Me thy soul, and thy sense,
and thy mind, which He mentioned under the
symbol of the heifer, the goat, and the ram of
three years old, as thougfi they represented the
pure knowledge of the Trinity.

And perhaps He also symbolizes the begin-
ning, the middle, and the end of our life and of
our age, wishing as far as possible that men
should spend their boyhood, their manhood, and
their more advanced life purely, and offer them
up to Him. Just as our Lord Jesus Christ com-
mands in the Gospels, thus directing : " Let not
your lights be extinguished, and let not your
loins be loosed. Therefore also be ye like men
who wait for their lord, when he will return
from the wedding ; that, when he cometh and
knocketh, they may open unto him immedi-
ately. Blessed are ye, when he shall make you
sit down, and shall come and serve you. And
if he come in the second, or in the third watch,
ye are blessed." ' For consider, O virgins, when
He mentions three watches of the night, and
His three comings. He shadows forth in symbol
our three periods of life, that of the boy, of the
full-grown man, and of the old man ; so that if
He should come and remove us from the world
while spending our first period, that is, while we
are boys. He may receive us ready and pure,
having nothing amiss ; and the second and the
third in like manner. For the evening watch is
the time of the budding and youth of man, when
the reason begins to be disturbed and to be
clouded by the changes of life, his flesh gaining
strength and urging him to lust. The second is
the time when, afterwards advancing to a full-
grown man, he begins to acquire stability, and
to make a stand against the turbulence of passion
and self-conceit. And the third, when most of
the imaginations and desires fade away, the flesh
now withering and declining to old age.

CHAP. III. FAR BEST TO CULTIVATE VIRTUE FROM

BOYHOOD.

Therefore, it is becoming that we should kin-
dle the unquenchable light of faith in the heart,
and gird our loins with purity, and watch and
ever wait for the Lord ; so that, if He should
will to come and take any of us away in the first
period of life, or in the second, or in the third,
and should find us most ready, and working
what He appointed, He may make us to lie


' Luke xii. 35-38. The author apparently quotes from memory.


down in the bosom of Abraham, of Isaac, and
of Jacob. Now Jeremiah says, " It is good for
a man that he bear the yoke in his youth ; " ^
and " that his soul should not depart from the
Lord." It is good, indeed, from boyhood, to
submit the neck to the divine Hand, and not
to shake off, even to old age, the Rider who
guides with pure mind, when the Evil One is
ever dragging down the mind to that which is
worse. For who is there that does not receive
through the eyes, through the ears, through the
taste and smell and touch, pleasures and delights,
so as to become impatient of the control of con-
tinence as a driver, who checks and vehemently
restrains the horse from evil? Another who
turns his thoughts to other things will think
differently ; but we say that he offers himself
perfectly to God who strives to keep the flesh
undefiled from childhood, practising virginity ;
for it speedily brings great and much- desired
gifts of hopes to those who strive for it, drying
up the corrupting lusts and passions of the soul.
But come, let us explain how we give ourselves
up to the Lord,

CHAP. IV. PERFECT C0NSECR.4TI0N AND DEVO-
TION TO GOD : WHAT IT IS.

That which is laid down in the Book of Num-
bers,3 " greatly to vow a vow," serves to show,
as, with a litle more explanation, I proceed to
prove, that chastity is the great vow above all
vows. For then am I plainly consecrated alto-
gether to the Lord, when I not only strive to
keep the flesh untouched by intercourse, but also
unspotted by other kinds of unseemliness. For
" the unmarried woman," it is said,'* " careth for
the things of the Lord, how she may please the
Lord ; " not merely that she may bear away the
glory in part of not being maimed in her virtue,
but in both parts, according to the apostle, that
she may be sanctified in body and spirit, ofier-
ing up her members to the Lord. For let us
say what it is to offer up oneself perfectly to the
Lord. If, for instance, I open my mouth on
some subjects, and close it upon others ; thus,
if I open it for the explanation of the Scriptures,
for the praise of God, according to my power,
in a true faith and with all due honour, and if I
close it, putting a door and a watch upon it 5
against foolish discourse, my mouth is kept pure,
and is offered up to God. " My tongue is a
pen," ^ an organ of wisdom ; for the Word of
the Spirit writes by it in clearest letters, from
the depth and power of the Scriptures, even the
Lord, the swift Writer of the ages, that He


2 Lam. iii. 27.

3 Num. vi. 2 (LXX.).

* I Cor. vii 34; quoted from memory.
s Cf. Ps. cxxxix. 4, and cxli. 3.
^ Ps. xlv. 2.


I


THE BANQUET OF THE TEN VIRGINS.


327


quickly and swiftly registers and fulfils the coun-
sel of the Father, hearing the words, " quickly
spoil, swiftly plunder." ' To such a Scribe the
words may be applied, " My tongue is a pen ; "
for a beautiful pen is sanctified and offered to
Him, writing things more lovely than the poets
and orators who confirm the doctrines of men.
If, too, I accustom my eyes not to lust after the
charms of the body, nor to take delight in un-
seemly sights, but to look up to the things which
are above, then my eyes are kept pure, and are
offered to the Lord. If I shut my ears against
detraction and slanders, and open them to the
word of God, having intercourse with wise men,^
then have I offered up my ears to the Lord. If
I keep my hands from dishonourable dealing,
from acts of covetousness and of licentiousness,
then are my hands kept pure to God. If I
withhold my steps from going ^ in perverse ways,
then have I offered up my feet, not going to the
places of public resort and banquets, where
wicked men are found, but into the right way,
fulfilling something of the '* commands. What,
then, remains to me, if I also keep the heart pure,
offering up all its thoughts to God ; if I think no
evil, if anger and wrath gain no rule over me, if
I meditate in the law of the Lord day and night ?
And this is to preserve a great chastity, and to
vow a great vow.

CHAP. V. THE vow OF CHASTITY, AND ITS RITES

IN THE LAW ; VINES, CHRIST, AND THE DEVIL.

I w^ill now endeavour to explain to you, O
virgins, the rest of that which is prescribed ;
for this is attached to your duties, consisting of
laws concerning virginity, which are useful as
teaching how we should abstain, and how ad-
vance to virginity. For it is written thus : s
" And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying. Speak
unto the children of Israel, and say unto them.
When either man or woman shall separate them-
selves to vow a vow of a Nazarite, to separate
themselves unto the Lord ; he shall separate
himself from wine and strong drink, and shall
drink no vinegar of wine, or vinegar of strong
drink, neither shall he drink any liquor of grapes,
nor eat moist grapes, or dried, all the days of
his separation." And this means, that he who
has devoted and offered himself to the Lord
shall not take of the fruits of the plant of evil,
because of its natural tendency to produce
intoxication and distraction of mind. For we
perceive from the Scriptures two kinds of vines
which were separate from each other, and were
unlike. For the one is productive of immortal-


' Isa. viii. i. The LXX. is quoted from memory. The meaning,
however, is nearer the origmal than the E. V. C/. Keil and Delitzsch,
Bib, Com., in loc,

* Cf. Ecclus. vi. 36.

3 TO TTooeuTiKov, the power of going.

* Divine.

s Niim. vi. 1-4,


ity and righteousness ; but the other of madness
and insanity. The sober and joy-producing vine,
from whose instructions, as from branches, there
joyfully hang down clusters of graces, distilling
love, is our Lord Jesus, who says expressly to
the apostles,^ " I am the true vine, ye are the
branches ; and my Father is the husbandman."
But the wild and death-bearing vine is the devil,
who drops down fury and poison and wrath, as
Moses relates, writing concerning him,^ " For
their vine is of the vine of Sodom, and of the
fields of Gomorrah : their grapes are grapes of .
gall, their clusters are bitter : their wine is the
poison of dragons, and the cruel venom of asps."
The inhabitants of Sodom having gathered grapes
from this, were goaded on to an unnatural and
fruitless desire for males. Hence, also, in the
time of Noah, men having given themselves up
to drunkenness, sank down into unbelief, and,
being overwhelmed by the deluge, were drowned.
And Cain, too, having drawn from this, stained
his fratricidal hands, and defiled the earth with
the blood of his own family. Hence, too, the
heathen, becoming intoxicated, sharpen their
passions for murderous battles ; for man is not
so much excited, nor goes so far astray through
wine, as from anger and wrath. A man does
not become intoxicated and go astray through
wine, in the same way as he does from sorrow,
or from love, or from incontinence. And there-
fore it is ordered that a virgin shall not taste of
this vine, so that she may be sober and watchful
from the cares of^life, and may kindle the shin-
ing torch of the light of righteousness for the
Word. "Take heed to yourselves," says the
Lord,** " lest at any time your hearts be over-
charged with surfeiting, and drunkenness, and
cares of this life, and so that day come upon
you unawares, as a snare."

CHAP. VI. SIKERA, A MANUFACTURED AND SPURI-
OUS WINE, YET INTOXICATING ; THINGS WHICH
ARE AKIN TO SINS ARE TO BE AVOIDED BY A
VIRGIN ; THE ALTAR OF INCENSE (a SYMBOL
of) VIRGINS.

Moreover, it is not only forbidden to virgins
in any way to touch those things which are made
from that vine, but even such things as resemble
them and are akin to them. For Sikera, which
is manufactured, is called a spurious kind of
wine, whether made of palms or of other fruit-
trees. For in the same way that draughts of
wine overthrow man's reason, so do these ex-
ceedingly ; and to speak the plain truth, the wise
are accustomed to call by the name of Sikera all
that produces dnmkenness and distraction of
mind, besides wine. In order, therefore, that


6 St. John XV. I, 5.
^ Dent, xxxii. 32,33,
^ Luke xxi. 34,


328


THE BANQUET OF THE TEN VIRGINS.


the virgin may not, when guarding against those
sins which are in their own nature evil, be defiled
by those which are like them and akin to them,
conquering the one and being conquered by the
other, that is, decorating herself with textures of
different cloths, or with stones and gold, and
other decorations of the body, things which in-
toxicate the soul ; on this account it is ordered
that she do not give herself up to womanish weak-
nesses and laughter, exciting herself to wiles and
foolish talking, which whirl the mind around and
confuse it ; as it is indicated in another place,'
" Ye shall not eat the hynsna and animals like it ;
nor the weasel and creatures of that kind." For
this is the straight and direct way to heaven, not
merely not to avoid any stumbling-block which
would trip up and destroy men who are agitated
by a desire for luxuries and pleasures, but also
from such things as resemble them.

Moreover, it has been handed down that the
unbloody altar of God signifies the assembly of
the chaste ; thus virginity appears to be some-
thing great and glorious. Therefore it ought to
be preserved undefiled and altogether pure,
having no participation in the impurities of the
flesh ; but it should be set up before the pres-
ence of the testimony, gilded with wisdom, for
the Holy of holies, sending forth a sweet savour
of love to the Lord ; for He says,^ " Thou shalt
make an altar to burn incense upon : of shittim-
wood shalt thou make it. ' And thou shalt make
the staves of shittim-wood, and overlay them
with gold. And thou shalt pi^t it before the veil
that is by the ark of the testimony, before the
mercy-seat that is over the testimony, where I
will meet with thee. And Aaron shall burn there-
on sweet incense every morning : when he dress-
eth the lamps, he shall burn incense upon it.
And when Aaron lighteth the lamps at even, he
shall burn incense upon it ; a perpetual incense
before the Lord throughout your generations.
Ye shall offer no strange incense thereon, nor
burnt-sacrifices nor meat-offering ; neither shall
ye pour drink-offering thereon."

CHAP. VII. THE CHURCH INTERMEDIATE BETWEEN

THE SHADOWS OF THE LAW AND THE REALITIES
OF HEAVEN.

If the law, according to the apostle, is spiritual,
containing the images "of future good things," ^
come then, let us strip off the veil of the letter
which is spread over it, and consider its naked
and true meaning. The Hebrews were com-
manded to ornament the Tabernacle as a type
of the Church, that they might be able, by means
of sensible things, to announce beforehand the


' Lev. xi. 2g; not an exact quotation.

2 Exod. XXX. 1-9.

3 Heb. X. I. The apostle says, " a shadow," and "not the very
image." The difference, however, is verbal only. — Tr.


image of divine things. For the pattern which
was shown to Moses-* in the mount, to which
he was to have regard in fashioning the Taberna-
cle, was a kind of accurate representation of the
heavenly dwelling, which we now perceive more
clearly than through types, yet more darkly than
if we saw the reality. For not yet, in our present
condition, has the truth come unmingled to men,
who are here unable to bear the sight of pure
immortality, just as we cannot bear to look upon
the rays of the sun. And the Jews declared that
the shadow of the image (of the heavenly things
which was afforded to them), was the third from
the reality ; but we clearly behold the image of
the heavenly order ; for the truth will be accu-
rately made manifest after the resurrection, when
we shall see the heavenly tabernacle (the city in
heaven " whose builder and maker is God " s)
"face to face," and not "darkly" and "in part."^

CHAP. VIII. — THE DOUBLE ALTAR, WIDOWS AND
VIRGINS ; GOLD THE SYMBOL OF VIRGINITY.

Now the Jews prophesied our state, but we
foretell the heavenly ; since the Tabernacle was
a symbol of the Church, and the Church of
heaven. Therefore, these things being so, and
the Tabernacle being taken for a type of the
Church, as I said, it is fitting that the altars
should signify some of the things in the Church.
And we have already compared the brazen altar
to the company and circuit of widows ; for they
are a living altar of God, to which they bring
calves and tithes, and free-will offerings, as a
sacrifice to the Lord ; but the golden altar within
the 7 Holy of holies, before the presence of the
testimony, on which it is forbidden to ofter sac-
rifice and libation, has reference to those in a
state of virginity, as those who have their bodies
preserved pure, like unalloyed gold, from carnal
intercourse. Now gold is commended for two
reasons : the first, that it does not rust, and the
second, that in its colour it seems in a measure
to resemble the rays of the sun ; and thus it is
suitably a symbol of virginity, which does not
admit any stain or spot, but ever shines forth
with the light of the Word. Therefore, also, it
stands nearer to 6^(?^/ within the Holy of hoHes,
and before the veil, with undefiled hands, like
incense, offering up prayers to the Lord, accept-
able as a sweet savour ; as also John indicated,
saying that the incense in the vials of the four-
and-twenty elders were the prayers of the saints.
This, then, I offer to thee, O Arete, on the spur
of the moment, according to my ability, on the
subject of chastity.


* Exod. XXV. 40.
S Heb. xi 10.

* I Cor. xiii. 12.

7 An apparent confusion between the altar of incense, to which the
author refers, and which stood in the Holy Place, and the Mercy-
Seat, which was within the vale in the Holy of holies. — Tr.


THE BANQUET OF THE TEN VIRGINS.


329


And when Thallousa had said this, Theopatra reasonable and clear-sighted beauty of mind by-
said that Arete touched x^gathe with her sceptre, intercourse with themselves, and desire to co-
and that she, perceiving it, immediately arose ■ habit with every soul which is betrothed to the


and answered.


DISCOURSE VI. — AGATHE.

CHAP. I. THE EXCELLENCE OF THE ABIDING GLORY

OF virginity; the SOUL MADE IN THE IMAGE
OF THE IMAGE OF GOD, THAT IS OF HIS SON ; THE
DEVIL A SUITOR FOR THE SOUL.

With great confidence of being able to per-
suade, and to carry on this admirable discourse,
O Arete, if thou go with me, will I also endeav-
our, according to my ability, to contribute some-
thing to the discussion of the subject before us ;
something commensurate to my own power, and
not to be compared with that which has already
been spoken. For I should be unable to put
forth in philosophizing anything that could com-
pete with those things which have already been
so variously and brilliantly worked out. For I
shall seem to bear away the reproach of silliness,
if I make an effort to match myself with my
superiors in wisdom. If, however, you will bear
even with those who speak as they can, I will
endeavour to speak, not lacking at least in good
will. And here let me begin.

We have all come into this world, O virgins,
endowed with singular beauty, which has a rela-
tionship and affinity to divine wisdom. For the
souls of men do then most accurately resemble
Him who begat and formed them, when, reflect-
ing the unsullied representation of His likeness,
and the features of that countenance, to which
God looking formed them to have an immortal
and indestructible shape, they remain such. For
the unbegotten and incorporeal beauty, which
neither begins nor is corruptible, but is unchange-
able, and grows not old and has need of nothing.
He resting in Himself, and in the very light which
is in unspeakable and inapproachable places,'
embracing all things in the circumference of His
power, creating and arranging, made the soul
after the image of His image. Therefore, also,
it is reasonable and immortal. For being made
after the image of the Only-begotten, as I said,
it has an unsurpassable beauty, and therefore
evil spirits - love it, and plot and strive to defile
its godlike and lovely image, as the prophet
Jeremiah shows, reproaching Jerusalem, " Thou
hadst a whore's forehead, thou refusedst to be
ashamed ; " ^ speaking of her who prostituted
herself to the powers which came against her to
pollute her. For her lovers are the devil and
his angels, who plan to defile and pollute our


Lord.

CHAP. II. THE PARABLE OF THE TEN VIRGINS.*

If, then, any one will keep this beauty invio-
late and unharmed, and such as He who con-
structed it formed and fashioned it, imitating the
eternal and intelligible nature of which man is
the representation and likeness, and will become
like a glorious and holy image, he will be trans-
ferred thence to heaven, the city of the blessed,
and will dwell there as in a sanctuary. Now our
beauty is then best preserved undefiled and perfect
when, protected by virginity, it is not darkened
by the heat of corruption from without ; but,
remaining in itself, it is adorned with righteous-
ness, being brought as a bride to the Son of
God ; as He also Himself suggests, exhorting
that the light of chastity should be kindled in
their flesh, as in lamps ; since the number of the
ten virgins s signifies the souls that have believed
in Jesus Christ, symbolizing by the ten the only
right way to heaven. Now five of them were
prudent and wise ; and five were foolish and un-
wise, for they had not the forethought to fill their
vessels with oil, remaining destitute of righteous-
ness. Now by these He signifies those who strive
to come to the boundaries of virginity, and who
strain every nerve to fulfil this love, acting vir-
tuously and temperately, and who profess and
boast that this is their aim ; but who, making
light of it, and being subdued by the changes
of the world, come rather to be sketches of the
shadowy image of virtue, than workers who rep-
resent the living truth itself.

CHAP. III. THE SAME ENDEAVOUR AND EFFORT

AFTER VIRGINITY, WITH A DIFFERENT RESULT.

Now when it is said s that " the kingdom of
heaven is likened unto ten virgins, which took
their lamps and went forth to meet the bride-
groom," this means that the same way towards
the goal had been entered upon, as is shown by
the mark X.^ By profession they had equally
proposed the same end, and therefore they are
called ten, since, as I have said, they chose the
same profession ; but they did not, for all that,
go forth in the same way to meet the bridegroom.
For some provided abundant future nourishment
for their lamps which were fed with oil, but
others were careless, thinking only of the pres-
ent. And, therefore, they are divided into two


' Cf. Tim. vi. 16.

2 TTKewnaTiKa T^5 novripCas (Eph. vi. 12).
wickedness."
■3 Jer. ill. 3.


* [Which has suggested the form of this allegorical work.]
5 Matt. XXV.

^ In Greek i = ten. The word employed signifies the index of a

sun-di.il. — Tr. [The lamps found in the Roman catacombs have

In E. v. " spiritual this mark (X), which is at once a monogram for Christ and a refer-

j ence to the ten virgins. In the Greek the accented Joia might yet

I be associated with the initial of Jesus.]


THE BANQUET OF THE TEN VIRGINS.


equal numbers of five, inasmuch as the one class
preserved the five senses, which most people
consider the gates of wisdom, pure and undefiled
by sins ; but the others, on the contrary, cor-
rupted them by multitudes of sins, defiling them-
selves with evil. For having restrained them,
and kept them free from righteousness, they bore
a more abundant crop of transgressions, in con-
sequence of which it came to pass that they
were forbidden, and shut out from the divine
courts. For whether, on the one hand, we do
right, or, on the other, do wrong through these
senses, our habits of good and evil are confirmed.
And as Thallousa said that there is a chastity of
the eyes, and of the ears, and of the tongue,
and so on of the other senses ; so here she who
keeps inviolate the faith of the five pathways of
virtue — sight, taste, smell, touch, and hearing
— is called by the name of the five virgins, be-
cause she has kept the five forms of the sense
pure to Christ, as a lamp, causing the light of
holiness to shine forth clearly from each of them.
For the flesh is truly, as it were, our five-lighted
lamp, which the soul will bear like a torch, when
it stands before Christ the Bridegroom, on the
day of the resurrection, showing her faith spring-
ing out clear and bright through all the senses,
as He Himself taught, saying,' " I am come to
send fire on the earth ; and what will I if it be
already kindled ? " meaning by the earth our
bodies, in which He wished the swift-moving and
fiery operation of His doctrine to be kindled.
Now the oil represents wisdom and righteous-
ness ; for while the soul rains down unsparingly,
and pours forth these things upon the body, the
light of virtue is kindled unquenchably, making
its good actions to shine before men, so that our
Father which is in heaven may be glorified.^

CHAP. IV. — WHAT THE OIL IN THE LAMPS MEANS.

Now they offered, in Leviticus,^ oil of this
kind, " pure oil olive, beaten for the light, to
cause the lamps to burn continually, without the
veil . . . before the Lord." But they were
commanded to have a feeble light from the even-
ing to the morning. For their light seemed to
resemble the prophetic word, which gives en-
couragement to temperance, being nourished by
the acts and the faith of the people. But the
temple (in which the light was kept burning)
refers to " the lot of their inheritance," ■* inas-
much as a light can shine in only one house.
Therefore it was necessary that it should be
lighted before day. For he says,' " they shall burn

' Luke xii. 49. The Latin version is certainly more accurate,
" Quid volo nisi ut accendatur? " — Tr. [A visionary interpretation
follows. But has not this text been too much overlooked in its literal
significance? " It is the last time." The planet is now on fire.]

2 Matt. V. 16.

3 Lev. xxiv. 2, 3.
* Ps. CV. II.

S Lev. xxiv. 3.


it until the morning," that is, until the coming of
Christ. But the Sun of chastity and of righteous-
ness having arisen, there is no need of oiher light.

So long, then, as this people treasured up
nourishment for the light, supplying oil by their
works, the light of continence was not extin-
guished among them, but was ever shining and
giving light in the " lot of their inheritance."
But when the oil failed, by their turning away
from the faith to incontinence, the light was en-
tirely extinguished, so that the virgins have again
to kindle their lamps by light transmitted from
one to another, bringing the light of incorruption
to the world from above. Let us then supply
now the oil of good works abundantly, and of
prudence, being purged from all corruption
which would weigh us down; lest, while the
Bridegroom tarries, our lamps may also in like
manner be extinguished. For the delay is the
interval which precedes the appearing of Christ.
Now the slumbering and sleeping of the virgins
signifies the departure from life ; and the mid-
night is the kingdom of Antichrist, during which
the destroying angel passes over the houses.^
But the cry which was made when it was said,'
" Behold the bridegroom cometh, go ye out to
meet him," is the voice which shall be heard
from heaven, and the trumpet, when the saints,
all their bodies being raised, shall be caught up,
and shall go on the clouds to meet the Lord.^

For it is to be observed that the word of God
says, that after the cry all the virgins arose, that
is, that the dead shall be raised after the voice
which comes from heaven, as also Paul inti-
mates,9 that " the Lord Himself shall descend
from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the
archangel, and with the trump of God : and the
dead in Christ shall rise first ; " that is the tab-
ernacles,'" for they died, being put off by their
souls. " Then we which are alive shall be caught
up together with them," meaning our souls."
For we truly who are alive are the souls which,
with the bodies, having put them on again, shall
go to meet Him in the clouds, bearing our lamps
trimmed, not with anything alien and worldly,
but like stars radiating the light of prudence and
continence, full of ethereal splendour.


CHAP. V.


■THE REWARD OF VIRGINITY.


These, O fair virgins, are the orgies of our
mysteries ; these the mystic rites of those who
are initiated in virginity ; these the " undefiled
rewards " '^ of the conflict of virginity. I am be-


6 Exod. xi., xii.

7 iSIatt. XXV. 5. [This parable greatly stimulated primitive celi-
bacy.]

8 I Thess. iv. 16, 17.

9 I Thess. iv. 16.
'° Bodies.

" I Thess. iv. 17. Commentators have remarked on the peculiar-
ity of the interpretation. We give simply the writer's meaning. — Tr.
" Wisd. iv. 2.


THE BANQUET OF THE TEN VIRGINS.


331


trothed to the Word, and receive as a reward the
eternal crown of immortality and riches from the
Father ; and I triumph in eternity, crowned with
the bright and unfading flowers of wisdom. I
am one in the choir with Christ dispensing His
rewards in heaven, around the unbeginning and
never-ending King. I have become the torch-
bearer of the unapproachable lights,' and I join
with their company in the new song of the
archangels, showing forth the new grace of the
Church ; for the Word says that the company of
virgins always follow the Lord, and have fellow-
ship with Him wherever He is. And this is what
John signifies in the commemoration of the
hundred and forty-four thousand.^

Go then, ye virgin band of the new ages. Go,
fill your vessels with righteousness, for the hour
is coming when ye must rise and meet the bride-
groom. Go, lightly leaving on one side the fas-
cinations and the pleasures of life, which confuse
and bewitch the soul ; and thus shall ye attain
the promises, " This I swear by Him who has
shown me the way of life." This crown, woven
by the prophets, I have taken from the prophetic
meadows, and offer to thee, O Arete.

Agathe having thus admirably brought her
discourse to an end, she said, and having been
applauded for what she had uttered, Arete again
commanded Procilla to speak. And she, rising
and passing before the entrance, spoke thus.

DISCOURSE VII. — PROCILLA.

CHAP. I. WHAT THE TRUE AND SEEMLY MANNER

OF PRAISING ; THE FATHER GREATER THAN THE
SON, NOT IN SUBSTANCE, BUT IN ORDER ;
VIRGINITY THE LILY ; FAITHFUL SOULS AND
VIRGINS, THE ONE BRIDE OF THE ONE CHRIST.

It is not lawful for me to delay, O Arete, after
such discourses, seeing that I confide undoubt-
ingly in the manifold wisdom of God, which gives
richly and widely to whomsoever it wills. For
sailors who have experience of the sea declare
that the same wind blows on all who sail ; and
that different persons, managing their course
differently, strive to reach different ports. Some
have a fair wind ; to others it blows across their
course ; and yet both easily accomplish their
voyage. Now, in the same way, the " under-
standing Spirit,^ holy, one only," ^ gently breath-
ing down from the treasures of the Father above,
giving us all the clear fair wind of knowledge,
will suffice to guide the course of our words
without offence.

And now it is time for me to speak.


' Although the Greek word is not the same as in i Tim. vi. 16, the
meaning is probably this rather than unquenchable, as it is rendered
in the Latin. — Tr. [See Discourse XI. cap. 2, in/ra.'\

^ Rev. vii. 4, .\iv. 4.

3 TrycO/xa here, and for wind nhnve.

* Literally, only begotten. Wisd. vii. 22.


This, O virgins, is the one true and seemly
mode of praising, when he who praises brings
forward a witness better than all those who are
praised. For thence one may learn with cer-
tainty that the commendation is given not from
favour, nor of necessity, nor from repute, but in
accordance with truth and an unflattering judg-
ment. And so the prophets and apostles, who
spoke more fully concerning the Son of God,
and assigned to Him a divinity above other men,
did not refer their praises of Him to the teaching
of angels, but to Him upon whom all authority
and power depend. For it was fitting that He
who was greater than all things after the Father,
should have the Father, who alone is greater than
Himself,5 as His witness. And so I will not
bring forward the praises of virginity from mere
human report, but from Him who cares for us,
and who has taken up the whole matter, showing
that He is the husbandman of this grace, and a
lover of its beauty, and a fitting witness. And
this is quite clear, in the Song of Songs,*" to any
one who is willing to see it, where Christ Him-
self, praising those who are firmly established in
virginity, says,^ " As the lily among thorns, so is
my love among the daughters;" comparing the
grace of chastity to the lily, on account of its
purity and fragrance, and sweetness and joyous-
ness. For chastity is like a spring flower, always
softly exhaling immortality from its white petals.
Therefore He is not ashamed to confess that He
loves the beauty of its prime, in the following
words : ^ " Thou hast ravished my heart, my
sister, my spouse ; thou hast ravished my heart
with one of thine eyes, with one chain of thy
neck. How fair is thy love, my sister, my
spouse ! how much better is thy love than wine !
and the smell of thine ointments than all spices !
Thy lips, O my spouse, drop as the honeycomb ;
honey and milk are under thy tongue ; and the
smell of thy garments is like the smell of Leba-
non. A garden enclosed is my sister, my spouse ;
a spring shut up, a fountain sealed."

These praises does Christ proclaim to those
who have come to the boundaries of virginity,
describing them all under the one name of His
spouse ; for the spouse must be betrothed to
the Bridegroom, and called by His name. And,
moreover, she must be undefiled and unpolluted,
as a garden sealed, in which all the odours of
the fragrance of heaven are grown, that Christ
alone may come and gather them, blooming with
incorporeal seeds. For the Word loves none of
the things of the flesh, because He is not of such
a nature as to be contented with any of the
things which are corruptible, as hands, or face,


5 St. John xiv. 28.

^ [That the Canticles demand allegorical interpretation, we may
admit; nor can I object to our author's ideas here.]
7 Cant. ii. 2.
* Cant. iv. 9-12.


THE BANQUET OF THE TEN VIRGINS.


or feet ; but He looks upon and delights in the
beauty which is immaterial and spiritual, not
touching the beauty of the body.


CHAP. II. THE

SAGE


INTERPRETATION OF THAT PAS-
OF THE CANTICLES.'


Consider now, O virgins, that, in saying to the
bride, " Thou hast ravished my heart, my sister,
my spouse," He shows the clear eye of the un-
derstanding, when the inner man has cleansed
it and looks more clearly upon the truth. For
it is clear to every one that there is a twofold
power of sight, the one of the soul, and the
other of the body. • But the Word does not pro-
fess a love for that of the body, but only that of
the understanding, saying, " Thou hast ravished
my heart with one of thine eyes, with one chain
of thy neck ; " which means, By the most lovely
sight of thy mind, thou hast urged my heart to
love, radiating forth from within the glorious
beauty of chastity. Now the chains of the neck
are necklaces which are composed of various
precious stones ; and the souls which take care
of the body, place around the outward neck of
the flesh this visible ornament to deceive those
who behold ; but those who live chastely, on
the other hand, adorn themselves within with
ornaments truly composed of various precious
stones, namely, of freedom, of magnanimity, of
wisdom, and of love, caring little for those tem-
poral decorations which, like leaves blossoming
for an hour, dry up with the changes of the body.
For there is seen in man a twofold beauty, of
which the Lord accepts that which is within and
is immortal, saying, "Thou hast ravished my
heart with one chain of thy neck ; " meaning to
show that He had been drawn to love by the
splendour of the inner man shining forth in its
glory, even as the Psalmist also testifies, saying,
" The King's daughter is all glorious within."^

CHAP. III. VIRGINS BEING MARTYRS FIRST AMONG

THE COMP.4NIONS OF CHRIST.

Let no one suppose that all the remaining
company of those who have believed are con-
demned, thinking that we who are virgins alone
shall be led on to attain the promises, not un-
derstanding that there shall be tribes and fami-
lies and orders, according to the analogy of the
faith of each. And this Paul, too, sets forth,
saying,^ " There is one glory of the sun, and
another glory of the moon, and another glory
of the stars : for one star differeth from another
star in glory. So also is the resurrection of the
dead." And the Lord does not profess to give
the same honours to all ; but to some He prom-


' Chap. iv. ver. 9-12.

2 Ps. xlv. 14.

3 I Cor. XV. 41, 42,


ises that they shall be numbered in the kingdom
of heaven, to others the inheritance of the earth,
and to others to see the Father.-* And here,
also, He announces that the order and holy
choir of the virgins shall first enter in company
with Him into the rest of the new dispensation,
as into a bridal chamber. For they were mar-
tyrs, not as bearing the pains of the body for a
little moment of time, but as enduring them
through all their life, not shrinking from truly
wrestling in an Olympian contest for the prize
of chastity ; but resisting the fierce torments of
pleasures and fears and griefs, and the other
evils of the iniquity of men, they first of all carry
off the prize, taking their place in the higher
rank of those who receive the promise. Un-
doubtedly these are the souls whom the Word
calls alone His chosen spouse and His sister,
but the rest concubines and virgins and daugh-
ters, speaking thus : 5 " There are threescore
queens and fourscore concubines, and virgins
without number. My dove, my undefiled, is but
one ; she is the only one of her mother, she is
the choice one of her that bare her : the daugh-
ters saw her and blessed her : yea, the queens
and the concubines, and they praised her." For
there being plainly many daughters of the
Church, one alone is the chosen and most pre-
cious in her eyes above all, namely, the order of
virgins.

CHAP. IV. THE PASSAGE S EXPLAINED ; THE

QUEENS, THE HOLY SOULS BEFORE THE DEL-
UGE ; THE CONCUBINES, THE SOULS OF THE
PROPHETS ; THE DIVINE SEED FOR SPIRITUAL
OFFSPRING IN THE BOOKS OF THE PROPHETS;
THE NUPTIALS OF THE WORD IN THE PROPHETS
AS THOUGH CLANDESTINE.

Now if any one should have a doubt about
these things, inasmuch as the points are nowhere
fully wrought out, and should still wish more fully
to perceive their spiritual significance, namely,
what the queens and the concubines and the
virgins are, we will say that these may have
been spoken concerning those who have been
conspicuous for their righteousness from the
beginning throughout the progress of time ; as
of those before the flood, and those after the
flood, and so on of those after Christ. The
Church, then, is the spouse. The queens are
those royal souls before the deluge, who became
well-pleasing to God, that is, those about Abel
and Seth and Enoch. The concubines ^ those
after the flood, namely, those of the prophets,
in whom, before the Church was betrothed to
the Lord, being united to them after the manner


•♦ Matt. V. 3-16.
S Cant. vi. 8, 9.

* [Here allegorizing is refuted and perishes in fanciful and over-
strained analogies.]


THE BANQUET OF THE TEN VIRGINS.


of concubines, He sowed true words in an in-
corrupt and pure philosophy, so that, conceiving
faith, they might bring forth to Him the spirit
of salvation. For such fruits do the souls bring
forth with whom Christ has had intercourse,
fruits which bear an ever-memorable renown.
For if you will look at the books of Moses, or
David, or Solomon, or Isaiah, or of the prophets
who follow, O virgins, you will see what offspring
they have left, for the saving of life, from their
intercourse with the Son of God. Hence the
Word has with deep perception called the souls
of the prophets concubines, because He did not
espouse them openly, as He did the Church,
having killed for her the fatted calf.'

CHAP. V. THE SIXTY QUEENS : WHY SIXT\% AND

WHY QUEENS ; THE EXCELLENCE OF THE SAINTS
OF THE FIRST AGE.

In addition to these matters, there is this also
to be considered, so that nothing may escape us
of things which are necessary, why He said that
the queens were sixty, and the concubines eighty,
and the virgins so numerous as not to be counted
from their multitude, but the spouse one. And
first let us speak of the sixty. I imagine that
He named under the sixty queens, those who
had pleased God from the first-made man in
succession to Noah, for this reason, since these
had no need of precepts and laws for their sal-
vation, the creation of the world in six days
being still recent. For they remembered that
in six days God formed the creation, and those
things which were made in paradise ; and how
man, receiving a command not to touch ^ the
tree of knowledge, ran aground, the author of
evil having led him astray. ^ Thence he gave
the symbolical name of sixty queens to those
souls who, .from the creation of the world, in
succession chose God as the object of their love,
and were almost, so to speak, the offspring of
the first age, and neighbours of the great six
days' work, from their having been born, as I
said, immediately after the six days. For these
had great honour, being associated with the
angels, and often seeing God manifested visi-
bly, and not in a dream. For consider what
confidence Seth had towards God, and Abel,
and Enos, and Enoch, and Methuselah, and
Noah, the first lovers of righteousness, and the
first of the first-bom children who are written
in heaven,* being thought worthy of the king-
dom, as a kind of first-fruits of the plants for
salvation, coming out as early fruit to God.
And so much may suffice concerning these.


* Luke XV. 23

2 This was Eve's testimony to the serpent, not the original com-
mand.— Tr. [But I do not see the force of this note. Eve in her
innocency is surely a competent witness.]

* Gen. iii. 3.

* Heb. xi. 23.


CHAP. VI. THE EIGHTY CONCUBINES, WH.'^T ; THE

KNOWLEDGE OF THE INCARNATION CO.M.MUNI-
CATED TO THE PROPHETS.

It Still remains to speak concerning the con-
cubines. To those who lived after the deluge
the knowledge of God was henceforth more re-
mote, and they needed other instruction to ward
off the evil, and to be their helper, since idola-
try was already creeping in. Therefore God,
that the race of man might not be wholly de-
stroyed, through forgetfiilness of the things which
were good, commanded His own Son to reveal
to the prophets His own future appearance in
the world by the flesh, in which the joy and
knowledge of the spiritual eighth day 5 shall be
proclaimed, which would bring the remission of
sins and the resurrection, and that thereby the
passions and corruptions of men would be cir-
cumcised. And, therefore, He called by the
name of the eighty virgins the list of the proph-
ets from Abraham, on account of the dignity
of circumcision, which embraces the number
eight, in accordance with which also the law is
framed ; because they first, before the Church
was espoused to the Word, received the divine
seed, and foretold the circumcision of the spirit-
ual eighth day. *

CHAP. VII. THE VIRGINS,^ THE RIGHTEOUS AN-
CIENTS ; THE CHURCH, THE ONE ONLY SPOUSE,
MORE EXCELLENT THAN THE OTHERS,

Now he calls by the name of virgins, who be-
long to a countless assembly, those who, being
inferior to the better ones, have practised right-
eousness, and have striven against sin with youth-
ful and noble energy. But of these, neither the
queens, nor the concubines, nor the virgins, are
compared to the Church. For she is reckoned
the perfect and chosen one beyond all these, con-
sisting and composed of all the apostles, the Bride
who surpasses all in the beauty of youth and vir-
ginity. Therefore, also, she is blessed and praised
by all, because she saw and heard freely what
those desired to see, even for a little time, and saw
not, and to hear, but heard not. For " blessed,"
said our Lord to His disciples,^ " are your eyes,
for they see ; and your ears, for they hear. For
verily I say unto you. That many prophets have
desired to see those things which ye see, and
have not seen them ; and to hear those things
which ye hear, and have not heard them." For
this reason, then, the prophets count them
blessed, and admire them, because the Church


5 Here, and in many other places, the prevalent millenarian be-
lief of the first centuries is expressed by Methodius. — Tr. [See
Barnabas, vol. i. p. 147, this series; also Irenseus (same vol.), p. 562,
at note 11. J

'' This word, as being that employed in the E.T. of the Canticles,
is adopted throughout. It must be remembered, that, in this connec-
tion, it stands for I'eanSes, and not for TrapOifoi.. — Tk.

7 Matt. xiii. 16, 17.


334


THE BANQUET OF THE TEN VIRGINS.


was thought worthy to participate in those things
which they did not attain to hear or see. For
" there are threescore queens, and fourscore con-
cubines, and virgins without number. My dove,
my undefiled, is but one." '

CHAP. VIII. — THE HUMAN NATURE OF CHRIST HIS
ONE DOVE.

Can any one now say otherwise than that
the Bride is the undefiled flesh of the Lord, for the
sake of which He left the Father and came down
here, and was joined to it, and, being incarnate,
dwelt in it? Therefore He called it figuratively
a dove, because that creature is tame and do-
mestic, and readily adapts itself to man's mode
of life. For she alone, so to speak, was found
spodess and undefiled, and excelling all in the
glory and beauty of righteousness, so that none
of those who had pleased God most perfectly
could stand near to her in a comparison of virtue.
And for this reason she was thought worthy to
become a partaker of the kingdom of the Only-
begotten, being betrothed and united to Him.
And in the forty-fourth psalm,^ the queen who,
chosen out of many, stands at the right hand of
God, clothed in the golden ornament of virtue,
whose beauty the King desired,^ is, as I said,
the undefiled and blessed flesh, which the Word
Himself carried into the heavens, and presented
at the right hand of God, " wrought about with
divers colours," that is, in the pursuits of im-
mortality, which he calls symbolically golden
fringes. For since this garment is variegated
and woven of various virtues, as chastity, pru-
dence, faith, love, patience, and other good
things, which, covering, as they do, the unseem-
liness of the flesh, adorn man with a golden
ornament.

CHAP. IX. — THE VIRGINS IMMEDIATELY AFTER THE
QUEEN AND SPOUSE.

Moreover, we must further consider what the
Spirit delivers to us in the rest of the psalm,
after the enthronization of the manhood assumed
by the Word at the right hand of the Father.
" The virgins," He says,-* " that be her fellows
shall bear her company, and shall be brought
unto thee. With joy and gladness shall they be
brought, and shall enter into the King's palace."
Now, here the Spirit seems quite plainly to praise
virginity, next, as we have explained, to the Bride
of the Lord, who promises that the virgins shall
approach second to the Almighty with joy and
gladness, guarded and escorted by angels. For |
so lovely and desirable is in truth the glory of;
virginity, that, next to the Queen, whom the |

' Cant. vi. 8, 9.

* The forty-fifth in our arrangement.
3 Ps, xlv. 2.

♦ Ps. xlv. IS, 16.


Lord exalts, and presents in sinless glory to the
Father, the choir and order of virgins bear her
company, assigned to a place second to that of
the Bride. Let these efforts of mine to speak
to thee, O Arete, concerning chastity, be en-
graven on a monument.

And Procilla having thus spoken, Thekla said,
It is my turn after her to continue the contest;
and I rejoice, since I too have the favouring wis-
dom of words, perceiving that I am, like a harp,
I inwardly attuned, and prepared to speak with
elegance and propriety.

Arete. I most willingly hail thy readiness,
O Thekla, in which I confide to give me fitting
discourse, in accordance with thy powers ; since
thou wilt yield to none in universal philosophy
and instruction, instructed by Paul in what is
fitting to say of evangelical and divine doctrine.

DISCOURSE VIII. — THEKLA.

CHAP. I. METHODIUS' DERIVATION OF THE WORD

VIRGINITY : 5 WHOLLY DIVINE ; VIRTUE, IN GREEK
dpcTiy, WHENCE SO CALLED.

Well, then, let us first say, beginning from the
origin of the name, for what cause this supreme
and blessed pursuit was called -rrapSivia, what it
aims at, what power it has, and afterwards,
what fruits it gives forth. For almost all have
been ignorant of this virtue as being superior
to ten thousand other advantages of virtue which
we cultivate for the purification and adornment
of the soul. For virginity s is divine by the
change of one letter,^ as she alone makes him
who has her, and is initiated by her incorrupti-
ble rites like unto God, than which it is impos-
sible to find a greater good, removed, as it is,
from pleasure and grief; and the wing of the
soul sprinkled by it becomes stronger and lighter,
accustomed daily to fly from human desires.

For since the children of the wise have said
that our life is a festival, and that we have come
to exhibit in the theatre the drama of truth, that
is, righteousness, the devil and the demons plot-
ting and striving against us, it is necessary for
us to look upwards and to take our flight aloft,
and to flee from the blandishments of their
tongues, and from their forms tinged with the
outward appearance of temperance, more than
from the Sirens of Homer. For many, be-
witched by the pleasures of error, take their
flight downwards, and are weighed down when
they come into this life, their nerves being re-
laxed and unstrung, by means of which the
power of the wings of temperance is strength-
ened, lightening the downward tendency of
the corrupdon of the body. Whence, O Arete,
whether thou hast thy name, signifying virtue.


5 irtxaQivia.,


THE BANQUET OF THE TEN VIRGINS.


335


because thou art worthy of being chosen ' for
thyself, or because thou raisest ^ and Uftest up
to heaven, ever going in the purest minds, come,
give me thy help in my discourse, which thou
hast thyself appointed me to speak.

CHAP. II. THE LOFTY MIND AND CONSTANCY OF

THE SACRED VIRGINS; THE INTRODUCTION OF
VIRGINS INTO THE BLESSED ABODES BEFORE
OTHERS.

Those who take a downward flight, and fall
into pleasures, do not desist from grief and la-
bours until, through their passionate desires,
they fulfil the want of their intemperance, and,
being degraded and shut out from the sanctu-
ary, they are removed from the scene of truth,
and, instead of procreating children with mod-
esty and temperance, they rave in the wild
pleasures of unlawful amours. But those who,
on light wing, ascend into the supramundane
life, and see from afar what other men do not
see, the very pastures of immortality, bearing in
abundance flowers of inconceivable beauty, are
ever turning themselves again to the spectacles
there ; and, for this reason, those things are
thought small which are here considered noble
— such as wealth, and glory, and birth, and
marriage ; and they think no more of those
things.3 But yet if any of them should choose
to give up their bodies to wild beasts or to fire,
and be punished, they are ready to have no care
for pains, for the desire of them or the fear of
them ; so that they seem, while in the world,
not to be in the world, but to have already
reached, in thought and in the tendency of their
desires, the assembly of those who are in heaven.
Now it is not right that the wing of virginity
should, by its own nature, be weighed down upon
the earth, but that it should soar upwards to
heaven, to a pure atmosphere, and to the life
which is akin to that of angels. Whence also
they, first of all, after their call and depart-
ure hence, who have rightly and faithfully con-
tended as virgins for Christ, bear away the prize
of victory, being crowned by Him with the
flowers of immortality. For, as soon as their
souls have left the world, it is said that the an-
gels meet them with much rejoicing, and con-
duct them to the very pastures already spoken
of, to which also they were longing to come,
contemplating them in imagination from afar,
when, while they were yet dwelling in their
bodies, they appeared to them divine.

CHAP. III. THE LOT AND INHERITANCE OF

VIRGINITY.

Furthermore, when they have come hither,
they see wonderful and glorious and blessed


things of beauty, and such as cannot be spoken
to men. They see there righteousness itself and
prudence, and love itself, and truth and temper-
ance, and other flowers and plants of wisdom,
equally splendid, of which we here behold only
the shadows '^ and apparitions, as in dreams, and
think that they consist of the actions of men,
because there is no clear image of them here,
but only dim copies, which themselves we see
often when making dark copies of them. For
never has any one seen with his eyes the great-
ness or the form or the beauty of righteousness
itself, or of understanding, or of peace ; but
there, in Him whose name is I AM, 5 they are
seen perfect and clear, as they are. For there is
a tree of temperance itself, and of love, and of
understanding, as there are plants of the fruits
which grow here — as of grapes, the pomegranate,
and of apples ; and so, too, the fruits of those
trees are gathered and eaten, and do not perish
and wither, but those who gather them grow to
immortality and a likeness to God. Just as he
from whom all are descended, before the fall
and the blinding of his eyes, being in paradise,
enjoyed its fruits, God appointing man to dress
and to keep the plants of wisdom. For it was
entrusted to the first Adam to cultivate those
fruits. Now Jeremiah saw that these things ex-
ist specially in a certain place, removed to a
great distance from our world, where, compas-
sionating those who have fallen from that good
state, he says : ^ " Learn where is wisdom, where
is strength, where is understanding; that thou
mayest know also where is length of days, and
life, where is the light of the eyes, and peace.
Who hath found out her place? or who hath
come into her treasures ? " The virgins having
entered into the treasures of these things, gather
the reasonable fruits of the virtues, sprinkled
with manifold and well-ordered lights, which,
like a fountain, God throws up over them, irra-
diating that state with unquenchable lights. And
they sing harmoniously, giving glory to God.
For a pure atmosphere is shed over them, and
one which is not oppressed by the sun.

CHAP. rV. EXHORTATION TO THE CULTIVATION

OF VIRGINITY ; A PASSAGE FROM THE APOCA-
LYPSE ^ IS PROPOSED TO BE EXAMINED.

Now, then, O Virgins, daughters of undefiled
temperance, let us strive for a life of blessedness
and the kingdom of heaven. And do ye unite
with those before you in an earnest desire for
the same glory of chastity, caring little for the


3 Than of the most ordinary things of life.


* The influence of Plato is traceable, here and elsewhere, through-
out the works of Methodius. It has been fully examined in the able
work of Jahn, Methodius Platotiizans. — Tr. [Elucidation I.]

5 Exod. iii. 14.

6 Baruch iii. 14, 15 The apocryphal book of Baruch, as bear-
ing the name of the companion of Jeremiah, was usually quoted, in
the second and third centuries, as the work of that great prophet.
— Tr.

^ Rev. xii. i-6.


Zo^


THE BANQUET OF THE TEN VIRGINS.


things of this life. For immortahty and chastity
do not contribute a httle to happiness, raising up
the flesh aloft, and drying up its moisture and its
clay-hke weight, by a greater force of attraction.
And let not the uncleanness which you hear
creep in and weigh you down to the earth ;
nor let sorrow transform your joy, melting away
your hopes in better things ; but shake off in-
cessantly the calamities which come upon you,
not defiling your mind with lamentations. Let
faith conquer wholly, and let its light drive
away the visions of evil which crowd around the
heart. For, as when the moon brightly shining
fills the heaven with its light, and all the air
becomes clear, but suddenly the clouds from the
west, enviously rushing in, for a little while over-
shadow its light, but do not destroy it, since
they are immediately driven away by a blast
of the wind ; so ye also, when causing the light of
chastity to shine in the world, although pressed
upon by afflictions and labours, do not grow
weary and abandon your hopes. For the clouds
which come from the Evil One are driven away
by the Spirit,' if ye, like your Mother, who gives
birth to the male Vn-gin in heaven, fear nothing
the serpent that lies in wait and plots against
you ; concerning whom I intend to discourse to
you more plainly ; for it is now time.

John, in the course of the Apocalypse, says : ^
" And there appeared a great wonder in heaven ;
a woman clothed with the sun, and the moon
under her feet, and upon her head a crown of
twelve stars : and she, being with child, cried,
travailing in birth, and pained to be delivered.
And there appeared another wonder in heaven ;
and behold a great red dragon, having seven
heads and ten horns, and seven crowns upon his
heads. And his tail drew the third part of the
stars of heaven, and did cast them to the earth :
and the dragon stood before the woman which
was ready to be delivered, for to devour her child
as soon as it was born. And she brought forth
a man-child, who was to rule all nations with a
rod of iron : and her child was caught up unto
God, and to His throne- And the woman fled
into the wilderness, where she hath a place pre-
pared of God, that they should feed her there a
thousand two hundred and threescore days."
So far we have given, in brief, the history of the
woman and the dragon. But to search out and
explain the solution of them is beyond my
powers. Nevertheless, let me venture, trusting
in Him who commanded to search the Scrip-
tures.3 If, then, you agree with this, it will not
be difficult to undertake it ; for you will quite
pardon me, if I am unable sufficiently to explain
the exact meaning of the Scripture.


' The same word in the text which is translated wind: irceOjia.
The play upon the word cannot be preserved in the translation. — Tr.
^ Rev. xii. i-6.
3 St. John V. 39.


CHAP. V. THE WOMAN WHO BRINGS FORTH, TO

WHOM THE DRAGON IS OPPOSED, THE CHURCH j
HER ADORNMENT AND GRACE.

The woman who appeared in heaven clothed
with the sun, and crowned with twelve stars, and
having the moon for her footstool, and being
with child, and travailing in birth, is certainly,
according to the accurate interpretation, our
mother,-* O virgins, being a power by herself dis-
tinct from her children ; whom the prophets,
according to the aspect of their subjects, have
called sometimes Jerusalem, sometimes a Bride,
sometimes Mount Zion, and sometimes the
Temple and Tabernacle of God. For she is
the power which is desired to give light in the
prophet, the Spirit crying to her :5 "Arise, shine ;
for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord
is risen upon thee. For, behold, the darkness
shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the
people : but the Lord shall arise upon thee, and
His glory shall be seen upon thee. And the
Gentiles shall come to thy light, and kings to
the brightness of thy rising. Lift up thine eyes
round about, and see ; all they gather themselves
together, they come to thee : thy sons shall come
from far, and thy daughters shall be nursed at
thy side." It is the Church whose children shall
come to her with all speed after the resurrection,
running to her from all quarters. She rejoices
receiving the light which never goes down, and
clothed with the brightness of the Word as with
a robe For with what other more precious or
honourable ornament was it becoming that the
queen should be adorned, to be led as a Bride
to the Lord, when she had received a garment
of light, and therefore was called by the Father?
Come, then, let us go forward in our discourse,
and look upon this marvellous woman as upon
virgins prepared for a marriage, pure and unde-
filed, perfect and radiating a permanent beauty,
wanting nothing of the brightness of light ; and
instead of a dress, clothed with light itself; and
instead of precious stones, her head adorned
with shining stars. For instead of the clothing
which we have, she had light ; and for gold and
brilliant stones, she had stars ; but stars not such
as those which are set in the invisible heaven,
but better and more resplendent, so that these
may rather be considered as their images and
likenesses.

CHAP. VI. THE WORKS OF THE CHURCH, THE

BRINGING FORTH OF CHILDREN IN BAPTISM ; THE
MOON IN BAPTISM, THE FULL MOON OF CHRIST'S
PASSION.

Now the statement that she stands upon the
moon, as I consider, denotes the faith of those
who are cleansed from corruption in the laver


[i.e., the Church. See p. 337, note 4, in/ra.l
Isa. Ix. 1-4.


THE BANQUET OF THE TEN VIRGINS.


337


of regeneration, because the light of the moon
has more resemblance to tepid water, and all
moist substance is dependent upon her. The
Church, then, stands upon our faith and adop-
tion, under the figure of the moon, until the
fulness of the nations come in, labouring and
bringing forth natural men as spiritual men ; for
which reason too she is a mother. For just as a
woman receiving the unformed seed of a man,
within a certain time brings forth a perfect man,
in the same way, one should say, does the Church
conceive those who flee to the Word, and, form-
ing them according to the likeness and form of
Christ, after a certain time produce them as citi-
zens of that blessed state. Whence it is ne-
cessary that she should stand upon the laver,
bringing forth those who are washed in it. And
in this way the power which she has in con-
nection with the laver is called the moon," be-
cause the regenerate shine being renewed with a
new ray,^ that is, a new light. Whence, also,
they are by a descriptive term called newly-en-
lightened ; 3 the moon ever showing forth anew
to them the spiritual full moon, namely, the
period and the memorial of the passion, until the
glory and the perfect light of the great day arise.

CHAP, VII. THE CHILD OF THE WOMAN IN THE

APOCALYPSE NOT CHRIST, BUT THE FAITHFUL WHO
ARE BORN IN THE LAVER.

If any one, for there is no difficulty in speak-
ing distinctly, should be vexed, and reply to
what we have said : " But how, O virgins, can
this explanation seem to you to be according
to the mind of Scripture, when the Apocalypse
plainly defines that the Church brings forth a
male, while you teach that her labour-pains have
their fulfilment in those who are washed in the
lav^er?" We will answer, But, O faultfinder, not
even to you will it be possible to show that
Christ Himself-t is the one who is born. For
long before the Apocalypse, the mystery of the
Incarnation of the Word was fulfilled. And
John speaks concerning things present and things
to come. But Christ, long ago conceived, was
not caught up to the throne of God when He
was brought forth, from fear of the serpent in-
juring Him. But for this was He begotten, and
Himself came down from the throne of the
Father, that He should remain and subdue the
dragon who made an assault upon the flesh. So
that you also must confess that the Church
labours and gives birth to those who are baptized.


* afKrfvri.

2 (re'Aa?.

3 |/6O(f)u>TtcrT0t.

* It is hardly necessary to observe, that amid many interpretations
of the passage, this which Methodius condemns is probably the true
one, as it is certainly the most natural. — Tk. [It is certamly worth
observing, that Methodius has on his side a strong following among
the ancients; the interpretation the translator favours having little
support save among modern defenders of the late pontiflf's bull /«-
ejfabilis. Elucidation II.]


As the spirit says somewhere in Isaiah : 5 " Be-
fore she travailed, she brought forth ; before her
pain came, she was delivered of a man-child.
Who hath heard such a thing? who hath seen
such things? Shall the eaith be made to bring
forth in one day ? or shall a nation be bom at
once ? for as soon as Zion travailed, she brought
forth her children."^ From whom did he flee?
Surely from the dragon, that the spiritual Zion
might bear a masculine people, who should come
back from the passions and weakness of women
to the unity of the Lord, and grow strong in
manly virtue.

CHAP. VIII. THE FAITHFUL IN BAPTISM MALES,

CONFIGURED TO CHRIST ; THE SAINTS THEMSELVES
CHRISTS.

Let us then go over the ground again from the
beginning, until we come in course to the end,
explaining what we have said. Consider if the
passage seems to you to be explained to your
mind. For I think that the Church is here said
to give birth to a male ; since the enlightened ^
receive the features, and the image, and the man-
liness of Christ, the likeness of the form of the
Word being stamped upon them, and begotten
in them by a true knowledge and faith, so that
in each one Christ is spiritually born. And,
therefore, the Church swells and travails in birth
until Christ is formed in us,** so that each of
the saints, by partaking of Christ, has been born
a Christ. According to which meaning it is
said in a certain scripture,? " Touch not mine
anointed, '° and do my prophets no harm," as
though those who were baptized into Christ had
been made Christs " by communication of the
Spirit, the Church contributing here their clear-
ness and transformation into the image of the
Word. And Paul confirms this, teaching it plain-
ly, where he says : '^ " For this cause I bow my
knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
of whom the whole family in heaven and earth
is named, that He would grant you, according
to the riches of His glory, to be strengthened
with might by His Spirit in the inner man ; that
Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith." For
it is necessary that the word of truth should be
imprinted and stamped upon the souls of the
regenerate.

CHAP, IX. — THE SON OF GOD, WHO EVER IS, IS
TO-DAY BEGOTTEN IN THE MINDS AND SENSE
OF THE FAITHFUL.

Now, in perfect agreement and correspond-
ence with what has been said, seems to be this


S Isa. Ixvi 7, 8.

* In the LXX. " a male."
7 The baptized.

* Gal iv. 19.
9 Ps. cv. 15.

" Anointed.

'^ Eph. ill. 14-17,


\3^


THE BANQUET OF THE TEN VIRGINS.


which was spoken by the Father from above to
Christ when He came to be baptized in the
water of the Jordan, " Thou art my son : this
day have I begotten thee ; " ' for it is to be
remarked that He was declared to be His Son
unconditionally, and without regard to time ;
for He says " Thou art," and not " Thou hast
become," showing that He had neither recently
attained to the relation of Son, nor again, having
begun before, after this had an end, but having
been previously begotten,^ that He was to be,
and was the same. But the expression, " This
day have I begotten thee," signifies that He
willed that He who existed before the ages in
heaven should be begotten on the earth — that
is, that He who was before unknown should be
made known. Now, certainly, Christ has never
yet been born in those men who have never
perceived the manifold wisdom of God — that
is, has never been known, has never been man-
ifested, has never appeared to them. But if
these also should perceive the mystery of grace,
then in them too, when they were converted
and believed. He would be born in knowledge
and understanding. Therefore from hence the
Church is fitly said to form and beget the male
Word in those who are cleansed. ^ So far I have
spoken according to my ability concerning the
travail of the Church ; and here we must change
to the subject of the dragon and the other mat-
ters. Let us endeavour, then, to explain it in
some measure, not deterred by the greatness of
the obscurity of the Scripture ; and if anything
difficult comes to be considered, I will again help
you to cross it like a river.

CHAP. X. THE DRAGON, THE DEVIL; THE STARS

STRUCK FROM HEAVEN BY THE TAIL OF THE
DRAGON, heretics; THE NUMBERS OF THE
TRINITY, THAT IS, THE PERSONS NUMBERED ;
ERRORS CONCERNING THEM.

The dragon, which is great, and red, and
cunning, and manifold, and seven-headed, and
horned, and draws down the third part of the
stars, and stands ready to devour the child of
the woman who is travailing, is the devil, who
lies in wait to destroy the Christ-accepted mind
of the baptized, and the image and clear features
of the Word which had been brought forth in
them. But he misses and fails of his prey, the
regenerate being caught up on high to the
throne of God — that is, the mind of those who
are renovated is lifted up around the divine seat
and the basis of truth against which there is no
stumbling, being taught to look upon and regard


' Ps. ii. 7.

2 Certain phrases like this have led to the opinion that Methodius
was inclined to Arianism. There is no ground for the supposition.
In the writer's mind, as is clear from the previous statements, the pre-
vious generation was eternal. — Tr.

3 In the baptismal font.


the things which are there, so that it may not
be deceived by the dragon weighing them down.
For it is not allowed to him to destroy those
whose thoughts and looks are upwards. And
the stars, which the dragon touched with the
end of his tail, and drew them down to earth,
are the bodies of heresies ; for we must say that
the stars, which are dark, obscure, and falling,
are the assemblies of the heterodox ; since they,
too, wish to be acquainted with the heavenly
ones, and to have believed in Christ, and to
have the seat of their soul in heaven, and to
come near to the stars as children of light. But
they are dragged down, being shaken out by
the folds of the dragon, because they did not
remain within the triangular forms of godliness,
falling away from it with respect to an orthodox
service. Whence also they are called the third
part of the stars, as having gone astray with re-
gard to one of the three Persons of the Trinity.
As when they say, like Sabellios, that the Al-
mighty Person of the Father Himself suffered ; ■♦
or as when they say, like Artemas, that the
Person of the Son was born and manifested only
in appearance ; 5 or when they contend, like the
Ebionites, that the prophets spoke of the Person
of the Spirit, of their own motion. For of Mar-
cion and Valentinus, and those al^out Elkesaios
and others, it is better not even to make mention.

CHAP. XI. THE WOMAN WTTH THE MALE CHILD

IN THE WILDERNESS THE CHURCH ; THE WIL-
DERNESS BELONGS TO VIRGINS AND SAINTS ; THE
PERFECTION OF NUMBERS AND MYSTERIES ; THE
EQUALITY AND PERFECTION OF THE NUMBER
SIX ; THE NUMBER SIX RELATED TO CHRI.ST ;
FROM THIS NUMBER, TOO, THE CREATION AND
HARMONY OF THE WORLD COMPLETED.

Now she who brings forth, and has brought
forth, the masculine Word in the hearts of the
faithful, and who passed, undefiled and uninjured
by the wrath of the beast, into the wilderness, is,
as we have explained, our mother the Church.
And the wilderness into which she comes, and
is nourished for a thousand two hundred and
sixty days, which is truly waste and unfruitful of
evils, and barren of corruption, and difficult of
access and of transit to the multitude ; but fruit-
ful and abounding in pasture, and blooming and
easy of access to the holy, and full of wisdom,
and productive of life, is this most lovely, and
beautifully wooded and well-watered abode of
Arete.^ Here the south wind awakes, and the
north wind blows, and the spices flow out,^ and
all things are filled with refreshing dews, and
crowned with the unfading plants of immortal


* Patripassianism : nearly the same as Sabellianism. — Tr.

5 AoKT^afi., hence Doceiie, — Tr.

6 Virtue.

7 Cant. iv. i6.


THE BANQUET OF THE TEN VIRGINS.


0J9


life ; in which we now gather flowers, and weave
with sacred fingers the purple and glorious crown
of virginity for the queen. For the Bride of the
Word is adorned with the fruits of virtue. And
the thousand two hundred and sixty days that
we are staying here, O virgins, is the accurate
and perfect understanding concerning the Father,
and the Son, and the Spirit, in which our mother
increases, and rejoices, and exults throughout
this time, until the restitution of the new dispen-
sation, when, coming into the assembly in the
heavens, she will no longer contemplate the I
AM through the means of human knowledge,
but will clearly behold entering in together with
Christ. For a thousand,' consisting of a hun-
dred multiplied by ten, embraces a full and per-
fect number, and is a symbol of the Father
Himself, who made the universe by Himself, and
rules all things for Himself. Two hundred em-
braces two perfect numbers united together, and
is the symbol of the Holy Spirit, since He is
the Author of our knowledge of the Son and the
Father. But sixty has the number six multiplied
by ten, and is a symbol of Christ, because the
number six proceeding^ from unity is composed
of its proper parts, so that nothing in it is want-
ing or redundant, and is complete when resolved
into its parts. Thus it is necessary that the
number six, when it is divided into even parts
by even parts, should again make up the same
quantity from its separated segments.^ For, first,
if divided equally, it makes three ; then, if di-
vided into three parts, it makes two ; and again,
if divided by six, it makes one, and is again col-
lected into itself. For when divided into twice
three, and three times two, and six times one,
when the three and the two and the one are
put together, they complete the six again. But
everything is of necessity perfect which neither
needs anything else in order to its completion,
nor has anything over. Of the other numbers,
some are more than perfect, as twelve. For the
half of it is six, and the third four, and the fourth
three, and the sixth two, and the twelfth one.
The numbers into which it can be divided, when
put together, exceed twelve, this number not
having preserved itself equal to its parts, like the
number six. And those which are imperfect, are
numbers like eight. For the half of it is four,
and the fourth two, and the eighth one. Now
the numbers into which it is divided, when put
together, make seven, and one is wanting to its
completion, not being in all points harmonious
with itself, like six, which has reference to the
Son of God, who came from the fiilness of the


■ \fethodius is not the first or the last who has sought lo explore
the mystery of numbers. An interesting and profound examination
of the subiect will be found in Bahr's Sytitholik: also in Delitzsch's
Bib. Psyrhology. — Tr. [C?7i the Six Days' IVork,^. 71, transla-
tion, E.linburgh, 187;.]

^ i e., in a regular arithmetical progression.

* i.e., its divisors or dividends.


Godhead into a human life. For having emptied
Himself, •♦ and taken upon Him the form of a
slave, He was restored again to His former per-
fection and dignity. For He being humbled,
and apparently degraded, was restored again
from His humiliation and degradation to His
former completeness and greatness, having never
been diminished from His essential perfection.

Moreover, it is evident that the creation of
the world was accomplished in harmony with
this number, God having made heaven and
earth, and the things which are in them, in six
days ; the word of creative power containing
the number six, in accordance with which the
Trinity is the maker of bodies. For length,
and breadth, and depth make up a body. And
the number six is composed of triangles. On
these subjects, however, there is not sufficient
time at present to enlarge with accuracy, for
fear of letting the main subject slip, in consider-
ing that which is secondary.

CHAP. XII. VIRGINS ARE CALLED TO THE IMITA-
TION OF THE CHURCH IN THE WILDERNESS
OVERCOMING THE DRAGON.

The Church, then, coming hither into this
wilderness, a place unproductive of evils, is
nourished, flying on the heavenward wings of
virginity, which the Word called the " wings of
a great eagle," 5 having conquered the serpent,
and driven away from her full moon the wintry
clouds. It is for the sake of these things, mean-
while, that all these discourses are held, teach-
ing us, O fair virgins, to imitate according to
our strength our mother, and not to be troubled
by the pains and changes and afflictions of life,
that you may enter in exulting with her into the
bride-chamber, showing your lamps. Do not,
therefore, lose courage on account of the schemes
and slanders of the beast, but bravely prepare
for the battle, armed with the helmet of salva-
tion,^ and the breastplate, and the greaves. For
you will bring upon him an immense consterna-
tion when you attack him with great advantage
and courage ; nor will he at all resist, seeing his
adversaries set in array by One more powerful ;
but the many-headed and many-faced beast will
immediately allow you to carry off the spoils of
the seven contests : —

" Lion in front, liut dragon all behind,
And in the midst a she-goat breathing forth
Profuse the violence of flaming fire.
Iler slew Bellerophon in truth. And this
.Slew Christ the King ; for many she desiro\-ed,
Nor could they bear the fetid foam which burst
From out the fountain of her horrid jaws ; " '

unless Christ had first weakened and overcome


•< " Make Himself of no reputation."-

5 Ezek xvii 3.

* Eph. vi. 17.

7 Horn., //., vi. i8i.


•E. T.,Phil. ii. 7.


340


THE BANQUET OF THE TEN VIRGINS.


her, making her powerless and contemptible
before us.

CHAP. XIII. THE SEVEN CROWNS OF THE BEAST

TO BE TAKEN AWAY BY VICTORIOUS CHASTITY ;
THE TEN CROWNS OF THE DRAGON, THE VICES
OPPOSED TO THE DECALOGUE ; THE OPINION OF
FATE THE GREATEST EVIL.

Therefore, taking to you a masculine and sober
mind, oppose your armour to the swelling beast,
and do not at all give way, nor be troubled be-
cause of his fury. For you will have immense
glory if you overcome him, and take away the
se\'en crowns which are upon him, on account
of which we have to struggle and wrestle, accord-
ing to our teacher Paul. For she who having
first overcome the devil, and destroyed his seven
heads, becomes possessed of the seven crowns
of virtue, having gone through the seven great
struggles of chastity. For incontinence and
luxury is a head of the dragon ; and whoever
bruises this is wreathed with the crown of tem-
perance. Cowardice and weakness is also a
head ; and he who treads upon this carries off
the crown of martyrdom. Unbelief and folly,
and other similar fruits of wickedness, is another
head ; and he who has overcome these and de-
stroyed them carries off the honours connected
with them, the power of the dragon being in
many ways rooted up. Moreover, the ten horns
and stings which he was said to have upon his
heads are the ten opposites, O virgins, to the
Decalogue, by which he was accustomed to gore
and cast down the souls of many imagining and
contriving things in opposition to the law, " Thou
shalt love the Lord thy God," ' and to the other
precepts which follow. Consider now the fiery
and bitter horn of fornication, by which he casts
down the incontinent ; consider adultery, con-
sider falsehood, covetousness, theft, and the
other sister and related vices, which flourish by
nature around his murderous heads, which if you
root out with the aid of Christ, you will receive,
as it were, divine heads, and will bloom with the
crowns gained from the dragon. For it is our
duty to prefer and to set forward the best things,
who have received, above the earth-born, a com-
manding and voluntary mind, and one free from
all necessity, so as to make choice like masters
of the things which please us, not being in bond-
age to fate or fortune. And so no man would
be master of himself and good, unless selecting
the human example of Christ, and bringing him-
self to the likeness of Him, he should imitate
Him in his manner of life. For of all evils the
greatest which is implanted in many is that which
refers the causes of sins to the motions of the
stars, and says that our life is guided by the ne-


cessities of fate, as those say who study the
stars, with much insolence. For they, trusting
more in guessing than in prudence, that is, in
something between truth and falsehood, go far
astray from the sight of things as they are.
Whence, if you permit me, O Arete, now that I
have completed the discourse which you, my
mistress, appointed to be spoken, I will endeav-
our, with your assistance and favour, to examine
carefully the position of those who are offended,
and deny that we speak the truth, when we say
that man is possessed of free-will, and prove that

" They perish self-destroyed.
By their own fault," ^

choosing the pleasant in preference to the expe-
dient.

Arete. I do permit you and assist you ; for
your discourse will be perfectly adorned when
you have added this to it.

CHAP. XIV. THE doctrine OF MATHEMATICIANS

NOT WHOLLY TO BE DESPISED, WHEN THEY ARE
CONCERNED ABOUT THE KNOWLEDGE OF THE
STARS; THE TWELVE SIGNS OF THE ZODIAC

MYTHICAL NAMES.

I

I Thekla. Resuming then, let us first lay bare,
I in speaking of those things according to our
i power, the imposture of those who boast as
though they alone had comprehended from what
: forms the heaven is arranged, in accordance with
I the hypothesis of the Chaldeans and Egyptians.
I For they say that the circumference of the world
: is likened to the turnings of a well-rounded
globe, the earth having a central point. For its
outline being spherical, it is necessary, they say,
since there are the same distances of the parts,
I that the earth should be the centre of the uni-
i verse, around which, as being older, the heaven
is whirling. For if a circumference is described
from the central point, which seems to be a circle,
— for it is impossible for a circle to be described
without a point, and it is impossible for a circle
to be without a point, — surely the earth con-
sisted before all, they say, in a state of chaos
and disorganization. Now certainly the wretched
ones were overwhelmed in the chaos of error,
" because that, when they knew God, they glori-
fied Him not as God, neither were thankful ; but
became vain in their imaginations, and their fool-
ish he^rt was darkened ; " ^ and their wise men
said that nothing earth-born was more honour-
able or more ancient than the Olympians.
Whence they are not mere children who know
Christ, like the Greeks, who, burying the truth
in fables and fictions, rather than in artistic
words, ascribing human calamities to the heav-
ens, are not ashamed to describe the circumfer-


' Deut. vi. 5.


2 Horn., Crt'., i. 7.

3 Rom. i. 21.


THE BANQUET OF THE TEN VIRGINS.


341


ence of the world by geometrical theorems and
figures, and explain that the heaven is adorned
with the images of birds and of animals that
live in water and on dry land, and that the
qualities of the stars were made from the
calamities of the men of old, so that the move-
ments of the planets, in their opinion, depended
upon the same kind of bodies. And they say
that the stars revolve around the nature of the
twelve signs of the Zodiac, being drawn along
by the passage of the circle of the Zodiac, so
that through their intermingling they see the
things which happen to many, according to their
conjunctions and departures, their rising and
setting.

For the whole heaven being spherical, and
having the earth for its central point, as they
think,' because all the straight Hnes from the
circumference falling upon the earth are equal
to one another, holds back from the circles
which surround it, of which the meridian is the
greatest ; and the second, which divides it into
two equal parts, is the horizon ; and the third,
which separates these, the equinoctial ; and on
each side of this the two tropics, the summer
and the winter — the one on the north, and the
other on the south. Beyond is that which is
called the axis, around which are the greater and
lesser Bears, and beyond them is the tropic. And
the Bears, turning about themselves, and weigh-
ing upon the axis, which passes through the
poles, produce the motion of the whole world,
having their heads against each other's loins, and
being untouched by our horizon.

Then they say that the Zodiac touches all the
circles, making its movements diagonally, and
that there are in it a number of signs, which are
called the twelve signs of the Zodiac, beginning
with the Ram, and going on to the Fishes, which,
they say, were so determined from mythical
causes ; saying that it was the Ram that con-
veyed Helle, the daughter of Athamas, and her
brother Phryxos into Scythia ; and that the head
of the Ox is in honour of Zeus, who, in the form
of a Bull, carried over Europe into Crete ; and
they say the circle called the Galaxy, or milky
way, which reaches from the Fishes to the Ram,
was poured forth for Herakles from the breasts
of Hera, by the commands of Zeus. And thus,
according to them, there was no natal destiny
before Europe or Phryxos, and the Dioscuroi,^
and the other signs of the Zodiac, which were
placed among the constellations, from men and
beasts. But our ancestors lived without destiny.
Let us endeavour now to crush falsehood, like


' [" As they think." Had Methodius any leaning to Pythagoras
and his school? To "science" the world owes its rejection of the
true theory of the universe for two thousand years, till Copernicus,
a Christian priest, broke that spell. Could the Christian Fathers know
more than science taught them ? Methodius hints it.]

^ Castor and Pollux.


physicians, taking its edge off, and quenching it
with the healing medicine of words, here con-
sidering the truth.

CHAP. XV. ARGUMENTS FROM THE NOVELTY OF

FATE AND GENERATION ; THAT GOLDEN AGE,
EARLY men; solid ARGUMENTS AGAINST THE
MATHEMATICIANS.

If it were better, O wretched ones, that man
should be subject to the star of his birth, than
that he should not, why was not his*generation
and birth from the very time when the race of
man began to be ? And if it was, what is the
need of those which had lately been placed
among the stars, of the Lion, the Crab, the
Twins, the Virgin, the Bull, the Balance, the
Scorpion, the Ram, the Archer, the Fishes,
the Goat, the Watercarrier, Perseus, Cassiopeia,
Cepheus, Pegasus, Hydra, the Raven, the Cup,
the Lyre, the Dragon, and others, from which
you introduce, by your instructions, many to
the knowledge of mathematics, or, rather, to a
knowledge which is anathema P^ Well, then,
either there was generation among those before, ,
and the removal of these creatures above was
absurd ; or else there was not, and God changed
human Ufe into a better state and government
than that of those who before that lived an
I inferior life. But the ancients were better than
those of the present time ; whence theirs was
called the golden age. There was then no natal
destiny.

If the sun, driving through the circles and
passing along the signs of the Zodiac in his
annual periods, accomplishes the changes and
turnings of the seasons, how did those who were
born before the signs of the Zodiac were placed
among the stars, and the heaven was adorned
with them, continue to exist, when summer,
autumn, winter, and spring, were not as yet
separated from each other, by means of which
the body is increased and strengthened?' But
they did exist, and were longer lived and stronger
than those who live now, since God then dis-
posed the seasons in the same manner. The
heaven was not then diversified by such shapes.

If the sun and the moon and the other stars
were made for the division and protection of
the members of the time,'* and for the adorn-
ment of the heaven, and the changes of the
seasons, they are divine, and better than men ;
for these must needs pass a better hfe, and a
blessed and peaceful one, and one which far
exceeds our own life in righteousness and virtue,
observing a motion which is well-ordered and
happy. But if they are the causes of the calami-
ties and mischief of mortals, and busy themselves


3 We cannot preserve the play upon words of the original. There
it is — u.aQr\ti.aT\.KT\v and KaTaS(tt.aTt.Kijy, — Tr.
* Gen. i. 14, etc.


142


THE BANQUET OF THE TEN VIRGINS.


in working the lasciviousness, and the changes
and vicissitudes of Ufe, then they are more mis-
erable than men, looking upon the earth, and
their weak and lawless actions, and doing noth-
ing better than men, if at least our life depends
upon their revolutions and movements.

CHAP. XVI. SEVER.\L OTHER THINGS TURNED

AGAINST THE SAME iMATHE.MATICIANS,

If no action is performed without a previous
desire, and there is no desire without a want, yet
the Divine Being has no wants, and therefore
has no conception of evil. And if the nature
of the stars be nearer in order to that of God,
being better than the virtue of the best men,
tjien the stars also are neither productive of evil,
nor in want.

And besides, every one of those who are per-
suaded that the sun and moon and stars are
divine, will allow that they are far removed from
evil, and incapable of human actions which
spring from the sense of pleasure and pain ; for
such abominable desires are unsuitable to heav-
enly beings. But if they are by nature exempt
from these, and in no want of anything, how
should they be the causes to men of those things
which they do not will themselves, and from
which they are exempt ?

Now those who decide that man is not pos-
sessed of free-will, and affirm that he is governed
by the unavoidable necessities of fate, and her
unwritten commands, are guilty of impiety
towards God Himself, making Him out to be
the cause and author of human evils. For if
He harmoniously orders the whole circular mo-
tion of the stars, with a w^isdom which man can
neither express nor comprehend, directing the
course of the universe ; and the stars produce
the qualities of virtue and vice in human life,
dragging men to these things by the chains of
necessity ; then they declare God to be the
Cause and Giver of evils. But God is the cause
of injury to no one ; therefore fate ' is not the
cause of all things.

Whoever has the least intelligence will confess
that God is good, righteous, wise, true, helpful,
not the cause of evils, free from passion, and
everything of that kind. And if the righteous be
better than the unrighteous, and unrighteousness
be abominable to them, God, being righteous,
rejoices in righteousness, and unrighteousness is
hateful to Him, being opposed and hostile to
righteousness. Therefore God is not the author
of unrighteousness.

If that which profits is altogether good, and
temperance is profitable to one's house and hfe
and friends, then temperance is good. And if


' Veveais = birth, i.e., our life is not controlled by the star of our
nativity. — Tr. [See Hippolytus, vol. v. p. 27, this series.]


temperance be in its nature good, and licentious-
ness be opposed to temperance, and that which
is opposed to good be evil, then licentiousness
is evil. And if Hcentiousness be in its nature
evil, and out of hcentiousness come adulteries,
thefts, quarrels, and murders, then a licentious
life is in its nature evil. But the Divine Being
is not by nature implicated in evils. Therefore
our birth is not the cause of these things.

If the temperate are better than the inconti-
nent, and incontinence is abominable to them,
and God rejoices in temperance, being free from
the knowledge of passions, then incontinence is
hateful also to God. Moreover, that the action
which is in accordance with temperance, being
a virtue, is better than that which is in accord-
ance with incontinence, which is a vice, we may
learn from kings and rulers, and commanders,
and women, and children, and citizens, and mas-
ters, and servants, and pedagogues, and teach-
ers ; for each of these is useful to himself and
to the public when he is temperate ; but when
he is licentious he is injurious to himself and to
the public. And if there be any difference be-
tween a filthy man and a noble man, a licentious
and a temperate ; and if the character of the
noble and the temperate be the better, and that
of the opposite the worse ; and if those of the
better character be near to God and His friends,
and those of the worse be far from Him and
His enemies, those who believe in fate make no
distinction between righteousness and unright-
eousness, between filthiness and nobility, between
licentiousness and temperance, which is a con-
tradiction. For if good be opposed to evil, and
unrighteousness be evil, and this be opposed to
righteousness and righteousness be good, and
good be hostile to evil, and evil be unlike to
good, then righteousness is different from un-
righteousness. And therefore God is not the
cause of evils, nor does He rejoice in evils.
Nor does reason commend them, being good.
If, then, any are evil, they are evil in accordance
with the wants and desires of their minds, and
not by necessity.

" They perish self-destroj'cd.
By their own fault." ^

If destiny ^ leads one on to kill a man, and to
stain his hands with murder, and the law forbids
this, punishing criminals, and by threats restrains
the decrees of destiny, such as committing in-
justice, adultery, theft, poisoning, then the law
is in opposition to destiny ; for those things
which destiny appointed the law prohibits, and
those things which the law prohibits destiny com-
pels men to do. Hence law is hostile to des-
tiny. But if it be hostile, then lawgivers do


2 Horn., Od., i. 7.

3 y«v£<ns = birth, h. the star of man's nativity, h. destiny.


THE BANQUET OF THE TEN VIRGINS.


343


not act in accordance with destiny ; for by pass-
ing decrees in opposition to destiny they destroy
destiny. Either, then, there is destiny and there
was no need of laws ; or there are laws and
they are not in accordance with destiny. But
it is impossible that anyone should be born or
anything done apart from destiny ; for they say
it is not lawful for anyone even to move a finger
apart from fate. And therefore it was in accord-
ance with destiny that Minos and Dracon, and
Lycurgus, and Solon, and Zaleukos were law-
givers and appointed laws, prohibiting adulteries,
murders, violence, rape, thefts, as things which
neither existed nor took place in accordance
with destiny. But if these things were in accord-
ance with destiny, then the laws were not in ac-
cordance with destiny. For destiny itself would
not be destroyed by itself, cancelling itself, and
contending against itself ; here appointing laws
forbidding adultery and murders, and taking
vengeance upon and punishing the wicked, and
there producing murders and adulteries. But
this is impossible : for nothing is alien and ab-
horrent to itself, and self-destructive, and at
variance with itself. And, therefore, there is no
destiny.

If everything in the world falls out in accord-
ance with destiny, and nothing without it, then
the law must needs be produced by destiny. But
the law destroys destiny, teaching that virtue
should be learnt, and diligently performed ; and
that vice should be avoided, and that it is pro-
duced by want of discipline. Therefore there is
no destiny.

If destiny makes men to injure one another,
and to be injured by one another, what need is
there of laws ? But if laws are made that they
may check the sinful, God having a care for those
who are injured, it were better that the evil
should not act in accordance with Fate, than
that they should be set right, after having acted.
But God is good and wise, and does what is
best. Therefore there is no fixed destiny.

Either education and habit are the cause of
sins, or the passions of the soul, and those de-
sires which arise through the body. But which-
ever of these be the cause, God is not the
cause.

If it is better to be righteous than to be un-
righteous, why is not man made so at once from
his birth? But if afterwards he is tempered by
instruction and laws, that he may become better,
he is so tempered as possessing free-will, and not
by nature evil.

If the evil are evil in accordance with destiny,
by the decrees of Providence, they are not
blameworthy and deserving of the punishment
which is inflicted by the laws, since they live
according to their own nature, and are not capa-
ble of being changed.


And, again, if the good, hving according to
their own proper nature, are praiseworthy, their
natal destiny being the cause of their goodness ;
yet the wicked, living according to their own
proper nature, are not blamable in the eye of a
righteous judge. For, if we must speak plainly,
he who lives according to the nature which be-
longs to him, in no way sins. For he did not
make himself thus, but Fate ; and he lives ac-
cording to its motion, being urged on by un-
avoidable necessity. Then no one is bad. But
some men are bad : and vice is blameworthy,
and hostile to God, as reason has shown. But
virtue is lovable and praiseworthy, God having
appointed a law for the punishment of the
wicked. Therefore there is no Fate.

CHAP. XVII. THE LUST OF THE FLESH AND SPIRIT :

VICE AND VIRTUE.

But why do I draw out my discourse to such
length, spending the time with arguments, having
set forth the things which are most necessary for
persuasion, and to gain approval for that which
is expedient ; and having made manifest to all,
by a few words, the inconsistency of their trick,
so that it is now possible even for a child to see
and perceive their error ; and that to do good or
evil is in our own power, and not decided by the
stars. For there are two motions in us, the lust
of the flesh and that of the soul, differing from
each other,' whence they have received two
names, that of virtue and that of vice. And we
ought to obey the most noble and most useful
leading of virtue, choosing the best in preference
to the base. But enough on these points. I
must come to the end of my discourse ; for I
fear, and am ashamed, after these discourses on
chastity, that I should be obliged to introduce
the opinions of men who study the heavens, or
rather who study nonsense, who waste their life
with mere conceits, passing it in nothing but
fabulous figments. And now may these offerings
of ours, composed from the words which are
spoken by God, be acceptable to thee, O Arete,
my mistress.

EuBOULios. How bravely and magnificently,
O Gregorion, has Thekla debated !

Gregorion. What, then, would you have said,
if you had listened to herself, speaking fluently,
and with easy expression, with much grace and
pleasure? So that she was admired by every
one ivho attended, her language blossoming with
words, as she set forth intelligently, and in fact
picturesquely, the subjects on which she spoke,
her countenance suffused with the blush of mod-
esty ; for she is altogether brilliant in body and
soul.

EuBOULios. Rightly do you say this, Grego-

' Gal. V. 17.


;44


THE BANQUET OF THE TEN VIRGINS.


rion, and none of these things is false ; for I
knew her wisdom also from other noble actions,
and what sort of things she succeeded in speak-
ing, giving proof of supreme love to Christ ; and
how glorious she often appeared in meeting the
chief conflicts of the martyrs, procuring for her-
self a zeal equal to her courage, and a strength
of body equal to the wisdom of her counsels.

Gregorion. Most truly do you also speak.
But let us not waste time ; for we shall often be
able to discuss these and other subjects. But I
must now first relate to you the discourses of the
other virgins which followed, as I promised ; and
chiefly those of Tusiane and Domnina ; for these
still remain. When, then, Thekla ceased speak-
ing these things, Theopatra said that Arete di-
rected Tusiane to speak ; and that she, smiling,
passed before her and said.


DISCOURSE IX.— TUSIANE.

CHAP. I. CHASTITY THE CHIEF ORNAMENT OF THE

TRUE TABERNACLE ; SEVEN DAVS APPOINTED TO
THE JEWS FOR CELEBRATING THE FEAST OF TAB-
ERNACLES : WHAT THEY SIGNIFY ] THE SUM OF
THIS SEPTENARY UNCERTAIN ; NOT CLEAR TO ANY
ONE WHEN THE CONSUMMATION OF THE WORLD
WILL BE ; EVEN NOW THE FABRIC OF THE WORLD
COMPLETED.

O Arete, thou dearest boast to the lovers of
virginity, I also implore thee to afford me thine
aid, lest I should be wanting in words, the sub-
ject having been so largely and variously handled.
Wherefore I ask to be excused exordium and in-
troductions, lest, whilst I delay in embellishments
suitable to them, I depart from the subject : so
glorious, and honourable, and renowned a thing
is virginity.

God, when He appointed to the true Israelites
the legal rite of the true feast of the tabernacles,
directed, in Leviticus, how they should keep and
do honour to the feast ; above all things, saying
that each one should adorn his tabernacle with
chastity. I will add the words themselves of
Scripture, from which, without any doubt, it will
be shown how agreeable to God, and acceptable
to Him, is this ordinance of virginity : " In the
fifteenth day of the seventh month, when ye
have gathered in the fruit of the land, ye shall
keep a feast unto the Lord seven days : on the
first day shall be a Sabbath, and on the eighth day
shall be a Sabbath. And ye shall take you orr the
first day the boughs of goodly trees, branches of
palm-trees, and the boughs of thick trees, and wil-
lows ' of the brook ; and ye shall rejoice before
the Lord your God seven days. And ye shall
keep it a feast unto the Lord seven days in the


' The LXX. adds " And of the Agnos." See note on this tree
at the beginning of the treatise, p. 310, note 2.]


year. It shall be a statute for ever in your gen-
erations ; ye shall celebrate it in the seventh
month. Ye shall dwell in booths seven days ;
all that are Israelites born shall dwell in booths ;
that your generations may know that I made the
children of Israel to dwell in booths, when I
brought them out of Egypt : I am the Lord
your God." ^

Here the Jews, fluttering about the bare letter
of Scripture, like drones about the leaves of
herbs, but not about flowers and fruits as the
bee, fully believe that these words and ordinances
were spoken concerning such a tabernacle as
they erect ; as if God delighted in those trivial
adornments which they, preparing, fabricate from
trees, not perceiving the wealth of good things
to come ; whereas these things, being like air
and phantom shadows, foretell the resurrection
and the putting up of our tabernacle that had
fallen upon the earth, which at length, in the
seventh thousand of years, resuming again im-
mortal, we shall celebrate the great feast of true
tabernacles in the new and indissoluble creation,
the fruits of the earth having been gathered in,
and men no longer begetting and begotten, but
God resting from the works of creation.^

For since in six days God made the heaven
and the earth, and finished the whole world, and
rested on the seventh day from all His works
which He had made, and blessed the seventh
day and sanctified it,'* so by a figure in the
seventh month, when the fruits of the earth have
been gathered in, we are commanded to keep
the feast to the Lord, which signifies that, when
this world shall be terminated at the seventh
thousand years, when God shall have completed
the world. He shall rejoice in us.s For now to
this time all things are created by His all-suffi-
cient will and inconceivable power ; the earth
still yielding its fruits, and the waters being
gathered together in their receptacles ; and the
light still severed from darkness, and the allotted
number of men not yet being complete ; and the
sun arising to rule the day, and the moon the
night ; and four-footed creatures, and beasts,
and creeping things arising from the earth, and
winged creatures, and creatures tliat swim, from
the water. Then, when the appointed times shall
have been accomplished, and God shall have
ceased to form this creation, in the seventh
month, the great resurrection-day, it is com-
manded that the Feast of our Tabernacles shall
be celebrated to the Lord, of which the things
said in Leviticus are symbols and figures, which
things, carefully investigating, we should con-


2 Lev. xxiii. 39-42.

3 [Methodius did not adopt the errors of the Chiliasts.but he kept
up the succession of witnesses to this primitive idea. Coleridge's re-
marks on Jeremy Taylor, touching this point, may be worth consult-
ing. Notes on Old English Divines, vol. i. p. 218. J

* Gen. ii. i.
5 Ps. civ. 31.


THE BANQUET OF THE TEN VIRGINS.


345


sider the naked truth itself, for He saith, "A
wise man will hear, and will increase learning ;
and a man of understanding shall attain unto
wise counsels : to understand a proverb, and the
interpretation ; the words of the wise, and their
dark sayings." '

Wherefore let it shame the Jews that they do
not perceive the deep things of the Scriptures,
thinking that nothing else than outward things
are contained in the law and the prophets ; for
they, intent upon things earthly, have in greater
esteem the riches of the world than the wealth
which is of the soul. For since the Scriptures
are in this way divided that some of them give
the likeness of past events, some of them a type
of the future, the miserable men, going back,
deal with the figures of the future as if they were
already things of the past. As in the instance
of the immolation of the Lamb, the mystery of
which they regard as solely in remembrance of
the deliverance of their fathers from Egypt, when,
although the first-born of Egypt were smitten,
they themselves were preserved by marking the
door-posts of their houses with blood. Nor do
they understand that by it also the death of
Christ is personified, by whose blood souls made
safe and sealed shall be preserved from wrath in
the burning of the world ; whilst the first-born,
the sons of Satan, shall be destroyed with an
utter destruction by the avenging angels, who
shall reverence the seal of the Blood impressed
upon the former.

CHAP. II. FIGURE, IMAGE, TRUTH : LAW, GR.A.CE,

GLORY ; iMAN CREATED IMMORTAL : DEATH
BROUGHT IN BY DESTRUCTIVE SIN.

And let these things be said for the sake of
example, showing that the Jews have wonderfully
fallen from the hope of future good, because they
consider things present to be only signs of things
already accomplished ; whilst they do not per-
ceive that the figures represent images, and
images are the representatives of truth. For the
law is indeed the figure and the shadow of an
image, that is, of the Gospel ; but the image,
namely, the Gospel, is the representative of truth
itself. For the men of olden time and the law
foretold to us the characteristics of the Church,
and the Church represents those of the new dis-
pensation which is to come. Whence we, having
received Christ, saying, " I am the truth," ^ know
that shadows and figures have ceased ; and we
hasten on to the truth, proclaiming its glorious
images. For now we know " in part," and as it
were " through a glass," ^ since that which is
perfect has not yet come to us ; namely, the
kingdom of heaven and the resurrection, when

' Prov i. 5, 6.
^ St. John xiv. i6.
^ I Cor. xiii. 12.


" that which is in part shall be done away." +
For then will all our tabernacles be firmly set up,
when again the body shall rise, with bones again
joined and compacted with flesh. Then shall
we celebrate truly to the Lord a glad festal-day,
when we shall receive eternal tabernacles, no
more to perish or be dissolved into the dust of
the tomb. Now, our tabernacle was at first fixed
in an immoveable state, but was moved by trans-
gression and bent to the earth, God putting an
end to sin by means of death, lest man immortal,
living a sinner, and sin living in him, should be
liable to eternal curse. Wherefore he died, al-
though he had not been created liable to death
or corruption, and the soul was separated from
the flesh, that sin might perish by death, not
being able to live longer in one dead. Whence
sin being dead and destroyed, again I shall rise
immortal ; and I praise God who by means of
death frees His sons from death, and I celebrate
lawfully to His honour a festal-day, adorning my
tabernacle, that is my flesh, with good works, as
there did the five virgins with the five-lighted
lamps.

CHAP. III. HOV^^ EACH ONE OUGHT TO PREPARE

HIMSELF FOR THE FUTURE RESURRECTION.

In the first day of the resurrection I am ex-
amined whether I bring these things which are
commanded, whether I am adorned with virtuous
works, whether I am overshadowed by the boughs
of chastity. For account the resurrection to be
the erection of the tabernacle. Account that the
things which are taken for the putting together
of the tabernacle are the works of righteousness.
I take, therefore, on the first day the things which
are set down, that is, on the day in which I stand
to be judged, whether I have adorned my taber-
nacle with the things commanded ; if those
things are found on that day which here in time
we are commanded to prepare, and there to
offer to God. But come, let us consider what
follows.

" And ye shall take you," He says, " on the
first day the boughs of goodly trees, branches of
palm-trees, and the boughs of thick trees, and
willows (and the tree of chastity) of the brook ;
and ye shall rejoice before the Lord your God." s
The Jews, uncircumcised in heart, think that the
most beautiful fruit of wood is the citron wood,
on account of its size ; nor are they ashamed to
say that God is worshipped with cedar, to whom
not all the quadrupeds of the earth would suffice
as a burnt-ofiering or as incense for burning.
And moreover, O hard breasts, if the citron ap-
pear beautiful to you, why not the pomegranate,
and other fruits of trees, and amongst them


* 1 Cor. xiii. 10.
S Lev. xxiii. 40.


!46


THE BANQUET OF THE TEN VIRGINS.


apples, which much surpass the citron? In-
deed, in the Song of Songs,' Solomon having
made mention of all these fruits, passes over in
silence the citron only. But this deceives the
unwary, for they have not understood that the
tree of life^ which Paradise once bore, now again
the Church has produced for all, even the ripe
and comely fruit of faith.

Such fruit it is necessary that we bring when
we come to the judgment-seat of Christ, on the
first day of the feast ; for if we are without it we
shall not be able to feast with God, nor to have
part, according to John,^ in the first resurrection.
For the tree of life is wisdom first begotten of
all. " She is a tree of life to them that lay hold
upon her," says the prophet ;■♦ "and happy is
every one that retaineth her." " A tree planted
by the waterside, that will bring forth his fruit in
due season ; " 5 that is, learning and charity and
discretion are imparted in due time to those
who come to the waters of redemption.

He that hath not believed in Christ, nor hath
understood that He is the first principle and the
tree of life, since he cannot show to God his
tabernacle adorned with the most goodly of
fruits, how shall he celebrate the feast? How
shall he rejoice? Desirest thou to know the
goodly fruit of the tree? Consider the words
of our Lord Jesus Christ, how pleasant they are
beyond the children of men. Good fruit came
by Moses, that is the Law, but not so goodly as
the Gospel. For the Law is a kind of figure and
shadow of things to come, but the Gospel is
truth and the grace of life. Pleasant was the
fruit of the prophets, but not so pleasant as the
fruit of immortality which is plucked from
the Gospel.

CHAP. IV. THE MIND CLEARER WHEN CLEANSED

FROM SIN ; THE ORNAMENTS OF THE MIND AND
THE ORDER OF VIRTUE ; CHARITY DEEP AND
full; CHASTITY THE LAST ORNAMENT OF ALL J
THE VERY USE OF MATRIMONY TO BE RE-
STRAINED.

" And ye shall take you on the first day the
boughs of goodly trees, branches of palm-trees."^
This signifies the exercise of divine discipline,
by which the mind that subdues the passions is
cleansed and adorned by the sweeping out and
ejection from it of sins. For it is necessary to
come cleansed and adorned to the feast, arrayed,
as by a decorator, in the discipHne and exercise
of virtue. For the mind being cleansed by
laborious exercises from the distracting thoughts
which darken it, quickly perceives the truth ; as

' Cant. iv. 13.
^ Gen. ii. 9.
3 Rev. XX. 6.

* Prov. iii. 18.
5 Ps.i. 3.

* Lev. xxiii. 40.


the widow in the Gospels ^ found the piece of
money after she had swept the house and cast
out the dirt, that is, the passions which obscure
and cloud the mind, which increase in us from
our luxuriousness and carelessness.

Whoso, therefore, desires to come to that
Feast of Tabernacles, to be numbered with the
saints, let him first procure the goodly fruit of
faith, then palm branches, that is, attentive
meditation upon and study of the Scriptures,
afterwards the far-spreading and thickly-leaved
branches of charity, which He commands us to
take after the palm branches ; most fitly calling
charity dense boughs, because it is all thick and
close and very fruitful, not having anything bare
or empty, but all full, both branches and trunks.
Such is charity, having no part void or unfruit-
ful. For " though I sell all my goods and give
to the poor, and though I yield up my body to
the fire, and though I have so great faith that
I can remove mountains, and have not charity, I
am nothing."^ Charity, therefore, is a tree the
thickest and most fruitful of all, full and abound-
ing, copiously abounding in graces.

After this, what else does He will that we
should take ? Willow branches ; by that figure
indicating righteousness, because " the just,"
according to the prophet, shall spring up " as
grass in the midst of the waters, as willows by
the watercourses," ^ flourishing in the word.
Lastly, to crown all, it is commanded that the
bough of the Agnos tree be brought to decorate
the Tabernacle, because it is by its very name
the tree of chastity, by which those already
named are adorned. Let the wanton now be
gone, who, through their love of pleasure, reject
chastity. How shall they enter into the feast with
Christ who have not adorned their tabernacle
with boughs of chastity, that God-making and
blessed tree with which all who are hastening to
that assembly and nuptial banquet ought to be
begirt, and to cover their loins? For come,
fair virgins, consider the Scripture itself, and its
commands, how the Divine word has assumed
chastity to be the crown of those virtues and
duties that have been mentioned, showing how
becoming and desirable it is for the resurrection,
and that without it no one will obtain the prom-
ises which we who profess viginity supremely
cultivate and offer to the Lord. They also pos-
sess it who live chastely with their wives, and
do, as it were about the trunk, yield its lowly
branches bearing chastity, not being able like us
to reach its lofty and mighty boughs, or even to
touch them ; yet they, too, offer no less truly,
although in a less degree, the branches of chas-


7 Luke XV. 8.

8 I Cor. xiii. 2, 3. Quoted from memory and in meaning, not
verbally. — Tr.

9 Isa. xliv. 4. The reading of the LXX.


THE BANQUET OF THE TEN VIRGINS.


347


tity.' But those who are goaded on by their
lusts, although they do not commit fornication,
yet who, even in the things which are permitted
with a lawful wife, through the heat of unsub-
dued concupiscence are excessive in embraces,
how shall they celebrate the feast? how shall
they rejoice, who have not adorned their taber-
nacle, that is their flesh, with the boughs of the
Agnos, nor have listened to that which has been
said, that " they that have wives be as though
they had none? " ^

CHAP. V. THE MYSTERY OF THE TABERNACLES.

Wherefore, above all other things, I say to those
who love contests, and who are strong-minded,
that without delay they should honour chastity,
as a thing the most useful and glorious. For in
the new and indissoluble creation, whoever shall
not be found decorated with the boughs of chas-
tity, shall neither obtain rest, because he has not
fulfilled the command of God according to the
law, nor shall he enter into the land of promise,
because he has not previously celebrated the
Feast of Tabernacles. For they only who have
celebrated the Feast of Tabernacles come to the
Holy Land, setting out from those dwellings
which are called tabernacles, until they come to
enter into the temple and city of God, advancing
to a greater and more glorious joy, as the Jewish
types indicate. For like as the Israelites, having
left the borders of Egypt, first came to the Taber-
nacles,3 and from hence, having again set forth,
came into the land of promise, so also do we.
For I also, taking my journey, and going forth
from the Egypt of this life, came first to the
resurrection, which is the true Feast of the Taber-
nacles, and there having set up my tabernacle,
adorned with the fruits of virtue, on the first day
of the resurrection, which is the day of judgment,
celebrate with Christ the millennium of rest,
which is called the seventh day, even the true
Sabbath. Then again from thence I, a follower
of Jesus, "who hath entered into the heavens,""*
as they also, after the rest of the Feast of Taber-
nacles, came into the land of promise, come into
the heavens, not continuing to remain in taber-
nacles— that is, my body not remaining as it
was before, but, after the space of a thousand
years, changed from a human and corruptible
form into angelic size and beauty, where at last
we virgins, when the festival of the resurrection
is consummated, shall pass from the wonderful
place of the tabernacle to greater and better
things, ascending into the very house of God
above the heavens, as, says the Psalmist, " in the
voice of praise and thanksgiving, among such as


' [See Jer. Taylor, Holy Living, cap. ii. sec. 3, Works, vol. i.
p. 427, ed. Bohn, 1844. This is a token of antiquity.]
^ 1 Cor. vii. 29.

3 In Hebrew, Succoih. Num. xxxiii. 5.
* Heb. iv. 14.


keep holy day." 5 I, O Arete, my mistress, offer
as a gift to thee this robe, adorned according to
my ability.

EuBOULios. I am much moved, O Gregorion,
considering within myself in how great anxiety
of mind Domnina must be from the character of
the discourses, perplexed in heart as she is, and
with good cause, fearing lest she should be at a
loss for words, and should speak more feebly
than the rest of the virgins, since they have
spoken on the subject with such ability and
variety. If, therefore, she was evidently moved,
come and complete this too ; for I wonder if she
had anything to say, being the last speaker.

Gregorion. Theopatra told me, Euboulios,
that she was greatly moved, but she was not
perplexed from want of words. After, therefore,
Tusiane had ceased, Arete looked at her and said,
Come, my daughter, do thou also deliver a dis-
course, that our banquet may be quite complete.
At this Domnina, blushing, and after a long delay,
scarcely looking up, rose to pray, and turning
round, invoked Wisdom to be her present helper.
And when she had prayed, Theopatra said that
suddenly courage came to her, and a certain
divine confidence possessed her, and she said : —


DISCOURSE X. — DOMNINA.

CHAP. I. CHASTITY ALONE AIDS AND EFFECTS

THE MOST PRAISEWORTHY GOVERNMENT OF THE
SOUL.

O Arete, I also, omitting the long preludes
of exordiums, will endeavour according to my
ability to enter upon the subject, lest, by delay-
ing upon those matters which are outside the
subject in hand, I should speak of them at
greater length than their importance would war-
rant. For I account it a very great part of
prudence not to make long speeches, which
merely charm the ears, before coming to the
main question, but to begin forthwith at the
point in debate. So I will begin from thence,
for it is time.

Nothing can so much profit a man, O fair
virgins, with respect to moral excellence, as
chastity ; for chastity alone accomplishes and
brings it about that the soul should be governed
in the noblest and best way, and should be set
free, pure from the stains and pollutions of the
world. For which reason, when Christ taught
us to cultivate it, and showed its unsurpassable
beauty, the kingdom of the Evil One was de-
stroyed, who aforetime led captive and enslaved
the whole race of men, so that none of the more
ancient people pleased the Lord, but all were
overcome by errors, since the law was not of
itself sufficient to free the human race from


5 Ps. xlii. 4.


548


THE BANQUET OF THE TEN VIRGINS.


corruption, until virginity, succeeding the law,
governed men by the precepts of Christ. Nor
truly had the first men so often run headlong
into combats and slaughter, into lust and idola-
try, if the righteousness that is by the law had
been to them sufficient for salvation. Now truly
they were then confused by great and frequent
calamities ; but from the time when Christ was
incarnate, and armed and adorned His flesh with
virginity, the savage tyrant who was master of
incontinence was taken away, and peace and
faith have dominion, men no longer turning so
much as before to idolatry.

CHAP. II. THE ALLEGORY OF THE TREES DE-
MANDING A KING, IN THE BOOK OF JUDGES,'
EXPLAINED.

But lest I should appear to some to be sophis-
tical, and to conjecture these things from mere
probabilities, and to babble, I will bring forward
to you, O virgins, from the Old Testament, writ-
ten prophecy from the Book of Judges, to show
that I speak the truth, where the future reign of
chastity was already clearly foretold. For we
read : " The trees went forth on a time to anoint
a king over them ; and they said unto the olive-
tree. Reign thou over us. But the olive-tree
said unto them, Should I leave my fatness, where-
with by me they honour God and man, and go
to be promoted over the trees ? And the trees
said to the fig-tree, Come thou, and reign over
us. But the fig-tree said unto them. Should I
forsake my sweetness, and my good fruit, and
go to be promoted over the trees ? Then said
the trees unto the vine, Come thou, and reign
over us. And the vine said unto them, Sliould
I leave my wine, which cheereth God and man,
and go to be promoted over the trees? Then
said all the trees unto the bramble, Come thou,
and reign over us. And the bramble said unto
the trees. If in truth ye anoint me king over you,
then come and put your trust in my shadow ;
and if not, let fire come out of the bramble, and
devour the cedars of Lebanon."

Now, that these things are not said of trees
growing out of the earth, is clear. For inani-
mate trees cannot be assembled in council to
choose a king, inasmuch as they are firmly fixed
by deep roots to the earth. But altogether are
these things narrated concerning souls which,
before the incarnation of Christ, too deeply lux-
uriating in transgressions, approach to God as
suppliants, and ask His mercy, and that they
may be governed by His pity and compassion,
which Scripture expresses under the figure of
the olive, because oil is of great advantage to
our bodies, and takes away our fatigues and
ailments, and affords light. For all lamp-light


' Judg. ix. S-15.


increases when nourished by oil. So also the
mercies of God entirely dissolve death, and assist
the human race, and nourish the light of the
heart. ^ And consider whether the laws, from
the first created man until Christ in succession,
were not set forth in these words by the Scrip-
ture by figments, in opposition to which the
devil has deceived the human race. And it has
likened the fig-tree to the command given to
man in paradise, because, when he was deceived,
he covered his nakedness with the leaves of a
fig-tree ; ^ and the vine to the precept given to
Noah at the time of the deluge, because, when
overpowered by wine, he was mocked. ■» The
olive signifies the law given to Moses in the
desert, because the prophetic grace, the holy
oil, had failed from their inheritance when they
broke the law. Lastly, the bramble not inaptly
refers to the law which was given to the apostles
for the salvation of the world ; because by their
instruction we have been taught virginity, of
which alone the devil has not been able to make
a deceptive image. For which cause, also, four
Gospels have been given, because God has four
times given the Gospel s to the human race, and
has instructed them by four laws, the times of
which are clearly known by the diversity of the
fruits. For the fig-tree, on account of its sweet-
ness and richness, represents the delights of
man, which he had in paradise before the fall.
Indeed, not rarely, as we shall afterwards show,
the Holy Spirit'' takes the fruit of the fig-tree
as an emblem of goodness. But the vine, on
account of the gladness produced by wine, and
the joy of those who were saved from wrath and
from the deluge, signifies the change produced
from fear and anxiety into joy.^ Moreover, the
olive, on account of the oil which it produces,
indicates the compassion of God, who again,
after the deluge, bore patiently when men turned
aside to ungodliness, so that He gave them the
law and manifested Himself to some, and nour-
ished by oil the light of virtue, now almost ex-
tinguished.

CHAP. III. THE BRAMBLE AND THE AGNOS THE

SYMBOL OF CHASTITY ; THE FOUR GOSPELS,
THAT IS, TEACHINGS OR LAWS, INSTRUCTING
TO SALVATION.

Now the bramble commends chastity, for the
bramble and the agnos is the same tree : by
some it is called bramble, by others agnos.^


2 For this use of heart, cf. 2 Cor. iv. 6 — 1r. [See Coleridge on
Leighton, Old English Divines, vol. ii. p. 137]
•* Gen. iii. 7.

* Gen. ix. 22.
5 Good news.

* Jer. viii. 13.
^ Joel ii. 22.

8 Jahn's reading is here followed. [This is a puzzle as well as a
parable; the Seventy give oa/ni'o?, which is not = a7»'0!. It spoils
the force of Jotham's caustic satire to adopt this conception of our
author.]


THE BANQUET OF THE TEN VIRGINS.


349


Perhaps it is because the plant is akin to virgin-
ity that it is called bramble and agnos; bramble,
because of its strength and firmness against pleas-
ures ; agnos, because it always continues chaste.
Hence the Scripture relates that Elijah, fleeing
from the face of the woman Jezebel,' at first
came under a bramble, and there, having been
heard, received strength and took food ; signify-
ing that to him who flies from the incitements
of lust, and from a woman — that is, from pleas-
ure— the tree of chastity is a refuge and a shade,
ruling men from the coming of Christ, the chief
of virgins. For when the first laws, which were
published in the times of Adam and Noah and
Moses, were unable to give salvation to man, the
evangelical law alone has saved all.

And this is the cause why the fig-tree may be
said not to have obtained the kingdom over
trees, which, in a spiritual sense, mean men ;
and the fig-tree the command, because man de-
sired, even after the fall, again to be subject to
the dominion of virtue, and not to be deprived
of the immortality of the paradise of pleasure.
But, having transgressed, he was rejected and
cast far away, as one who could no longer be
governed by immortality, nor was capable of
receiving it. And the first message to him after
the transgression was preached by Noah,^ to
which, if he had applied his mind, he might
have been saved from sin ; for in it he promised
both happiness and rest from evils, if he gave
heed to it with all his might, just as the vine
promises to yield wine to those who cultivate it
with care and labour. But neither did this law
rule mankind, for men did not obey it, although
zealously preached by Noah. But, after they
began to be surrounded and drowning by the
waters, they began to repent, and to promise
that they would obey the commandments.
Wherefore with scorn they are rejected as sub-
jects ; that is, they are contemptuously told that
they cannot be helped by the law ; the Spirit
answering them back and reproaching them be-
cause they had deserted those men whom God
had commanded to help them, and to save them,
and make them glad ; such as Noah and those
with him. " Even to you, O rebellious," said
he, " I come, to bring help to you who are des-
titute of prudence, and who differ in nothing
from dry trees, and who formerly did not believe
me when I preached that you ought to flee from
present things."

CHAP. IV. — THE LAW USELESS FOR SALVATION;
THE LAST LAW OF CHASTIT\' UNDER THE FIGURE
OF THE BRAMBLE.

And so those men, having been thus rejected
from the divine care, and the human race having

' I Kings xix. 4.
* Gen. V. 29.


again given themselves up to error, again God
sent forth, by Moses, a law to rule them and re-
call them to righteousness. But these, thinking
fit to bid a long farewell to this law, turned to
idolatry. Hence God gave them up to mutual
slaugliters, to exiles, and captivities, the law it-
self confessing, as it were, that it could not save
them. Therefore, worn out with flls and af-
flicted, they again promised that they would obey
the commandments ; until God, pitying man the
fourth time, sent chastity to rule o\'er them, which
Scripture consequently called the bramble. And
she consuming pleasures threatens besides, that
unless all undoubtingly obey her, and truly come
to her, she will destroy all with fire, since there
will be hereafter no other law or doctrine but
judgment and fire. For this reason, man hence-
forth began to do righteousness, and firmly to
believe in God, and to separate himself from the
devil. Thus chastity was sent dowm, as being
most useful and helpful to men. For of her
alone was the devil unable to forge an imitation
to lead men astray, as is the case with the other
precepts.

CHAP. v. — THE MALIGNITY OF THE DEVIL AS AN
IMITATOR IN ALL THINGS ; TWO KINDS OF FIG-
TREES AND VINES.

The fig-tree, as I said, from the sweetness and
excellence of its fruit, being taken as a type of
the delights of paradise, the devil, having be-
guiled the man by its imitations, led him captive,
persuading him to conceal the nakedness of his
body by fig-leaves ; that is, by their friction he
excited him to sexual pleasure. Again, those
that had been saved from the deluge, he intoxi-
cated with a drink which was an imitation of the
vine of spiritual joy ; and again he mocked them,
having stripped them of virtue. And what I say
will hereafter be more clear.

The enemy, by his power, always imitates ^ the
forms of virtue and righteousness, not for the
purpose of truly promoting its exercise, but for
deception and hypocrisy. For in order that those
w^ho fly from death he may entice to death, he
is outwardly dyed with the colours of immortality.
And hence he wishes to seem a fig-tree or vine,
and to produce sweetness and joy, and is " trans-
formed into an angel of light," ■* ensnaring many
by the appearance of piety.

For we find in the Sacred Writings that there
are two kinds of fig-trees and vines, " the good
figs, very good ; and the evil, very evil ; " 5 " wine
that maketh glad the heart of man," ^ and wine
which is the poison of dragons, and the incurable


3 \_Diabohis simia Dei, an idea very common to the Fathers.
He is the malignant caricature of the Most Hi^h, exulting in the de-
formity which he gives to his copies. Exod. vii. ii.]

* 2 Cor. xi. 14.


Jer. XXIV. 3.
Ps. civ


civ. 15.


i5o


THE BANQUET OF THE TEN VIRGINS.


venom of asps.' But from the time when chas-
tity began to rule over men, the fraud was de-
tected and overcome, Christ, the chief of virgins,
overturning it. So both the true fig-tree and the
true vine yield fruit after that the power of chas-
tity has laid hold upon all men, as Joel the
prophet preaches, saying : " Fear not, O land ;
be glad and rejoice, for the Lord will do great
things. Be not afraid, ye beasts of the field ; for
the pastures of the wilderness do spring, for the
tree beareth her fruit, the fig-tree and the vine
do yield their strength. Be glad then, ye chil-
dren of Zion, and rejoice in the Lord your God,
for He hath given you food unto righteousness ; " ^
calling the former laws the vine and the fig, trees
bearing fruit unto righteousness for the children
of the spiritual Zion, which bore fruit after the
incarnation of the Word, when chastity ruled over
us, when formerly, on account of sin and much
error, they had checked and destroyed their buds.
For the true vine and the true fig-tree were not
able to yield such nourishment to us as would be
profitable for life, whilst as yet the false fig-tree,
variously adorned for the purpose of fraud, flour-
ished. But when the Lord dried up the false
branches, the imitations of the true branches,
uttering the sentence against the bitter fig-tree,
" Let no fruit grow on thee henceforward for
ever," ^ then those which were truly fruit-bear-
ing trees flourished and yielded food unto right-
eousness.

The vine, and that not in a few places, refers
to the Lord Himself,^ and the fig-tree to the
Holy Spirit, as the Lord " maketh glad the hearts
of men," and the Spirit healeth them. And
therefore Hezekiah is commanded 5 first to make
a plaster with a lump of figs — that is, the fruit
of the Spirit — that he may be healed — that is,
according to the apostle — by love ; for he says,
" The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-
suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness,
temperance ; " ^ which, on account of their great
pleasantness, the prophet calls figs. Micah also
says, " They shall sit every man under his vine
and under his fig-tree ; and none shall make
them afraid." ^ Now it is certain that those who
have taken refuge and rested under the Spirit,
and under the shadow of the Word, shall not be
alarmed, nor frightened by him who troubles the
hearts of men.

CHAP. VI. — THE MYSTERY OF THE VISION OF
ZECHARIAH.

Moreover, Zechariah shows that the olive
shadows forth the law of Moses, speaking thus :


' Deut. xxxii. 33.

2 Joel ii. 21-23. The last words of the quotation are from the
LXX. version. — Tr.
■3 Matt. xxi. 19.
* John XV. I.

5 2 Kings XX. 7; Isa. xxxviii. 21.
'' Gal. V. 22, 23,
1 Micah iv. 4.


" And the angel that talked with me came again,
and waked me, as a man that is wakened out of
his sleep, and said unto me, What seest thou?
And I said, I have looked, and behold a candle-
stick all of gold, with a bowl upon the top of it.
. . . And two olive-trees by it, one upon the
right side of the bowl, and the other upon the
left side thereof." * And after a few words,
the prophet, asking what are the olives on the
right and left of the candlestick, and what the
two olive-boughs in the hands of the two pipes,
the angel an.swered and said : " These are the
two sons of fruitfulness 9 which stand by the Lord
of the whole earth," signifying the two first-born
virtues that are waiting upon God, which, in His
dwelling, supply around the wick, through the
boughs, the spiritual oil of God, that man may
have the light of divine knowledge. But the two
boughs of the two olives are the law and the
prophets, around, as it were, the lot '° of the in-
heritance, of which Christ and the Holy Spirit
are the authors, we ourselves meanwhile not
being able to take the whole fruit and the great-
ness of these plants, before chastity began to rule
the world, but only their boughs — to wit, the
law and the prophets — did we formerly culti-
vate, and those moderately, often letting them
slip. For who was ever able to receive Christ
or the Spirit, unless he first purified himself?
For the exercise which prepares the soul from
childhood for desirable and delectable glory, and
carries this grace safely thither with ease, and
from small toils raises up mighty hopes, is chas-
tity, which gives immortality to our bodies ;
which it becomes all men willingly to prefer in
honour and to praise above all things ; some,
that by its means they may be betrothed to the
Word, practising virginity ; and others, that by
it they may be freed from the curse, " Dust thou
art, and unto dust shalt thou return." "

This, O Arete, is the discourse on virginity
which you required of me, accomplished accord-
ing to my ability ; which I pray, O mistress, al-
though it is mediocre and short, that thou wilt
receive with kindness from me who was chosen
to speak last.

DISCOURSE XI. — ARETE.

CHAP. I. THE TRUE AND CHASTE VIRGINS FEW;

CHASTITY A CONTEST ; THEKLA CHIEF OF VIR-
GINS.

I do accept it, Theopatra related that Arete
said, and approve of it all. For it is an excellent
thing, even although you had not spoken so
clearly, to take up and go through with earnest-
ness those things which have been said, not to


8 Zech. iv. 1-3.

9 E. V. "Anointed ones," ver. 14.

'° <rxoiVi(r/ia: same word as that translated " wick." — Tr.
'' Gen. iii. 19.


THE BANQUET OF THE TEN VIRGINS.


351


prepare a sweet entertainment for those who
listen, but for correction, recollection, and absti-
nence. For whoever teaches that chastity is to
be preferred and embraced first of all among my
pursuits, rightly advises ; which many think that
they honour and cultivate, but which few, so to
speak, really honour. For it is not one who has
studied to restrain his flesh from the pleasure of
carnal delight that cultivates chastity, if he do
not keep in check the rest of the desires ; but
rather he dishonours it, and that in no small
degree, by base lusts, exchanging pleasures for
pleasures. Nor if he have strongly resisted the
desires of the senses, but is lifted up with vain-
glory, and from this cause is able to repress the
heats of burning lust, and reckon them all as
nothing, can he be thought to honour chastity ;
for he dishonours it in that he is lifted up with
pride, cleansing the outside of the cup and plat-
ter, that is, the flesh and the body, but injuring
the heart by conceit and ambition. Nor when
any one is conceited of riches is he desirous of
honouring chastity ; he dishonours it more than
all, preferring a little gain to that to which noth-
ing is comparable of those things that are in this
life esteemed. For all riches and gold " in re-
spect of it are as a little sand." ' And neither
does he who loves himself above measure, and
eagerly considers that which is expedient for
himself alone, regardless of the necessities of his
neighbour, honour chastity, but he also dishon-
ours it. For he who has repelled from himself
charity, mercy, and humanity, is much inferior
to those who honourably exercise chastity. Nor
is it right, on the one hand, by the use of chas-
tity to keep virginity, and, on the other hand, to
pollute the soul by evil deeds and lust ; nor here
to profess purity and continence, and there to
pollute it by indulgence in vices. Nor, again,
here to declare that the things of this world bring
no care to himself; there to be eager in procur-
ing them, and in concern about them. But all
the members are to be preserved intact and free
from corruption ; not only those which are sex-
ual, but those members also which minister to
the service of lusts. For it would be ridiculous
to preserve the organs of generation pure, but
not the tongue ; or to preserve the tongue, but
neither the eyesight, the ears, nor the hands ; or
lasdy, to preserve these pure, but not the mind,
defiling it with pride and anger.

It is altogether necessary for him who has re-
solved that he will not err from the practice of
chastity, to keep all his members and senses
clean and under restraint, as is customary with
the planks of ships, whose fastenings the ship-
masters diligently join together, lest by any
means the way and access may lie open for sin

' Wisd. vii. 9.


to pour itself into the mind. For great pursuits
are liable to great falls, and evil is more opposed
to that which is really good than to that which
is not good. For many who thought that to
repress vehement lascivious desires constituted
chastity, neglecting other duties connected with
it, failed also in this, and have brought blame ^
upon those endeavouring after it by the right
way, as you have proved who are a model in
everything, leading a virgin life in deed and
word. And now what that is which becomes a
virgin state has been described.

And you all in my hearing having sufficiently
contended in speaking, I pronounce victors and
crown ; but Thekla with a larger and thicker
chaplet, as the chief of you, and as having shone
with greater lustre than the rest.

CHAP. II. THEKLA SINGING DECOROUSLY A H\'IMN,

THE REST OF THE VIRGINS SING WITH HER;
JOHN THE BAPTIST A MARTYR TO CHASTITY ;
THE CHURCH THE SPOUSE OF GOD, PURE AND
VIRGIN.

Theopatra said that Arete having said these
things, commanded them all to rise, and, stand-
ing under the Agnos, to send up to the Lord in
a becoming manner a hymn of thanksgiving ; and
that Thekla should begin and should lead the
rest. And when they had stood up, she said that
Thekla, standing in the midst of the virgins on
the right of Arete, decorously sang ; but the rest,
standing together in a circle after the manner
of a chorus, responded to her : " I keep myself
pure for Thee, O Bridegroom, and holding a
lighted torch I go to meet Thee." ^

Thekla. i. From above, O virgins, the sound
of a noise that wakes the dead has come, bidding
us all to meet the Bridegroom in white robes, and
with torches towards the east. Arise, before the
King enters within the gates.

Chorus. I keep myself pure for Thee, O
Bridegroom, and holding a lighted torch I
go to meet Thee.
Thekl.\. 2. Fleeing from the sorrowful hap-
piness of mortals, and having despised the luxu-
riant delights of life and its love, I desire to be
protected under Thy life-giving arms, and to
behold Thy beauty for ever, O blessed One.
Chorus. I keep myself pure for Thee, O
Bridegroom, and holding a lighted torch I
go to meet Thee.
Thekl.4. 3. Leaving marriage and the beds
of mortals and my golden home for Thee, O
King, I have come in undefiled robes, in order


* [Compare our Lord's wisdom and mercy, Matt. xix. 11.]
3 The text of Jahn is here followed. — Tr. [I have been obliged
to arrange this hymn (so as to bring out the refrain as sung by the
chorus of virgins) somewhat differently from the form in the Edin-
burgh edition. I invite a comparison.]


OD-


THE BANQUET OF THE TEN VIRGINS.


that I might enter with Thee within Thy happy
bridal chamber.

Chorus. I keep myself pure for Thee, O

Bridegroom, and holding a lighted torch I

go to meet Thee.

Thekla. 4. Having escaped, O blessed One,

from the innumerable enchanting wiles of the

serpent, and, moreover, from the flame of fire,

and from the mortal-destroying assaults of wild

beasts, I await Thee from heaven.

Chorus. I keep myself pure for Thee, O

Bridegroom, and holding a lighted torch 1

go to meet Thee.

Thekla. 5. I forget my own country, O

Lord, through desire of Thy grace.' I forget,

also, the company of virgins, my fellows, the

desire even of mother and of kindred, for Thou,

O Christ, art all things to me.

Chorus. I keep myself pure for Thee, O
Bridegroom, and holding a lighted torch I
go to meet Thee.
Thekla. 6. Giver of life art Thou, O Christ.
Hail, light that never sets, receive this praise.
The company of virgins call upon Thee, Perfect
Flower, Love, Joy, Prudence, Wisdom, Word.
Chorus. I keep myself pure for Thee, O
Bridegroom, and holding a lighted torch I
go to meet Thee.
Thekla. 7. With open gates, O beauteously
adorned Queen, admit us within thy chambers.
O spotless, gloriously triumphant Bride, breath-
ing beauty, we stand by Christ, robed as He
is, celebrating thy happy nuptials, O youthful
maiden.

Chorus. I keep myself pure for Thee, O
Bridegroom, and holding a lighted torch I
go to meet Thee.
Thekla. 8. The virgins standing without the
chamber,^ with bitter tears and deep moans, wail
and mournfully lament that their lamps are gone
out, having failed to enter in due time the cham-
ber of joy.

Chorus. I keep myself pure for Thee, O
Bridegroom, and holding a lighted torch I
go to meet Thee.
Thekla. 9. For turning from the sacred way
of life, unhappy ones, they have neglected to
prepare sufficiency of oil for the path of life ;
bearing lamps whose bright light is dead, they
groan from the inward recesses of their mind.
Chorus. I keep myself pure for Thee, O
Bridegroom, and holding a lighted torch I
go to meet Thee.
Thekla. 10. Here are cups full of sweet
nectar ; let us drink, O virgins, for it is celestial
drink, which the Bridegroom hath placed for
those duly called to the wedding.

Chorus. I keep myself pure for Thee, O

1 Ps xlv. 10.

2 Matt. XXV. II.


Bridegroom, and holding a lighted torch I
go to meet Thee.
Thekla. ii. Abel, clearly prefiguring Thy
death,3 O blessed One, with flowing blood, and
eyes lifted up to heaven, said. Cruelly slain by a
brother's hand, O Word, I pray Thee to receive me.
Chorus. I keep myself pure for Thee, O
Bridegroom, and holding a lighted torch I
go to meet Thee.
Thekla. 12. Thy valiant son Joseph,'* O
Word, won the greatest prize of virginity, when
a woman heated with desire forcibly drew him
to an unlawful bed- but he giving no heed to
her fled stripped, and crying aloud : —

Chorus. I keep myself pure for Thee, O
Bridegroom, and holding a lighted torch I
go to meet Thee.
Thekla. 13. Jephthah offered his fresh slaugh-
tered virgin daughter a sacrifice to God, like a
lamb ; and she, nobly fulfilling the type of Thy
body, O blessed One, bravely cried : —

Chorus. I keep myself pure for Thee, O
Bridegroom, and holding a lighted torch I
go to meet Thee.
Thekla. 14. Daring Judith, s by clever wiles
having cut off the head of the leader of the for-
eign hosts, whom previously she had allured by
her beautiful form, without polluting the limbs
of her body, with a victor's shout said : —
Chorus. I keep myself pure for Thee, O
Bridegroom, and holding a lighted torch I
go to meet Thee.
Thekla. 15. Seeing the great beauty of Su-
sanna, the two Judges, maddened with desire,
said, O dear lady, we have come desiring secret
intercourse with thee ; but she with tremulous
cries said : —

Chorus. I keep myself pure for Thee, O

Bridegroom, and holding a lighted torch I

go to meet Thee.

Thekla. 16. It is far better for me to die

than to betray my nuptials to you, O mad for

women, and so to suffer the eternal justice of

God in fiery vengeance. Save me now, O Christ,

from these evils.

Chorus. I keep myself pure for Thee, O
Bridegroom, and holding a lighted torch I
go to meet Thee.
Thekla. 17. Thy Precursor, washing multi-
tudes of men in flowing lustral water, unjustly
by a wicked man, on account of his chastity,
was led to slaughter ; but as he stained the dust
with his life-blood, he cried to Thee, O blessed
One: —

Chorus. I keep myself pure for Thee, O
Bridegroom, and holding a lighted torch I
go to meet Thee.


3 Gen. iv. 10.
* Gen. xxxix. 12.
s Jud. viii.


THE BANQUET OF THE TEN VIRGINS.


Thekla. 1 8. The parent of Thy Hfe, that]
unspotted Grace ' and undefiled Virgin, bearing
in her womb without the ministry of man, by an
immaculate conception,- and who thus became
suspected of having betrayed the marriage-bed,
she, O blessed One, when pregnant, thus
spoke : —

Chorus. I keep myself pure for Thee, O

Bridegroom, and holding a lighted torch I

go to meet Thee.

Thekla. 19. Wishing to see Thy nuptial day,

O blessed One, as many angels as Thou, O King,

calledst from above, bearing the best gifts to

Thee, came in unsullied robes : —

Chorus. I keep myself pure for Thee, O

Bridegroom, and holding a lighted torch I

go to meet Thee.

Thekla. 20. In hymns, O blessed spouse of

God, we attendants of the Bride honour Thee,

O undefiled virgin Church of snow-white form,

dark haired, chaste, spotless, beloved.

Chorus. I keep myself pure for Thee, O
Bridegroom, and holding a lighted torch I
go to meet Thee.
Thekla. 21. Corruption has fled, and the
tearful pains of diseases ; death has been taken
away, all folly has perished, consuming mental
grief is no more ; for again the grace of the
God-Christ has suddenly shone upon mortals.
Chorus. I keep myself pure for Thee, O
Bridegroom, and holding a lighted torch I
go to meet Thee.
Thekla. 22. Paradise is no longer bereft of
mortals, for by divine decree he no longer dwells
there as formerly, thrust out from thence when
he was free from corruption, and from fear by
the various wiles of the serpents, O blessed
One.

Chorus. I keep myself pure for Thee, O

Bridegroom, and holding a lighted torch I

go to meet Thee.

Thekla. 23. Singing the new song, now the

company of virgins attends thee towards the

heavens, O Queen, all manifestly crowned with

white lilies, and bearing in their hands bright

lights.

Chorus. I keep myself pure for Thee, O

Bridegroom, and holding a lighted torch I

go to meet Thee.

Thekla. 24. O blessed .One, who inhabited

the undefiled seats of heaven without beginning,

who governed all things by everlasting power, O

Father, with Thy Son, we are here, receive us

also within the gates of life.

Chorus. I keep myself pure for Thee, O
Bridegroom, and holding a lighted torch I
go to meet Thee.


chap. in. — which are the better, the con-
tinent, OR those who delight in tranquil-
lity OF LIFE ? contests THE PERIL OF CHASTITY :
THE FELICITY OF TRANQUILLITY ; PURIFIED AND
TRANQUIL MINDS GODS : THEY WHO SHALL SEE
GOD ; VIRTUE DISCIPLINED BY TEMPTATIONS.

EuBOULios. Deservedly, O Gregorion, has
Thekla borne off the chief prize.

Gregorion. Deservedly indeed.

EuBOULios. But what about the stranger Tcl-
misiake ? ^ Tell me, was she not listening from
without? I wonder if she could keep silence
on hearing of this banquet, and would not forth-
with, as a bird flies to its food, listen to the things
which were spoken.

Gregorion. The report is that she was pres-
ent with Methodios * when he inquired respect-
ing these things of Arete. But it is a good as
well as a happy thing to have such a mistress
and guide as Arete, that is virtue.

EuBOULios. But, Gregorion, which shall we
say are the better, those who without lust govern
concupiscence, or those who under the assaults
of concupiscence continue pure?

Gregorion. For my part, I think those who
are free from lust, for they have their mind un-
defiled, and are altogether uncorrupted, sinning
in no respect.

EuBOULios. Well, I swear by chastity, and
wisely, O Gregorion. But lest in any wise I hin-
der you, if I gainsay your words, it is that I ma)'
the better learn, and that no one hereafter may
refute me.

Gregorion. Gainsay me as you will, you
have my permission. For, Euboulios. I think
that, I know sufficient to teach you that he who
is not concupiscent is better than he who is. If
I cannot, then there is no one who can convince
you.

Euboulios. Bless me ! I am glad that you
answer me so magnanimously, and show how
wealthy you are as regards wisdom.

Gregorion. A mere chatterer, so you seem
to be, O Euboulios.

Euboulios. Why so ?

Gregorion. Because you ask rather for the
sake of amusement than of truth.

Euboulios. Speak fair, I pray you, my good
friend ; for I greatly admire your wisdom and
renown. I say this because, with reference to
the things that many wise men often dispute
among themselves, you say that you not only
understand them, but also vaunt that }'ou can
teach another.

Gregorion. Now tell me truly whether it is
a difficulty with you to receive the opinion, that
they who are not concupiscent excel those who


Matt. i. 18.
[The only one.


See p. 355, Elucidation II., I'nyra.]


3 In Jahn, Telmesiake. — Tr. [Comp. p. 356, n. 2, ififraj]
* [Contrast the shameful close of Plato's Symposium.'\


354


THE BANQUET OF THE TEN VHIGINS.


are concupiscent, and yet restrain themselves?
or are you joking?

EuBOULios. How so, when I tell you that I
do not know? i>ut, come, tell me, O wisest
lady, in what do the non-concupiscent and chaste
excel the concupiscent who live chastely?

Gregorion. Because, in the first place, they
have the soul itself pure, and the Holy Spirit
always dwells in it, seeing that it is not dis-
tracted and disturbed by fancies and unre-
strained thoughts, so as to pollute the mind.
But they are in every way inaccessible to lust,
both as to their flesh and to their heart, enjoy-
ing tranquillity from passions. But they who
are allured from without, through the sense of
sight, with fancies, and receiving lust flowing
like a stream into the heart, are often not less
polluted, even when they think that they con-
tend and fight against pleasures, being van-
quished in their mind.

EuBOULios. Shall we then say that they who
serenely live and are not disturbed by lusts are
pure ?

Gregorion. Certainly. For these ' are they
whom God makes gods in the beatitudes ; they
who believe in Him without doubt. And He
says that they shall look upon God with confi-
dence, because they bring in nothing that darkens
or confuses the eye of the soul for the behold-
ing of God ; but all desire of things secular
being eliminated, they not only, as I said, pre-
serve the flesh pure from carnal connection, but
even the heart, in which, especially, as in a
temple, the Holy Spirit rests and dwells, is open
to no unclean thoughts.

EuBOULios. Stay now ; for I think that from
hence we shall the better go on to the discovery
of what things are truly the best ; and, tell me,
do you call anyone a good pilot ?

Gregorion. I certainly do.

EuBOULios. Whether is it he that saves his
vessel in great and perplexing storms, or is it he
who does so in a breathless calm ?

Gregorion. He that does so in a great and
perplexing storm.

EuBOULios. Shall we not then say that the
soul, which is deluged with the surging waves of
the passions, and yet does not, on that account,
weary or grow faint, but direct her vessel — that
is, the flesh — nobly into the port of chastity, is
better and more estimable than he that navigates
in calm weather?

Gregorion. We will say so.

EuBOULios. For to be prepared against the
entrance of the gales of the Evil Spirit, and not
to be cast away or overcome, but to refer all to
Christ, and strongly to contend against pleasures,
brings greater praise than he wins who lives a
virgin life calmly and with ease.


• Matt. V. 8.


Gregorion. It appears so.

l']uBOULios. And what saith the Lord ? Does
He not seem to show that he who retains conti-
nence, though concupiscent, excels him who,
having no concupiscence, leads a virgin life ?

Gregorion. Where does He say so ?

EuBOULios. Where, comparing a wise man
to a house well founded. He declares him im-
moveable because he cannot be overthrown by
rains, and floods, and winds ; likening, as it
would seem, these storms to lusts, but the im-
moveable and unshaken firmness of the soul in
chastity to the rock.

Gregorion. You appear to speak what is
true.

EuBOULios. And what say you of the physi-
cian? Do you not call him the best who has
been proved in great diseases, and has healed
many patients?

Gregorion. I do.

EuBOULios. But the one who has never at any
time practised, nor ever had the sick in his
hands, is he not still in all respects the inferior ?

Gregorion. Yes.

EuBOULios. Then we may certainly say that
a soul which is contained by a concupiscent
body, and which appeases with the medicaments
of temperance the disorders arising from the
heat of lusts, carries off the palm for healing,
over one to whose lot it has fallen to govern
aright a body which is free from lust.^

Gregorion. It must be allowed.

EuBOULios. And how is it in wrestling?
Whether is the better wrestler he who has many
and strong antagonists, and continually is con-
tending without being worsted, or he who has
no opponents?

Gregorion. Manifestly he who wrestles.

EuBOULios. And, in wrestling, is not the
athlete who contends the more experienced ?

Gregorion. It must be granted.

EuBOULios. Therefore it is clear that he whose
soul contends against the impulses of lust, and is
not borne down by it, but draws back and sets
himself in array against it, appears stronger than
he who does not lust.^

Gregorion. True.

EuBOULios. What then? Does it not appear
to you, Gregorion, that there is more courage in
being valiant against the assaults of base desires ?

Gregorion. Yes, indeed.

EuBOULios. Is not this courage the strength
of virtue?

Gregorion. Plainly so.

EuBOULios. Therefore, if endurance be the
strength of virtue, is not the soul, which is
troubled by lusts, and yet perseveres against
them, stronger than that which is not so troubled ?

2 [Recur to what is said of Origen and his epoch on p. 224, vol. iv.
of this series.]


I


ELUCIDATIONS.


355


Gregorion. Yes.

EuBOULios. And if stronger, then better?

Gregorion. Truly.

EuBOULios. Therefore the soul which is con-
cupiscent, and exercises self-control, as appears
from what has been said, is better than that which
is not concupiscent, and exercises self-control.'


Gregorion. You speak truly, and I shall de-
sire still more fully to discourse with you con-
cerning these things. If, therefore, it pleases
you, to-morrow I will come again to hear respect-
ing them. Now, however, as you see, it is time
to betake ourselves to the care of the outward


' [Here is our author's conclusive condemnation of Origen, whose work. Possibly the epoch of Anthony had revived such discussioHs
great mistake, I have supposed, gave occasion to this extraordinary when this was written.]


ELUCIDATIONS


I.


(We here behold only shadows, etc., p. 335.)

ScHLElERMACHER,' in commenting on Plato's Symposium, remarks : " Even natural birth (i.e.,
in Plato's system) was nothing but a reproduction of the same eternal form, and idea. . . . The
whole discussion displays the gradation, not only from that pleasure which arises from the contem-
plation of personal beauty through that which every larger object, whether single or manifold, may
occasion, to that immediate pleasure of which the source is in the Eternal Beauty," etc. Our
author ennobles such theorizing by mounting up to the great I AM.


II.

(Christ Himself is the one who is born, p. 337.)

Wordsworth, and many others of the learned, sustain our author's comment on this passage.*
So Aquinas, ad loc, Bede, and many others. Methodius is incorrectly represented as rejecting'^
the idea that " the woman " is the Blessed Virgin Mary, for no such idea existed for him to reject.
He rejects the idea that the man-child is Christ ; but that idea was connected with the supposition
that the woman was the Church of the Hebrews bringing forth the Messiah. Gregory the Great
regards the woman as the Christian Church. So Hippolytus : * "By the woman ... is meant
most manifestly the Church, endued with the Father's Word, whose brightness is above the sun,"
etc. Bossuet says candidly,5 " C'est I'Eghse, tout eclatante de la lumiere de J. C," etc.

Now, note the progress of corruption, one fable engendering another. The text of Gen. iii.
15, contrary to the Hebrew, the Seventy, the Syriac, and the Vulgate itself, in the best mss., is made
to read, " She shall bruise thy head," etc. The "woman," therefore, becomes the Mother of our
Lord, and the "great red dragon" (of verse 3), from which the woman "fled into the wilderness,"
is next represented as under her feet (where the moon appears in the sacred narrative) ; and then
the Immaculate Conception of her Holy Seed is transferred back to the mother of Mary, who is
indecently discussed, and affirmed to have been blest with an " Immaculate Conception " when, in
the ordinary process of nature, she was made the mother of the Virgin. So, then, the bull Inef
fabilis comes forth, eighteen hundred years after the event,^ with the announcement that what
thousands of saints and many bishops of Rome have denounced as a fable must be received by
all Christians on peril of eternal damnation.? The worst of it all is the fact, that, as the mystery of
the Incarnation of the Son of God has heretofore been the only " Immaculate Conception " known
to the faith of Christendom, thousanils now imagine that this is what was only so lately set forth,
and what we must therefore renounce as false.


' hitroduction to the Dialogues, etc., Dobson's translation, Cambridge, 1836.
- See his work On the Apocalypse, Lecture IX. p. 198, ed. Philadelphia, 1852.
^ Speaker's Com., ad loc.

' See The Eirenicon of Dr. Pusey, ed. New Vork, 1866.


*■ Vol. v. p. 217, this series.

5 Works, vol. i. p. 447, ed. Paris, 1845.

6 Dec. 8, 1854.


CONCERNING FREE-WILL.


Orthodoxus. The old man of Ithaca, ac-
cording to the legend of the Greeks, when he
wished to hear the song of the Sirens, on account
of the charm of their voluptuous voice, sailed to
Sicily in bonds, and stopped up the ears of his
companions ; not that he grudged them the hear-
ing, or desired to load himself with bonds, but
because the consequence of those singers' music
to those who heard it was death. For such, in
the opinion of the Greeks, are the charms of the
Sirens. Now I am not within hearing of any
such song as this ; nor have I any desire to hear
the Sirens who chant men's dirges, and whose
silence is more profitable to men than their voice ;
but I pray to enjoy the pleasure of a divine
voice, which, though it be often heard, I long to
hear again ; not that I am overcome with the
charm of a voluptuous voice, but I am being
taught divine mysteries, and expect as the result,
not death but eternal salvation. For the singers
are not the deadly Sirens of the Greeks, but a
divine choir of prophets, with whom there is no
need to stop the ears of one's companions, nor
to load one's-self with bonds, in fear of the.
penalty of hearing. For, in the one case, the
hearer, with the entrance of the voice, ceases to
live ; in the other, the more he hears, the better
life will he enjoy, being led onwards by a divine
Spirit. Let every one come, then, and liear the
divine song without any fear. There are not with
us the Sirens from the shore of Sicily, nor the
bonds of Ulysses, nor the wax poured melting
into men's ears ; but a loosening of all bonds,
and liberty to listen to every one that approach^.
For it is worthy of us to hear such a song as
this ; and to hear such singers as these, seems to
me to be a thing to be prayed for. But if one
wishes to hear the choir of the apostles as well,
he will find the same harmony of song. For the
others sang beforehand the divine plan in a mys-
tical manner ; but these sing an interpretation
of what has been mystically announced by the
former. Oh, concordant harmony, composed by
the Divine Spirit ! Oh, the comeliness of those
who sing of the mysteries of God ! Oh, that


' [This debate between Orthodoxus and a Valentinian reminds
us of the Octavius of Minucius Kehx, vol iv.]
^!;6


I also may join in these songs in my prayer. Let
us then also sing the like song, and raise the
hymn to the Holy Father, glorifying in the Spirit
Jesus, who is in His bosom.^

Shun n4)t, man, a spiritual hymn, nor be ill-
disposed to listen to it. Death belongs not to
it ; a story of salvation is our song. Already I
seem to taste better enjoyments, as I discourse
on such subjects as these ; and especially when
there is before me such a flowering meadow, that
is to say, our assembly of those who unite in
singing and hearing the divine mysteries. Where-
fore I dare to ask you to listen to me with ears
free from all envy, without imitating the jealousy
of Cain, 3 or persecuting your brother, like P^sait,-*
or approving the brethren of Joseph,' because
they hated their brother on account of his words ;
but differing far from all these, insomuch that
each of you is used to speak the mind of his
neighbour. And, on this account, there is no
evil jealousy among you, as ye have undertaken
to supply your brother's deficiencies. O noble
audience, and venerable company, and spiritual
food ! That I may ever have a right to share in
such pleasures, be this my prayer !

Valentinian. As I was walking yesterday
evening, my friend, along the shore of the sea,
and was gazing on it somewhat intently, I saw an
extraordinary instance of divine power, and a
work of art produced by wise science, if at least
such a thing may be called a work of art. For
as that verse of Homer ^ says, —

" As when two adverse winds blowing from Thrace,
Boreas and Zephyrus, the fishy deep
Vex sudden, all around, the sable flood
High curled, flings forth the salt weed on the shore ; " —

So it seemed to me to have happened yesterday.
For I saw waves very like mountain-tops, and, so
to speak, reaching up to heaven itself. Whence
I expected nothing else but that the whole land
would be deluged, and I began to form in my
mind a place of escape, and a Noah's ark. But
it was not as I thought ; for, just as the sea rose

2 John i. i8.

3 Gen. iv. 5.

* Gen. xxvii. 41.
5 Gen. XXX vii. 4
fi Iliad, ix. 4, H. (Cowper's Tr.).


CONCERNING FREE-WILL.


357


to a crest, it broke up again into itself, without
overstepping its own limits, having, so to speak,
a feeling of awe for a divine decree.' And as
oftentimes a servant, compelled by his master to
do something against his will, obeys the command
through fear, while he dares not say a word of
what he suffers in his unwillingness to do it, but,
full of rage, mutters to himself, — somewhat so
it appeared to me that the sea, as if enraged and
confining its awe within itself, kept itself under,
as not willing to let its Master perceive its anger.

On these occurrences I began to gaze in si-
lence, and wished to measure in my mind the
heaven and its sphere. I began to inquire
whence it rises and where it sets ; also what sort
of motion it had — whether a progressive one,
that is to say, one from place to place, or a re-
volving one ; and, besides, how its movement is
continued. And, of a truth, it seemed worth
while to inquire also about the sun, — what is the
manner of his being set in the heaven ; also what
is the orbit he traverses ; also whither it is that,
after a short time, he retires ; and why it is that
even he does not go out of his proper course :
but he, too, as one may say, is observing a com-
mandment of a higher power, and appears with
us just when he is allowed to do so, and departs
as if he were called away.

So, as I was investigating these things, I saw
that the sunshine was departing, and the daylight
failing, and that immediately darkness came on ;
and the sun was succeeded by the moon, who, at
her first rising, was not of full size, but after ad-
vancing in her course presented a larger appear-
ance. And I did not cease inquiring about her
also, but examined the cause of her waning and
waxing, and why it is that she, too, observes the
revolution of days ; and it seemed to me from
all this that there is a divine government and
power controlling the whole, which we may justly
call God.

And thereupon I began to praise the Creator,
as I saw the earth fast fixed, and living creatures
in such variety, and the blossoms of plants with
their many hues. But my mind did not rest upon
these things alone ; but thereupon I began to
inquire whence they have their origin — whether
from some source eternally co-existent with God,
or from Himself alone, none co-existing with
Him ; for that He has made nothing out of that
which has no existence appeared to me the right
view to take, unless my reason were altogether
untrustworthy. For it is the nature of things
which come into being to derive their origin
from what is already existing. And it seemed to
me that it might be said with equal truth, that
nothing is eternally co-existent with God distinct
from Himself, but that whatever exists has its


Job xj


XVlll. II.


origin from Him, and I was persuaded of this
also by the undeniable disposition of the ele-
ments, and by the orderly arrangement of nature
about them.

So, with some such thoughts of the fair order
of things, I returned home. But on the day fol-
lowing, that is to-day, as I came I saw two beings
of the same race — I mean men — striking and
abusing one another ; and another, again, wish-
ing to strip his neighbour. And now some be-
gan to venture upon a more terrible deed ; for
one stripped a corpse, and exposed again to the
light of day a body that had been once hidden
in the earth, and treated a form like his own with
such insult as to leave the corpse to be food for
dogs ; while another bared his sword, and at-
tacked a man like himself. And he wanted to
procure safety by flight ; but the other ceased
not from pursuing, nor would control his anger.
And why should I say more ? It is enough that
he attacked him, and at once smote him with
his sword. So the wounded man became a sup-
pliant to his fellow, and spread out his hands
in supplication, and was willing to give up his
clothing, and only made a claim for life. But
the other did not subdue his anger, nor pity his
fellow-man, nor would he see his own image in
the being before him ; but, like a wild beast,
made preparations with his sword for feeding
upon him. And now he was even putting his
mouth to the body so like his own, such was the
extent of his rage. And there was to be seen
one man suffering injurious treatment, and an-
other forthwith stripping him, and not even cov-
ering with earth the body which he denuded of
clothing. But, in addition to these, there was
another who, robbing others of their marriage
rights, wanted to insult his neighbour's wife, and
urged her to turn to unlawful embraces, not wish-
ing her husband to be father to a child of his
own.

After that I began to believe the tragedies,
and thought that the dinner of Thyestes had
really taken place ; and believed in the unlawful
lust of Oinomaos, nor doubted of the strife in
which brother drew the sword on brother.

So, after beholding such things as these, I be-
gan to inquire whence they arise, and what is
their origin, and who is _ the author of such de-
vices against men, whence came their discovery,
and who is the 'teacher of them. Now to dare
to say that God was the author of these things
was impossible ; for surely it could not even be
said that they have from Him their substance, or
their existence. For how were it possible to
entertain these thoughts of God? For He is
good, and the Creator of what is excellent, and
to Him belongs nothing bad. Nay, it is His
nature to take no pleasure in such things ; but
He forbids their production, and rejects those


358


CONCERNING FREE-WILL.


who delight in them, but admits into His pres-
ence those who avoid them. And how could it
be anything but absurd to call God the maker of
these things of which He disapproves? For He
would not wish them not to be, if He had first
been their creator ; and He wishes those who
approach Him to be imitators of Him.

Wherefore it seemed to me unreasonable to
attribute these things to God, or to speak of
them as having sprung from Him ; though it
must certainly be granted that it is possible for
something to come into existence out of what
has no existence, in case He made what is evil.
For He who brought them into existence out
of non-existence would not reduce them to the
loss of it. And again, it must be said that there
was once a time when God took pleasure in evil
things, which now is not the case. Wherefore it
seems to me impossible to say this of God.
For it is unsuitable to His nature to attach this
to Him. Wherefore it seemed to me that there
is co-existent with Him somewhat which has the
name of matter, from which He formed existing
things, distinguishing between them with wise
art, and arranging them in a fair order, from
which also evil things seem to have come into
being. For as this matter was without quality
or form, and, besides this, was borne about with-
out order, and was untouched by divine art, God
bore no grudge against it, nor left it to be con-
tinually thus borne about, but began to work upon
it, and wished to separate its best parts from its
worst, and thus made all that it was fitting for
God to make out of it ; but so much of it as
was like lees, so to speak, this being unfitted for
being made into anything. He left as it was, since
it was of no use to Him ; and from this it seems
to me that what is evil has now streamed down
among men. This seemed to me the right view
to take of these things. But, my friend, if you
think that anything I have said is wrong, men-
tion it, for I exceedingly desire to hear about
these things.

Orthodoxus. I appreciate your readiness,
my friend, and applaud your zeal about the sub-
ject ; and as for the opinion which you have ex-
pressed respecting existing things, to the effect
that God made them out of some underlying
substance, I do not altogether find fault with it.
For, truly, the origin of evil is a subject that has
called out opinions from many men.' Before
you and me, no doubt, there have been many
able men who have made the most searching
inquiry into the matter. And some of them ex-
pressed the same opinion as you did, but others

' [See the essay of Archbishop King On the Origin of Evil, ^A.
Cambridge, 1739. Law's annotations in this edition are valuable.
See also Dr. Bledsoe, Theodicy, and Elucidation VIII. p. 522, vol.
ii., this series. Of Leibnitz (refuting Bayle), no need to speak here.
Comp. Addison, Spectator, Nos. 237 and 519; also Pamell's Her-
mit; al.<;o Jer. xii, i.]


again represented God as the* creator of these
things, fearing to allow the existence of substance
as coeval with Him ; while the former, from fear
of saying that God was the author of evil,
thought fit to represent matter as coeval with
Him.^ And it was the fate of both of these
to fail to speak righdy on the subject, in conse-
quence of their fear of God not being in agree-
ment with an accurate knowledge of the truth.

But others declined to inquire about such a
question at all, on the ground that such an in-
quiry is endless. As for me, however, my con-
nection with you in friendship does not allow me
to decline the subject of inquiry, especially when
you announce your own purpose, that you are not
swayed by prejudice, — although you had your
opinion about the condition of things derived
from your conjectures, — but say that you are
confirmed in a desire of knowing the truth.

Wherefore I will willingly turn to the discus-
sion of the question. But I wish this companion
of mine here to listen to our conversation. ^
For, indeed, he seems to have much the same
opinions about these things as you have, where-
fore I wish that you should both have a share in
the discussion. For whatever I should say to
you, situated as you are, I shall say just as much
to him. If, then, you are indulgent enough to
think I speak truly on this great subject, give an
answer to each question I ask ; for the result of
this will be that you will gain a knowledge of the
truth, and I shall not carry on my discussion
with you at random.

Valentinian. I am ready to do as you say ;
and therefore be quite ready to ask those ques-
tions from which you think I may be able to
gain an accurate knowledge of this important
subject. For the object which I have set before
myself is not the base one of gaining a victory,
but that of becoming thoroughly acquainted with
the truth. Wherefore apply yourself to the rest
of the discussion.

Orthodoxus. Well, then, I do not suppose
you are ignorant that it is impossible for two un-
created things to exist together, although you
seem to have expressed nearly as much as this
in an earlier part of the conversation. Assuredly
we must of necessity say one of two things :
either that God is separate from matter, or, on
the other hand, that He is inseparable from it.
If, then, one would say that they are united, he
will say that that which is uncreated is one only,
for each of the things spoken of will be a part
of the other; and as they are parts of each
other, there will not be two uncreated things,
but one composed of different elements. For


2 The reader will here naturally think of the great and long-con-
tinued Manichsean controversy. — Tr.

3 [See Routh, R. S., torn. ii. p. 98, and note p. 115, and all Routh's
notes on Maximus, the original of Methodius, of whom see Eusebiuf.,
H. £., book V. cap. 27. J


CONCERNING FREE-WILL.


359


we do not, because a man has different mem-
bers, break him up into many beings. But, as
the demands of reason require, we say that a
single being, man, of many parts, has been
created by God. So it is necessary, if God be
not separate from matter, to say that that which
is uncreated is one only ; but if one shall say
that He is separate, there must necessarily be
something intermediate between the two, which
makes their separation evident. For it is im-
possible to estimate the distance of one thing
from another, unless there be something else
with which the distance between them may be
compared. And this holds good, not only as
far as the instance before us, but also to any
number of others. For the argument which we
advanced in the case of two uncreated things
would of necessity be of equal force, were the
uncreated things granted to be three in number.
For I should ask also respecting them, whether
they are separate from each other, or, on the
other hand, are united each to its neighbour.
For if any one resolve to say that they are
united, he will be told the same as before ; if,
again, that they are separate, he will not escape
the necessary existence of that which separates
them.

If, then, any one were to say that there is a
third account which might fitly be given of
uncreated things, namely, that neither is God
separate from matter, nor, again, are they united
as part of a whole ; but that God is locally
situate in matter, and matter in God, he must
be told as the consequence,' that if we say that
God is placed in matter, we must of necessity say
that He is contained within limits, and circum-
scribed by matter. But then He must, equally
with matter, be carried about without order.
And that He rests not, nor remains by Himself,
is a necessary result of that in which He is
being carried, now this way, and now that. And
besides this, we must say that God was in worse
case still.

For if matter were once without order, and
He, determining to change it for the better, put
it into order, there was a time when God was in
that which had no order. And I might fairly
ask this question also, whether God filled matter
completely, or existed in some part of it. For
if one resolve to say that God was in some part
of matter, how far smaller than matter does he
make Him ; that is, if a part of it contained
God altogether. But if he were to say that He
is in all of it, and is extended through the whole
of matter, he must tell us how He wrought upon
it. For we must say that there was a sort of
contraction of God, which being effected, He
wrought upon that from which He was withdrawn,


Jahn's reading is here followed.


or else that He wrought in union with matter,
without having a place of withdrawal. But if
any one say that matter is in God, there is equal
need of inquiry, namely, whether it is by His
being separated from Himself, and as creatures
exist in the air, by His being divided and parted
for the reception of the beings that are in Him ;
or whether it is locally situated, that is to say,
as water in land ; for if we were to say, as in
the air, we must say that God is divisible ; but
if, as water in earth, — since matter was without
order and arrangement, and besides, contained
what was evil, — we must say that in God were
to be found the disorderly and the evil. Now
this seems to me an unbecoming conclusion, nay,
more, a dangerous one. For you wish for the
existence of matter, that you may avoid saying
that God is the author of evil ; and, determining
to avoid this, you say that He is the receptacle
of evil.

If, then, under the supposition that matter is
separate from created substances, you had said
that it is uncreated, I should have said much
about it, to prove that it is impossible for it to
be uncreated ; but since you say that the ques-
tion of the origin of evil is the cause of this sup-
position, it therefore seems to me right to proceed
to inquire into this. For when it is clearly
stated how evil exists, and that it is not possible
to say that God is the cause of evil, because of
matter being subject to Him, it seems to me to
destroy such a supposition, to remark, that if
God created the quahties which did not exist, ^
He equally created the substances. ^

Do you say, then, that there co-exists with
God matter without qualities out of which He
formed the beginning of this world?

Valentinian. So I think.

Orthodoxus. If, then, matter had no quali-
ties, and the world were produced by God, and
qualities exist in the world, then God is the
maker of qualities ?

Valentinian. It is so.

Orthodoxus. Now, as I heard you say some
time ago that it is impossible for anything to
come into being out of that which has no exist-
ence, answer my question : Do you think that
the qualities of the world were not produced
out of any existing qualities ?

Valentinian. I do.

Orthodoxus. And that they are something
distinct from substances ?

Valentinian. Yes.

Orthodoxus. If, then, (jualities were neither
made by God out of any ready at hand, nor
derive their existence from substances, because
they are not substances, we must say that they ]
were produced by God out of what had no


The text is here in an uncertain state. Cf. Migne and Jahn.


36o


CONCERNING FREE-WILL.


existence. Wherefore I thought you spoke ex-
travagantly in saying that it was impossible to
suppose that anything was produced by God
out of what did not exist.

But let our di.scussion of this matter stand
thus. For truly we see among ourselves men
making things out of what does not exist,
although they seem for the most part to be mak-
ing them with something. As, for instance, we
may have an example in the case of architects ;
for they truly do not make cities out of cities,
nor in like manner temples out of temples.'

But if, because substances underlie these
things, you think that the builders make them
out of what does exist, you are mistaken in your
calculation. For it is not the substance which
makes the city or the temples, but art applied to
substance. And this art is not produced out of
some art which lies in the substances themselves,
but from that which is not in them.

But you seem likely to meet me with this
argument : that the artificer makes the art which
is connected with the substance out of the art
which he has. Now I think it is a good reply
to this to say, that in man it is not produced
from any art lying beneath ; for it is not to be
granted that substance by itself is art. For art
is in the class of accidents, and is one of the
^ things that have an existence only when they are
employed about some substance. For man will
exist even without the art of building, but it will
have no existence unless man be previously in
being. Whence we must say that it is in the
nature of things for arts to be produced in men
out of what has no existence. If, then, we
have shown that this is so in the case of men,
why was it improper to say that God is able to
make not only qualities, but also substances, out
of that which has no existence ? For as it ap-
pears possible for something to be produced out
of what exists not, it is evident that this is the
case with substances. To return to the question
of evil. Do you think evil comes under the
head of substa-nces, or of qualities of substances ?

Valentinian. Of qualities.

Orthodoxus. But matter was found to be
without quality or form ?

Valentinmn. It was.

Orthodoxus. Well, then, the connection of
these names with substance is owing to its acci-
dents. For murder is not a substance, nor is
any other evil ; but the substance receives a
cognate name from putting it into practice. For
a man is not (spoken of as) murder, but by
committing it he receives the derived name of
murderer, without being himself murder ; and,
to speak concisely, no other evil is a substance ;


* Imperfecl. The rest from the Bibliotheca of Photius.


but by practising any evil, it can be called evil.
Similarly consider, if you imagine anything else
to be the cause of evil to men, that it too is evil
by reason of its acting by them, and suggesting
the committal of evil. For a man is evil in
consequence of his actions. For he is said to
be evil, because he is the doer of evil. Now
what a man does, is not the man himself, but his
activity, and it is from his actions that he receives
the title of evil. For if we were to say that he
is that which he does, and he commits murders,
adulteries, and such-like, he will be all these.
Now if he is these, then when they are produced
he has an existence, but when they are not, he
too ceases to be. Now these things are produced
by men. Men then will be the authors of them,
and the causes of their existing or not existing.
But if each man is evil in consequence of what
he practises, and what he practises has an origin. -
he also made a beginning in evil, and evil too
had a beginning. Now if this is the case, no
one is without a beginning in evil, nor are evil
things without an origin.

Valentinian. Well, my friend, you seem to
me to have argued sufficiently against the other
side. For you appeared to draw right conclu-
sions from the premises which we granted to the
discussion. For truly if matter is without quali-
ties, then God is the maker of qualities ; and if
evils are qualities, God will be the author of
evils. But it seems to me false to say that matter
is without qualities ; for it cannot be said respect-
ing any substance that it is without qualities.
But indeed, in the very act of saying that it is
without qualities, you declare that it has a quality,
by describing the character of matter, which is
a kind of quality. Therefore, if you please,
begin the discussion from the beginning ; for it
seems to me that matter never began to have
qualities. For such being the case, I assert, my
friend, that evil arises from its emanation.

Orthodoxus. If matter were possessed of
qualities from eternity, of what will God be the
creator? For if we say substances, we speak
of them as pre-existing ; if, again, we say quali-
ties, these too are declared to have an existence.
Since, then, both substances and qualities exist,
it seems to me superfluous to call God a creator.
But answer me a question. In what way do you
say that God was a creator ? ^^'as it by changing
the existence of those substances into non-exist-
ence, or by changing the qualities while He
preserved the substances?

Valentinian. I think that there was no
change of the substances, but only of the quali-
ties ; and in respect to these we call God a
creator. And just as if one might chance to say
that a house was made of stones, it cannot be
said of them that they do not still continue stones
in substance, because they are called a house ;


CONCERNING FREE-WILL.


361


for I afifirm that the house is made by the quaUty
of construction. So 1 think that God, while
substance remained, produced a change of its
qualities, by reason of which I say that this
world was made by God.

Orthodoxus. Do you think, too, that evil is
among the qualities of substances?

Valentinian. I do.

Orthodoxus. And were these qualities in
matter from the first, or had they a beginning?

Valentinian. I say that these qualities were
eternally co-existent with matter.

Orthodoxus. But do you not say that God
lias made a change in the qualities ?

Valentinian. I do say this.

Orthodoxus. For the better?

Valentinian. I think so.

Orthodoxus. If, then, evil is among the
qualities of matter, and its qualities were changed
by God for the better, the inquiry must be made
whence evil arose. For either all of them, being
evil, underwent a change for the better, or some
of them being evil, and some not, the evil ones
were not changed for the better ; but the rest,
as far as they were found superior, were changed
by God for the sake of order.

Valentinian. That is the opinion I lield
from the beginning.

Orthodoxus. How, then, do you say it was
that He left the qualities of evil as they were ?
Was it that He was able to do away with them,
or that, though He wished to do so, He was un-
able ? For if you say that He was able, but dis-
inchned to do so, He must be the author of these
things : because, while He had power to bring
evil to an end, He allowed it to remain as it was,
especially when He had begun to work upon
matter. For if He had had nothing at all to do
with matter, He would not have been the author
of what He allowed to remain. But since He
works upon a part of it, and leaves a part of it
to itself, while He has power to change it for the
better, I think He is the author of evil, since He
left part of matter in its vileness. He wrought
then for the ruin of a part ; and, in this respect,
it seems to me that this part was chiefly injured
by His arranging it in matter, so that it became
partaker of evil. For before matter was put in
order, it was without the perception of evil ; but
now each of its parts has the capacity of per-
ceiving evil. Now, take an example in the case
of man. Previously to becoming a living crea-
ture, he was insensible to evil ; but from the
time when he is fashioned by God into the form
of man, he gains the perception of approaching
evil. So this act of God, which you say was
done for the benefit of matter, is found to have
happened to it rather for the worse. But if you
/ csay that God was not able to stop evil, does the
j impossibility result from His being naturally


weak, or from His being overcome by fear, and
in subjection to some more powerful being?
See which of these you would like to attribute
to the almighty and good God. But, again,
answer me about matter. Is matter simple or
compound ? For if matter be simple and uni-
form, and the universe compound, and composed
of different substances, it is impossible to say
that it is made of matter, because compound
things cannot be composed of one pure and sim-
ple ingredient. For composition indicates the
mixture of several simple things. But if, on the
other hand, you say that matter is compound, it
has been entirely composed of simple elements,
and they were once each separately simple, and
by their composition matter was produced ; for
compound things derive their composition from
simple things. So there was once a time when
matter did not exist — that is to say, before the
combination of the simple elements. But if
there was once a time when matter did not exist,
and there was never a time when what is uncre-
ated did not exist, then matter is not uncreated.
And from this it follows that there are many
things which are uncreated. For if God were
uncreated, and the simple elements of which
matter was composed were uncreated, the num-
ber of the uncreated would be more than two.
But to omit inquiring what are the simple ele-
ments, matter or form — for this would be fol-
lowed by many absurdities — let me ask, do you
think that nothing that exists is contrary to
itself?

Valentinlan. I do.

Orthodoxus. Yet water is contrary to fire,
and darkness to light, and heat to cold, and
moisture to dryness.

Valentinian. I think it is.

Orthodoxus. If, then, nothing that exists is
contrary to itself, and these are contrary to one
another, they will not be one and the same mat-
ter — no, nor formed from one and the same
matter. But, again, I wish to ask, do you think
that the parts of a thing are not destructive of
one another?

Valentinian. I do.

Orthodoxus. And that fire and water, and
the rest likewise, are parts of matter?

Valentinian. I hold them to be so.

Orthodoxus. Why, then, do you not think
that water is destructive of fire, and light of
darkness, and so on with the rest?

Valentinian. I do.

Orthodoxus. Then, if parts of a thing are
not 'destructive of one another, and these are
found to be so, they will not be parts of the
same thing. But if they are not parts of the
same thing, they will not be parts of one and
the same matter. And, indeed, they will not be
matter either, because nothing that exists is de-


362


CONCERNING FREE-WILL.


structive of itself. And this being the case with
the contraries, it is shown that they are not mat-
ter. This is enough on the subject of matter.

Now we must come to the examination of
evils, and must necessarily inquire into the evils
among men. As to these, are they forms of the
principle of evil, or parts of it? If forms, evil
will not have a separate existence distinct from
them, because the species are to be sought for in
the forms, and underlie them. But if this is the
case, evil has an origin. For its forms are shown
to have an origin — such as murder, and adul-
tery, and the like. But if you will have them to
be parts of some principle of evil, and they have
an origin, it also must have an origin. For those
things whose parts have an origin, are of neces-
sity originated likewise. For the whole consists
of parts. And the whole will not exist if the
parts do not, though there may be some parts,
even if the whole be not there.

Now there is nothing existing of which one
part is originated, and another part not. But if
I were even to grant this, then there was a time
when evil was not complete, namely, before
matter was wrought by God. And it attains
completeness when man is produced by God ;
for man is the maker of the parts of evil. And
from this it follows that the cause of evil being
complete, is God the Creator, which it is impious
to say. But if you say that evil is neither of the
things supposed, but is the doing of something
evil, you declare that it has an origin. For the
doing of a thing makes the beginning of its
existence. And besides this, you have nothing
further to pronounce evil. For what other action
have you to point out as such, except what
happens among men ? Now, it has been already
shown that he who acts is not evil according to
his being, but in accordance with his evil doing.

Because there is nothing evil by nature, but it
is by use that evil things become such. So I say,
says he, that man was made with a free-will, not
as if there were already evil in existence, which
he had the power of choosing if he wished, but
on account of his capacity of obeying or dis-
obeying God.

For this was the meaning of the gift of Free
Will. And man after his creation receives a com-
mandment from God ; and from this at once rises
(evil, for he does not obey the divine command ;
and this alone is evil, namely, disobedience,
which had a beginning.

For man ' received power, and enslaved him-
self, not because he was overpowered by the
irresistible tendencies of his nature, nor because

' The whole of this work, as preserved, is in a very fragmentary
state. We have followed Migne in general, as his edition is most
widely known, and but little is gained by adopting Jahn's, which is
somewhat more complete. — Tr.


the capacity with which he was gifted deprived
him of what was better for him ; for it was for
the sake of this that I say he was endowed with
it (but he received the power above mentioned),
in order that he may obtain an addition to what
he already possesses, which accrues to him from
the Superior Being in consequence of his obedi-
ence, and is demanded as a debt from his Maker.
For I say that man was made not for destruction,
but for better things. For if he were made as
any of the elements, or those things which render
a similar service to God, he would cease to
receive a reward befitting deliberate choice, and
would be like an instrument of the maker ; and
it would be unreasonable for him to suffer blame
for his wpong-doings, for the real author of them
is the one by whom he is used. But man did
not understand better things, since he did not
know the author (of his existence), but only the
object for which he was made. I say therefore
that God, purposing thus to honour man, and to
grant him an understanding of better things,
has given him the power of being able to do
what he wishes, and commends the employment,
of his power for better things ; not that He^
deprives him again of free-will, but wishes to
point out the better way. For the power is
present with him, and he receives the command-
ment ; but God exhorts him to turn his power of
choice to better things. For as a father exhorts
his son, who has power to learn his lessons, to
give more attention to them, inasmuch as, while
he points out this as the better course, he does
not deprive his son of the power which he
possessed, even if he be not inclined to learn
wiUingly ; so I do not think that God, while He
urges on man to obey His commands, deprives
him of the power of purposing and withholding
obedience. For He points out the cause of
His giving this advice, in that He does not
deprive him of the power. But He gives com-
mands, in order that man may be able to enjoy
better things. For this is the consequence of
obeying the commands of God. So that He
does not give commands in order to take away
the power which He has given, but in order that
a better gift may be bestowed, as to one worthy
of attaining greater things, in return for his
having rendered obedience to God, while he had
power to withhold it. I say that man was made
with free-will, not as if there were already exist-
ing some evil, which he had the power of choosing
if he wished, . . . but that the power of obey-
ing and disobeying God is the only cause. ^

For this was the object to be obtained by free-
will. And man after his creation receives a
commandment from God, and from this at once
rises evil ; for he does not obey the divine com-


" Of the bestowal of free-wiU.


CONCERNING FREE-WILL.


36:


raand, and this alone is evil, namely, disobe-
dience, which had a beginning. For no one has
it in his power to say that it is without an origin,
when its author had an origin. But you will be
sure to ask whence arose this disobedience. It
is clearly recorded in Holy Scripture, by which
I am enabled to say that man was not made by
God in this condition, but that he has come to
it by some teaching. For man did not receive
such a nature as this. For if it were the case
that his nature was such, this would not have
come upon him by teaching. Now one says in


Holy Writ, that "man has learnt (evil)."' 1
say, then, that disobedience to God is taught.
For this alone is evil which is produced in oppo-
sition to the purpose of God, for man would not
learn evil by itself. He, then, who teaches evil
is the Serpent.

For my part, I said that the beginning of evil
was envy, and that it arose from man's being dis-
tinguished by God with higher honour. Now
evil is disobedience to the commandment of God.


' Jer. xiii. 33.


FROM THE DISCOURSE ON THE RESURRECTION.'


PART I.

I. God did not make evil,^ nor is He at all in
any way the author of evil ; but whatever failed
to keep the law, which He in all justice ordained,

f after being made by Him with the faculty of free-
i will, for the purpose of guarding and keeping it,
jis called evil. Now it is the gravest fault to dis-
obey God, by overstepping the bounds of that
righteousness which is consistent with free-will.

II. Now the question has already been raised,^
and answered,-* that the " coats of skins " s are not
'bodies. Nevertheless, let us speak of it again,
for it is not enough to have mentioned it once.
Before the preparation of these coats of skins,
the first man himself acknowledges that he has
both bones and flesh ; for when he saw the
woman brought to him : " This is now," he cried,^
" bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh." And
again : " She shall be called Woman, because
she was taken out of man.? For this cause shall
a man leave his father and mother, and shall be
joined unto his wife, and they two shall be one I
flesh." For I cannot endure the trifling of some
who shamelessly do violence to Scripture, in '
order that their opinion, that the resurrection '
is without flesh, may find support ; supposing
rational bones and flesh, and in different ways
changing it backwards and forwards by allego- I
rizing. And Christ confirms the taking of these ;
things as they are written, when, to the question
of the Pharisees about putting away a wife, He
answers : " Have ye not read that He which '
made them at the beginning made them male !
and female ; and said, For this cause shall a man
leave his father," ^ and so on. ■

III. But it is evidently absurd to think that the '
body will not co-exist with the soul in the eternal
state, because it is a bond and fetters ; in order
that, according to tlieir view, we who are to live

■ [Compare Athenagoras, vol. ii. p. 149, and other Fathers
passim.^

- [See p. 363, sj{pra.'\

3 Cf. Anastasius, in Doctriiia Fatnim de Verbi htcarnatione,
c. 25. — Jahn.

■* By Epiphanius, Hier., Ixiv. n. 22. — MiGNE.

5 Gen. iii. 21.

'' Gen. ii. 23, 24.

7 [See vol. iv. p. 38, this series.]

* Matt. xix. 4, 5.


in the kingdom of light may not be for ever con-
demned to be bondmen of corruption. For as
the question has been sufficiently solved, and
the statement refuted in which they defined the
flesh to be the soul's chain, the argument also is
destroyed, that the flesh will not rise again, lest,
if we resume it, we be prisoners in the kingdom
of light.

IV. In order, then, that man might not be an
undying or ever-living evil, as would have been
the case if sin were dominant within him, as it
! had sprung up in an immortal body, and was
I provided with immortal sustenance, God for this
cause ])ronounced him mortal, and clothed him
j with mortality. For this is what was meant by
I the coats of skins, in order that, by the dissolu-
j tion of the body, sin might be altogether de-
I stroyed from the very roots, that there might not
I be left even the smallest particle of root from
; which new shoots of sin might again burst forth.
j v. For as a fig-tree, which has grown in the
I splendid buildings ? of a temple, and has reached
a great size, and is spread over all the joints of
' the stones with thickly-branching roots, ceases
i not to grow, till, by the loosening of the stones
from the place in which it sprung up, it is alto-
gether torn away ; for it is possible for the stones
to be fitted into their own places, when the fig-
tree is taken away, so that the temple may be
preserved, having no longer to support what was
the cause of its own destruction ; while the fig-
tree, torn away by the roots, dies ; in the same
way also, God, the builder, checked by the sea-
sonable application of death. His own temple,
man, when he had fostered sin, like a wild fig-
tree, " killing," '° in the words of Scripture, "and
making alive," in order that the flesh, after sin
is withered and dead, may, like a restored temple,
be raised up again with the same parts, uninjured
and immortal, while sin is utterly and entirely
destroyed. For while the body still lives, before
it has passed through death, sin must also live
with it, as it has its roots concealed within us,
even though it be externally checked by the


9 [i.e., " in the courts of the Lord's house; " among the build-
ings.]

'° Deut. xxxii. 39.


FROM THE DISCOURSE ON THE RESURRECTION.


365


wounds inflicted by corrections and warnings ;
since, otherwise, it would not happen that we do
wrong after baptism, as we should be entirely
and absolutely free from sin. But now, even after
believing, and after the time of being touched
by the water of sanctification, we are oftentimes
found in sin. For no one can boast of being so
free from sin as not even to have an evil thought.
So that it is come to pass that sin is now re-
strained and lulled to sleep by faith, so that it
does not produce injurious fruits, but yet is not
torn up by the roots. For the present we restrain
its sprouts, such as evil imaginations, " lest any
root of bitterness springing up trouble " ' us, not
suffering its leaves ,to unclose and open into
shoots ; while the Word, like an axe, cuts at its
roots which grow below. But hereafter the very
thought of evil will disappear.

VI. But come now, since there is need of many
examples in matters of this kind, let us examine
them particularly from this point of view, with-
out desisting till our argument ends in clearer
explanation and proof. It appears, then, as if
an emix^-^rit craftsman were to cast over again a
noble image, wrought by himself of gold or other
material, and beautifully proportioned in all its
members, upon his suddenly perceiving that it
had been mutilated by some infamous man, who,
too envious to endure the image being beautiful,
spoiled it, and thus enjoyed the empty pleasure
of indulged jealousy. For take notice, most
wise Aglaophon, that, if the artificer wish that
that upon which he has bestowed so much pains
and care and labour, shall be (;[uite free from
injury, he will be impelled to melt it down, and
restore it to its former condition. But if he
should not cast it afresh, nor reconstruct it, but
allow it to remain as it is, repairing and restoring
it, it must be that the image, being passed
through the fire and forged, cannot any longer
be preserved unchanged, but will be altered and
wasted. Wherefore, if he should wish it to be
perfectly beautiful and faultless, it must be broken
up and recast, in order that all the disfigurements
and mutilations inflicted upon it by treachery and
envy, may be got rid of by the breaking up and
recasting of it, while the image is restored again
uninjured and unalloyed to the same form as
before, and made as like itself as possible. For
it is impossible for an image under the hands of
the original artist to be lost, even if it be melted
down again, for it may be restored ; but it is
possible for blemishes and injuries to be put off,
for they melt away and cannot be restored ; be-
cause in every work of art the best craftsman
looks not for blemish or failure, but for symme-
try and correctness in his work. Now God's
plan seems to me to have been the same as that

' Heb. xii. m.


which prevails among ourselves. For seeing
man. His fairest work, corrupted by envious
treachery, He could not endure, with His love
for man, to leave him in such a condition, lest
he should be for ever faulty, and bear the blame
to eternity ; but dissolved him again into his
original materials, in order that, by remodelling,
all the blemishes in him might waste away and
disappear. For the melting down of the statue
in the former case corresponds to the death and
dissolution of the body in the latter, and the re-
moulding of the material in the former, to the
resurrection after death in the latter ; as also
saith the prophet Jeremiah, for he addresses tlic
Jews in these words, " And I went down to the
potter's house ; and, behold, he wrought a work
upon the stones. And the vessel which he made
in his hands was broken ; and again he made
another vessel, as it pleased him to make it.
And the word of the Lord came to me, saying.
Cannot I do to you as this potter, O house of
Israel ? Behold, as the clay of the potter are ye
in my hands." ^

VII. For I call your attention to this, that, as
I said, after man's transgression the Great Hand
was not content to leave as a trophy of victory
its own work, debased by the Evil One, who
wickedly injured it from motives of envy ; but
moistened and reduced it to clay, as a potter
breaks up a vessel, that by the remodelling of
it all the blemishes and bruises in it may disap-
pear, and it may l)e made afresh faultless and
pleasing.

VIII. But it is not satisfactory to say that the
universe will be utterly destroyed, and sea and
air and sky will be no longer. For the whole
world will be deluged with fire from heaven, and
burnt for the purpose of purification and re-
newal ; it will not, however, come to complete
ruin and corruption. For if it were better for
the world not to be than to be, why did God,
in making the world, take the worse course?
But God did not work in vain, or do that which
was worst. Crod therefore ordered the creation
with a view to its existence and continuance, as
also the Book of IVisdoin confirms, saying, " For
God created all things that they might have their
being ; and the generations of the world were
healthful, and there is no poison of destruction
in them." ^ And Paul clearly testifies this, say-
ing, " For the earnest expectation of the crea-
ture 4 waiteth for the manifestation of the sons
of God. For the creature •♦ was made subject
to vanity, not willingly, but by reason of him
that subjected the same in hope : because the
creature ^ itself also shall be delivered from the


^ Jer. xviii. 3-6.
3 Wisd. i. 14.

■* [Greek, creation, KTiCTis. The English version faulty and con-
fusing.]


i66


FROM THE DISCOURSE ON THE RESURRECTION.


bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty
of the children of (]od." ' For the creation was
made subject to vanity, he says, and he expects
that it will be set free from such servitude, as
he intends to call this world by the name of
creation. For it is not what is unseen but what
is seen that is subject to corruption. The crea-
tion, then, after being restored to a better and
more seemly state, remains, rejoicing and exult-
ing over the children of God at the resurrection ;
for whose sake it now groans and travails,^ wait-
ing itself also for our redemption from the cor-
ruption of the body, that, when we have risen
and shaken off the mortality of the flesh, accord-
ing to that which is written, " Shake off the dust,
and arise, and sit down, O Jerusalem," ^ and
have been set free from sin, it also shall be freed
from corruption and be subject no longer to
vanity, but to righteousness. Isaiah says, too,
*' For as the new heaven and the new earth which
I make, remaineth before me, saith the Lord,
so shall your seed and your name be ; " ■* and
again, "Thus saith the Lord that created the
heaven, it is He who prepared the earth and
created it. He determined it ; He created it not
in vain, but formed it to be inhabited." s For
in reality God did not establish the universe in
vain, or to no purpose but destruction, as those
weak-minded men say, but to exist, and be in-
habited, and continue. Wherefore the earth and
the heaven must exist again after the conflagra-
tion and shaking of all things.

IX. But if our opponents say. How then is it,
if the universe be not destroyed, that the Lord
says that " heaven and earth shall pass away ;'"'
and the prophet, that " the heaven shall perish
as smoke, and the earth shall grow old as a gar-
ment ; " 7 we answer, because it is usual for the
Scriptures to call the change of the world from
its present condition to a better and more glori-
ous one, destruction ; as its earlier form is lost
in the change of all things to a state of greater
splendour ; for there is no contradiction nor
absurdity in the Holy Scriptures. For not " the
world " but the " fashion of this world " passeth
away,*^ it is said ; so it is usual for the Scrip-
tures to call the change from an earlier form to
a better and more comely state, destruction ;
just as when one calls by the name of destruc-
tion the change from a childish form into a
perfect man, as the stature of the child is turned
into manly size and beauty. We may expect
that the creation will pass away, as if it were to
perish in the burning, in order that it may be


I Rom. vili. 19-21.

* The reading and punctuation of Jahn are here adopted.
3 Isa. Hi. 2.

* Isa. Ixvi. 22.
5 Isa. xlv. 18.

* Matt. xxiv. 35.
7 Isa. li. 6.

* 1 Cor. vii. 31.


renewed, not however that it will be destroyed,
that we who are renewed may dwell in a renewed
world without taste of sorrow ; according as it
is said, " When Thou lettest Thy breath go forth,
they shall be made, and Thou shalt renew the
face of the earth ; " ^ God henceforth providing
for the due temperature of that which surrounds
it. For as the earth is to exist after the present
age,'° there must be by all means inhabitants for
it, who shall no longer be liable to death, nor
shall marry, nor beget children, but live in all
happiness, like the angels, without change or
decay. Wherefore it is silly to discuss in what
way of life our bodies will then exist, if there is
no longer air, nor earth, nor anything else.

X. But in addition to what has been said,
there is this point worth consideration, since it
misleads very much, if we may be outspoken
about matters of such importance, Aglaophon.
For you said that the Lord declared plainly"
that those who shall obtain the resurrection shall
then be as the angels.'" You brought this objec-
tion : The angels, being without flesh, are on
this account in the utmost happiness an'^j glory.
We must then, as we are to be made equal to
the angels, be like them stripped of flesh, and
be angels. But you overlooked this, my excel-
lent friend, that He who created and set in order
the universe out of nothing, ordained the nature
of immortal beings to be distributed not only
among angels and ministers, but also among
principalities, and thrones, and powers. For the
race of angels is one, and that of principalities
and powers another ; because immortal beings
are not all of one order, and constitution, and
tribe, and family, but there are differences of
race and tribe. And neither do the cherubim,
departing from their own nature, assume the
form of angels ; nor, again, do angels assume
the form of the others. For they cannot be any-
thing but what they are and have been made.
Moreover, man also having been appointed by
the original order of things to inhabit the world,
and to rule over all that is in it, when he is im-
mortal, will never be changed from being a man
into the form either of angels or any other ; for
neither do angels undergo a change from their
original form to another. For Christ at His
coming did not proclaim that the human nature
should, when it is immortal, be remoulded or
transformed into another nature, but into what
it was before the fall. For each one among
created things must remain in its own proper
place, that none may be wanting to any, but all
may be full : heaven of angels, thrones of powers,
luminaries of ministers ; and the more divine
spots, and the undefiled and untainted lumina-


9 Ps. civ. 30.
'° Or, " dispensation."
'^ When tempted by the Sadducees.
'2 Matt. xxii. 30.


FROM THE DISCOURSE ON THE RESURRECTION.


367


ries, with seraphim, who attend the Supreme
Council, and uphold the universe ; and the world
of men. For if we granted that men are changed
into angels, it would follow that we say that an-
gels also are changed into powers, and these
into one thing and the other, until our argument
proceed too far for safety.

XI. Neither did God, as if He had made man
badly, or committed a mistake in the formation
of him, determine afterwards to make an angel,
repenting of His work, as the worst of craftsmen
do ; nor did He fashion man, after He had
wished originally to make an angel, and failed ;
for this would be a sign of weakness, etc. Why
even then did He make man and not angels,
if He wished men to be angels and not men?
Was it because He was unable? It is blasphemy
to suppose so. Or was He so busy in making
the worse as to loiter about the better? This
too is absurd. For He does not fail in making
what is good, nor defers it, nor is incapable of
it ; but He has the power to act how and when
He pleases, inasmuch as He is Himself power.
Wherefore it was because He intended man to
be man, that He originally made him so. But
if He so intended — since He intends what is
good — man is good. Now man is said to be
composed of soul and body ; he cannot then
exist without a body, but with a body, unless
there be produced another man besides man.
For all the orders of immortal beings must be
preserved by God, and among these is man.
•' For," says the Book of Wisdom, " God created
man to be immortal, and made him to be an
image of His own eternity."' The body then
perishes not ; for man is composed of soul and
body.

XII. Wherefore observe that these are the very
things which the Lord wished to teach to the
Sadducees, who did not beUeve in the resurrec-
tion of the flesh. For this was the opinion of
the Sadducees. Whence it was that, having
contrived the parable about the woman and the
seven brethren, that they might cast doubt upon
the resurrection of the flesh, " There came to
Him," 2 it is said, " the Sadducees also, who say
that there is no resurrection." Christ, then, if
there had been no resurrection of the flesh, but
the soul only were saved, would have agreed
with their opinion as a right and excellent one.
l>ut as it was, He answered and said, " In the
resurrection they neither marry, nor are given in
marriage, but are as the angels in heaven," ^ not
on account of having no flesh, but of not marry-
ing nor being married, but being henceforth in-
corruptible. And He speaks of our being near
the angels in this respect, that as the angels in
heaven, so we also in paradise, spend our time


' Wisd. ii. 23.
^ Matt. xxii. 2


no more in marriage-feasts or other festivities,
but in seeing God and cultivating life, under the
direction of Christ. For He did not say " they
shall be angels," but like angels, in being, for
instance, crowned, as it is written, with glory and
honour ; differing a little from the angels, ^ while
near to being angels. Just as if He had said,
while observing the fair order of the sky, and
the stillness of the night, and everything illu-
mined by the heavenly light of the moon, " the
moon shines hke the sun." We should not then
say that He asserted that the moon was abso-
lutely the sun, but like the sun. As also that
which is not gold, but approaching the nature
of gold, is said not to be gold, but to be hke
gold. But if it were gold, it would be said to
be, and not to be like, gold. But since it is not
gold, but approaching to the nature of it, and
has the appearance of it, it is said to be like
gold ; so also when He says that the saints shall,
in the resurrection, be like the angels, we do
not understand Him to assert that they will then
be actually angels, but approaching to the con-
dition of angels. So that it is most unreasonable
to say, " Since Christ declared that the saints in
the resurrection appear as angels, therefore their
bodies do not rise," although the very words
employed give a clear proof of the real state of
the case. For the term " resurrection " is not
applied to that which has not fallen, but to that
which has fallen and rises again ; as when the
prophet says, " I will also raise up again the
tabernacle of David which has fallen down." •♦
Now the much-desired tabernacle of the soul is
fallen, and sunk down into " the dust of the
earth." 5 For it is not that which is not dead,
but that which is dead, that is laid down. But
it is the flesh which dies ; the soul is immortal.
So, then, if the soul be immortal, and the body
be the corpse, those who say that there is a
resurrection, but not of the flesh, deny any resur-
rection ; because it is not that which remains
standing, but that which has fallen'' and been
laid down, that is set up ; according to that
which is written, " Does not he who falls rise
again, and he who turns aside return? " ^

XIII. Since flesh was made to border on incor-
ruption and corruption, being itself neither the
one nor the other, and was overcome by corrup-
tion for the sake of pleasure, though it was the
work and property of incorruption ; therefore it
became corruptible, and was laid in the dust of
the earth. When, then, it was overcome by
corruption, and delivered over to death through
disobedience, God did not leave it to corruption,
to be triumphed over as an inheritance ; but,


3 Ps. viii. 5.

■• Amos ix. 1 1
3 Dan. xii. 2.
f" [A play on ih
' Jcr. viii. 4.


e Greek a.v6.<jra.<ji.%^ but good exegesis.]


368


FROM THE DISCOURSE ON THE RESURRECTION.


after conquering death by the resurrection, de-
livered it again to incorruption, in order that
corruption might not receive the property of in-
corruption, but incorruption that of corruption.
Therefore the apostle answers thus, " For this
corruptible must put on incorruption, and this
mortal must put on immortality." ' Now the
corruptible and mortal putting on immortality,
what else is it but that which is " sown in cor-
ruption and raised in incorruption,"- — for the
soul is not corruptible or mortal ; but this which
is mortal and corrupting is of flesh, — in order
that, " as we have borne the image of the earthy,
we shall also bear the image of the heavenly? " ^
For the image of the earthy which we have
borne is this, " Dust thou art, and unto dust
shalt thou return."-* But the image of the heav-
enly is the resurrection from the dead, and in-
corruption, in order that " as Christ was raised
up from the dead by the glory of the Father, so
we also should walk in newness of life." s But
if any one were to think that the earthy image
is the flesh itself, but the heavenly image some
other spiritual body besides the flesh ; let him
first consider that Christ, the heavenly man,
when He appeared, bore the same form of limbs
and the same image of flesh as ours, through
which also He, who was not man, became man,
that " as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall
all be made alive." ^ F'or if He bore flesh for
any other reason than that of setting the flesh
free, and raising it up, why did He bear flesh
superfluously, as He purposed neither to save it,
nor to raise it up ? But the Son of God does
nothing superfluously. He did not then take
the form of a servant uselessly, but to raise it
up and save it. For He truly was made man,
and died, and not in mere appearance, but that
He might truly be shown to be the first begotten
from the dead, changing the earthy into the
heavenly, and the mortal into the immortal.
When, then, Paul says that " flesh and blood
cannot inherit the kingdom of (jod," 7 he does
not give a disparaging opinion of the regeneration
of the flesh, but would teach that the kingdom of
God, which is eternal life, is not possessed by
the body, but the body by the life. For if the
kingdom of God, which is life, were possessed
by the body, it would happen that the life would
be consumed by corruption. But now the life
possesses what is dying, in order that " death
may be swallowed up in victory " ^ by life, and
the corruptible may be seen to be the possession
of incorruption and immortality, while it be-


' I Cor. XV. 53.
" I Cor. V. 42.
3 I Cor. XV. 49.

* Gen. iii. 19.
5 Rom. vi. 4.

'' I Cor. XV. 22.
'' I Cor. XV. 50.

* I Cor. XV. 54.


comes unbound and free from death and sin,
but the slave and servant of immortality ; so that
the body may be the possession of incorruption,
and not incorruption that of the body.

XIV. If, then, out of such a drop, small, and
previously without any existence, in its actual
state of moistness, contractedness, and insignifi-
cance, in fact out of nothing, man is brought
into being, how much rather shall man spring
again into being out of a previously existing
man? For it is not so difficult to make any-
thing anew after it has once existed and fallen
into decay, as to produce out of nothing that
which has never existed. Now, in case we choose
to exhibit the seminal fluid discharged from a
man, and place by it a corpse, each by itself,
which of them, as they both lie exposed to view,
will the spectators think most likely to become
a man — that drop, which is nothing at all, or
that which has already shape, and size, and sub-
stance ? For if the very thing which is nothing
at all, merely because God pleases, becomes a
man, how much rather shall that which has ex-
istence and is brought to perfection become
again a man, if God pleases ? For what was the
purpose of the theologian Moses, in introducing,
under a mystical sense, the Feast of Tabernacles
in the Book of Leviticus? Was it that we may S
keep a feast to (xod, as the Jews with their low J
view of the Scriptures interpret it? as if God
took pleasure in such tabernacles, decked out
with fruits and boughs and leaves, which im-
mediately wither and lose their verdure. We
cannot say so. Tell me, then, what was the
object of the Feast of Tabernacles ? It was in-
troduced to point to this real tabernacle of ours,
which, after it was fallen down to corruption
through the transgression of the law, and broken
up by sin, God promised to put together again,
and to raise up in incorruptibility, in order that
we may truly celebrate in His honour the great
and renowned Feast of Tabernacles at the resur-
rection ; when our tabernacles are put together
in the perfect order of immortality and harmony,
and raised up from the dust in incorruption ;
when the dry bones,"? according to the most true
prophecy, shall hear a voice, and be brought to
their joints by God, the Creator and Perfect Ar-
tificer, who will then renew the flesh and bind it
on, no more with such ties as those by which it
was at first held together, but by such as shall
be for ever undecaying and indissoluble. For I
once saw '° on Olympus, which is a mountain of
Lycia, fire bursting up from the ground spon-
taneously on the summit of the mountain ; and
by it was standing an Agnos tree, so flourishing,
green, and shady, that one might suppose a

9 Ezek. xxxvii. 4.

'° [See part ii. cap. viii., p. 375, lujra. What he testifies may be
accepted, at least, as his genuine conviction.]


FROM THE DISCOURSE ON THE RESURRECTION.


369


never-failing stream of water had nourished its
growth, rather than what was really the case.
For which cause, therefore, though the natures
of things are corruptible, and their bodies con-
sumed by fire, and it is impossible for things
which are once of an inflammable nature to re-
main unaffected by fire ; yet this tree, so far from
being burnt, is actually more vigorous and green
than usual, though it is naturally inflammable,
and that too when the fire is glowing about its
very roots. I certainly cast some boughs of
trees from the adjoining wood on to the place
where the fire burst forth, and they immediately
caught fire and were burnt to ashes. Now, then,
tell me why it is that that which cannot bear
even to feel the heat of the sun, but withers up
under it unless it be sprinkled with water, is not
consumed when beset by such fiery heat, but
both lives and thrives? What is the meaning of
this marvel? God appointed this as an example
and introduction to the day that is coming, in
order that we may know more certainly that,
when all things are deluged with fire from heav-
en, the bodies which are distinguished by chastity
and righteousness vvill be taken up by Him as
free from all injury from the fire as from cold
water. For truly, O beneficent and bountiful
Lord, " the creature that serve th Thee, who art
the Maker, increaseth his strength against the
unrighteous for their punishment, and abateth
his strength for the benefit of such as put their
trust in Thee ; " ' and at Thy pleasure fire cools,
and injures nothing that Thou determinest to be
preserved ; and again, water burns more fiercely
than fire, and nothing opposes Thine unconquer-
able power and might. For Thou createdst all
things out of nothing ; wherefore also Thou
changest and transformest all things as Thou
wilt, seeing they are Thine, and Thou alone art
(rod.

XV. The apostle certainly, after assigning the
planting and watering to art and earth and water,
conceded the growth to God alone, where he
says, " Neither is he that planteth anything,
neither he that watereth ; but God that giveth
the increase." ^ For he knew that Wisdom, the
first-born of God, the parent and artificer of all
things, brings forth everything into the world ;
whom the ancients called Nature and Providence,
because she, with constant provision and care,
gives to all things birth and growth. " For,"
says the Wisdom of God, " my Father worketh
hitherto, and I work." ^ Now it is on this ac-
count that Solomon called Wisdom the artificer
of all things, since God is in no respect poor,
but able richly to create, and make, and vary,
and increase all things.


' Wisd. xvi. 24.
^ I Cor. iii. 7.
' John V. 17.


XVI. God, who created all things, and provides
and cares for all things, took dust from the
ground, and made our outer man.


PART II.
THE SECOND DISCOURSE ON THE RESURRECTION.'*

For instance, then, the images of our kings
here, even though they be not formed of the
more precious materials — gold or silver — are
honoured by all. For men do not, while they
treat with respect those of the far more precious
material, slight those of a less valuable, but hon-
our every image in the world, even though it be
of chalk or bronze. And one who speaks against
either of them, is not acquitted as if he had only
spoken against clay, nor condemned for having
despised gold, but for having been disrespectful
towards the King and Lord Himself The
images of God's angels, which are fashioned of
gold, the principalities and powers, we make to
His honour and glory.


PART III.
I. FROM THE DISCOURSE ON THE RESURRECTI0N.5

I. Read the Book on the Resurrection by
St. Methodius, Bishop and Martyr, of which that
which follows is a selection, that the body is
not the fetter of the soul, as Origen thought,
nor are souls called by the prophet Jeremiah
" fettered " on account of their being within
bodies. For he lays down the principle that
the body does not hinder the energies of the
soul, but that rather the body is carried about
with it, and co-operates in whatever the soul
commits to it. But how are we to understand
the opinion of Gregory ^ the theologian, and
many others?

II. That Origen said that the body was given
to the soul as a fetter after the fall, and that pre-
viously it lived without a body ; but that this
body which we wear is the cause of our sins ;
wherefore also he called it a fetter, as it can hin-
der the soul from good works.

III. That if the body was given to the soul
after the fall as a fetter, it must have been given
as a fetter upon the evil or the good. Now it is
impossible that it should be upon the good ; for
no physician or artificer gives to that which has
gone wrong a remedy to cause further error,
much less would God do so. It remains, then,
that it was a fetter upon evil. But surely we
see that, at the beginning, Cain, clad in this
body, committed murder ; and it is evident into


■« From St. John Damascene, Orat. 2, De hnaghi., torn. i. p. 389,
ed. Paris, 1712.

5 From Photius, Bibliotheca, cod. 234.

t" Gregory, surnameU Theologus, commonly known as Gregory
Nazianzen.


3/


O


FROM THE DISCOURSE ON THE RESURRECTION.


what wickedness those who succeeded him ran.
The body is not, then, a fetter upon evil, nor
indeed a fetter at all ; nor was the soul clothed
in it for the first time after the fall.

IV. That man, with respect to his nature, is
most truly said to be neither soul without body,
nor, on the other hand, body without soul ; but
a being composed out of the union of soul and
body into one form of the beautiful. But Ori-
gen said that the soul alone is man, as did Plato.

V. That there is a difference between man and
other living creatures ; and to them are given
varieties of natural form and shape, as many as
the tangible and visible forces of nature pro-
duced at the command of God ; while to him
was given the form and image of God, with
every part accurately finished, after the very origi-
nal likeness of the Father and the only-begotten
Son. Now we must consider how the saint
states this.

VI. He says that Phidias the statuary, after he
had made the Pissean image of ivory, ordered oil
to be poured out before it, that, as far as he could
secure it, it might be preserved imperishable.

VII. He says, as was said also by Athenagoras,'
that the devil is a spirit, made by God, in the
neighbourhood of matter, as of course the rest
of the angels are, and that he was entrusted
with the oversight of matter, and the forms of
matter. For, according to the original constitu-
tion of angels, they were made by God, in His
providence, for the care of the universe ; in
order that, while God exercises a perfect and
general supervision over the whole, and keeps
the supreme authority and power over all — for
upon Him their existence depends — the angels
appointed for this purpose take charge of par-
ticulars. Now the rest of them remained in the
positions for which God made and appointed
them ; but the devil was insolent, and having
conceived envy of us, behaved wickedly in the
charge committed to him ; as also did those
who subsequently were enamoured of fleshly
charms, and had illicit intercourse with the
daughters of men.' For to them also, as was the
case with men, God granted the possession of
their own choice. And how is this to be taken?

VIII. He says that by the coats of skins is sig-
nified death. For he says of Adam, that when
the Almighty God saw that by treachery he, an
immortal being, had become evil, just as his de-
ceiver the devil was. He prepared the coats of
skins on this account ; that when he was thus, as
it were, clothed in mortality, all that was evil in
him might die in the dissolution of the body.

IX. He holds that St. Paul had two revelations.
For the apostle, he says, does not suppose para-
dise to be in the third heaven, in the opinion of


I [Athenagoras, Plea, cap. xxiv. vol. ii. p. 142, this series.]


those who knew how to observe the niceties of
language, when he says, " I know such a man
caught up to the third heaven ; and I know such
a man, whether in the body or out of the body,
God knoweth, that was caught up into para-
dise." ^ Here he signifies that he has seen two
revelations, having been evidently taken up twice,
once to the tl^ird heaven, and once into paradise.
For the words, "I know such a man caught up,"
make it certain that he was personally shown a
revelation respecting the third heaven. And the
words which follow, " And I know such a man,
whether in the body or out of the body, God
knoweth, that he was caught up into paradise,"
show that another revelation was made to him re-
specting paradise. Now he was led to make this
statement by his opponent's having laid it down
from the apostle's words that paradise is a mere
conception, as it is above the heaven, in order
to draw the conclusion that life in paradise is
incorporeal.3

X. He says that it is in our power to do, or to •
avoid doing, evil ; since otherwise we should not
be punished for doing evil, nor be rewarded for
doing well ; but the presence or absence of
evil thoughts does not depend upon ourselves.
Wherefore even the sainted Paul says, " For what
I would, that do I not, but what I would not,
that I do ; " "* that is to say, " My thoughts are
not what I would, but what I would not." Now
he says that the habit of imagining evil is rooted
out by the approach of physical death, 5 — since
it was for this reason that death was appointed
by God for the sinner, that evil might not re-,
main for ever.

But what is the meaning of this statement?
It is to be noted that it has been made by others
of our Fathers as well. What is the meaning,
seeing that those who meet death find in it at
the time neither increase nor decrease of sins ?

II. A SYNOP.SIS OF SOME APOSTOLIC WORDS FROM
THE SAME DISCOURSE.*^

I. Kead a compendious interpretation of some
apostolic words from the same discourse. Let
us see, then, what it is that we have endeavoured
to say respecting the apostle. For this saying
of his, " I was alive without the law once," ^ refers
to the life which was lived in paradise before the
law, not without a body, but with a body, by our ]
first parents, as we have shown above ; for we
lived without concupiscence, being altogether
ignorant of its assaults. For not to have a law
according to which we ought to live, nor a power
of establishing what manner of life we ought to^


^ 2 Cor. xii. 2, 3.

3 [Gregory's opponent, not St. Paul's.]

"• Rom. vii. 15.

5 [Gregory says.]

6 From Photius, Bibliotheca, cod. 234.
^ Rom, vii. 9.


FROM THE DISCOURSE ON THE RESURRECTION.


Zl^


adopt, so that we might justly be approved or
blamed, is considered to exempt a person from
accusation. Because one cannot lust after those
things from which he is not restrained, and even
if he lusted after them, he would not be blamed.
For lust is not directed to things which are be-
fore us, and subject to our power, but to those
which are before us, and not in our power. For
how should one care for a thing which is neither
forbidden nor necessary to him ? And for this
reason it is said, " I had not known lust,jsxcept
the law had said. Thou shalt not covet." ' For
when (our first parents) heard, "Of the tree of
the knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not
eat of it ; for in the day thou eatest thereof thou
shalt surely die," ^ then they conceived lust, and
gathered it. Therefore was it said, " I had not
known lust, except the law had said, Thou shalt
not covet;" nor would they have desired to eat,
except it had been said, " Thou shalt not eat of
it." For it was thence that sin took occasion
to deceive me. For when the law was given,
the devil had it in his power to work lust in me ;
" for without the law, sin' was dead ; " ^ which
means, " when the law was not given, sin could
not be committed." But I was alive and blame-
less before the law, having no commandment in
accordance with which it was necessary to live ;
"but when the commandment came, sin revived,
and I died. And the commandment, which was
ordained to life, I found to be unto death." •*
For after God had given the law, and had com-
manded me what I ought to do, and what I
ought not to do, the devil wrought lust in me.
For the promise of God which was given to me,
this was for life and incorruption, so that obeying
it I might have ever-blooming hfe and joy unto
incorruption ; but to him who disobeyed it, it
would issue in death. But the devil, whom he
calls sin, because he is the author of sin, taking
occasion by the commandment to deceive me
to disobedience, deceived and slew me, thus
rendering me subject to the condemnation, " In
the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely
die."^ "Wherefore the law is holy, and the
commandment holy, and just and good ; " s be-
cause it was given, not for injury, but for safety ;
for let us not suppose that God makes anything
useless or hurtful. What then? "Was then that
which is good made death unto me?"^ namely,
that which was given as a law, that it might be
the cause of the greatest good? " God forbid."
For it was not the law of God that became the
cause of my being brought into subjection to
corruption, but the devil ; that he might be made


manifested who, through that which is good,
wrought evil ; that the inventor of evil might be-
come and be proved the greatest of all sinners.
" For we know that the law is spiritual ; " 7 and
therefore it can in no respect be injurious to any
one ; for spiritual things are far removed from
irrational lust and sin. " But I am carnal, sold
under sin ;" ^ which means : But I being carnal, i
and being placed between good and evil as a
voluntary agent, am so that I may have it in my
power to choose what I will. For " behold I
set before thee life and death ; " ^ meaning that
death would result from disobedience of the
spiritual law, that is of the commandment ; and
from obedience to the carnal law, that is the
counsel of the serpent ; for by such a choice " I
am sold " to the devil, fallen under sin. Hence
evil, as though besieging me, cleaves to me and
dwells in me, justice giving me up to be sold to
the Evil One, in consequence of having violated
the law. Therefore also the expressions : "That
which I do, I allow not," and " what I hate, that'
do I," 9 are not to be understood of doing evil,
but of only thinking it. For it is not in our
power to think or not to think of improper
things, but to act or not to act upon our thoughts.
For we cannot hinder thoughts from coming into
our minds, since we receive them when they are
inspired into us from without ; but we are able
to abstain from obeying them and acting upon
them. Therefore it is in our power to will not
to think these things ; but not to bring it about
that they shall pass away, so as not to come into
the mind again ; for this does not lie in our :
power, as I said ; which is the meaning of that
statement, "The good that I would, I do not ; " "^
for I do not will to think the things which injure
me ; for this good is altogether innocent. But
" the good that I would, I do not ; but the evil
which I would not, that I do ; " not willing to
think, and yet thinking what I do not will. And
consider whether it was not for these very things
that David entreated God, grieving that he
thought of those things which he did not will :
" O cleanse Thou me from my secret faults.
Keep Thy servant also from presumptuous sins,
lest they get the dominion over me ; so shall I
be undefiled, and innocent from the great of-
fence." " And the apostle too, in another place :
" Casting down imaginations, and every high
thing that exalteth itself against the knowledge
of God, and bringing into captivity every thought
to the obedience of Christ." '^

II. But if any one should venture to oppose this
statement, and reply, that the apostle teaches


' Rom. vii. 7.
- Gen. ii. 17.
3 Rom. vii. 8.
* Rom. vii. 9, 10.
5 Rom. vii. 12.
'' Rom. vii. 13.


7 Rom. vii. 14.

8 Jer. xxi. 8; Ecclus. xv. 8; Deut. xxx. 15.

9 Rom. vii. 15.
'° Rom. vii. 19.
" Ps. xix. 12, 13.
'^ 2 Cor. X. 5.


ZT^


FROM THE DISCOURSE ON THE RESURRECTION.


that we hate not only the evil which is in thought,
but that we do that which we will not, and we
hate it even in the very act of doing it, for he
says, " The good which I would, I do not ; but
the evil which I would not, that I do ; " ' if he
who says so speaks the truth, let us ask him to
explain what was the evil which the apostle hated
and willed not to do, but did ; and the good
which he willed to do, but did not ; and con-
versely, whether as often as he willed to do good,
so often he did not do the good which he willed,
but did the evil which he willetl not ? And how
he can say, when exhorting us to shake off all
manner of sin, " Be ye followers of me, even as
I also am of Christ?"^ Thus he meant the
things already mentioned which he willed not to
do, not to be done, but only to be thought of.
For how otherwise could he be an exact imitation
of Christ ? It would be excellent then, and most
delightful, if we had not those who oppose us,
and contend with us ; but since this is impossible,
we cannot do what we will. For we will not to
have those who lead us to passion, for then we
could be saved without weariness and effort ;
but that does not come to pass which we will,
but that which we will not. For it is necessary,
as I said, that we should be tried. Let us not
then, O my soul, let us not give in to the Evil
One ; but putting on " the whole armour of God,"
which is our protection, let us have " the breast-
plate of righteousness, and your feet shod with
the preparation of the Gospel (of peace).
Above all, taking the shield of faith, wherewith
ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of
the wicked. And take the helmet of salvation,
and the sword of the spirit, which is the Word of
(iod," 3 that ye may be able to stand against the
wiles of the devil ; '' casting down imaginations,
and every high thing that exalteth itself against
the knowledge of Christ," •* " for we wrestle not
against flesh and blood ; " s for that which I do,
I allow not ; for what I would, that do I not :
but what I hate, that do I. If then I do that
which I would not, I consent unto the law that
it is good. Now then it is no more I that do it,
but sin that dwelleth in me. For I know that in
me — that is, in my flesh — dwelleth no good
thing." "^ And this is rightly said. For re-
member how it has been already shown that,
from the time when man went astray and dis-
obeyed the law, thence sin, receiving its birth
from his disobedience, dwelt in him. For thus a
commotion was stirred up, and we were filled
with agitations and foreign imaginations, being
emptied of the divine inspiration and filled with


■ Rom. vii. 19.

^ I Cor. xi. I.

3 Eph. vi. 13, I4-17.

■* 2 Cor. X. 5.

5 Eph. vi. 12.

*■ Rom. vii. 15-18.


carnal desire, which the cunning serpent infused
into us. And, therefore, God invented death for
our sakes, that He might destroy sin, lest rising
up in us immortals, as I said, it should be immor-
tal. \Vhen the apostle says, " for I know that
in me — that is, in my flesh — dwelleth no good
thing," by which words he means to indicate that
sin dwells in us, from the transgression, through
lust ; out of which, like young shoots, the ima-
ginations of pleasure rise around us. For there
are two kinds of thoughts in us ; the one which
arises from the lust which lies in the body,
which, as I said, came from the craft of the Evil
Spirit ; the other from the law, which is in ac-
cordance with the commandment, which we had
implanted in us as a natural law, stirring up our
thoughts to good, when we delight in the law of
God according to our mind, for this is the inner
man ; but in the law of the devil according to
the lust which dwells in the flesh. For he who
wars against and opposes the law of God, that is,
against the tendency of the mind to good, is the
same who stirs up the carnal and sensual impulses
to lawlessness.

III. For the apostle here sets forth clearly, as I
think, three laws : One in accordance with the
good which is implanted in us, which clearly he
calls the law of the mind. One the law which
arises from the assault of evil, and which often
draws on the soul to lustful fancies, which, he
says, " wars against the law of the mind." ^ And
the third, which is in accordance with sin, settled
in the flesh from lust, which he calls the " law of
sin which dwells in our members ; " 7 which the
Evil One, urging on, often stirs up against us,
driving us to unrighteousness and evil deeds.
For there seems to be in ourselves one thing
which is better and another which is worse.
And when that which is in its nature better is
about to become more powerful than that which
is worse, the whole mind is carried on to that
which is good ; but when that which is worse
increases and overbalances, man is on the con-
trary urged on to evil imaginations. On account
of which the apostle prays to be delivered from
it, regarding it as death and destruction ; as also
does the prophet when he says, " Cleanse Thou
me from my secret faults." '^ And the same is
denoted by the words, " For I delight in the law
of God after the inward man ; but I see another
law in my members, warring against the law of
my mind, and bringing me into captivity to the
law of sin which is in my members. O wretched
man that I am ! who shall deliver me from the
body of this death?" ^ By which he does not
mean that the body is death, but the law of sin
which is in his members, lying hidden in us


" Rom. vii. 23.

^ Ps. xix. 12.

9 Rom. vii. 22-24.


FROM THE DISCOURSE ON THE RESURRECTION.


2>7?>


through the transgression, and ever deluding the
soul to the death of unrighteousness. And he
immediately adds, clearly showing from what
kind of death he desired to be delivered, and
who he was who delivered him, " I thank God,
through Jesus Christ." ' And it should be con-
sidered, if he said that this body was death, O
Aglaophon, as you supposed, he would not after-
wards mention Christ as delivering him from so
great an evil. For in that case what a strange
thing should we have had from the advent of
Christ? And how could the apostle have said
this, as being able to be delivered from death
by the advent of Christ ; when it was the lot of
all to die before Christ's coming into the world ?
And, therefore, O Aglaophon, he says not that
this body was death, but the sin which dwells in
the body through lust, from which God has deliv-
ered him by the coming of Christ. " For the
law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus hath made
me free from the law of sin and death ; " so that
'■ He that raised up Jesus from the dead shall
also quicken your mortal bodies by His Spirit
that dwelleth in you ; " having '* condemned sin "
which is in the body to its destruction ; " that the
righteousness of the law " - of nature which draws
us to good, and is in accordance with the com-
mandment, might be kindled and manifested.
For the good which " the law " of nature " could
not do, in that it was weak," being ov'ercome by
the lust which lies in the body, God gave strength
to accomplish, " sending His own Son in the
likeness of sinful flesh ; " so that sin being con-
demned, to its destruction, so that it should never
bear fruit in the flesh, the righteousness of the
law of nature might be fulfilled, abounding in
the obedience of those who walk not according
to the lust of the flesh, but according to the lust
and guidance of the Spirit ; " for the law of the
Spirit of life," which is the Gospel, being different
from earlier laws, leading by its preaching to obe-
dience and the remission of sins, delivered us
from the law of sin and death, having conquered
entirely sin which reigned over our flesh.

rv. He 3 says that plants are neither nourished
nor increased from the earth. For he says, let
any one consider how the earth can be changed
and taken up into the substance of trees. For
then the place of the earth which lay around,
and was drawn up through the roots into the
whole compass of the tree, where the tree grew,
must needs be hollowed out ; so that such a
thing as they hold respecting the flux of bodies
is absurd. For how could the earth first enter
in through the roots into the trunks of the plants,
and then, passing through their channels into all
their branches, be turned into leaves and fruit?


' Rom. vii. 25.

^ Rom. viii. 2, 11, 3, 4.

■* Methodius.


Now there are large trees, such as the cedar,
pines, firs, which annually bear much leaves and
fruit ; and one may see that they consume none
of the surrounding earth into the bulk and sub-
stance of the tree. For it would be necessary,
if it were true that the earth went up through
the roots, and was turned into wood, that the
whole place where the earth lay round about
them should be hollowed out ; for it is not the
nature of a dry substance to flow in, like a moist
substance, and fill up the place of that which
moves away. Moreover, there are fig-trees, and
other similar plants, which frequently grow in the
buildings of monuments, and yet they never con-
sume the entire building into themselves. But
if any one should choose to collect their fruit
and leaves for many years, he would perceive
that their bulk had become much larger than the
earth upon the monuments. Hence it is absurd
to suppose that the earth is consumed into the
crop of fruits and leaves ; and even if they were
all made by it, they would be so only as using it
for their seat and place. For bread is not made
without a mill, and a place, and time, and fire ;
and yet bread is not made out of any of these
things. And the same may be said of a thousand
other things.

V. Now the followers of Origen bring forward
this passage, " For we know that if our earthly
house of this tabernacle were dissolved," + and
so forth, to disprove the resurrection of the body,
saying that the " tabernacle " is the body, and
the " house not made with hands " " in the
heavens " is our spiritual clothing. Therefore,
says the holy Methodius, by this earthly house
must metaphorically 5 be understood our short-
lived existence here, and not this tabernacle ;
for if you decide to consider the body as being
the earthly house which is dissolved, tell us what
is the tabernacle whose house is dissolved ? For
the tabernacle is one thing, and the house of the
tabernacle another, and still another we who have
the tabernacle. " For," he says, " if our earthly
house of this tabernacle be dissolved" — by
w^hich he points out that the souls are ourselves,
that the body is a tabernacle, and that the house
of the tabernacle figuratively represents the en-
joyment of the flesh in the present life. If,
then, this present life of the body be dissolved
like a house, we shall have that which is not
made with hands in the heavens. " Not made
with hands," he says, to point out the difference ;
because this life may be said to be made with
hands, seeing that all the employments and pur-
suits of life are carried on by the hands of men.
For the body, being the workmanship of God,
is not said to be made with hands, inasmuch as

* 2 Cor. V. I.

5 The word means literally, "by an abuse, or misapplication; "
but the author's meaning is very nearly that expressed in the text.
— Tr.


374


FROM THE DISCOURSE ON THE RESURRECTION.


it is not formed by the arts of men. But if they
shall say that it is made with hands, because it
was the workmanship of (lod, then our souls
also, and the angels, and the spiritual clothing in
the heavens, are made with hands ; for all these
things, also, are the workmanship of God. What,
then, is the house which is made with hands?
It is, as I have said, the short-lived existence
which is sustained by human hands. For God
said, " In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat
bread ; " ' and when that life is dissolved, we
have the life which is not made with hands. As
also the Lord showed, when He said : " Make
to yourselves friends of the mammon of un-
righteousness ; that, when ye fail, they may re-
ceive you into everlasting habitations."^ For
what the Lord then called " habitations," ^ the
apostle here calls " clothing." '* And what He
there calls " friends " " of unrighteousness," the
apostle here calls " houses " " dissolved." As
then, when the days of our present life shall fail,
those good deeds of beneficence to which we
have attained in this unrighteous life, and in this
" world " which " lieth in wickedness," 5 will re-
ceive our souls ; so when this perishable life shall
be dissolved, we shall have the habitation which
is before the resurrection — that is, our souls
shall be with God, until we shall receive the new
house which is prepared for us, and which shall
never fall. Whence also "we groan," "not for
that we would be unclothed," as to the body,
" but clothed upon " ^ by it in the other hfe.
For the "house in heaven," with which we de-
sire to be " clothed," is immortality ; with which,
when we are clothed, every weakness and mor-
tality will be entirely " swallowed up " in it, being
consumed by endless life. " For we walk by
faith, not by sight ; "? that is, for we still go for-
ward by faith, viewing the things which are be-
yond with a darkened understanding, and not
clearly, so that we may see these things, and
enjoy them, and be in them. " Now this I say,
brethren, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the
kingdom of God ; neither doth corruption in-
herit incorruption." ^ By flesh, he did not mean
flesh itself, but the irrational impulse towards the
lascivious pleasures of the soul. And therefore
when he says, " Flesh and blood cannot inherit
the kingdom of God," he adds the explanation,
" Neither doth corruption inherit incorruption."
Now corruption is not the thing which is cor-
rupted, but the thing which corrupts. For when
death prevails the body sinks into corruption ;
but when life still remains in it, it stands uncor-


' Gen. iii. 19.
2 Luke xvi. 9.

^ e7rei/5u<Tao'dat,
5 I John V. 19.
*> 2 Cor. V. 4.
7 2 Cor. V. 7.
' I Cor. XV. 50.


2 Cor. V. 2, 3.


rupted. Therefore, since the flesh is the boun-
dary between corruption and incorruption, not
being either corruption or incorruption, it was
vanquished by corruption on account of pleasure,
although it was the work and the possession of
incorruption. Therefore it became subject to
corruption. When, then, it had been overcome
by corruption, and was given over to death for
chastisement. He did not leave it to be van-
quished and given over as an inheritance to cor-
ruption ; but again conquering death by the
resurrection, He restored it to incorruption, that
corruption might not inherit incorruption, but in-
corruption that which is corruptible. .A.nd there-
fore the apostle answers, " This corruptible must
put on incorruption, and this mortal immortal-
ity." 9 But the corruptible and mortal putting
on incorruption and immortality, what else is
this, but that which is sown in corruption rising
in incorruption?'" For, "as we have borne the
image of the earthly, we shall also bear the
image of* the heavenly." " For the "image of
the earthly " which we have borne refers to the
saying, " I3ust thou art, and unto dust thou shalt
return."'^ And the "image of the heavenly is
the resurrection from the dead and incorruption."

VI. Now Justin of NeapoHs,'^ a man not far re-
moved either from the times or from the virtues
of the apostles, says that that which is mortal is
inherited, but that life inherits ; and that flesh dies,,
but that the kingdom of heaven lives. When
then, Paul says that " flesh and blood cannot
inherit the kingdom of heaven," ■•♦ he does not
so speak as seeming to slight the regeneration
of the flesh, but as teaching that the kingdom
of God, which is eternal life, is not inherited by
the body, but the body by hfe. For if the
kingdom of God, which is life, were inherited
by the body, it would happen that life was swal-
lowed up by corruption. But now life inherits
that which is mortal, that death may be swal-
lowed up of life unto victory, and that which is
corruptible appear the possession of incorrup-
tion ; being made free from death and sin, and
become the slave and subject of immortality,
that the body may become the possession of in-
corruption, and not incorruption of the body.

VII. Now the passage, "The dead in Christ
shall rise first : then we which are alive," St.
Methodius thus explains : Those are our bodies ;
for the souls are we ourselves, who, rising, re-
sume that which is dead from the earth ; so that
being caught up with them to meet the Lord, we
may gloriously celebrate the splendid festival of


I


9 I Cor. XV. 53.

■° I Cor. XV. 42.

" I Cor. XV. 49.

'2 Gen. iii. 19.

" Commonly known as St. Justin Maityr. — Tr. [See his treatise
On the Resurrection, vol. i. p. 295; also On Life, p. 198, this
series.]

'■♦ I Cor. XV. 50.


FROM THE DISCOURSE ON THE RESURRECTION.


375


the resurrection, because we have received our
everlasting tabernacles, which shall no longer
die nor be dissolved.

VIII. I saw, he says, on Olympus ' (Olympus
is a mountain in Lycia), a fire spontaneously!
arising on the top of the mountain from the
earth, beside which is the plant Puragnos, so
flourishing, green, and shady, that it seemed |
rather as though it grew from a fountain. For \
what cause, although they are by nature corrup- '
tible, and their bodies consumed by fire, was
this plant not only not burnt, but rather more
flourishing, although in its nature it is easily
burnt, and the fire was burning about its roots ?
Then I cast branches of trees out of the sur-
rounding wood into the place where the fire
streamed forth, and, immediately bursting up
into flame, they were converted into cinders.
What then is the meaning of this contradiction ?
This God appointed as a sign and prelude of
the coming I3ay, that we may know that, when all
things are overwhelmed by fire, the bodies which j
are endowed with chastity and righteousness
shall pass through it as though it were cold water.

IX. Consider, he says, whether too the blessed
John, when he says, " And the sea gave up the j
dead which were in it : and death and hell de-
livered up the dead which were in them," ^ does
not mean the parts which are given up by the
elements for the reconstruction of each one?
By the sea is meant the moist element ; by hell,^
the air, derived from detSe?, because it is invisi-
ble, as was said by Origen ; and by death, the
earth, because those who die are laid in it ;
whence also it is called in the Psalms the " dust
of death," + Christ saying that He is brought
"into the dust of death."

X. For, he says, whatever is composed and
consists of pure air and pure fire, and is of like
substance with the angelic beings, cannot have
the nature of earth and water ; since it would
then be earthy. And of such nature, and con-
sisting of such things, Origen has shown that
the body of man shall be which shall rise, which
he also said would be spiritual.

XI. And he asks what will be the appearance
of the risen body, when this human form, as
according to him useless, shall wholly disappear ;
since it is the most lovely of all things which are
combined in living creatures, as being the form
which the Deity Himself employs, as the most
wise Paul explains : " For a man indeed ought
not to cover his head, forasmuch as he is the
image and glory of God ; " 5 in accordance with
which the rational bodies of the angels are set
in order? will it be circular, or polygonal, or


' C/. p. 368, supra.

^ Rev. XX. 13.

3 Hades.

* Ps. xxii. 15.

5 I Cor. xi. 7.


[Pyragnos = fire-proof agnos.]


cubical, or pyramidal? For there are very many
kinds of forms ; but this is impossible.'^ Well
then, what are we to think of the assertion, that
the godlike shape is to be rejected as more igno-
ble, for he himself allows that the soul is like
the body, and that man is to rise again without
hands or feet?

XII. The transformation, he says, is the restora-
tion into an impassible and glorious state. For
now the body is a body of desire and of humilia-
tion,7 and therefore Daniel was called " a man
of desires."^ But then it will be transfigured
into an impassible body, not by the change of
the arrangement of the members, but by its not
desiring carnal pleasures.

Then he says, refuting Origen, Origen there-
fore thinks that the same flesh will not be re-
stored to tjie soul, but that the form of each,
according to the appearance by which the flesh
is now distinguished, shall arise stamped upon
another spiritual body ; so that every one will
again appear the same in form ; and that this is
the resurrection which is promised. For, he
says, the material body being fluid, and in no
wise remaining in itself, but wearing out and
being replaced around the appearance by which
its shape is distinguished, and by which the
figure is contained, it is necessary that the resur-
rection should be only that of the form.

XIII. Then, after a little, he says : If then, O
Origen, you maintain that the resurrection of
the body changed into a spiritual body is to be
expected only in appearance, and put forth the
vision of Moses and Elias as a most convincing
proof of it ; saying that they appeared after
their departure from life, preserving no different
appearance from that which they had from the
beginning ; in the same way will be the resur-
rection of all men. But Moses and Elias arose
and appeared with this form of which you speak,
before Christ suffered and rose. How then
could Christ be celebrated by prophets and
apostles as "the first begotten of the dead?"''
For if the Christ is believed to be the first be-
gotten of the dead. He is the first begotten of
the dead as having risen before all others. But
Moses appeared to the apostles before Christ
suffered, having this form in which you say the
resurrection is fulfilled. Hence, then, there is
no resurrection of the form without the flesh.
P'or either there is a resurrection of the form as
you teach, and then Christ is no longer " the
first begotten of the dead," from the fact that
souls appeared before Him, having this form
after death ; or He is truly the first begotten,
and it is quite impossible that any shouM have


*> [Justin Martyr, vol. i. p. 295, this series.]

7 Phil. iii. 21.

8 Dan. ix. 23, marginal reading.

9 Rev. i. 5.


7>1^


FROM THE DISCOURSE ON THi<: R INSURRECTION.


been thought meet for a resurrection before
Him, so as not to die again. But if no one
arose before Him, and Moses and Elias appeared
to the apostles not having flesh, but only it: ap-
pearance, the resurrection in the flesh is clearly
manifested. For it is most absurd that the
resurrection should be set forth only in form,
since the souls, after their departure from the
flesh, never appear to lay aside the form which,
he says, rises again. But if that remains with
them, so that it cannot be taken away, as with
the soul of Moses and Elias ; and neither per-
ishes, as you think, nor is destroyed, but is
everywhere present with them ; then surely that
form which never fell cannot be said to rise again.

XIV. But if any one, finding this inadmissible,
answers. But how then, if no one rose before
Christ went down into Hades, are .several re-
corded as having risen before Him ? Among
whom is the son of the widow of Sarepta, and
the son of the Shunammite, and Lazarus. We
must say : These rose to die again ; but we are
speaking of those who shall never die after their
rising. And if any one should speak doubtfully
concerning the soul of Elias, as that the Scrip-
tures say that he was taken up in the flesh, and
we say that he appeared to the apostles divested
of the flesh, we must say, that to allow that he
appeared to the apostles in the flesh is more in
favour of our argument. For it is shown by this
case that the body is susceptible of immortality,
as was also proved by the translation of Enoch.
For if he could not receive immortality, he
could not remain in a state of insensibility so
long a time. If, then, he appeared with the
body, that was truly after he was dead, but cer-
tainly not as having arisen from the dead. And
this, we may say, if we agree with Origen when
he says that the same form is given to the soul
after death ; when it is separated from the body,
which is of all things the most impossible, from
the fact that the form of the flesh was destroyed
before liy its changes, as also the form of the
melted statue before its entire dissolution. Be-
cause the quality cannot be separated from the
material, so as to exist by itself; for the shape
which disappears around the l)rass is separated
from the melted statue, and has not longer a
substantial existence.

XV. Since the form is said to be separated in
death from the flesh, come, let us consider in
how many ways that which is separated is said
to be separated. Now a thing is said to be
separated from another either in act and sub-
sistence, or in thought ; or else in act, but not
in subsistence. As if, for instance, one should
separate from each other wheat and barley which
had been mingled together \ in as far as they
are separated in motion, they are said to be
separated in act ; in as far as they stand apart


when separated, they are said to be separated
in subsistence. They are separated in thought
when we separate matter from its ciualities, and
qualities from matter ; in act, but not in subsist-
ence, when a thing separated from another no
longer exists, not having a substantive existence.
And it may be observed that it is so also in
mechanics, when one looks upon a statue or a
brazen horse melted. For, when he considers
these things, he will see their natural form chan-
ging ; and they alter into another figure from
which the original form disappears. For if any
one should melt down the works formed into
the semblance of a man or a horse, he will find
the appearance of the form disappearing, but the
material itself remaining. It is, therefore, un-
tenable to say, that the form shall arise in nowise
corrupted, but that the body in which the form
was stamped shall be destroyed.
j XVI. But he says that it will be so ; for it will
i be changed in a spiritual body. Therefore, it
j is necessary to confess that the very same form
i as at first does not arise, from its being changed
; and corrupted with the flesh. For although it
be changed into a spiritual body, that will not he
I properly the original substance, but a certain
I resemblance of it, fashioned in an ethereal body.
\ If, however, it is not the same form, nor yet the
^ body which arises, then it is another in the place
; of the first. For that which is like, being differ-
' ent from that which it resembles, cannot be that
very first thing in accordance with which it was
I made.

XVII. Moreover, he says that that is the aj)-
I pearance or form which shows forth the identity
• of the members in the distinctive character of
[ the form.

xviii. And, when Origen allegorises that which
is said by the prophet Ezekiel concerning the
' resurrection of the dead, and perverts it to the
\ return of the Israelites from their captivity in
Babylon, the saint in refuting him, after many
j other remarks, says this also : For neither did
! they ' obtain a perfect liberty, nor did they over-
I come their enemies by a greater power, and
dwell again in Jerusalem ; and when they fre-
quently intended to build (the temple), they
were prevented by other nations. Whence, also,
they were scarce able to build that in forty-six
years, which Solomon completed from the foun-
dations in seven years. But what need we say
on this subject? For from the time of Nebu-
chadnezzar, and those who after him reigned
over Babylon, until the time of the Persian ex-
pedition against the Assyrians, and the empire
of Alexander, and the war which was stirred up
by the Romans against the Jews, Jerusalem was
six times overthrown by its enemies. And this


' The Israelites.


FROM THE DISCOURSE ON THE RESURRECTION.


377


is recorded by Josephus, who says : " Jerusalem
was taken in the second year of the reign of
Vespasian. It liad been taken before five times ;
but now for the second time it was destroyed.
For Asochaeus, king of Egypt, and after him
Antiochus, next Pompey, and after these Sosius,
with Herod, took the city and burnt it ; but
before these, the king of Babylon conquered and
destroyed it."

XIX. He says that Origen holds these opinions
which he refutes. And there may be a doubt
concerning Lazarus and the rich man. The
simpler persons think that these things were
spoken as though both were receiving their due
for the things which they had done in life in
their bodies ; but the more accurate think that,
since no one is left in life after the resurrection,
these things do not happen at the resurrection.
For the rich man says : " I have five brethren ;
. . . lest they also come into this place of tor-
ment, " ' send Lazarus, that he may tell them
of those things which are here. And, therefore,
if we ask respecting the "tongue," and the "fin-
ger," and " Abraham's bosom," and the reclining
there, it may perhaps be that the soul receives
in the change a form similar in appearance to
its gross and earthly body. If, then, any one
of those who have fallen asleep is recorded as
having appeared, in the same way he has been
seen in the form which he had when he was in
the flesh. Besides, when Samuel appeared, it
is clear that, being seen, he was clothed in a
body ; and this must especially be admitted, if
we are pressed by arguments which prove that
the essence of the soul is incorporeal, and is
manifested by itself.^ But the rich man in tor-
ment, and the poor man who was comforted in
the bosom of Abraham, are said, the one to be
punished in Hades, and the other to be com-
forted in Abraham's bosom, before the appearing
of the Saviour, and before the end of the world,
and therefore before the resurrection ; teaching
that now already, at the change, the soul uses
a body. Wherefore, the feaint says as follows :
Setting forth that the soul, after its removal
hence, has a form similar in appearance to this

' Luke xvi. 28.

* I Sam. xxviii. 12. [See vol. v. p. 169, note 11, this series.]

5 The reading of Jahn, " xaO' eavrriv," is here adopted. — Tr.


sensitive body ; does Origen represent the soul,
after Plato, as being incorporeal? And how
should that which, after removal from the world,
is said to have need of a vehicle and a clothing,
so that it might not be found naked, be in itself
other than incorporeal? But if it be incorporeal,
must it not also be incapable of passion ? For
it follows, from its being incorporeal, that it is
also impassible and imperturbable. If, then, it
was not distracted by any irrational desire, neither
was it changed by a pained or suffering body.
For neither can that which is incorporeal sym-
pathize with a bo^y, nor a body with that which
is incorporeal, if,-* indeed, the soul should seem
to be incorporeal, in accordance with what has
been said. But if it sympathize with the body,
as is proved by the testimony of those who ap-
pear, it cannot be incorporeal. Therefore God
alone is celebrated, as the unbegotten, independ-
ent, and unwearied nature ; being incorporeal,
and therefore invisible ; for " no man hath seen
God." 5 But souls, being rational bodies, are
arranged by the Maker and Father of all things
into members which are visible to reason, hav-
ing received this impression. Whence, also, in
Hades, as in the case of Lazarus and the rich
man, they are spoken of as having a tongue, and
a finger, and the other members ; not as though
they had with them another invisible body, but
that the souls themselves, naturally, when en-
tirely stripped of their covering, are such accord-
ing to their essence.

XX. The saint says at the end : The words,
" For to this end Christ both died, and rose, and
revived, that He might be Lord both of the
dead and living," '^ must be taken as referring
to souls and bodies ; the souls being the living,
as being immortal, and the bodies being dead.

XXI. Since the body of man is more honour-
able than other living creatures, because it is
said to have been formed by the hands of God,
and because it has attained to be the vehicle of
the reasonable soul ; how is it that it is so short-
lived, shorter even than some of the irrational
creatures? Is it not clear that its long-lived
existence will be after the resurrection ?


•• Jahn's reading.
5 John i. 18.
'^ Rom. xiv. g.


FRAGMENTS.


ON THE HISTORY OF JONAH.


FROM THE BOOK ON THE RESURRECTION.'

I. The history of Jonah ^ contains a great mys-
tery. For it seems that the whale signifies Time,
which never stands still, but is always going on,
and consumes the things which are made by
long and shorter intervals. But Jonah, who
fled from the presence of God, is himself the
first man who, having transgressed the law, fled
from being seen naked of immortality, having
lost through sin his confidence in the Deity.
And the ship in which he embarked, and which
was tempest-tossed, is this brief and hard life in
the present time ; just as though we had turned
and removed from that blessed and secure life,
to that which was most tempestuous and un-
stable, as from solid land to a ship. For what
a ship is to the land, that our present life is to
that which is immortal. And the storm and the
tempests which beat against us are the tempta-
tions of this life, which in the world, as in a
tempestuous sea, do not permit us to have a fair
voyage free from pain, in a calm sea, and one
which is free from evils. And the casting of
Jonah from the ship into the sea, signifies the
fall of the first man from life to death, who re-
ceived that sentence because, through having
sinned, he fell from righteousness : " Dust thou
art, and unto dust shalt thou return." ^ And his
being swallowed by the whale signifies our in-
evitable removal by time. For the belly in which
Jonah, when he was swallowed, was concealed,
is the all-receiving earth, which receives all
things which are consumed by time.

II. As, then, Jonah spent three days and as


' [A fragment given by Combefis, in Latin, in the Bibliotheca
Concionatoria, t. ii. p. 263, etc. Published in Greek from the Vat-
ican MS. (1611), by Simon de Magistris, in Acta Martyrum ad
ostia Tiberina sub Claudia Gothico, (Rome, 1792, folio. Append,
p. 462.)]

2 [Matt. xii. 40. This history comes to us virtually from the Son
of God, who confirms the testimony of His prophet. See the very
curious remarks of Edward King in his Morsels of Criticism, vol.
i. p. 601, ed. 1788.]

3 Gen. iii. 19.


many nights in the whale's belly, and was de-
livered up sound again, so shall we all, who have
passed through the three stages of our present
life on earth — I mean the beginning, the middle,
and the end, of which all this present time con-
sists— rise again. For there are altogether three
intervals of time, the past, the future, and the
present. And for this reason the Lord spent so
many days in the earth symbolically, thereby
teaching clearly that when the fore-mentioned
intervals of time have been fulfilled, then shall
come our resurrection, which is the beginning of
the future age, and the end of this. For in that
age ■* there is neither past nor future, but only the
present. Moreover, Jonah having spent three
days and three nights in the belly of the whale,
was not destroyed by his flesh being dissolved,
as is the case with that natural decomposition
which takes place in the belly, in the case of
those meats which enter into it, on account of
the greater heat in the liquids, that it might be
shown that these bodies of ours may remain un-
destroyed. For consider that God had images
of Himself made as of gold, that is of a purer
spiritual substance, as the angels ; and others of
clay or brass, as ourselves. He united the soul
which was made in the image of (lod to that
which was earthy. As, then, we must here hon-
our all the images of a king, on account of the
form which is in them, so also it is incredible
that we who are the images of God should be
altogether destroyed as being without honour.
Whence also the Word descended into our world, ,
and was incarnate of our body, in order that,]
having fashioned it to a more divine image, He
might raise it incorrupt, although it had been
dissolved by time. And, indeed, when we trace '
out the dispensation which was figuratively set j
forth by the prophet, we shall find the whole ■
discourse visibly extending to this.


* Or, dispensation.


FRAGMENTS.


379


EXTRACTS FROM THE WORK ON THINGS CREATED.'


I. This selection is made, by way of compen-
dium or synopsis, from the work of the holy mar-
tyr and bishop Methodius, concerning things
created. The passage, " Give not that which is
holy unto the dogs, neither cast ye your pearls
before swine," - is explained by Origen as signi-
fying that the pearls are the more mystical teach-
ings of our God-given religion, and the swine
those who roll in impiety and in all kinds of
pleasures, as swine do in mud ; for he said that
it was taught by these words of Christ not to
cast about the divine teachings, inasmuch as they
could not bear them who were held by impiety
and brutal pleasures. The great Methodius says :
If we must understand by pearls the glorious and
divine teachings, and by swine those who are
given up to impiety and pleasures, from whom
are to be withheld and hidden the apostle's
teachings, which stir men up to piety and faith
in Christ, see how you say that no Christians can
be converted from their impiety by the teachings
of the apostles. For they would never cast the
mysteries of Christ to those who, through want
of faith, are like swine. Either, therefore, these
things were cast before all the Greeks and other
unbelievers, and were preached by the disciples
of Christ, and converted them from impiety to
the faith of Christ, as we believers certainly con-
fess, and then the words, " Cast not your pearls
before swine," can no longer mean what has
been said ; or meaning this, we must say that
faith in Christ and dehverance from impiety have
been accorded to none of the unbelievers, whom
we compare to swine, by the apostolic instruc-
tions enlightening their souls like pearls. But
this is blasphemous. Therefore the pearls in this
place are not to be taken to mean the deepest
doctrines, and the swine the impious ; nor are
we to understand the words, " Cast not your
pearls before swine," as forbidding us to cast
before the impious and unbelieving the deep
and sanctifying doctrines of faith in Christ ; but
we must take the pearls to mean virtues, with
which the soul is adorned as with precious pearls ;
and not to cast them before swine, as meaning
that we are not to cast these virtues, such as
chastity, temperance, righteousness, and truth,
that we are not to cast these to impure pleasures,
for these are like swine, lest they, fleeing from
the virtues, cause the soul to live a swinish and
a vicious life.

u. Origen says that what he calls the Centaur
is the universe which is co-eternal with the only


' From Photius, Bibliotheca, cod. 235.
* Matt. vii. 6.


wise and independent (iod. For he says, since
there is no workman without some work, or
maker without something made, so neither is
there an Almighty without an object of His
power. For the workman must be so called
from his work, and the maker from what he
makes, and the Almighty Ruler from that which
He rules over. And so it must be, that these
things were made by God from the beginning,
and that there was no time in which they did
not exist. For if there was a time when the
things that are made did not exist, then, as there
were no things which had been made, so there
was no maker ; which you see to be an impious
conclusion. x\nd it will result that the unchange-
able and unaltered God has altered and changed.
For if He made the universe later, it is clear
that He passed from not making to making.
But this is absurd in connection with what has
been said. It is impossible, therefore, to say
that the universe is not unbeginning and co-eter-
nal with God. To whom the saint replies, in
the person of another, asking, " Do you not con-
sider God the beginning and fountain of wisdom
and glory, and in short of all virtue in substance
and not by acquisition?" ''Certainly," he says.
"And what besides? Is He not by Himself per-
fect and independent?" "True; for it is im-
possible that he who is independent should have
his independence from another. For we must
say, that all which is full by another is also im-
perfect. For it is the thing which has its com-
pleteness of itself, and in itself alone, which can
alone be considered perfect." "You say most
truly. For would you pronounce that which is
neither by itself complete, nor its own complete
ness, to be independent?" "By no means
For that which is perfect through anything else
must needs be in itself imperfect." "Well, then
shall God be considered perfect by Himself, and
not by some other?" " Most rightly." "Then
God is something different from the world, and
the world from God ? " "Quite so." "We must
not then say that God is perfect, and Creator,
and Almighty, through the world?" "No; for
He must surely by Himself, and not by the world,
and that changeable, be found perfect by Him-
self." " Quite so." " But you will say that the
rich man is called rich on account of his riches ?
And that the wise man is called wise not as being
wisdom itself, but as being a possessor of sub-
stantial wisdom?" "Yes." "Well, then, since
God is something different from the world, shall
He be called on account of the world rich,
and beneficent, and Creator? " " By no means.


;8o


FRAGMENTS.


Away with such a thought ! " " Well, then, He
is His own riches, and is by Himself rich and
powerful." "So it seems." " He was then be-
fore the world altogether independent, being
Father, and Almighty, and Creator ; so that He
by Himself, and not by another, was this." "It
must be so." " Yes ; for if He were acknowl-
edged to be Almighty on account of the world,
and not of Himself, being distinct from the world,
— may God forgive the words, which the necessity
of the argument requires, — He would by Him-
self be imperfect and have need of these things,
through which He is marvellousl}' Almighty and
Creator. We must not then admit this pestilent
sin of those who say concerning God, that He is
Almighty and Creator by the things which He
controls and creates, which are changeable, and
that He is not so by Himself.

III. Now consider it thus : " If, you say, the
world was created later, not existing before, then
we must change the passionless and unchange-
able God ; for it must needs be, that he who did
nothing before, but afterwards, passes from not
doing to doing, changes and is altered." Then
I said, " Did God rest from making the world,
or not?" "He rested." "Because otherwise
it would not have been completed." " True."
"If, then, the act of making, after not making,
makes an alteration in God, does not His ceas-
ing to make after making the same ? " "Of ne-
cessity." "But should you say that He is altered
as not doing to-day, from what He was, when He
was doing?" " By no means. There is no ne-
cessity for His being changed, when He makes
the world from what He was when He was not
making it ; and neither is there any necessity for
saying that the universe must have co-existed
with Him, on account of our not being forced to
say that He has changed, nor that the universe
is co-eternal with Him."

IV. But speak to me thus : " Should you call
that a thing created which had no beginning of
its creation? " " Not at all." " But if there is
no beginning of its creation, it is of necessity
uncreated. But if it was created, you will grant
that it was created by some cause. For it is
altogether impossible that it should have a be-
ginning without a cause." " It is impossible."
" Shall we say, then, that the world and the things
which are in it, having come into existence and
formerly not existing, are from any other cause
than God?" "It is plain that they are from
God." " Yes ; for it is impossible that that which
is limited by an existence which has a beginning
should be co-existent with the infinite." " It is
impossible." " But again, O Centaur, let us
consider it from the beginning. Do you say
that the things which exist were created by Di-
vine knowledge or not?" "Oh, begone, they
will say; not at all." "Well, but was it from


the elements, or from matter, or the firmaments,
or however you choose to name them, for it
makes no difference ; these things existing be-
forehand uncreated and borne along in a state
of chaos ; did God separate them and reduce
them all to order, as a good painter who forms
one picture out of many colours?" "No, nor
yet this." For they will quite avoid making a
concession against themselves, lest agreeing that
there was a beginning of the separation and
transformation of matter, they should be forced
in consistency to say, that in all things God began
the ordering and adorning of matter which hith-
erto had been without form.

V. But come now, since by the favour of God
we have arrived at this point in our discourse ;
let us suppose a beautiful statue standing upon
its base ; and that those who behold it, admiring
its harmonious beauty, differ among themselves,
some trying to make out that it had been made,
others that it had not. I should ask them : For
what reason do you say that it was not made?
on account of the artist, because he must be
considered as never resting from his work? or
on account of the statue itself? If it is on ac-
count of the artist, how could it, as not being
made, be fashioned by the artist ? But if, when
it is moulded of brass, it has all that is needed
in order that it may receive whatever impression
the artist chooses, how can that be said not to
be made which submits to and receives his
labour? If, again, the statue is declared to be
by itself perfect and not made, and to have no
need of art, then we must allow, in accordance j
with that pernicious heresy, that it is self-made.
If perhaps they are unwilling to admit this argu-
ment, and reply more inconsistently, that they i
do not say that the figure was not made, but |
that it was always made, so that there was no
beginning of its being made, so that artist might
be said to have this subject of his art without >
any beginning. Well then, my friends, we will'
say to them, if no time, nor any age before can
be found in the past, when the statue was not per-
fect, will you tell us what the artist contributed
to it, or wrought upon it? For if this statue
has need of nothing, and has no beginning of
existence, for this reason, according to you, aj
maker never made it, nor will any maker bej
found. And so the argument seems to come!
again to the same conclusion, and we must allow!
that it is self-made. For if an artificer is saidj
to have moved a statue ever so slightly, he willl
submit to a beginning, when he began to movej
and adorn that which was before unadorned and
unmoved. But the world neither was nor will
be for ever the same. Now we must compare
the artificer to God, and the statue to the world, i
But how then, O foolish men, can you imagine
the creation to be co-eternal with its Artificer,


FRAGMENTS.


381


and to have no need of an artificer? For it is
of necessity that the co-eternal should never
have had a beginning of being, and should be
equally uncreated and powerful with Him. But
the uncreated appears to be in itself perfect and
unchangeable, and it will have need of nothing,
and be free from corruption. And if this be so,
the world can no longer be, as you say it is,
capable of change.

VI. He says that the Church ' is so called from
being called out - with respect to pleasures.

VII. The saint says : We said there are two
kinds of formative power in what we have n#v
acknowledged ; the one which works by itself
what it chooses, not out of things which already
exist, by its bare will, without delay, as soon
as it wills. This is the power of the Father.
The other which adorns and embellishes, by
imitation of the former, the things which already
exist. This is the power of the Son, the al-
mighty and powerful hand of the Father, by
which, after creating matter not out of things
which were already in existence, He adorns it.

vm. The saint says that the Book of Job is
by Moses. He says, concerning the words, " In
the beginning God created the heaven and the
earth," ^ that one will not err who says that the
"Beginning" is Wisdom. For Wisdom is said
by one of the Divine band to speak in this man-
ner concerning herself : " The Lord created me
the beginning of His ways for His works : of
old He laid my foundation." ^ It was fitting and
more seemly that all things which came into ex-
istence, should be more recent than Wisdom,
since they existed through her. Now consider
whether the saying : " In the beginning was the
Word, and the Word was with God, and the
Word was God. The same was in the begin-
ning with God ; " ' — whether these statements
be not in agreement with those. For we must
say that the Beginning, out of which the most
upright Word came forth, is the Father and
Maker of all things, in whom it was. And the


3 Gen. i. i.

* Prov. viii. 22.

5 John i. 1,2.


words, "The same was in the beginning with
God," seem to indicate the position of authority
of the Word, which He had with the Father be-
fore the world came into existence ; " beginning "
signifying His power. And so, after the peculiar
unbeginning beginning, who is the Father, He
is the beginning of other things, by whom all
things are made.

IX. He says that Origen, after having fabled
many things concerning the eternity of the uni-
verse, adds this also : Nor yet from Adam, as
some say, did man, previously not existing, first
take his existence and come into the world.
Nor again did the world begin to be made six
days before the creation of Adam. But if any
one should prefer to differ in these points, let
him first say, whether a period of time be not
easily reckoned from the creation of the world,
according to the Book of Moses, to those who
so receive it, the voice of prophecy here pro-
claiming : " Thou art God from everlasting, and
world without end. . . . For a thousand years
in Thy sight are but as yesterday : seeing that is
past as a watch in the night." ^ For when a
thousand years are reckoned as one day in the
sight of God, and from the creation of the world
to His rest is six days, so also to our time, six
days are defined, as those say who are clever
arithmeticians. Therefore, they say that an age
of six thousand years extends from Adam to our
time. For they say that the judgment will come
on the seventh day, that is in the seventh thou-
sand years. Therefore, all the days from our
time to that which was in the beginning, in which
God created the heaven and the earth, are com-
puted to be thirteen days ; before which God,
because he had as yet created nothing according
to their folly, is stripped of His name of Father
and x\lmighty. But if there are thirteen days in
the sight of God from the creation of the world,
how can Wisdom say, in the Book of the Son of
Sirach : " Who can number the sand of the sea,
and the dro])S of rain, and the days of eternity ? " ''
This is what Origen says seriously, and mark
how he trifles.


* Ps XC. 2, 4.

7 Ecclus. i. 2.


:82


FRAGMENTS.


FROM THE WORKS OF METHODIUS AGAINST PORPHYRY.


This, in truth, must be called most excellent
and praiseworthy, which God Himself considers
excellent, even if it be despised and scoffed at
by all. For things are not what men think them
to be.

Then repentance effaces every sin, when there
is no delay after the fall of the soul, and the dis-
ease is not suffered to go on through a long in-
terval. For then evil will not have power to
leave its mark in us, when it is drawn up at the


' From the Parallels of St. John Damascene, Opera, torn. ii. p.
778, ed. Lequien.
2 'i,id., p. 784, B.


moment of its being set down like a plant new-
ly planted.

III. J

In truth, our evil comes out of our want of
resemblance to God, and our ignorance of Him ;
and, on the other hand, our great good consists
in our resemblance to Him. And, therefore,
(#ir conversion and faith in the Being who is in-
corruptible and divine, seems to be truly our
proper good, and ignorance and disregard of
Him our evil ; if, at least, those things which are
produced in us and of us, being the evil effects
of sin, are to be considered ours.

3 Ibid., p. 785, E.


FROM HIS DISCOURSE CONCERNING MARTYRS.'

For martyrdom is so admirable and desirable, I ouring it, testified, " He thought it not robbery
that the Lord, the Son of God Himself, hon- to be equal with God,"^ that He might honour

man to whom He descended with this gift.


' From Theodoretup, Dial., i, "Arpen-T,
iv. p. 37.


.,ed. Sirmond, torn.


2 Phil. ii. 5.


GENERAL NOTE.


The Banquet appears to me a genuine work, although, like other writings of this Father, it may
have been corrupted. Tokens of such corruptions are not wanting, and there can be little doubt
that Methodius the monkish artist and missionary of the ninth century has been often copied into
the works of his earlier namesake."

In a fragment, for example, found on a preceding page,- there is a passage on God's image
in angels and men, which appears in its more probable form in another fragment,^ discovered
by Combefis. As quoted by St. John Damascene, it is enough to say of it, with the candid Dupin,
" I very jnuch question whether the passage beloiigs to Methodius ; or, if it does, it must be taken
in another sense ^ than that in which Damascene understood it, . . . as the words which imme-
diately precede seem to intimate." That it is a positive anachronism in any other sense, is proved
by the history of Images, on which see Epiphanius, quoted by Faber, Difficulties of Romanism,
p. 488, ed. 1830. He gives St. Jerome, Opp., ii. p. 177. A learned friend suggests that the
Rev. J. Endell Tyler's popular work on Primitive Christian IVoiship may supply an accessible
reference. 5 It is a very good thought, for the whole book is worth reading, on other points also.

' Murdock's Mosheim, Eccles. Hist., ii. 51.

2 P. 369, note 4, supra.

3 The yonah Fragment, p. 378, siipra.

•• The sense, that is, of the golden image of God in angels, and " in clay or brass, as ourselves." See p. 378, supra.
s See pp. 131, 132, edition of the London Society for the Promotion of Christian Knowledge.


ORATION CONCERNING SIMEON AND ANNA

ON THE DAY THAT THEY MET IN THE TEMPLE.'


I. Although I have before, as briefly as possi-
ble, in my dialogue on chastity, sufficiently laid
the foundations, as it were, for a discourse on
virginity, yet to-day the season has brought for-
ward the entire subject of the glory of virginity,
and its incorruptible crown, for the delightful
consideration of the Church's foster-children.
For to-day the council chamber of the divine
oracles is opened wide, and the signs prefiguring
this glorious day, with its effects and issues, are
by the sacred preachers read over to the assem-
bled Church. To-day the accomplishment of
that ancient and true counsel is, in fact and
deed, gloriously manifested to the world. To-
day, without any covering,^ and with unveiled
face, we see, as in a mirror, the glory of the
Lord, and the majesty of the divine ark itself.
To-day, the most holy assembly, bearing upon
its shoulders the heavenly joy that was for gener-
ations expected, imparts it to the race of man.
" Old things are passed away " ^ — things new
burst forth into flowers, and such as fade not
away. No longer does the stern decree of the
law bear sway, but the grace of the Lord reign-
eth, drawing all men to itself by saving long-
suffering. No second time is an Uzziah^* invisibly
punished, for daring to touch what may not be
touched ; for God Himself invites, and who will
stand hesitating with fear ? He says : " Come
unto Me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden." 5
Who, then, will not run to Him ? Let no Jew
contradict the truth, looking at the type which
went before the house of Obededom.'' The
Lord has " manifestly come to His own.''' 7 And
sitting on a living and not inanimate ark, as upon
the mercy-seat, He comes forth in solemn pro-


' The oration likewise treats of the Holy Theotocos. [Published
Tiy Pantinus, 1598, and obviously corrupt. Dupin states that it is
"not mentioned by the ancients, nor even by Photius." The style
resembles that of Methodius in many places.]

^ 2 Cor. iii. 18.

3 2 Cor. V. 17.

■* 2 Sam. vi. 7.

5 Matt. xi. 28.

* 2 Sam. vi. 10.

/ John i. 11; Ps. 1. 3. ^AOev — €ja<jbafws. The text plainly re-
■quires this connection with evident allusion to Ps. I. " Our God will
manifestly come " enffcai'us Jjf ei, which passage our author connects
with another from John i. — Tr.


cession upon the earth. The publican, when he
touches this ark, comes away just ; the harlot,
when she approaches this, is remoulded, as it
were, and becomes chaste ; the leper, when he
touches this, is restored whole without pain. It
repulses none ; it shrinks from none ; it imparts
the gifts of healing, without itself contracting any
disease ; for the Lord, who loves and cares for
man, in it makes His resting-place. These are
the gifts of this new grace. This is that new and
strange thing that has happened under the sun '*
— a thing that never had place before, nor will
have place again. That which God of His
compassion toward us foreordained has come to
pass, He hath given it fulfilment because of that
love for man which is so becoming to Him.
With good right, therefore, has the sacred trum-
pet sounded, " Old things are passed away, be-
hold all things are become new." ^ And what
shall I conceive, what shall I speak worthy of
this day? I am struggling to reach the inacces-
sible, for the remembrance of this holy virgin
far transcends all words of mine. Wherefore,
since the greatness of the panegyric required
completely puts to shame our limited powers,
let us betake ourselves to that hymn which is
not beyond our faculties, and boasting in our
own 9 unalterable defeat, let us join the rejoicing
chorus of Christ's flock, who are keeping holy-
day. And do you, my divine and saintly audit-
ors, keep strict silence, in order that through
the narrow channel of ears, as into the harbour
of the understanding, the vessel freighted with
truth may peacefully sail. We keep festival, not
according to the vain customs of the Greek
mythology ; we keep a feast which brings with
it no ridiculous or frenzied banqueting '° of the
gods, but which teaches us the wondrous conde-
scension to us men of the awful glory of Him
who is God over all."


^ Ecclus. i. 10.

9 ^r\v aKtvriToy r/TTav eyKauxrjtra^iei'Oi. It seems better to retain
this. Pantinus would substitute avUriTov for olkLvthtov, and render
less happily " invicto hoc certamine victos."

t° [See p. 309, note i, ntpra, and the reflection upon even the
Ba>ii}7iet nf Philosophers, the SyinposzzDn of Plato.]
" Rom. ix. 5.


384


ORATION CONCERNING SIMEON AND ANNA.


II. Come, therefore, Isaiah, most solemn of
preachers and greatest of prophets, wisely, un-
fold to the Church the mysteries of the congre-
gation in glory, and incite our excellent guests
abundantly to satiate themselves with enduring
dainties, in order that, placing the reality which
we possess over against that mirror of thine,
truthful prophet as thou art, thou mayest joyfully
clap thine hands at the issue of thy predictions.
It came to pass, he says, " in the year in which
king Uzziah died, I saw the Lord sitting upon
a throne, high and lifted up ; and the house was
full of His glory. And the seraphim stood round
about him : each one had six wings. And one
cried unto another, and said. Hoi)', holy, holy,
is the Lord of hosts : the whole earth is full of
His glory. And the posts of the door were
moved at the voice of him that cried, and the
house was filled with smoke. And I said, Woe
is me ! I am pricked to the heart, for I am a
man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst
of a people of unclean lips : for mine eyes have
seen the King, the Lord of hosts. And one of
the seraphim was sent unto me, having a live
coal in his hand, which he had taken with the
tongs from off the altar. And he touched my
mouth, and said, Lo, this hath touched thy lips ;
and thine inic^uity is taken away, and thy sin is
purged. Also I heard the voice of the Lord,
saying, Whom shall I send, and who will go unto
this people ? Then said I,- Here am I ; send
me. And He said. Go, and tell this people,
Hear ye indeed, but understand not ; and see ye
indeed, but perceive not." ' These are the
proclamations made beforehand by the prophet
through the Spirit. Do thou, dearly beloved,
consider the force of these words. So shalt
thou understand the issue of these sacramental -
symbols, and know both what and how great this
assembling together of ourselves is. And since
the prophet has before spoken of this miracle,
come thou, and with the greatest ardour and
exultation, and alacrity of heart, together with
the keenest sagacity of thine intelligence, and
therewith approach Bethlehem the renowned,
and place before thy mind an image clear and
distinct, comparing the prophecy with the actual
issue of events. Thou wilt not stand in need
of many words to come to a knowledge of the
matter ; only fix thine eyes on the things which
are taking place there. " All things truly are
plain to them that understand, and right to them
that find knowledge."^ For, behold, as a throne
high and lifted up by the glory of Him that fash-
ioned it, the virgin-mother is there made ready,
and that most evidently for the King, the Lord
of hosts. Upon this, consider the Lord now


coming unto thee in sinful flesh. Upon this vir-
ginal throne, I say, worship Him who now comes
to thee by this new and ever-adorable way.
Look around thee with the eye of faith, and
thou wilt find around Him, as by the ordinance
of their courses,-* the royal and priestly company
of the seraphim. These, as His body-guard, are
ever wont to attend the presence of their king.
Whence also in this place they are not only said
to hymn with their praises the divine substance
of the divine unity, but also the glory to be
adored by all of that one of the sacred Trinity,
which now, by the appearance of God in the
flesh, hath even lighted upon earth. They say :
" The whole earth is full of His glor)'." For we
believe that, together with the Son, who was
made man for our sakes, according to the good
pleasure of His will,5 was also present the Father,
who is inseparable from Him as to His divine
nature, and also the Spirit, who is of one and the
same essence with Him.^ For, as says Paul, the
interpreter of the divine oracle,^ " God was in
Christ reconciling the world unto Himself, not
imputing their trespasses unto them." ^ He thus
shows that the Father was in the Son, because
that one and the same will worked in them.

III. Do thou, therefore, O lover of this festival,
when thou hast considered well the glorious
mysteries of Bethlehem, which were brought to
pass for thy sake, gladly join thyself to the heav-
enly host, which is celebrating magnificently thy
salvation.9 As once David did before the ark,
so do thou, before this virginal throne, joyfully
lead the dance. Hymn with gladsome song the
Lord, who is always and everywhere present, and
Him who from Teman,'° as says the prophet, hath
thought fit to appear, and that in the flesh, to
the race of men. Say, with Moses, " He is my
God, and I will glorify Him ; my father's God,
and I will exalt Him." " Then, after thine hymn
of thanksgiving, we shall usefully inquire what
cause aroused the King of Crlory to appear in
Bethlehem. His compassion for us compelled
Him, who cannot be compelled, to be born in a
human body at Bethlehem. But what necessity
was there that He, when a suckling infant," that


' Isa. vi. 1-9. The quotations are from LXX. version.

2 fjLVOTiqpLov is, in the Greek Fathers, equivalent to the Latin
Sacramentum. — Tr.

3 Prov. viii. 9.


•* iepaTevM-a. Perhaps less definitely priesthood. Ace. Arist. it
is r; -nepl Tous Seous i-m-ixikeia. The cult and ordinances of re-
ligion to be observed especially by the priests, whose business it is to
celebrate the e.\cellence of God. — Tr.

5 Kara tt)v evSoxiav. Allusion is made to Eph. i. 5, According to
the good pleasure of God, and His decree for the salvation of man.
Less aptly Pantinus renders, ob propensam seca;m in nos voluntatem.
— Tr.

^ " One and the same essence." This is the famous ojioouo-tos
of the Nicene Council. — Tr.

7 icpo<|>acT7)?, teacher of the divine oracles. This, which is the
technical term for the presiding priest at Eleusis, and the Greek trans-
lation of the Latin " Pontifex Maximus," is by our author applied to
St. Paul. — Tr.

8 2 Cor. V. 19.

9 2 .Sam. vi. 14.
■o Hab. iii. 3.

" Exod. XV. 2.

'2 iiTTOTCTflioi' Tvyx^avovTa. It is an aggravation, so to speak, that
He not only willed to become an infant, and to take upon Him, of
necessity, the infirmities of infancy, but even at that tender age to be


ORATION CONCERNING SIMEON AND ANNA.


385


He who, though born in time, was not Hmited
by time, that He, who though wrapped in swad-
dling clothes, was not by them held fast, what
necessity was there that He should be an exile
and a stranger from His country? Should you,
forsooth, wish to know this, ye congregation most
holy, and upon whom the Spirit of God hath
breathed, listen to Moses proclaiming plainly to
the people, stimulating them, as it were, to the
knowledge of this extraordinary nativity, and
saying, " Every male that openeth the womb,
shall be called holy to the Lord." ' O wondrous
circumstance ! " O the depth of the riches both
of the wisdom and knowledge of God ! " ^ It
became indeed the Lord of the law and the
prophets to do all things in accordance with His
own law, and not to make void the law, but to
fulfil it, and rather to connect with the fulfilment
of the law the beginning of His grace. There-
fore it is that the mother, who was superior to
the law, submits to the law. And she, the holy
and undefiled one, observes that time of forty
days that was appointed for the unclean. And
He who makes us free from the law, became
subject to the law ; and there is offered for Him,
who hath sanctified us, a pair of clean birds,^ in
testimony of those who approach clean and
blameless. Now that that parturition was un-
polluted, and stood not in need of expiatory
victims, Isaiah is our witness, who proclaims dis-
tinctly to the whole earth under the sun : " Be-
fore she travailed," he says, " she brought forth ;
before her pains came, she escaped, and brought
forth a man-child." ■♦ \Vho hath heard such a
thing? Who hath seen such things? The most
holy virgin mother, therefore, escaped entirely
the manner of women even before she brought
forth : doubtless, in order that the Holy Spirit,
betrothing her unto Himself, and sanctifying her,
she might conceive without intercourse with man.
She hath brought forth her first-born Son, even
the only-begotten Son of God, Him, I say, who
in the heavens above shone forth as the only-
begotten, without mother, from out His Father's
substance, and preserved the virginity of His
natural unity undivided and inseparable ; and
who on earth, in the virgin's nuptial chamber,
joined to Himself the nature of Adam, like a
bridegroom, by an inalienable union, and pre-
served His mother's purity uncorrupt and un
injured — Him, in short, who in heaven was
begotten without corruption, and on earth brought


banished from His country, and to make a forcible change of resi-
dence, /icTotKos yeviaOav. fieroiKot are those who, at the command
of their princes, are transferred, by way of punishment, to another
State. Their lands are confiscated. They are sometimes called
oviicTTrao-Toi. Like to the condition of these was that of Jesus, who
fled into Egypt soon after His birth. For the condition of the ixiroiKoi
at Athens, see An. Smith's Diet. Antiq. — Tr.

■ Exod. .\x.\i. 19.

^ Rom. xi. 33.

3 Luke xi. 24. ,

* Isa. Ixvi. 7,


forth in a manner quite unspeakable. But to
return to our subject.

IV. Therefore the prophet brought the virgin
from Nazareth, in order that she might give birth
at Bethlehem to her salvation-bestowing child,
and brought her back again to Nazareth, in
order to make manifest to the world the hope
of life. Hence it was that the ark of God re-
moved from the inn at Bethlehem, for there He
paid to the law that debt of the forty days, due
not to justice but to grace, and rested upon the
mountains of Sion, and receiving into His pure
bosom as upon a lofty throne, and one tran-
scending the nature of man, the Monarch of all,5
she presented Him there to God the Father, as
the joint-partner of His throne, and inseparable
from His nature, together with that pure and
undefiled flesh which he had of her substance
assumed. The holy mother goes up to the
temple to exhibit to the law a new and strange
wonder, even that child long expected, who
opened the virgin's womb, and yet did not burst
the barriers of virginity ; that child, superior to
the law, who yet fulfilled the law ; that child
that was at once before the law, and yet after it ;
that child, in short, who was of her incarnate
beyond the law of nature.^ For in other cases
every womb being first opened by connection
with a man, and, being impregnated by his seed,
receives the beginning of conception, and by the
pangs which make perfect parturition, doth at
length bring forth to light its offspring endowed
W'ith reason, and with its nature consistent, in
accordance with the wise provision of God its
Creator. For God said, " Be fruitful, and multi-
ply, and replenish the earth." But the womb of
this virgin, without being opened before, or being
impregnated with seed, gave birth to an offspring
that transcended nature, while at the same time
it was cognate to it, and that without detriment
to the indivisible unity, so that the miracle was
the more stupendous, the prerogative of virginity
likewise remaining intact. She goes up, there-
fore, to the temple, she who was more exalted
than the temple, clothed with a double glory — .
the glory, I say, of undefiled virginity, and that
of ineffable fecundity, the benediction of the law,
and the sanctification of grace. Wherefore he
says who saw it : " And the whole house was full
of His glory, and the seraphim stood round
about him ; and one cried unto another, and
said. Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of hosts : the
whole earth is full of His glory." 7 As also the
blessed prophet Habakkuk has charmingly sung,
saying, "In the midst of two living creatures
thou shalt be known : as the years draw nigh


5 Cf. Luke ii. 22.

6 [Here seems to me a deep and true insight regarding the scrip-
tural topics and events touched upon.]

' Isa. vi. 3.


l86


ORATION CONCERNING SIMEON AND ANNA.


thou shalt be recognised — when the time is
come thou shalt be shown forth." ' See, I pray
you, the exceeding accuracy of the Spirit. He
speaks of knowledge, recognition, showing forth.
As to the first of these : " In the midst of two
living creatures thou shalt be known," ^ he refers
to that overshadowing of the divine glory which,
in the time of the law, rested in the Holy of
holies upon the covering of the ark, between the
typical cherubim, as He says to Moses, " There
will I be known to thee." 3 But He refers like-
wise to that concourse of angels, which hath now
come to meet us, by the divine and ever adora-
ble manifestation of the Saviour Himself in the
flesh, although He in His very nature cannot be
beheld by us, as Isaiah has even before declared.
But when He says, " As the years draw nigh,
thou shalt be recognised," He means, as has
been said before, that glorious recognition of our
Saviour, God in the flesh, who is otherwise in-
visible to mortal eye ; as somewhere Paul, that
great interpreter of sacred mysteries, says : " But
when the fulness of the time was come, God sent
forth His Son, made of a woman, made under
the law, to redeem them that were under the
law, that we might receive the adoption of sons."-*
And then, as to that which is subjoined, " When
the time is come, Thou shalt be shown forth,"
what exposition doth this require, if a man dili-
gently direct the eye of his mind to the festival
which we are now celebrating? "For then shalt
Thou be shown forth," He says, " as upon a
kingly charger, by Thy pure and chaste mother,
in the temple, and that in the grace and beauty
of the flesh assumed by Thee." All these things
the prophet, summing up for the sake of greater
clearness, exclaims in brief : " The Lord is in
His holy temple ; " s " Fear before Him all the
earth." ^

V. Tremendous, verily, is the mystery con-
nected with thee, O virgin mother, thou spiritual
throne, glorified and made worthy of God.?
Thou hast brought forth, before the eyes of
those in heaven and earth, a pre-eminent won-
der. And it is a proof of this, and an irref-
ragable argument, that at the novelty of thy
supernatural child-bearing, the angels sang on
earth, " Glory to God in the highest, and on
earth peace, good-will towards men," ^ by their
threefold song bringing in a threefold holiness. ^


- The quotation from the prophet Habakkuk is from the LXX.
version. — Tr.
^ Hab. iii. 2.
3 Exod. XXV. 22.

* Gal. iv. 4, 5.
^ Hab. ii. 20.

* Ps xcvi. 9.

^ [Note " ;«<t(/<r worthy ; " so " found grace " and " my Saviour,"
in St. Luke. Hence not immaculate by nature.]

* Luke ii. 14.

9 Tor T^tTrAacTiatr/u.bf T»)s ayioTrjTo?, Pantinus translates triplicem
sanctitatis ratioiietn, but this is hardly theological. Allusion is
made to the song of the seraphim, Isa. vi. ; and our author contends
that the threefold hymn sung by the angels at Christ's birth answers to
that threefold acclamation of theirs in sign of the triune Deity. — Tr.


Blessed art thou among the generations of
women, O thou of God most blessed, for by
thee the earth has been filled with that divine
glory of God ; as in the Psalms it is sung :
" Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, and the
whole earth shall be filled with His glory.
Amen. Amen." "^ And the posts of the door,
says the prophet, moved at the voice of him
that cried, by which is signified the veil of the
temple drawn before the ark of the covenant,
which typified thee, that the truth might be laid
open to me, and also that I might be taught, by
the types and figures which went before, to
approach with reverence and trembling to do
honour to the sacred mystery which is connected
with thee ; and that by means of this prior
shadow-painting of the law I might be restrained
from boldly and irreverently contemplating with
fixed gaze Him who, in His incomprehensibility,
is seated far above all." For if to the ark, which
was the image and type of thy sanctity, such
honour was paid of God that to no one but to
the priestly order only was the access to it open,
or ingress allowed to behold it, the veil separat-
ing it off", and keeping the vestibule as that of a
queen, what, and what sort of veneration is due
to thee from us who are of creation the least, to
thee who art indeed a queen ; to thee, the living
ark of God, the Lawgiver ; to thee, the heaven
that contains Him who can be contained of
none? For since thou, O holy virgin,'^ hast
dawned as a bright day upon the world, and hast
brought forth the Sun of Righteousness, that
hateful horror of darkness has been chased
away ; the power of the tyrant has been broken,
death hath been destroyed, hell swallowed up,
and all enmity dissolved before the face of
peace ; noxious diseases depart now that salva-
tion looks forth ; and the whole universe has
been filled with the pure and clear light of truth.
To which things Solomon alludes in the Book
of Canticles, and begins thus : " My beloved is
mine, and I am his ; he feedeth among the lilies
until the day break, and the shadows flee away." '3
Since then, the God of gods hath appeared in
Sion, and the splendour of His beauty hath
appeared in Jerusalem ; and " a light has sprung
up for the righteous, and joy for those who are
true of heart." '•♦ According to the blessed
David, the Perfecter and Lord of the perfected 'S
hath, by the Holy Spirit, called the teacher and


10 Ps. Ixxii. i8, ip. _

'' TOi' TO. ■na.via. tv a.Ka.Ta.\T\^i.a VTrepiSpyfievov. Cf. I Tim. vi. i6,
(f)<I)? oiKUiv i.TTp6<Ti.Tov, Of slSev ovSels avOpioirav ovde iSelv SvvaTOLi,
— Tr.

'- [This apostrophe is not prayer nor worship. (See sec. xiv.,
infra.) It may be made by any orator. See Burgon's pertinent
references to Legh Richmond and Bishop Home, Lett, from Rome,

PP- 237. 238J

'3 Cant. ii. i5, 17.

'■* Ps. xcvii. II.

IS o TMv TeAovfie'fMj' TeAttwTTjs, initiator, consummator. 5ta tou
Uvevp^aTo^ ayCov is to be referred to avviKdAeaev, rather than to Tui'
TTpaTTop-^yoiy, — Tr.


ORATION CONCERNING SIMEON AND ANNA.


;87


minister of the law to minister and testify of
those tilings which were done.

VI. Hence the aged Simeon, putting off the
weakness of the flesh, and putting on the strength
of hope, in the face of the law hastened to re-
ceive the Minister of the law, the Teacher ' with
authority, the God of Abraham, the Protector
of Isaac, the Holy One of Israel, the Instructor
of Moses ; Him, I say, who promised to show
him His divine incarnation, as it were His hinder
parts ; ^ Him who, in the midst of poverty, was
rich ; Him who in infancy was before the ages ;
Him who, though seen, was invisible ; Him who
in comprehension was incomprehensible ; Him
who, though in littleness, yet surpassed all mag-
nitude— at one and the same time in the tem-
ple and in the highest heavens — on a royal
throne, and on the chariot of the cherubim ;
Him who is both above and below continuously ;
Him who is in the form of a servant, and in the
form of God the Father ; a subject, and yet
King of all. He was entirely given up to de-
sire, to hope, to joy ; he was no longer his own,
but His who had been looked for. The Holy
Spirit had announced to him the joyful tidings,
and before he reached the temple, carried aloft
by the eyes of his understanding, as if even now
he possessed what he had longed for, he exulted
with joy. Being thus led on, and in his haste
treading the air with his steps, he reaches the
shrine hitherto held sacred ; but, not heeding
the temple, he stretches out his holy arms to
the Ruler of the temple, chanting forth in song
such strains as become the joyous occasion : I
long for Thee, O Lord God of my fathers, and
Lord of mercy, who hast deigned, of Thine own
glory and goodness, which provides for all, of
Thy gracious condescension, with which Thou in-
clmest towards us, as a Mediator bringing peace,
to establish harmony between earth and heaven.
1 seek Thee, the Great Author of all. With
longing I expect Thee who, with Thy word, em-
bracest all things. I wait for Thee, the Lord
of life and death. For Thee I look, the Giver of
the law, and the Successor of the law. I hunger
for Thee, who quickenest the dead ; I thirst for
Thee, who refreshest the weary ; I desire Thee,
the Creator and Redeemer of the world. ^ Thou
art our God, and Thee we adore ; Thou art our
holy Temple, and in Thee we pray ; Thou art
our Lawgiver, and Thee we obey ; Thou art God
of all thmgs the First. Before Thee was no
other god begotten of God the Father ; neither
after Thee shall there be any other son consub-
stantial and of one glory with the Father. And
to know Thee is perfect righteousness, and to
know Thy power is the root of immortality.'*

' Trv av0evTr)v StSao-KaAof. The allusion is to ^lark i. 22.

^ Exod. iii. 23.

5 Isa. xliii. 10.

* Wisd. XV. 3.


Thou art He who, for our salvation, was made
the head stone of the corner, precious and hon-
ourable, declared before to Sion.s For all things
are placed under Thee as their Cause and
Author, as He who brought all things into being
out of nothing, and gave to what was unstable
a firm coherence ; as the connecting Band and
Preserver of that which has been brought into
being ; as the Framer of things by nature differ-
ent ; as He who, with wise and steady hand,
holds the helm of the universe ; as the very
Principle of all good order ; as the irrefragable
Bond of concord and peace. For in Thee we
live, and move, and have our being.^^ Where-
fore, O Lord my God, I will glorify Thee, I will
praise Thy name ; for Thou hast done wonder-
ful things ; Thy counsels of old are faithfulness
and truth ; Thou art clotlied with majesty and
honour. 7 For what is more splendid for a king
than a purple robe embroidered around with flow-
ers, and a shining diadem ? Or what for God,
who delights in man, is more magnificent than
this merciful assumption of the manhood, illumi-
nating with its resplendent rays those who sit in
darkness and the shadow of death P*^ Fitly did
that temporal king and Thy servant once sing of
Thee as the King Eternal, saying. Thou art
fairer than the children of men, who amongst
men art very God and man.^ For Thou hast
girt, by Thy incarnation. Thy loins witli right-
eousness, and anointed Thy veins with faithful-
ness, who Thyself art very righteousness and
truth, the joy and exultation of all.'° Therefore
rejoice with me this day, ye heavens, for the
Lord hath showed mercy to His people. Yea,
let the clouds drop the dew of righteousness
upon the world ; let the foundations of the earth
sound a trumpet-blast to those in Hades, for the
resurrection of them that sleep is come." Let
the earth also cause compassion to spring up to
its inhabitants ; for I am filled with comfort ; I
am exceeding joyful since I have seen Thee, the
Saviour of men."

VII. While the old man was thus exultant, and
rejoicing with exceeding great and holy joy, that
which had before been spoken of in a figure by
the prophet Isaiah, the holy mother of God now
manifestly fulfilled. For taking, as from a pure
and undefiled altar, that coal living and ineffable,
with man's flesh invested, in the embrace of her
sacred hands, as it were with the tongs, she held
Him out to that just one, addressing and exhort-
ing him, as it seems to me, in words to this ef-
fect : Receive, O reverend senior, thou of priests


5 Ps. cxviii. 22; Isa. xxviii. 16; i Pet. ii, 6.
'' Acts xviii. 28.

7 Exod. XV. 2: Isa. xxv. i; Ps. civ. 1.
^ Isa. xlii. 7; Luke 1. 79.
9 1 Tim. 1. 17; Ps. xlv. 2.
'° Isa. xi. 5.
" Isa. xlv. 8.
■^ 2 Cor. vii. 4.


3^^


ORATION CONCERNING SIMEON AND ANNA.


the most excellent, receive the Lord, and reap
the full fruition of that hope of thine which is
not left widowed and desolate. Receive, thou
of men the most illustrious, the unfailing treasure,
and those riches which can never be taken away.
Take to thine embrace, O thou of men most
wise, that unspeakable might, that unsearchable
power, which can alone support thee. Embrace,
thou minister of the temple, the Greatness in-
finite, and the Strength incomparable. Fold thy-
self around Him who is the very life itself, and
live, O thou of men most venerable. Cling
closely to incorruption and be renewed, O thou
of men most righteous. Not too bold is the
attempt ; shrink not from it then, O thou of men
most holy. Satiate thyself with Him thou hast
longed for, and take thy delight in Him who has
been given, or rather who gives Himself to thee,
O thou of men most divine. Joyfully draw thy
light, O thou of men most pious, from the
Sun of Righteousness* that gleams around thee
through the unsullied mirror of the flesh. Fear
not His gentleness, nor let His clemency terrify
thee, O thou of men most blessed. Be not
afraid of His lenity, nor shrink from His kind-
ness, O thou of men most modest. Join thyself
to Him with alacrity, and delay not to obey Him.
That which is spoken to thee, and held out to
thee, savours not of over-boldness. Be not then
reluctant, O thou of men the most decorous.
The flame of the grace of my Lord does not
consume, but illuminates thee, O thou of men
most just.' Let the bush which set forth me in
type, with respect to the verity of that fire which
yet had no subsistence, teach thee this, O thou
who art in the law the best instructed.^ Let
that furnace which was as it were a breeze dis-
tilling dew persuade thee, O master, of the dis-
pensation of this mystery. Then, beside all this,
let my womb be a proof to thee, in which He
was contained, who in nought else was ever con-
tained, of the substance of which the incarnate
Word yet deigned to become incarnate. The
blast 3 of the trumpet does not now terrify those
who approach, nor a second time does the moun-
tain all on smoke cause terror to those who draw
nigh, nor indeed does the law punish relentlessly ^
those who would boldly touch. What is here
present speaks of love to man ; what is here
apparent, of the Divine condescension. Thank-
fully, then, receive the God who comes to thee,
for He shall take away thine iniquities, and thor-
oughly purge thy sins. In thee, let the cleans-
ing of the world first, as in type, have place. In
thee, and by thee, let that justification which is
of grace become known beforehand to the Gen-
tiles. Thou art worthy of the quickening first-

' Exod. Hi. 2.

2 Dan. iii. 21.

3 Exod. xix. 16.
* Ps. vi. 6.


fruits. Thou hast made good use of the law.
Use grace henceforth. With the letter thou hast
grown weary ; in the spirit be renewed. Put off
that whic his old, and clothe th)-self with that
which is new. For of these matters I think not
that thou art ignorant.

VIII. Upon all this that righteous man, waxing
bold and yielding to the exhortation of the
mother of God, w^ho is the handmaid of God in
regard to the things which pertain to men, re-
ceived into his aged arms Him who in infancy
was yet the Ancient of days, and blessed God,
and said, " Lord, now lettest Thou Thy servant
depart in peace, according to Thy Avord : for
mine eyes have seen Thy salvation, which Thou
hast prepared before the face of all people ; a
light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of
Thy people Israel." s I have received from Thee
a joy unmixed with pain. Do thou, O Lord,
receive me rejoicing, and singing of Thy mercy
and compassion. Thou hast given unto me this
joy of heart. I render unto Thee with gladness
my tribute of thanksgiving. I have known the
power of the love of God. Since, for my sake,
God of Thee begotten, in a manner ineffable,
and without corruption, has become man. I
have known the inexplicable greatness of Thy
love and care for us, for Thou hast sent forth
Thine own bowels to come to our deliverance.
Now, at length, I understand what I had from
Solomon learned : " Strong as death is love :
for by it shall the sting of death be done away,
by it shall the dead see life, by it shall even
death learn what death is, being made to cease
from that dominion which over us he exercised.
By it, also, shall the serpent, the author of our
evils, be taken captive and overwhelmed."^
Thou hast made known to us, O Lord, Thy sal-
vation,? causing to spring up for us the plant of
peace, and we shall no longer wander in error.
Thou hast made known to us, O Lord, that Thou
hast not unto the end overlooked Thy servants ;
neither hast Thou, O beneficent One, forgotten
entirely the works of Thine hands. For out of
Thy compassion for our low estate Thou hast
shed forth upon us abundantly that goodness of
Thine w'hich is inexhaustible, and with Thy very
nature cognate, having redeemed us by Thine
only begotten Son, who is unchangeably like to
Thee, and of one substance with Thee ; judging
it unworthy of Thy majesty and goodness to en-
trust to a servant the work of saving and bene-
fiting Thy servants, or to cause that those who
had offended should be reconciled by a minister.
But by means of that light, which is of one sub-
stance with Thee, Thou hast given fight to those
that sat in darkness^ and in the shadow of


5 Luke ii. 29-32.

* Cant. viii. 6.

7 Ps. xcviii. 2.

^ Isa. ix. 2, xlii. 7; Luke i. 79.


ORATION CONCERNING SIMEON AND ANNA.


389


death, in order that in Thy hght they might see
the hght of knowledge ; ' and it has seemed
good to Thee, by means of our Lord and Crea-
tor, to fashion us again unto immortahty ; and
Thou hast graciously given unto us a return to
Paradise by means of Him who separated us
from the joys of Paradise ; and by means of Him
who hath power to forgive sins Thou hast^
blotted out the handwriting which was against
us. 3 Lastly, by means of Him who is a partaker
of Thy throne, and who cannot be separated
from Thy divine nature. Thou hast given unto
us the gift of reconciliation, and access unto
Thee with confidence, in order that, by the Lord
who recognises the sovereign authority of none,
by the true and omnipotent God, the subscribed
sanction, as it were, of so many and such great
blessings might constitute the justifying gifts of
grace to be certain and indubitable rights to
those who have obtained mercy. And this very
thing the prophet before had announced in the
words : No ambassador, nor angel, but the Lord
Himself saved them ; because He loved them,
and spared them, and He took them up, and
exalted them.^ And all this was, not of works
of righteousness 5 which we have done, nor be-
cause we loved Thee, — for our first earthly fore-
father, who was honourably entertained in the
dehghtful abode of Paradise, despised Thy di-
vine and saving commandment, and was judged
unworthy of that life-giving place, and mingling
his seed with the bastard off-shoots of sin, he
rendered it very weak ; — but Thou, O Lord, of
Thine own self, and of Thine ineffable love
toward the creature of Thine hands, hast con-
firmed Thy mercy toward us, and, pitying our
estrangement from Thee, hast moved Thyself
at the sight of our degradation ^ to take us into
compassion. Hence, for the future, a joyous
festival is established for us of the race of xAdam,
because the first Creator of Adam of His own
free-will has become the Second Adam. And
the brightness of the Lord our God hath come
down to sojourn with us, so that we see God
face to face, and are saved. Therefore, O Lord,
I seek of Thee to be allowed to depart. I have
seen Thy salvation ; let me be delivered from
the bent yoke of the letter. I have seen the
King Eternal, to whom no other succeeds ; let
me be set free from this servile and burdensome
chain. I have seen Him who is by nature my
Lord and Deliverer; may I obtain, then, His
decree for my deliverance. Set me free from
the yoke of condemnation, and place me under
the yoke of justification. Deliver me from the


' Ps. xxxvL 9.

2 Mark ii. lo.

3 Col. ii. 4.

* Lsa. Ixiii. 9, Sept. version.
5 Tit. iii. 5.
^ John iv. 9.


yoke of the curse, and of the letter that killeth ; ?
and enrol me in the blessed company of those
who, by the grace of this Thy true Son, who is
of equal glory and power with Thee, have been
received into the adoption of sons.

IX. Let then, says he, what I have thus far
said in brief, suffice for the present as my offer-
ing of thanks to God. But what shall I say to
thee, O mother-virgin and virgin-mother? For
the praise even of her who is not man's work
exceeds the power of man. Wherefore the dim-
ness of my poverty I will make bright with the
splendour of the gifts of the spirits that around
thee shine, and offering to thee of thine own,
from the immortal meadows I will pluck a gar-
land for thy sacred and divinely crowned head.
With thine ancestral hymns will I greet thee, O
daughter of David, and mother of the Lord and
God of David. For it were both base and in-
auspicious to adorn thee, who in thine own glory
excellest with that which belongeth unto another.
Receive, therefore, O lady most benignant, gifts
precious, and such as are fitted to thee alone, O
thou who art exalted above all generations, and
who, amongst all created things, both visible
and invisible, shinest forth as the most honour-
able. Blessed is the root of Jesse, and thrice
blessed is the house of David, in which thou
hast sprung up.^ God is in the midst of thee,
and thou shalt not be moved, for the Most High
hath made holy the place of His tabernacle.
For in thee the covenants and oaths made of
God unto the fathers have received a most glori-
ous fulfilment, since by thee the Lord hath ap-
peared, the God of hosts with' us. That bush
which could not be touched,9 which beforehand
shadowed forth thy figure endowed with divine
majesty, bare God without being consumed, who
manifested Himself to the prophet just so far as
He willed to be seen. Then, again, that hard
and rugged rock,'° which imaged forth the grace
and refreshment which has sprung out from thee
for all the world, brought forth abundantly in the
desert out of its thirsty sides a healing draught
for the fainting people. Yea, moreover, the rod
of the priest which, without culture, blossomed
forth in fruit," the pledge and earnest of a
perpetual priesthood, furnished no contempt-
ible symbol of thy supernatural child-bearing.'^
What, moreover? Hath not the mighty Moses
expressly declared, that on account of these
types of thee, hard to be understood, '^ he delayed
longer on the mountain, in order that he might
learn, O holy one, the mysteries that with thee


' 2 Cor. iii. 6.

8 Ps. xlvi. 4, 5.

9 Exod. iii. 2.
*° Exod. xvii. 6.
" Num. xvii. 8.
" Heb. ix. 4.

13 Exod. XXV. 8.


390


ORATION CONCERNING SIMEON AND ANNA.


are connected ? For being commanded to build
the ark as a sign and similitude of this thing, he
was not negligent in obeying the command, al-
though a tragic occurrence happened on his de-
scent from the mount ; but having made it in
size five cubits and a half, he appointed it to be
the receptacle of the law, and covered it with
the wings of the cherubim, most evidently pre-
signifying thee, the mother of God, who hast
conceived Him without corruption, and in an
ineffable manner brought forth Him who is Him-
self, as it were, the very consistence of incorrup-
tion, and that withm the limits of the five and a
half circles of the world. On thy account, and
the undefiled Incarnation of God, the Word,
which by thee had place for the sake of that
flesh which immutably and indivisibly remains
with Him for ever.' The golden pot also, as a
most certain type, preserved the manna con-
tained in it, which in other cases was changed
day by day, unchanged, and keeping fresh for
ages. The prophet Elijah^ likewise, as prescient
of thy chastity, and being emulous of it through
the Spirit, bound around him the crown of that
fiery life, being by the divine decree adjudged
superior to death. Thee also, prefiguring his
successor Elisha,^ having been instructed by a
wise master, and anticipating thy presence who
wast not yet born, by certain sure indications of
the things that would have place hereafter,-* min-
istered help and healing to those who were in
need of it, which was of a virtue beyond nature ;
now with a new cruse, which contained healing
salt, curing the deadly waters, to show that the
world was to be recreated by the mystery mani-
fested in thee ; now with unleavened meal, in
type responding to thy child-bearing, without
being defiled by the seed of man, banishing from
the food the bitterness of death ; and then again,
by efforts which transcended nature, rising supe-
rior to the natural elements in the Jordan, and
thus exhibiting, in signs beforehand, the descent
of our Lord into Hades, and His wonderful de-
liverance of those who were held fast in corrup-
tion. For all things yielded and succumbed to
that divine image which prefigured thee.

X. But why do I digress, and lengthen out my
discourse, giving it the rein with these varied
illustrations, and that when the truth of thy mat-
ter stands like a column before the eye, in which
it were better and more profitable to luxuriate
and delight in? Wherefore, bidding adieu to
the spiritual narrations and wondrous deeds of
the saints throughout all ages, I pass on to thee
who art always to be had in remembrance, and
who boldest the helm, as it were, of this festival. 5


1 Heb. ix. 4.
^ 2 Kings ii. ii.
3 Ecclus. xlviii. i.
* 2 Kings ii. 20, iv. 41, v.

5 [The feast of the Purification. Here follows an impassioned
apostrophe, which apart from its Oriental extravagance is full of poet-


Blessed art thou, all-blessed, and to be de-
sired of all. Blessed of the Lord is thy name,
full of divine grace, and grateful exceedingly to
God, mother of God, thou that givest light to
the faithful. Thou art the circumscription, so
to speak, of Him who cannot be circumscribed ;
the root '' of the most beautiful flower ; the
mother of the Creator ; the nurse of the Nour-
isher ; the circtfinference of Him who embraces
all things ; the upholder of Him ^ who upholds
all things by His word ; the gate through which
God appears in the flesh ; ^ the tongs of that
cleansing coal ; 9 the bosom in small of that
bosom which is all-containing ; the fleece of
wool,'° the mystery of which cannot be solved ;
the well of Bethlehem," that reservoir of life
which David longed for, out of which the draught
of immortality gushed forth ; the mercy-seat '^
from which God in human form was made known
unto men ; the spotless robe of Him who clothes
Himself with light as with a garment. '3 Thou
hast lent to God, who stands in need of nothing,
that flesh which He had not, in order that the
Omnipotent might become that which it was his
good pleasure to be. What is more splendid
than this? What than this is more sublime?
He who fills earth and heaven,'^ whose are all
things, has become in need of thee, for thou
hast lent to God that flesh which He had not.
Thou hast clad the Mighty One with that beau-
teous panoply of the body by which it has be-
come possible for Him to be seen by mine eyes.
And I, in order that I might freely approach to
behold Him, have received that by which all the
fiery darts of the wicked shall be quenched. '5
Hail ! hail ! mother and handmaid of God.
Hail ! hail ! thou to whom the great Creditor of
all is a debtor. We are all debtors to God, but
to thee He is Himself indebted.

For He who said, " Honour thy father and
thy mother," ''^ will have most assuredly, as Him-
self willing to be proved by such proofs, kept
inviolate that grace, and His own decree towards
her who ministered to Him that nativity to
which He voluntarily stooped, and will have
glorified with a divine honour her whom He, as
being without a father, even as she was without
a husband. Himself has written down as mother.
Even so must these things be. For the hymns '7


ical beauty. Its language, however, like that of other parts of this
Oration, suggests at least interpolation, subsequent to the Nestorian
controversy. Previously, there would have been no call for such
vehemence of protestation.]
'^ Isa. xl. I.

7 Heb. i. 3.

8 Ezek. xliv. 2.

9 Isa. vi. 6.

'° Judg. vi. 37.

I' 2 Sam. xxiii. 17.

'^ Exod. xxxv. 17.

^3 Ps. civ. 2.

■'' Jer. xxiii. 24.

'5 Ephes. vi. 16.

If' Exod. XX. 12. •

•7 [Apostrophes like the above; paneg>'rical, not odes of worship.]


ORATION CONCERNING SIMEON AND ANNA.


;9i


which we offer to thee, O thou most holy and
admirable habitation of God, are no merely use-
less and ornamental words. Nor, again, is thy
spiritual laudation mere secular trifling, or the
shoutings of a false flattery, O thou who of God
art praised ; thou who to God gavest suck ; who
by nativity givest unto mortals their beginning
of being, but they are of clear and evident
truth. But the time would fail us, ages and
succeeding generations too, to render unto thee
thy fitting salutation as the mother of the King
Eternal,' even as somewhere the illustrious
prophet says, teaching us how incomprehensi-
ble thou art.^ How great is the house of God,
and how large is the place of His possession !
Great, and hath none end, high and unmeasur-
able. For verily, verily, this prophetic oracle,
and most true saying, is concerning thy majesty ;
for thou alone hast been thought worthy to share
with God the things of God ; who hast alone
borne in the flesh Him, who of God the Father
was the Eternally and Only-Begotten. So do
they truly believe who hold fast to the pure faith. ^
XI. But for the time that remains, my most
attentive hearers, let us take up the old man, the
receiver of God, and our pious teacher, who
hath put in here, as it were, in safety from that
virginal sea, and let us refresh him, both satis-
fied as to his divine longing, and conveying to us
this most blessed theology ; and let us ourselves
follow out the rest of our discourse, directing
our course unerringly with reference to our pre-
scribed end, and that under the guidance of
God the Almighty, so shall we not be found
altogether unfruitful and unprofitable as to what
is required of us. When, then, to these sacred
rites, prophecy and the priesthood had been
jointly called, and that pair of just ones elected
of God — Simeon, I mean, and Anna, bearing in
themselves most evidently the images of both
peoples — had taken their station by the side of
that glorious and virginal throne, — for by the old
man was represented the people of Israel, and
the law now waxing old ; whilst the widow rep-
resents the Church of the Gentiles, which had
been up to this point a widow, — the old man, in-
deed, as personating the law, seeks dismissal ; but
the widow, as personating the Church, brought
her joyous confession of faith,-^ and spake of
Him to all that looked for redemption in Jeru-
salem, even as the things that were spoken of
both have been appositely and excellently re-
corded, and quite in harmony with the sacred
festival. For it was fitting and necessary ttiat
the old man who knew so accurately that decree
of the law, in which it is said : Hear Him, and

' I Tim. i. 17.

2 Baruch iii. 24, 25.

3 [This must have been interpolated after the Council of Ephesus,
A.D. 431. The whole Oration is probably after that date.]

* Luke ii. 38.


every soul that will not hearken unto Him shall
be cut off from His people, 5 should seek a
peaceful discharge from the tutorship of the
law ; for in truth it were insolence and presump-
tion, when the king is present and addressing
the people, for one of his attendants to make a
speech over against him, and that to this man
his subjects should incline their ears. It was
necessary, too, that the widow who had been
increased with gifts beyond measure, should in
festal strains return her thanks to God ; and so
the things which there took place were agreeable
to the law. But, for what remains, it is neces-
sary to inquire how, since the prophetic types
and figures bear, as has been shown, a certain
analogy and relation to this prominent feast, it is
said that the house was filled with smoke. Nor
does the prophet say this incidentally, but with
significance, speaking of that cry of the Thrice-
Holy,'' uttered by the heavenly seraphs. You
will discover the meaning of this, my attentive
hearer, if you do but take up and examine what
follows upon this narration : For hearing, he
says, ye shall hear, and shall not understand ;
and seeing, ye shall see, and not perceive. ^
When, therefore, the foolish Jewish children had
seen the glorious wonders which, as David sang,
the Lord had performed in the earth, and had
seen the sign from the depth ^ and from the
height meeting together, without division or con-
fusion ; as also Isaiah had before declared,
namely, a mother beyond nature, and an off-
spring beyond reason ; an earthly mother and a
heavenly son ; a new taking of man's nature, I
say, by God, and a child-bearing without mar-
riage ; what in creation's circuit could be more
glorious and more to be spoken of than this !
yet when they had seen this it was all one as if
they had not seen it ; they closed their eyes, and
in respect of praise were supine. Therefore the
house in which they boasted was filled with
smoke.

XII. And in addition to this, when besides the
spectacle, and even beyond the spectacle, they
heard an old man, very righteous, very worthy of
credit, worthy also of emulation, inspired by the
Holy Spirit, a teacher of the law, honoured with
the priesthood, illustrious in the gift of prophecy,
by the hope which he had conceived of Christ,
extending the limits of life, and putting off the
debt of death — when they saw him, I say, leap-
ing for joy, speaking words of good omen, quite
transformed with gladness of heart, entirely rapt
in a divine and holy ecstasy ; who from a man
had been changed into an angel by a godly
change, and, for the immensity of his joy, chant-


5 Deut. xviii. 15-19.
'' Isa. vi. 4.

7 Isa. vi. 9; Acts xxviii. 26.

8 Ps. xlvi. 8; Isa. vii. 11.


392


ORATION CONCERNING SIMEON AND ANNA.


ed his hymn of thanksgiving, and openly pro-
claimed the " Light to lighten the Gentiles, and
the glory of Thy people Israel." ' Not even
then were they willing to hear what was placed
within their hearing, and held in veneration by
the heavenly beings themselves ; wherefore the
house in which they boasted was filled with
smoke. Now smoke is a sign and sure evidence
of wrath ; as it is written, " There went up a
smoke in His anger, and fire from His coun-
tenance devoured ; " ^ and in another place,
" Amongst the disobedient people shall the fire
burn," 3 which plainly, in the revered Gospels,
our Lord signified, when He said to the Jews,
" Behold your house is left unto you desolate." *
Also, in another place, " The king sent forth his
armies, and destroyed those murderers, and burnt
up their city." s Of such a nature was the ad-
verse reward of the Jews for their unbelief, which
caused them to refuse to pay to the Trinity the
tribute of praise. For after that the ends of the
earth were sanctified, and the mighty house of
the Church was filled, by the proclamation of the
Thrice Holy, with the glory of the Lord, as the
great waters cover the seas,^ there happened to
them the things which before had been declared,
and the beginning of prophecy was confirmed
by its issue, the preacher of truth signifying, as
has been said, by the Holy Spirit, as it were in
an example, the dreadful destruction which was
to come upon them, in the words : " In the year
in which king Uzziah died, I saw the Lord " —
Uzziah, doubtless, as an apostate, being taken
as the representative of the whole apostate body
— the head of which he certainly was — who also,
paying the penalty due to his presumption, car-
ried on his forehead, as upon a brazen statue, the
divine vengeance engraved, by the loathsomeness
of leprosy, exhibiting to all the retribution of
their loathsome impiety. Wherefore with divine
wisdom did he, who had foreknowledge of these
events, oppose the bringing in of the thankful
Anna to the casting out of the ungrateful syna-
gogue. Her very name also presignifies the
Church, that by the grace of Christ and God is
justified in baptism. For Anna is, by interpre-
tation, grace.

XIII. But here, as in port, putting in the vessel
that bears the ensign of the cross, let us reef the
sails of our oration, in order that it may be with
itself commensurate. Only first, in as few words
as possible, let us salute the city of the Great
King,7 together with the whole body of the
Church, as being present with them in spirit, and
keeping holy-day with the Father, and the breth-


^ Luke ii. 32.

2 Ps. xviii. 8.

3 Ecclus. xxii. 7.

* Matt, xxiii. 38.

* Matt. xvii. 7.

* Isa. vi. 3, 4, i.

7 Ps. xlviii. 2; Matt. v. 33; Isa. i. 26.


ren most held in honour there. Hail, thou city
of the Great King, in which the mysteries of our
salvation are consummated. Hail, thou heaven
upon earth, Sion, the city that is for ever faithful
unto the Lord. Hail, and shine thou Jerusalem,
for thy light is come, the Light Eternal, the
Light for ever enduring, the Light Supreme, the
Light Immaterial, the Light of one substance
with God and the Father, the Light which is in
the Spirit, and in which is the Father ; the Light
which illumines the ages ; the Light which gives
light to mundane and supramundane things,
Christ our very God. Hail, city sacred and
elect of the Lord. Joyfully keep thy festal days,
for they will not multiply so as to wax old and
pass away. Hail, thou city most happy, for
glorious things are spoken of thee ; thy priest
shall be clothed with righteousness, and thy
saints shall shout for joy, and thy poor shall be
satisfied with bread.^ Hail ! rejoice, O Jerusa-
lem, for the Lord reigneth in the midst of thee.9
That Lord, I say, who in His simple and imma-
terial Deity, entered our nature, and of the vir-
gin's womb became ineffably incarnate ; that
Lord, who was partaker of nothing else save the
lump of Adam, who was by the serpent tripped
up. For the Lord laid not hold of the seed of
angels '° — those, I say, who fell not away from
that beauteous order and rank that was assigned
to them from the beginning. To us He conde-
scended, that Word who was always with the
Father co-existent God. Nor, again, did He
come into the world to restore ; nor will He
restore, as has been imagined by some impious
advocates of the devil, those wicked demons
who once fell from light ; but when the Creator
and Framer of all things had, as the most divine
Paul says, laid hold of the seed of Abraham,
and through him of the whole human race, He
was made man for ever, and without change, in
order that by His fellowship with us, and our
joining on to Him, the ingress of sin into us
might be stopped, its strength being broken by
degrees, and itself as wax being melted, by that
fire which the Lord, when He came, sent upon
the earth." Hail to thee, thou Catholic Church,'^
which hast been planted in all the earth, and do
thou rejoice with us. Fear not, little flock, the
storms of the enemy,'^ for it is your Father's
good pleasure to give you the kingdom, and that
you should tread upon the necks of your ene-
mies.'-* Hail, and rejoice, thou that wast once
barren, and without seed unto godliness, but who


^ Isa. Ix. i; Ps. Ixxxvii. 3; Ps. cxxxii. 16.
9 Isa. xii. 6.

'o Heb. ii. 16.

" Luke xii. 49.

'^ [Here is an apostrophe to the Church, a hymn to " the Elect
Lady. ' See, illustrating note 17, p. 390, sn/)^.]

■^ TpiKvfj.ia<;, stormy waves. Latin, decumani fluctus. Metho-
dius perhaps alludes to Diocletian's persecution, in which he perished
as a martyr — Tk.

*■* Luke xii. 32.


ORATION CONCERNING SIMEON AND ANNA.


o9j


hast now many children of faith.' Hail, thou
people of the Lord, thou chosen generation,
thou royal priesthood, thou holy nation, thou
peculiar people — show forth His praises who
hath called you out of darkness into His mar-
vellous light ; and for His mercies glorify Him.^
XIV. Hail to thee for ever, thou virgin mother
of God, our unceasing joy, for unto thee do I
again return. ^ Thou art the beginning of our
feast; thou art its middle and end;-* the pearl
of great price that belongest unto the kingdom ;
the fat of every victim, the living altar of the
bread of life. Hail, thou treasure of the love
of God. Hail, thou fount of the Son's love
for man. Hail, thou overshadowing mount 5 of
the Holy Ghost. Thou gleamedst, sweet gift-
bestowing mother, of the light of the sun ; thou
gleamedst with the insupportable fires of a most
fervent charity, bringing forth in the end that
which was conceived of thee before the begin-
ning, making manifest the mystery hidden and
unspeakable, the invisible Son of the Father —
the Prince of Peace, who in a marvellous man-
ner showed Himself as less than all litdeness.
"Wherefore, we pray thee, the most excellent


' Isa. llv. I.

- I Pet." ii. p.

3 [He again apostrophizes the Blessed Theotocos, but in lan-
guage hardly appropriate to the period preceding Cyril of Alexan-
dria.]

■* [Not so, for he ends with a noble strain of worship to the Son
of God. This expression suggests interpolation.]

5 Hab. iii. 3,


among women, who boastest in the confidence
of thy maternal honours, that thou wouldest un-
ceasingly keep us in remembrance. O holy
mother of God, remember us, I say, who make
our boast in thee, and who in hymns august
celebrate the memory, which will ever live, and
never fade away. And do thou also, O honoured
and venerable Simeon, thou earliest host of our
holy religion, and teacher of the resurrection of
the faithful, be our patron and advocate with
that Saviour God, whom thou wast deemed
worthy to receive into thine arms. We. together
with thee, sing our ]3raises to Christ, who has the
power of life and death, saying. Thou art the
true Light, proceeding from the true Light ;
the true God, begotten of the true God ; the
one Lord, before Thine assum]3tion of the hu-
manity ; that One nevertheless, after Thine as-
sumption of it, which is ever to be adored ; God
of Thine own self and not by grace, but for our
sakes also perfect man ; in Thine own nature
the King absolute and sovereign, but for us and
for our salvation existing also in the form of a
servant, yet immaculately and without defilement.
For Thou who art incorruption hast come to set
corruption free, that Thou mightest render all
things uncorrupt. For Thine is the glory, and
the power, and the greatness, and the majesty,
with the Father and the Holy Spirit, for ever.
Amen.


ORATION ON THE PALMS/


I. Blessed be God ; let us proceed, brethren,
from wonders to the miracles of the Lord, and
as it were, from strength to strength.^ For just
as in a golden chain the links are so intimately
joined and connected together, as that the one
holds the other, and is fitted on to it, and so
carries on the chain — even so the miracles that
have been handed down by the holy Gospels, one
after the other, lead on the Church of God, which
delights in festivity, and refresh it, not with the
meat that perisheth, but with that which endur-
eth unto everlasting life.^ Come then, beloved,
and let us, too, with prepared hearts, and with
ears intent, listen to what the Lord our God
shall say unto us out of the prophets and Gos-
pels concerning this most sacred feast. Verily,
He will speak peace unto His people, and to His
saints, and to those which turn their hearts unto
Him. To-day,-* the trumpet-blast of the proph-
ets have roused the world, and have made glad
and filled with joyfulness the churches of God
that are everywhere amongst the nations. And,
summoning the faithful from the exercise of holy
fasting, and from the palaestra, wherein they
struggle against the lusts of the flesh, they have
taught them to sing a new hymn of conquest
and a new song of peace to Christ who giveth
the victory. Come then, every one, and let us
rejoice in the Lord ; O come, all ye people, and
let us clap our hands, and make a joyful noise
to God our Saviour, with the voice of melody. s
Let no one be without portion in this grace ;
let no one come short of this calling ; for the
seed of the disobedient is appointed to destruc-
tion. — Let no one neglect to meet the King,
lest he be shut out from the Bridegroom's
chamber. — Let no one amongst us be found to
receive Him with a sad countenance, lest he be
condemned with those wicked citizens — the
citizens, I mean, who refused to receive the Lord
as King over them.^ Let us all come tog^er


' [Diipin hardly credits this oration to Methodius. See eluci-
dation, p. 398.

^ Ps. Ixxxiv. 8.

3 John vi. 27.

* [Evidently a homily for Palm Sunday, the first day of the
Paschal week ]

5 Ps. Ixxxv. 9, xcv. I, xlvii. i.

^ Luke xix. 27.

394


cheerfully ; let us all receive Him gladly, and
hold our feast with all honesty. Instead of our
garments, let us strew our hearts before Him,^
In psalms and hymns, let us raise to Him our
shouts of thanksgiving ; and, without ceasing,
let us exclaim, " Blessed is He that cometh in
the name of the Lord ; " ^ for blessed are they
that bless Him, and cursed are they that curse
Him.9 Again I will say it, nor will I cease ex-
horting you to good. Come, beloved, let us bless
Him who is blessed, that we may be ourselves
blessed of Him. Every age and condition does
this discourse summon to praise the Lord ; kings
of the earth, and all people ; princes, and all
judges of the earth ; both young men and maid-
ens '° — and what is new in this miracle, the
tender and innocent age of babes and suck-
lings hath obtained the first place in raising to
God with thankful confession the hymn which
was of God taught them in the strains in which
Moses sang before to the people when they came
forth out of Egypt — namely, " Blessed is He
that cometh in the name of the Lord."

IL To-day, holy David rejoices with great joy,
being by babes despoiled of his lyre, with whom
also, in spirit, leading the dance, and rejoicing
together, as of old, before the ark of God," he
mingles musical harmony, and sweetly lisps out
in stammering voice. Blessed is He that cometh
in the name of the Lord. Of whom shall we
inquire ? Tell us, O prophet, who is this that
cometh in the name of the Lord? He will say
it is not my part to-day to teach you, for He
hath consecrated the school to infants, who hath
out of the mouth of babes and sucklings per-
fected praise to destroy the enemy and the
avenger,'^ in order that by the miracle of these
the hearts of the fathers might be turned to the
children, and the disobedient unto the wisdom of
the just. '3 Tell us, then, O children, whence is
this, your beautiful and graceful contest of song ?


I
I


7 Ps. Ixii. 8.

8 Ps. cxviii. 26; Matt. xxi. 9; Mark xi. 9; Luke xix. 38; John
xii. 13.

9 Gen. xxvii. 29.

'° Ps. cxlviii. II, 12.

" 2 Sam. vi. 14.

1- Ps. viii. 2.

'3 Mai. iv. 6; Luke i. 17.


ORATION ON THE PALMS.


195


Who taught it you ? Who instructed you ? Who
brought you together? What were your tablets?
Who were your teachers ? Do but you, they say,
join us as our companions in this song and fes-
tivity, and you will learn the things which were
by Moses and the prophet earnestly longed for.'
Since then the children have invited us, and have
given unto us the right hand of fellowship,- let
us come, beloved, and ourselves emulate that
holy chorus, and with the apostles, let us make
way for Him who ascends over the heaven of
heavens towards the East,^ and who, of His good
pleasure, is upon the earth mounted upon an
ass's colt. Let us, with the children, raise the
branches aloft, and with the olive branches make
glad applaud, that upon us also the Holy Spirit
may breathe, and that in due order we may raise
the God- taught strain : " Blessed is He that
cometh in the name of the Lord ; Hosanna in
the highest." * To-day, also, the patriarch Jacob
keeps feast in spirit, seeing his prophecy brought
to a fulfilment, and with the faithful adores the
Father, seeing Him who bound his foal to the
vine, 5 mounted upon an ass's colt. To-day the foal
is made ready, the irrational exemplar of the
Gentiles, who before were irrational, to signify
the subjection of the people of the Gentiles ;
and the babes declare their former state of
childhood, in respect of the knowledge of God,
and their after perfecting, by the worship of God
and the exercise of the true religion. To-day,
according to the prophet,^ is the King of Glory
glorified upon earth, and makes us, the inhabit-
ants of earth, partakers of the heavenly feast,
that He may show Himself to be the Lord of
both, even as He is hymned with the common
praises of both. Therefore it was that the heav-
enly hosts sang, announcing salvation upon earth,
" Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord God of hosts ;
the whole earth is full of His glory." 7 And
those below, joining in harmony with the joyous
hymns of heaven, cried : " Hosanna in the high-
est ; Hosanna to the Son of David." In heaven
the doxology was raised, " Blessed be the glory
of the Lord from His place ; " ^ and on earth
was this caught up in the words, " Blessed is he
that cometh in the name of the Lord."

III. But while these things were doing, and the
disciples were rejoicing and praising God with a
loud voice for all the mighty works that they had
seen, saying, Blessed be the King that cometh
in the name of the Lord ; peace in heaven, and
glory in the highest ; '^ the city began to inquire.


' Luke X. 24.

^ Gal. ii. g.

3 Ps. Ixviii. 4, 34.

* Matt. xxi. 5.
S Gen. xlix. lo.

* Ps. cxlviii. 9.
' Isa. vi. 3.

8 Ezek. iii 22.

9 Luke xix. 37, 38.


saying, Who is this?'° stirring up its hardened
and inveterate envy against the glory of the Lord.
But when thou hearest me say the city, under-
stand the ancient and disorderly multitude of the
synagogue. They ungratefully and malignantly
ask. Who is this? as if they had never yet seen
their Benefactor, and Him whom divine miracles,
beyond the power of man, had made famous
and renowned ; for the darkness comprehended
not " that unsetting light which shone in upon it.
Hence quite appositely with respect to them
hath the prophet Isaiah exclaimed, saying, Hear,
ye deaf; and look, ye blind, that ye may see.
And who is blind, but my children? and deaf,
but they that have the dominion over them ? '^
And the servants of the Lord have become blind ;
ye have often seen, but ye observed not ; your
ears are opened, yet ye hear not. See, beloved,
how accurate are these words ; how the Divine
Spirit, who Himself sees beforehand into the
future, has by His saints foretold of things future
as if they were present. For these thankless
men saw, and by means of His miracles handled
the wonder-working God, and yet remained in
unbelief.'^ They saw a man, blind from his birth,
proclaiming to them the God who had restored
his sight. They saw a paralytic, who had grown
up, as it were, and become one with his infirmity,
at His bidding loosed from his disease. ''^ They
saw Lazarus, who was made an exile from the
region of death. '5 They heard that He had
walked on the sea.'^ They heard of the wine
that, without previous culture, was ministered ; '7
of the bread that was eaten at that spontaneous
banquet ; '^ they heard that the demons had been
put to flight ; the sick restored to health."^ Their
very streets proclaimed His deeds of wonder ;
their roads declared His healing power to those
who journeyed on them. All Judea was filled
with His benefit ; yet now, when they hear the
divine praises, they inquire, Who is this ? O the
madness of these falsely-named teachers ! O
incredulous fathers ! O foolish seniors ! O seed
of the shameless Canaan, and not of Judah the
devout ! ^° The children acknowledge their Crea-
tor, but their unbelieving parents said. Who is
this ? The age that was young and inexperienced
sang praises to God, while they that had waxen old
in wickedness inquired. Who is this ? Sucklings
praise His Divinity, while seniors utter blasphe-
mies ; children piously offer the sacrifice of praise,
whilst profan? priests are impiously indignant.-'


■° Matt. xxi. lo.

" John i. 5.

'- Isa. xlii. 18-20.

'3 John ix.

'■^ John V. 5.

'S John xi. 44.

'^ Matt. xiv. 26.

'^ John ii. 7.

'' John vi. II.

'9 Luke viii. 29, etc.

20 Dan. iii. s6 (LXX.).

2' Matt. xxi. 15.


396


ORATION ON THE PALMS.


IV. O ye disobedient as regards the wisdom
of the just/ turn your hearts to your children.
Learn the mysteries of God ; the very thing it-
self which is being done bears witness that it is
God that is thus hymned by uninstructed tongues.
Search the Scriptures, as ye have heard ^ from
the l^ord ; for they are they which testify of Him,
and be not ignorant of this miracle. Hear ye
men without grace, and thankless, what good
tidings the prophet Zechariah brings to you.
He says, Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion ;
behold thy King cometh unto thee : just and
having salvation ; lowly, and riding upon the foal
of an ass. 3 Why do ye repel the joy? Why,
when the sun shineth, do ye love darkness?
Why do ye against unconquerable peace medi-
tate war? If, therefore, ye be the sons of Zion,
join in the dance together with your children.
Let the religious service of your children be to
you a pretext for joy. Learn from them who
was their Teacher ; who called them together ;
whence was the doctrine ; what means this new
theology and old prophecy. And if no man
hath taught them this, but of their own accord
they raise the hymn of praise, then recognise
the work of God, even as it is written in the
law : " Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings
hast Thou perfected praise." ■♦ Redouble, there-
fore, your joy, that you have been made the
fathers of such children who, under the teaching
of God, have celebrated with their praises things
unknown to their seniors. Turn your hearts to
your children, 5 and close not your eyes against
the truth. But if you remain the same, and
hearing, hear not, and seeing, perceive not,^ and
to no purpose dissent from your children, then
shall they be your judges,^ according to the
Saviour's word. Well, therefore, even this thing
also, together with others, has the prophet Isaiah
spoken before of you, saying, Jacob shall not
now be ashamed, neither shall his face now wax
pale. But when they see their children doing
my works, they shall for me sanctify My name,
and sanctify the Holy One of Jacob, and shall
fear the God of Israel. They also that err in
spirit shall come to understanding, and they that
murmured shall learn obedience, and the stam-
mering tongues shall learn to speak peace.^
Seest thou, O foolish Jew, how from the begin-
ning of his discourse, the prophet declares con-
fusion to you because of your unbelief. Learn
even from him how he proclaims the God-
inspired hymn of praise that is raised by your
children, even as the blessed David hath de-


I Luke i. 17.
^ John V. 39.
3 Zech. ix. 9.

* Ps. viii. 2.
S Luke i. 17.
^ Isa. vi. 10.

' Matt. xh. 27.

* Isa. xxix. 22,


clared beforehand, saying, Out of the mouth of
babes and sucklings hast Thou perfected praise.
Either then, — as is right, — claim the piety of
your children for your own, or devoutly give
your children unto us. We with them will lead
the dance, and to the new glory will sing in con-
cert the divinely-inspired hymn.

v. Once, indeed, the aged Simeon met the
Saviour,^ and received in his arms, as an infant,
the Creator of the world, and proclaimed Him
to be Lord and God ; but now, in the place of
foolish elders, children meet the Saviour, even
as' Simeon did, and instead of their arms, strew
under Him the branches of trees, and bless the
Lord God seated upon a colt, as upon the cheru-
bim, Hosanna to the son of David : Blessed is
He that cometh in the name of the Lord ; and
together with these let us also exclaim. Blessed
is He that cometh, God the King of Glory, who,
for our sakes, became poor, yet, in His own
proper estate, being ignorant of poverty, that with
His bounty He might make us rich. Blessed is
He who once came in humility, and who will
hereafter come again in glory : at the first, lowly,
and seated upon an ass's colt, and by infants ex-
tolled- in order that it might be fulfilled which
was written : Thy goings have been seen, O
God ; even the goings of my God, my King, in
the sanctuary ; but at the second time seated on
the clouds, in terrible majesty, by angels and
powers attended. O the mellifluous tongue of
the children ! O the sincere doctrine of those
who are well pleasing to God ! David in proph-
ecy hid the spirit under the letter ; children,
opening their treasures, brought forth riches
upon their tongues, and, in language full of
grace, invited clearly all men to enjoy them.
Therefore let us with them draw forth the un-
fading riches. In our bosoms insatiate, and in
treasure-houses which cannot be filled, let us lay
up the divine gifts. Let us exclaim without
ceasing. Blessed is He that cometh in the name
of the Lord ! Very God, in the name of the
Very God, the Omnipotent from the Omnipotent,
the Son in the name of the Father. The true
King from the true King, whose kingdom, even
as His who begat Him, is with eternity, coeval
and pre-existent to it. For this is common to
both ; nor does the Scripture attribute this
honour to the Son, as if it came from another
source, nor as if it had a beginning, or could be
added to or diminished — away with the thought !
— but as that which is His of right by nature,
and by a true and proper possession. For the
kingdom of the Father, of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost, is one, even as their substance is
one and their dominion one. Whence also, with
one and the same adoration, we worship the one


9 Luke ii. 29.


ORATION ON THE PALMS.


S97


Deity in three Persons, subsisting without begin-
ning, uncreate, without end, and to which there
is no successor. For neither will the Father ever
cease to be the Father, nor again the Son to be
the Son and King, nor the Holy Ghost to be
wh^t in substance and personality He is. For
nothing of the Trinity will suffer diminution,
either in respect of eternity, or of communion,
or of sovereignty. For not on that account is
the Son of God called king, because for our sakes
He was made man, and in the flesh cast down
the tyrant that was against us, having, by taking
this upon Him, obtained the victory over its
cruel enemy, but because He is always Lord and
God ; therefore it is that now, both after His
assumption of the flesh and for ever, He remains
a king, even as He who begat Him. Speak not,
O heretic, against the kingdom of Christ, lest
thou dishonour Him who begat Him. If thou
art faithful, in faith approach Christ, our very
God, and not as using your liberty for a cloak
of maliciousness. If thou art a servant, with
trembling be subject unto thy Master ; for he
who fights against the Word is not a well-disposed
servant, but a manifest enemy, as it is written :
He that honoureth not the Son, honoureth not
the Father which hath sent Him.

VI. But let us, beloved, return in our discourse
to that point whence we digressed, exclaiming.
Blessed is He that cometh in the name of the
Lord : that good and kind Shepherd, voluntarily
to lay down His life for His sheep. That just
as hunters take by a sheep the wolves that de-
vour sheep, even so the Chief Shepherd,' offer-
ing Himself as man to the spiritual wolves and
those who destroy the soul, may make His prey
of the destroyers by means of that Adam who
was once preyed on by them. Blessed is He
that Cometh in the name of the Lord : God
against the devil : not manifestly in His might,
which cannot be looked on, but in the weakness
of the flesh, to bind the strong man ^ that is
against us. Blessed is He that cometh in the
name of the Lord : the King against the tyrant ;
not with omnipotent power and wisdom, but with
that which is accounted the foolishness ^ of the
cross, which hath reft his spoils from the serpent
who is wise in wickedness. Blessed is He that
cometh in the name of the Lord : the True One
against the liar ; the Saviour against the de-
stroyer ; the Prince of Peace + against him who
stirs up wars ; the Lover of mankind against the
hater of mankind. Blessed is He that cometh
in the name of the Lord : the Lord to have
mercy upon the creature of His hands. Blessed
is He that cometh in the name of the Lord :


' 1 Pet, V. 4.

2 Matt. xii. 29.

3 I Cor. i. 21.
* Isa. ix. 6,


the Lord to save man who had wandered in
error ; to put away error ; to give light to those
who are in darkness ; to abolish the imposture
of idols ; in its place to bring in the saving
knowledge of God ; to sanctify the world ; to
drive away the abomination and misery of the
worship of false gods. Blessed is He that com-
eth in the name of the Lord : the one for the
many ; to deliver the poor s out of the hands of
them that are too strong for him, yea, the poor
and needy from him that spoileth him. Blessed
is He that cometh in the name of the Lord, to
pour wine and oil upon him who had fallen
amongst thieves,^ and had been passed by.
pjlessed is He that cometh in the name of the
Lord : to save us by Himself, as says the proph-
et ; no ambassador, nor angel, but the Lord
Himself saved us.^ Therefore we also bless
Thee, O Lord ; Thou with the Father and the
Holy Spirit art blessed before the worlds and
for ever. Before the world, indeed, and until
now being devoid of body, but now and for ever
henceforth possessed of that divine humanity
which cannot be changed, and from which Thou
art never divided.

VII. Let us look also at what follows. What
says the most divine evangelist? Wlien the
Lord had entered into the temple, the blind and
the lame came to Him ; and He healed them.
And when the chief priests and Pharisees saw
the wonderful things that He did, and the chil-
dren crying, and saying, Hosanna to the Son of
David : Blessed is He that cometh in the name
of the Lord,^ they brooked not this honour that
was paid Him, and therefore they came to Him,
and thus spake, Hearest Thou not what these
say ? As if they said, Art Thou not grieved at
hearing from these innocents things which befit
God, and God alone? Has not God of old
made it manifest by the prophet, " My glory will
I not give unto another ; " ^ and how dost Thou,
being a man, make Thyself God ? '° But what
to this answers the long-suffering One, He who
is abundant in mercy," and slow to wrath ? '- He
bears with these frenzied ones ; with an apology
He keeps their wrath in check ; in His turn He
calls the Scriptures to their remembrance ; He
brings forward testimony to what is done, and
shrinks not from inquiry. Wherefore He says,
Have ye never heard Me saying by the prophet,
Then shall ye know that I am He that doth
speak? '3 nor again. Out of the mouth of babes
and sucklings hast Thou perfected praise be-


5 Ps. XXXV. 10.

* Luke X. 34.

7 Isa. Ixiii. 9.

8 Matt. xxi. 14-16.

9 Isa. xlii. 3.
'° John X. 33.
" Joel ii. 13.
'2 Jas. i. 18.
" Isa. lii. 6.


398


ELUCIDATION.


cause of Thine enemies, that Thou mightest still
the enemy and the avenger? Which without
doubt are ye, who give heed unto the law, and
read the prophets, while yet ye despise Me who,
both by the law and the prophets, have been
beforehand proclaimed. Ye think, indeed, under
a pretence of piety, to avenge the glory of God,
not understanding that he that despiseth Me
despiseth My Father also.' I came forth from
God, and am come into the world, ^ and My
glory is the glory of My Father also. Even
thus these foolish ones, being convinced by our
Saviour-God, ceased to answer Him again, the
truth stopping their mouths ; but adopting a new
and foolish device, they took counsel against
Him. But let us sing, Great is our Lord, and
great is His power ; 3 and of His understanding
there is no number. For all this was done 1:hat
the Lamb and Son of God, that taketh away the

' John XV. 23.
^ John xvi. 28.
3 Ps. clxvii. 5.


sins of the world, might, of His own will, and
for us, come to His saving Passion, and might
be recognised, as it were, in the market and
place of selhng ; and that those who bought
Him might for thirty pieces of silver covenant
for Him who, with His life-giving blood, was' to
redeem the world ; and that Christ, our pass-
over, might be sacrificed for us, in order that
those who were sprinkled with His precious
blood, and sealed on their lips, as the posts of
the door,-* might escape from the darts of the
destroyer ; and that Christ having thus suffered
in the flesh, and having risen again the third
day, might, with equal honour and glory with
the Father and the Holy Ghost, be by all created
things equally adored ; for to Him every knee
shall bow, of things in heaven, and things in
earth, and things under the earth,5 sending up
glory to Him, for ever and ever. Amen.


* Exod. xi. 7.
s Phil. ii. 10.


ELUCIDATION.

The candid Dupin ' says that we owe this to Pere Combefis,^ on the authority of a :ms. in the
Royal Library of Paris. It appeared in Sir Henry Savile's edition of Chrysostom ascribed to that
Father. Dupin doubts as to parts of this homily, if not as to the whole. He adds, " The style
of Methodius is Asiatic, diffuse, swelling, and abounding in epithet. His expressions are figurative,
and the turn of his sentences artificial. He is full of similitudes and far-fetched allegories. His
thoughts are mysterious, and he uses many words to say a few things." His doctrine, apart from
these faults, is sound, and free from some errors common to the ancients : such faults as I have
frequently apologized for in Origen, whom Methodius so generally condemns.


• Ecclesiastical Writers, vol. i. p. i6i.


^ He was a Dominican, and learned in Greek. Died 1679.


THREE FRAGMENTS FROM THE HOMILY ON THE
CROSS AND PASSION OF CHRIST.


Methodius, Bishop, to those who say : What
doth it profit us that the Son of God was cruci-
fied upon earth, and made man ? And wherefore
did He endure to suffer in the manner of the
cross, and not by some other punishment ? And
what was the advantage of the cross ?

Christ, the Son of God, by the command of
the Father, became conversant with the visible
creature, in order that, by overturning the do-
minion of the t)Tants, the demons, that is. He
might dehver our souls from their dreadful bond-
age, by reason of which our whole nature, in-
toxicated by the draughts of iniquity, had become
full of tumult and disorder, and could by no
means return to the remembrance of good and
useful things. Wherefore, also, it was the more
easily carried away to idols, inasmuch as evil had
overwhelmed it entirely, and had spread over all
generations, on account of the change which had
come over our fleshy tabernacles in consequence
of disobedience ; until Christ, the Lord, by the
flesh in which He lived and appeared, weakened
the force of Pleasure's onslaughts, by means of
which the infernal powers that were in arms
against us reduced our minds to slavery, and
freed mankind from all their evils. For with
this end the Lord Jesus both wore our flesh, and
became man, and by the divine dispensation was
nailed to the cross ; in order that by the flesh
in which the demons had proudly and falsely
feigned themselves gods, having carried our souls
captive unto death by deceitful wiles, even by
this they might be overturned, and discovered
to be no gods. For he prevented their arrogance
from raising itself higher, by becoming man ; in
order that by the body in which the race pos-
sessed of reason had become estranged from the
worship of the true God, and had suffered in-
jury, even by the same receiving into itself in
an ineffable manner the Word of Wisdom, the
enemy might be discovered to be the destroyers
and not the benefactors of our souls.

For it had not been wonderful if Christ, by

■ Apud. Gretserum, De Sancta Cruce, p. 401, torn. ii. Nov.
edit. Ratisb., 1754. [Concerning which I quote from Dupin as fol-
lows: " The Pere Combefis has collected some other fragments, «/-
tributed to Methodius, cited by St. John Damascene and by Nicetas
as drawn out of his books against Porphyry. But, besides that, we
cannot depend upon the authority of these two authors, who are not
very exact; these fragments have nothing considerable, and we think
It not worth while to say anything more concerning them."]


the terror of His divinity, and the greatness of
His invincible power, had reduced to weakness
the adverse nature of the demons. But since
this was to cause them greater grief and tor-
ment, for they would have preferred to be over-
come by one stronger than themselves, therefore
it was that by a man He procured the safety of
the race ; in order that men, after that very Life
and Truth had entered into them in bodily form,
might be able to return to the form and light of
the Word, overcoming the power of the entice-
ments of sin ; and that the demons, being con-
quered by one weaker than they, and thus brought
into contempt, might desist from their over-bold
confidence, their hellish wrath being repressed.
It was for this mainly that the cross was brought
in, being erected as a trophy against iniquity,
and a deterrent from it, that henceforth man
might be no longer subject to wrath, after that
he had made up for the defeat which, by his
disobedience, he had received, and had lawfully
conquered the infernal powers, and . by the gift
of God had been set free from every debt.
Since, therefore, the first-born Word of God thus
fortified the manhood in which He tabernacled
with the armour of righteousness, He overcame,
as has been said, the powers that enslaved us
by the figure of the cross, and showed forth
man, who had been oppressed by corruption, as
by a tyrant power, to be free, with unfettered
hands. For the cross, if you wish to define it,
is the confirmation of the victory, the way by
which God to man descended, the trophy against
material spirits, the repulsion of death, the foun-
dation of the ascent to the true day ; and the
ladder for those who are hastening to enjoy the
light that is there, the engine by which those
who are fitted for the edifice of the Church are
raised up from below, like a stone four square,
to be compacted on to the divine Word. Hence
it is that our kings, perceiving that the figure
of the cross is used for the dissipating of every
evil, have made vexillas, as they are called in
the Latin language. Hence the sea, yielding to
this figure, makes itself navigable to men. For
every creature, so to speak, has, for the sake of
liberty, been marked with this sign ; for the birds
which fly aloft, form the figure of the cross by
the expansion of their wings ; and man himself,
also, with his hands outstretched, represents the

399


400


THREE FRAGMENTS ON THE PASSION OF CHRIST.


same. Hence, when the Lord had fashioned
him in this form, in which He had from the be-
ginning framed him, He joined on his body to
tlie Deity, in order that it might be henceforth
an instrument consecrated to God, freed from all
discord and want of harmony. For man can-
not, after that he has been formed for the wor-
ship of God, and hath sung, as it were, the
incorruptible song of truth, and by this hath
been made capable of holding the I)eity, being
fitted to the lyre of life as the chords and
strings, he cannot, I say, return to discord and
corruption.

II.'

THE S.A3IE METHODIUS TO THOSE WHO ARE
ASHAMED OF THE CROSS OF CHRIST.

Some think that God also, whom they meas-
ure with the measure of their own feelings, judges
the same thing that wicked and foolish men
judge to be subjects of praise and blame, and
that He uses the opinions of men as His rule
and measure, not taking into account the fact
that, by reason of the ignorance that is in them,
every creature falls short of the beauty of God.
For He draws all things to life by His Word,
from their universal substance and nature. For
whether He would have good, He Himself is
the Very Good, and remains in Himself; or,
whether the beautiful is pleasing to Him, since
He Himself is the Only Beautiful, He beholds
Himself, holding in no estimation the things
which move the admiration of men. That,
verily, is to be accounted as in reality the most
beautiful and praiseworthy, which Cxod Himself
esteems to be beautiful, even though it be con-
temned and despised by all else — not that which
men fancy to be beautiful. Whence it is, that
although by this figure He hath willed to deliver
the soul from corrupt affections, to the signal
putting to shame of the demons, we ought to
receive it, and not to speak evil of it, as being
that which was given us to deliver us, and set
us free from the chains which for our disobedi-
ence we incurred. For the Word suffered, being
in the flesh affixed to the cross, that He might
bring man, who had been deceived by error, to
His supreme and godlike majesty, restoring him
to that divine life from which he had become
alienated. By this figure, in truth, the passions
are blunted ; the passion of the passions having
taken place by the Passion, and the death of
death by the death of Christ, He not having
been subdued by death, nor overcome by the
pains of the Passion. For neither did the Pas-
sion cast Him down from His equanimity, nor
did death hurt Him, but He was in the passible
remaining impassible, and in the mortal remain-
ing immortal, comprehending all that the air.


' Apud. Gretserum, De Sancia Cruce, torn. ii. p. 403.


and this middle state, and the heaven above
contained, and attempering the mortal to the
immortal divinity. Death was vanquished en-
tirely ; the flesh being crucified to draw forth
its immortality.

1 1 1.2

THE SAME METHODIUS : HOW CHRIST THE SON OF
GOD, IN A BRIEF AND DEFINITE TIME, BEING EN-
CLOSED BY THE BODY, AND EXISTING IMPASSIBLE,
BECAME OBNOXIOUS TO THE PASSION.

For since this virtue was in Him, now it is
of the essence of power to be contracted in a
small space, and to be diminished, and again to
be expanded in a large space, and to be increased.
But if it is possible for Him to be with the larger
extended, and to be made equal, and yet not with
the smaller to be contracted and diminished,
then power is not in Him. For if you say that
this is possible to power, and that impossible,
you deny it to be power ; as being infirm and
incapable with regard to the things which it can-
not do. Nor again, further, will it ever contain
any excellence of divinity with respect to those
things which suffer change. For both man and
the other animals, with respect to those things
which they can effect, energise ; but with respect
to those things which they cannot perform, are
weak, and fade away. Wherefore for this cause
the Son of God was in the manhood enclosed,
because this was not impossible to Him. For
with power He suffered, remaining impassible ;
and He died, bestowing the gift of immortality
upon mortals. Since the body, when struck or
cut by a body, is just so far struck or cut as the
striker strikes it, or he that cuts it cut it. For
according to the rebound of the thing struck, the
blow reflects upon the striker, since it is neces-
sary that the two must suffer equally, both the
agent and the sufferer. If, in truth, that which
is cut, from its small size, does not correspond to
that which cuts it, it will not be able to cut it at
all. For if the subject body does not resist
the blow of the sword, but rather yields to it, the
operation will be void of effect, even as one sees
in the thin and subtle bodies of fire and air;
for in such cases the impetus of the more solid
bodies is relaxed, and remains without effect.
But if fire, or air, or stone, or iron, or anything
which men use against themselves for the pur-
poses of mutual destruction — if it is not possi-
ble to pierce or divide these, because of the
subtle nature which they possess, why should
not rather Wisdom remain invulnerable and
impassible, in nothing injured by anything, even
though it were conjoined to the body which was
pierced and transfixed with nails, inasmuch as it
is purer and more excellent than any other nature,
if you except only that of God who begat Him ?


2 Apud. AUatium, Diatr. de Methcdioru?n scriptis, p. 349.


SOME OTHER FRAGMENTS OF THE SAME

METHODIUS.


But, perhaps, since the friends of Job imagined
that they understood the reason why he suffered
such things, that just man, using a long speech to
them, confesses that the wisdom of the divine
judgment is incomprehensible, not only to him,
but also to every man, and declares that this
earthly region is not the fitting place for under-
standing the knowledge of the divine counsels.
One might say, that perfect and absolute piety —
a thing plainly divine, and of God alone given
to man, is in this place called wisdom. But the
sense of the words is as follows : God, he says,
hath given great things unto men, sowing, as it
were, in their nature the power of discovery, to-
gether with wisdom, and the faculty of art. And
men having received this, dig metals out of the
earth, and cultivate it ; but that wisdom which is
conjoined with piety, it is not possible in any
place to discover. Man cannot obtain it from
his own resources, nor can he give it unto others.
Hence it was that the wise men of the Greeks,
who in their own strength sought to search out
piety, and the worship of the Deity, did not
attain their end. For it is a thing, as we have
said, which exceeds human strength, the gift and
the grace of God; and therefore from the be-
ginning, partly by visions, partly by the inter-
vention of angels, partly by the discourses of the
divinely-inspired prophets, God instructed man
in the principles of true religion. Nay, moreover,
that contemplative wisdom by which we are
impelled to the arts, and to other pursuits, and
with which we are all in common, just and unjust,
alike endued, is the gift of God : if we have been
made rational creatures, we have received this.
Wherefore, also, in a former place it was said,
as of a thing that is of God bestowed, " Is it not
the Lord who teacheth understanding and
knowledge? " ^

Observe that the Lord was not wont from the
begining to speak with man ; Sut after that the

' Ex Nicetae Catena on Job, cap. xix. p 429, edit. Londin., 1637.
All the shorter fragments collected in the editions of Migne and Jahn
are here appended.

^ Job xxi. 22, xxii. 2.

3 Ex Nicet» Catena on yob, cap. xxvi. p. 538.


soul was prepared, and exercised in many ways,
and had ascended into the height by contempla-
tion, so far as it is possible for human nature to
ascend, then is it His wont to speak, and to re-
veal His Word unto those who have attained
unto this elevation. But since the whirlwind is
the producer of the tempests, and Job, in the
tempest of his afflictions, had not made ship-
wreck of his faith, but his constancy shone forth
the rather ; therefore it was that He who gave
him an answer answered him by the whirlwind,
to signify the tempest of calamity which had be-
fallen him ; but, because He changed the stormy
condition of his affairs into one of serene tran-
quillity. He spoke to him not only by the whirl-
wind, but in clouds also.


III.*

Many have descended into the deep, not so as
to walk on it, but so as to be by its bonds re-
strained. Jesus alone walked on the deep, where
there are no traces of walkers, as a free man.
For He chose death, to which He was not sub-
ject, that He might deliver those who were the
bondslaves of death ; saying to the prisoners,
" Go forth ; and to them that are in darkness,
show yourselves." s With which, also, the things
which follow are consistent.


IV.6

Seest thou how, at the end of the contest, with
a loud proclamation he declares the praises of
the combatant, and discovers that which was in
his afflictions hidden, in the words : " Thinkest
thou that I had else answered thee, but that
thou shouldest appear just?" ^ This is the salve
of his wounds, this the reward of his patience.
For as to what followed, although he received
double his former possessions, these may seem to
have been given him by divine providence as
small indeed, and for trifling causes, even though
to some they may appear great.


* Ex Nicetae Catena on Job, p. 547.

5 Isa. xlix. 9.

^ Ex Nicetae Catena on Job, cap. xxviii. p. 570.

^ Jobxl 3 (LXX.).

401


402


FRAGMENTS.


FRAGMENT, UNCERTAIN,

Thou contendest with Me, and settest thyself
against Me, and opposest those who combat for
Me. But where wert thou when I made the
world ? What wert thou then ? Hadst thou yet,
says He, fallen from thy mother? for there was
darkness, in the beginning of the world's creation.
He says, upon the face of the deep. Now this
darkness was no created darkness, but one which
of set purpose had place, by reason of the ab-
sence of light.

v.>

But Methodius : The Holy Spirit, who of God
is given to all men, and of whom Solomon said,
" For Thine incorruptible Spirit is in all things," ^
He receives for the conscience, which condemns
the offending soul.

VI.3

THE SAME METHODIUS.

I account it a greater good to be reproved than


to reprove, inasmuch as it is more excellent to
free oneself from evil than to free another.


' Ex Nicetae Catena on Job, cap xix. p. 418, ex Olympiodoro.

2 Wisd. xii. I. [" The Spirit of Christ," given to all; John i. 9.]

3 Ex Parallelis. Damascen., Opp., torn. ii. p. 331, D.


VII.*
THE SAME METHODIUS.

Human nature cannot clearly perceive pure
justice in the soul, since, as to many of its
thoughts, it is but dim-sighted.

VIII.
THE SAME METHODIUS.

Wickedness never could recognise virtue or its
own self.

IX.

THE SAME METHODIUS.

Justice, as it seems, is four square, on all sides
equal and like.

The just judgment of God is accommodated
to our affections ; and such as our estate is, pro-
portionate and similar shall the retribution be
which is allotted us.


4 Ibid., p. 488, B.


TWO FRAGMENTS, UNCERTAIN.


I.

The beginning of every good action has its
foundation in our wills, but the conclusion is of
God.

II.

Perhaps these three persons of our ancestors,
being in an image the consubstantial representa-
tives of humanity, are, as also Methodius thinks,
types of the Holy and Consubstantial Trinity,'

' [Such is the fact, no doubt, as to the ancestors of the Jewish
race; the fatherly character of Abraham, the filial character of Isaac,
and the missionary offices of Jacob — whose wisdom and organizing
faculties are so conspicuous — interpreting, in some degree, " the Holy
and Consubstr.ntial Trinity." This seems to be hinted, indeed, in the
formula, " I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the


the innocent and unbegotten Adam being the
type and resemblance of God the Father Al-
mighty, who is uncaused, and the cause of all ;
his begotten son^ shadowing forth the image of
the begotten Son and \\'ord of God ; whilst Eve,
that proceedeth forth from Adam,^ signifies the
person and procession of the Holy Spirit.'*


God of Jacob." Isaac's submission to be sacrificed upon Mount
Moriah, and Jacob's begetting and .sending forth the twelve patriarchs,
singularly identify them as types of the Atoning Son and the regen-
erating Spirit, whose gifts and mission were imparted to the twelve
Apostles.]

2 [Abel.]

3 [Note the single procession. The formula of the Hebrews, how-
ever, above noted, supplies a type of the Fihoque and the ab utroque
in the true sense of those terms.]

4 [Recur to chap. v. of Tke Banquet, p. 333, supra.]


GENERAL NOTE.

( Vexillas, — as they are called, p. 399.)

It is very curious to note how certain ideas are inherited from- the earliest Fathers, and travel
down, as here, to find a new expression in a distant age. Here our author reflects Justin
Martyr,' and the Labanim ^ itself is the outcrop of what Justin wrote to Antoninus Pius.


^ See vol. i p. 181, this series.


2 See p. 285, supra, under the Emperors.


ARNOBIUS.


[TRANSLATED BY ARCHDEACON HAMILTON BRYCE, LL.D., D.C.L., AND HUGH CAMPBELL, M.A.]


INTRODUCTORY NOTICE


ARNOBIUS.


[a.d. 297-303.] Amobius appears before us, not as did the earlier apologists, but as a token
that the great struggle was nearing its triumphant close. He is a witness that Minucius Felix and
TertuUian had not preceded him in vain. He is a representative character, and stands forth boldly
to avow convictions which were, doubtless, now struggling into light from the hearts of every reflect-
ing pagan in the empire. In all probability it was the alarm occasioned by tokens that could not
be suppressed — of a spreading and deepening sense of the nothingness of Polytheism — that
stimulated the (Ecumenical rage of Diocletian, and his frantic efforts to crush the Church, or,
rather, to overwhelm it in a deluge of flame and blood.

In our author rises before us another contributor to Latin Christianity, which was still North-
African in its literature, all but exclusively. He had learned of TertuUian and Cyprian what he
was to impart to his briUiant pupil Lactantius. Thus the way was prepared for Augustine, by
whom and in whom Latin Christianity was made distinctly Occidental, and prepared for the
influence it has exerted, to this day, under the mighty prestiges of his single name.

And yet Amobius, like Boethius afterwards, is much discredited, and has even been grudged
the name of a Christian. Coleridge is one of the many who have disparaged Arnobius, but he
always talked like an inspired madman, and often contradicted himself. Enough to say, that,
emerging from gross heathenism in mature life, and forced to learn as he could what is now taught
to Christian children, our author is a witness to the diffusion of truth in his day. He shows
also such a faculty of assimilation, that, as a practical Christian, Coleridge himself does not shine
in comparison ; and if, as is probable, he closed his life in martyrdom, we may well be ashamed
to deny him our gratitude and the tribute of our praise. Our author is an interesting painter of
many features of paganism in conflict with the Church, which we gain from no one else. Econo-
mizing Clement of Alexandria, he advances to an assured position and form of assault. He per-
sistently impeaches Jove himself in a daring confidence that men will feel his terrible charges to
be true, and that the victory over heathenism is more than half gained already.' I doubt not that,
as a heathen, he was influenced by a dream to study Christianity. As a believer, he discarded
dreams as vain. Converted late in life, we need not wonder at some tokens of imperfect knowl-
edge ; but, on the whole, he seems a well-informed disciple, and shows how thoroughly the
catechumens were trained. But what does he prove ? In short, he gives us a most fascinating
insight into the mental processes by which he, and probably Constantine soon after him, came
to the conclusion that heathenism was outworn and must disappear. He proves that the Church
was salt that had not " lost its savour." It is true, that, reasoning with pagans, he does not freely
cite the Scriptures, which had no force with them ; yet his references to the facts of Scripture
show that he had studied them conscientiously, and could present the truths of the Gospel clearly

■ Lardner's Testimony of Ancient Heathenism, Works, vol. vii. p. 17.

405


4o6 INTRODUCTORY NOTICE.

and with power. Lardner has demonstrated ' this in a fair spirit and with conclusive evidence.
Referring the reader to his admirable criticisms, I am glad to say that a full and satisfactory outline
of his career is presented in the following : —

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTORY NOTICE.

§ I. Arnobius has been most unjustly neglected in modern times; but some excuse for this
may be found in the fact that even less attention seems to have been paid to him in the ages
immediately succeeding his own. We find no mention of him in any author except Jerome ; and
even Jerome has left only a few lines about him, which convey very little information.

In his list of ecclesiastical writers he says,^ " During the reign of Diocletian, Arnobius taught
rhetoric with the greatest success, at Sicca, in Africa, and wrote against the heathen the books
extant ; " and again speaks of this work more particularly when he says,^ " Arnobius published
seven books against the heathen." In his Chro7iicon, however, he writes under the year 2342,+
" Arnobius is considered a distinguished rhetorician in Africa, who, while engaged at Sicca in
teaching young men rhetoric, was led by visions to the faith ; and not being received by the
bishop as hitherto a persistent enemy to Christ, composed very excellent books against his former
belief" It must at once be seen that there is here a mistake, for Arnobius is put some twenty-
three years later than in the former passage. Jerome himself shows us that the former date is the
one he meant, for elsewhere s he speaks of Lactantius as the disciple of Arnobius. Lactantius, in
extreme old age,^ was appointed tutor of Constantine's son Crispus ; and this, we are told in the
Chronicoji^ was in the year 317. No one will suppose that if the disciple was a very old man in
317, his master could have been in his prime in 326. It is certain, therefore, that this date is not
correct ; and it seems very probable that Oehler's conjecture is true, who supposes that Jerome
accidentally transposed his words from the year 303 to the place where we find them, misled by
noticing the vicetialia of Constantine when he was looking for those of Diocletian.

It is with some difficulty that we can believe that Arnobius was led to embrace Christianity
by dreams, as he speaks of these with little respect,^ — which he could hardly have done if by
them the whole course of his life had been changed ; but in our utter ignorance we cannot say
that this may not have been to some extent the case. The further statement, that his apology for
Christianity was submitted as a proof of his sincerity to the bishop of Sicca, is even less credible,
— for these two reasons, that it is evidently the fruit not of a few weeks' but of protracted labour,
and that it is hardly likely that any bishop would have allowed some parts of it to pass into circu-
lation. It is just possible that the first or third books may have been so presented ; but it is not
credible that any pledge would be required of a man seeking to cast in his lot with the persecuted
and terrified Church referred to in the fourth.

§ 2. If we learn but little from external sources as to the life of Arnobius, we are not more
fortunate when we turn to his own writings. One or two facts, however, are made clear ; and
these are of some importance. " But lately," he says, " O blindness, I worshipped images just
brought from the furnaces, gods made on anvils and forged with hammers : now, led by so great
a teacher into the ways of truth, I know what all these things are." ' We have thus his own
assurance of his conversion from heathenism. He speaks of himself, however, as actually a Chris-
tian, — not as a waverer, not as one purposing to forsake the ancient superstitions and embrace
the new religion, but as a firm believer, whose faith is already established, and whose side has

• Credib., iii. 463. 5 Cat. Script. EccL, Ixxx. f. 121, ep. Ixxxiii.

2 Cat. Script. Ecci.,\xxix. f. 121, Bened. ed. torn. iv. 6 Cat. Script. EccL, Ixxx.

3 Ep. Ixxxiii. f. 656. 7 Anno 2333.

* i.e., A.D. 326. 8 As " vain." [But see p. 405, supra.'Y

9 Book i. sec. 39, p. 423, in/ra.


INTRODUCTORY NOTICE. 407

been taken and stedfastly maintained. In a word, he refers to himself as once lost in error, but
now a true Christian.

Again, in different passages he marks pretty accurately the time or times at which he wrote.
Thus, in the first book ' he speaks of about three hundred years as the time during which Chris-
tianity had existed ; and in the second,^ of a thousand and fifty, or not many less, having elapsed
since the foundation of Rome. There has been much discussion as to what era is here referred
to ; and it has been pretty generally assumed that the Fabian must be intended, — in which case
303 would be the year meant. If it is observed, however, that Arnobius shows an intimate ac-
quaintance with Varro, and great admiration for him, it will probably be admitted that it is most
likely that the Varronian, or common, era was adopted by him ; and in this case the year referred
to will be 297 A.D. This coincides sufficiently with the passage in the first book, and is in har-
mony with the idea which is there predominant, — the thought, that is, of the accusation so
frequently on the lips of the heathen, that Christianity was the cause of the many and terrible
afflictions with which the empire was visited. These accusations, ever becoming more bitter and
threatening, would naturally be observed with care and attention by thoughtful Christians towards
the close of the third century ; and accordingly we find that the words with which Arnobius
begins his apology, express the feeling of awakening anxiety with which he viewed the growth of
this fear and hatred in the minds of the heathen. He declares, in effect, that one great object —
indeed the main object — which he had proposed to himself, was to show that it was not because
of the Christians that fresh evils and terrible calamities were continually assailing the 'state. And
it must be remembered that we cannot refer such a proposal to a later period than that assigned.
It would certainly not have occurred to a Christian in the midst of persecution, with death over-
hanging him, and danger on every side, to come forward and attempt calmly to show the heathen
that there was no reason for their complaints against the Christians. In the later books there is
a change in tone, upon which we cannot now dwell, although it is marked. In one passage he
asks indignantly,^ "Why should our writings be given to the flames, our meetings be cruelly
broken up, in which prayer is offered to the supreme God, peace and pardon are asked for all in
authority, for soldiers, kings, friends, enemies?" In the calm tranquillity of the last half of the
third century these words could hardly have been written, but they are a striking testimony to the
terms of the imperial edict issued in the year 303 a.d. So, too, the popular expression of anger
and disgust at the anti-pagan character of some of Cicero's works '^ belongs to the incipient
stages of persecution.

Nor must it be supposed that the whole work may be referred to the era which ensued after
the abdication of Diocletian, in 305. From this time an apology for Christianity with such a
design would have been an anachronism, for it was no longer necessary to disarm the fears of the
heathen by showing that the gods could not be enraged at the Christians. It has further to be
noticed, that although it is perfectly clear that Arnobius spent much time on his apology, it has
never been thoroughly revised, and does not seem to have been ever finished.s

We surely have in all this sufficient reason to assign the composition of these books adversus
Gentes to the end of the third and beginning of the fourth centuries. Beyond this we cannot go,
for we have no data from which to derive further inferences.

§ 3. We have seen that the facts transmitted to us are very itvf and scanty indeed ; but, few
as they are, they suggest an interesting picture. Arnobius comes before us in Sicca ; we are
made spectators of two scenes of his life there, and the rest — the beginning and the end — are

' i. 13, p- 417-

^ ii. 71, p. 461.
^ iv. 36.

< Noticed in iii. 7, infra.-

5 Cf. note on book vii. sec. 36, infra. [It is not at all improbable that some sketch of his convictions, written to assure the bishop
of his conversion, was the foundation of what afterwards grew into a work.]


4o8 INTRODUCTORY NOTICE.


shrouded in darkness. Sicca Veneria was an important town, lying on the Numidian border, to
the south-west of Carthage. As its name signifies, it was a seat of that vile worship of the goddess
of lust, which was dear to the Phoenician race. The same cultus was found there which disgraced
Corinth ; and in the temple of the goddess the maidens of the town were wont to procure for
themselves, by the sacrifice of their chastity, the dowries which the poverty of their parents could
not provide.

In the midst of traditions of such bestial foulness Arnobius found himself, — whether as a
native, or as one who had been led to settle there. He has told us himself how true an idolater
he was, how thoroughly he complied with the ceremonial demands of superstition ; but the fre-
quency and the vehemence of language with which his abhorrence of the sensuality of heathenism
is expressed, tell us as plainly that practices so horrible had much to do in preparing his mind to
receive another faith.

In strong contrast to the filthy indulgences with which paganism gratified its adherents, must
have appeared the strict purity of life which was enjoined by Christianity and aimed at by its
followers ; and perhaps it was in such a place as Sicca that considerations of this nature would
have most influence. There, too. the story of Cyprian's martyrdom must have been well known,
— may indeed have been told in the nursery of the young Arnobius, — and many traditions must
have been handed down about the persistency with which those of the new religion had held fast
their faith, in spite of exile, torture, and death. However distorted such tales might be, there
would always remain in them the evidence of so exalted nobility of spirit, that every disclosure of
the meanness and baseness of the old superstition must have induced an uneasy feeling as to
whether that could be impiety which ennobled men, — that piety which degraded them lower
than the brutes.

For some time all went well with Arnobius. He was not too pure for the world, and his learn-
ing and eloquence won him fame and success in his profession. But in some way, we know not
how, a higher learning was communicated to him, and the admired rhetorician became first a
suspected, then a persecuted Christian. He has left us in no doubt as to the reason of the
change. Upon his darkness, he says, there shone out a heavenly light,' a great teacher appeared
to him and pointed out the way of truth ; and he who had been an earnest worshipper of images,
of stones, of unknown gods, was now as earnest, as zealous in his service of the true God. Of
the trials which he must have endured we know nothing. A terrible persecution swept over the
world, and many a Christian perished in it. Such a man as Arnobius must have been among the
first to be assailed, but we hear of him no more. With his learning and talents he could not have
failed to make himself a name in the Church, or outside its pale, if he had lived. The conclusion
seems inevitable, that he was one of the victims of that last fiery trial to which Christians under
the Roman empire were exposed.

§ 4. The vast range of learning shown in this apology has been admitted on all sides. Even
Jerome says that it should at times be read on account of the learning displayed in it.^ In
another passage Jerome says,^ " Arnobius is unequal and prolix, confused from want of arrange-
ment." This may be admitted to a certain extent ; but although such defects are to be found
in his work, they are certainly not characteristic of Arnobius. So, too, many passages may be
found strangely involved and mystical, and it is at times hard to understand what is really meant.
Solecisms and barbarisms are also met with, as Nourry has objected, so that it cannot be said
that Arnobius writes pure Latin. Still we must not be misled into supposing that by enumerating
these defects we have a fair idea of his style.

If we remember that no man can wholly escape the influences of his age, and that Arnobius
was so warm an admirer of Varro and Lucretius that he imitated their style and adopted their

' [Conf. Constantine's " vision."] 2 £p_ l^ii. ad TranqniU. 3 Ep. xlix. ad Paulinum.


INTRODUCTORY NOTICE. 409

vocabulary, we shall be able to understand in what way he may be fairly spoken of as a good
writer, although not free from defects. His style is, in point of fact, clear and lucid, rising at
times into genuine eloquence ; and its obscurity and harshness are generally caused by an attempt
to express a vague and indefinite idea. Indeed very considerable power of expression is mani-
fested in the philosophical reasonings of the second book, the keen satire of the fourth and fifth,
and the vigorous argument of the sixth and seventh.

Jerome's last stricture is scarcely applicable. Amobius wrote adversus Gentes ; he addressed
himself to meet the taunts and accusations of the heathen, and in so doing he retorts upon them
the charges which they preferred against the Christians. His work must therefore be criticised
from this standpoint, not as a systematic exposition or vindication of Christianity. Christianity is
indeed defended, but it is by attacking heathenism. We must consider, also, that evidently the
work was not revised as a whole, and that the last book would have been considerably altered
had Amobius lived or found opportunity to correct it.' If we remember these things, we shall
find litde to object to in the arrangement.

After making all deductions, it may be said fairly that in Arnobius the African Church found
no unfitting champion. Living amidst impurity and corruption, and seeing on every side the
effects of a superstitious and sensual faith, he stands forward to proclaim that man has a nobler
ideal set before him than the worship of the foul imaginations of his depraved fancy, to call his
fellows to a purer life, and to point out that the Leader who claims that men should follow Him
is both worthy and able to guide. This he does with enthusiasm, vigour, and effect ; and in
doing this he accomplishes his end.

§ 5. Various opinions have been entertained as to the position which Amobius occupied with
regard to the Bible. We cannot here enter into a discussion of these, and shall merely present
a brief statement of facts.

It is evident that with regard to the Jews and the Old Testament Arnobius was in a state of
perfect ignorance ; for he confounds the Sadducees with the Pharisees,^ makes no allusion to the
history of the Israelites, and shows that he was not acquainted with their forms of sacrifice. ^

He was evidently well acquainted with the life of Christ and the history of the Church, and
alludes at times to well-known Christian sayings ; but how far in so doing he quotes the Gospels
and Epistles, is not easily determined. Thus it has been supposed, and with some probabihty,
that in referring to the miracles of Christ he must allude to the Gospels as recording them. But
it must be observed that he ascribes to Christ a miracle of which the New Testament makes no
mention, — of being understood by men of different nations, as though He spoke in several
languages at the same moment.'* So, too, his account 5 of the passion differs from that of the
New Testament. On the other hand, we find that he speaks of Christ as having taught men
" not to return evil for evil," ^ as " the way of salvation, the door of life, by whom alone there is
access to the light," 7 and as having been seen by " countless numbers of men " after His resur-
rection.^ Still further, he makes frequent references to accounts of Christ written by the apostles
and handed down to their followers,^ and asks why their writings should be burned. '° In one
place," also, he asks, " Have the well-known words never rung in your ears, that the wisdom of
man is foolishness with God?" where the reference seems to be very distinct; '^ but he nowhere
says that he is quoting, or mentions any books.

This is, however, less remarkable when we take into account his mode of dealing with
Clemens Alexandrinus and Cicero. The fourth, fifth, and sixth books are based on these two

' Cf. book vii. cap. 36, note, and lb. cap. 51, note, with the Appendix. "> Book ii. cap. 65, note.

2 Book iii. cap. 12, note. 8 Book i. cap. 46; cf. i Cor. xv. 6.

3 Cf. book vii., on sacrifices generally. [Proves nothing.] 9 i. 55, 56, 58, 59.
* Book i. cap. 46, note. '° iv. 36.

5 Book i. cap. 53, note. " ii. 6, note.

6 Book i. cap. 5. '2 Cf. i Cor. iii. 19.


4IO INTRODUCTORY NOTICE.

authors, and from Clement, in particular, whole sentences are taken unchanged.' Yet the only
reference made to either is the very general allusion in the third and fourth books.^

On the other hand, he quotes frequently and refers distinctly to many authors, and is espe-
cially careful to show that he has good authority for his statements, as will be seen by observing
the number of books to which he refers on the mysteries and temples. If we bear this in mind,
the principle which guided him seems to have been, that when he has occasion to quote an author
once or twice, he does so by name, but that he takes it for granted that every one knows what
are the great sources of information, and that it is therefore unnecessary to specify in each case
what is the particular authority.

There are many interesting questions connected with his subject, but these we must for the
present leave untouched.

§ 6. No other works by Amobius have been preserved, and only two Mss. are known to exist.
Of these, the one in Brussels is merely a transcript of that preserved in the public library at Paris,
on which all editions have been based. This is a ms. of the ninth or tenth century, and contains
the Octavius of Minucius Felix immediately after the seventh book adversus Gentes, in conse-
quence of which that treatise was at first printed as the eighth book of Amobius. Although it has
been collated several times, we are still in doubt as to its true readings, — Hildebrand, who last
examined it, having done so with too little care.

The firsts edition was printed at Rome in 1542, and was followed by that of Gelenius,'' in
which much was done for the emendation of the text ; but arbitrary conjectures were too fre-
quently admitted. Next in order follow those of Canterus,^ who did especial service by pointing
out what use Arnobius has made of Clement, Ursinus,^ Elmenhorst,'' Stewechius,*^ Heraldus,^
and the Leyden '° variorum edition, based on a recension of the text by Salmasius." The later
editions are those of Oberthiir,'^ w^hose text is adopted by Orelli,'^ Hildebrand,'-* and Oehler.'S
Oberthiir's edition is of little importance, and that of Orelli is valuable solely as a collection of
notes gathered from many sources into a crude and undigested mass. Hildebrand seems to have
taken too little pains with his work ; and Oehler, whose critical sagacity and industry might have
given us a most satisfactory edition, was unfortunately hampered by want of space.

No edition of Arnobius has been published in England ; and the one Englishman who has
taken any pains wdth this author seems to be John Jones, who, under the pseudonym of Leander
de St, Mardno, prepared summaries, which were added to a reprint of Stewechius at Douay, 1634.
As this edition has not come into our hands, we are unable to speak of it more particularly.

§ 7. It will be observed that adversus Gentes is the title of this work in all editions except
those of Hildebrand and Oehler, in w^hich it is adversus Natioties. The difference is very slight,
but it may be well to mention that neither can be said with certainty to be correct. The first is
the form used by Jerome in two passages of his writings ; '^ and as he must have seen earlier mss.

' [Compare the Exhortation of Clement, vol. ii. p. i-]\, passim ; and TertuUian, vol. iii. and /assim.]

2 Book iii. cap. 7, and book iv. cap. 13, note.

3 Arnobii Dispittationum adversus Gentes, libri octo, nunc primum in lucem editi Romae, apud Franc. Priscianum Florentinum, 1542,
* Basilese, 1546.

5 Antverpiae, 1582.

6 Romse, 1583. This is the second Roman edition, and restores the Octavius to Minucius Felix.

7 Hanoviae, 1603; dedicated to Joseph Scaliger.

8 Antverpiae, 1604.

9 Paris, 1605. This edition, which is of great value, and shows great learning and ability, was completed in two months, as Heraldus
himself tells us.

*° Lugduni Batavorum 1651, containing the notes of Canterus, Elmenhorst, Stewechius, and Heraldus.

" Salmasius purposed writing commentaries for this edition, but died without doing more than beginning them.

'- Wirceburgi, 17S3, 8vo, preceded by a rambling introductory epistle.

'3 Lipsiae, 1816-17, 8vo.

'* Halis Saxonum, 1S44, Svo.

'5 Lipsiae, 1846, 8vo.

'* Cf. § I, notes 2 and 3,


INTRODUCTORY NOTICE. 411

than that now extant, he is supposed to give the title which he found in them. In the Paris
MS., however, at the end of the second book, the subscription is, " The second book of Arnobius
adversjis Natioties ends ; " and it has been argued that, as the copyist would hardly have gone
so far astray, while it is quite possible that Jerome did not attempt to do more than indicate
generally the purpose of the book without quoting its titlepage, this must be the true title. The
first page of the existing MS. is torn away, and the question remains therefore undecided : fortu-
nately its decision is not of the slightest importance.

§ 8. This translation of Arnobius was begun in the hope that it would be possible to adhere
throughout to the text of Orelli, and that very little attention to the various readings would be
found necessary. This was, however, found to be impossible, not merely because Hildebrand's
collation of the Paris MS. showed how frequently liberties had been taken with the text, but on
account of the corrupt state of the text itself.

It has therefore been thought advisable to lay before the reader a close translation founded on
the MS., so far as known. A conjectural reading has in no case been adopted without notice.

Throughout the Work use has been made of four editions, — Oehler's, Orelli's, Hildebrand's,
and that of Leyden ; other editions being consulted only for special reasons.

It is to be regretted that our knowledge of the single MS. of Arnobius is still incomplete ; but
it is hoped that this will soon be remedied, by the publication of a revised text, based upon a
fresh collation of the MS., with a complete apparatus and a carefully digested body of notes."

* [This section (8) appears as a " Preface " to the Edinburgh edition.]


THE SEVEN BOOKS OF ARNOBIUS AGAINST

THE HEATHEN.

{AD VERS us GENTES.)

BOOK I.


1. Since I have found some who deem them-
selves very wise in their opinions, acting as if
they were inspired/ and announcing with all the
authority of an oracle/ that from the time when
the Christian people began to exist in the world
the universe has gone to ruin, that the human
race has been visited with ills of many kinds,
that even the very gods, abandoning their ac-
customed charge, in virtue of which they were
wont in former days to regard with interest our
affairs, have been driven from the regions of
earth, — I have resolved, so far as my capacity
and my humble power of language will allow, to
oppose pubUc prejudice, and to refute calumnious
accusations ; lest, on the one hand, those per-
sons should imagine that they are declaring some
weighty matter, when they are merely retailing
vulgar rumours ; ^ and on the other, lest, if we
refrain from such a contest, they should suppose
that they have gained a cause, lost by its own
inherent demerits, not abandoned by the silence
of its advocates. For I should not deny that
that charge is a most serious one, and that we
fully deserve the hatred attaching to public ene-
mies,-* if it should appear that to us are attributa-
ble causes by reason of which the universe has
deviated from its laws, the gods have been driven
far away, and such swarms of miseries have been
inflicted on the generations of men.

2. Let us therefore examine carefully the real
significance of that opinion, and what is the na-


^ The words insanire, bacchari, refer to the appearance of the
ancient seers when under the influence of the deity. So Virgil says,
Insanam vatein aspicies {ALn., iii. 443), and, Bacchatur vatei
(y£'«.,vi. 78). The meaning is, that they make their asseverations
with all the confidence of a seer when filled, as he pretended, with the
influence of the god.

^ Et velut quiddam promptunt ex oraculo dzcere, i.e., to de-
clare a matter with boldness and majesty, as if most certain and
undoubted.

^ Popularia verba, i.e., rumours arising from the ignorance of
the common people.

■* The Christians were regarded as " public enemies," and were so
called.


ture of the allegation ; and laying aside all de-
sire for wrangling,^ by which the calm view of
subjects is wont to be dimmed, and even inter-
cepted, let us test, by fairly balancing the con-
siderations on both sides, whether that which is
alleged be true. For it will assuredly be proved
by an array of convincing arguments, not that
we are discovered to be more impious, but that
they themselves are convicted of that charge
who profess to be worshippers of the deities,
and devotees of an antiquated superstition. And,
in the first place, we ask this of them in friendly
and calm language : Since the name of the Chris-
tian religion began to be used on the earth, what
phenomenon, unseen before,^ unheard of before,
what event contrary to the laws established in
the beginning, has the so-called " Nature of
Things " felt or suffered? Have these first ele-
ments, from which it is agreed that all things
were compacted, been altered into elements of
an opposite character? Has the fabric of this
machine and mass of the universe, by which we
are all covered, and in which we are held en-
closed, relaxed in any part, or broken up ? Has
the revolution of the globe, to which we are ac-
customed, departing from the rate of its primal
motion, begun either to move too slowly, or to
be hurried onward in headlong rotation ? Have
the stars begun to rise in the west, and the
setting of the constellations to take place in
the east? Has the sun himself, the chief of the
heavenly bodies, with whose light all things are
clothed, and by whose heat all things are vivified,
blazed forth with increased vehemence ? has he
become less warm, and has he altered fof the
worse into opposite conditions that well-regulated
temperature by which he is wont to act upon the
earth ? Has the moon ceased to shape herself


5 Or, " all party zeal."

* So Meursius, — the MS. reading is inusitatiitn,
nary."


' e.\traordi-


414


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


anew, and to change into former phases by the
constant recurrence of fresh ones ? Has the cold
of winter, has the heat of summer, has the mod-
erate warmth of spring and autumn, been modi-
fied by reason of the intermixture of ill-assorted
seasons? Has the winter begun to have long
days? has the night begun to recall the very
tardy twilights of summer? Have the winds at
all exhausted their violence? Is the sky not
collected ' into clouds by reason of the blasts
having lost their force, and do the fields when
moistened by the showers not prosper? Does
the earth refuse to receive the seed committed
to it, or will not the trees assume their foliage ?
Has the flavour of excellent fruits altered, or has
the vine changed in its juice? Is foul blood
pressed forth from the olive berries, and is oil no
longer supplied to the lamp, now extinguished?
Have animals of the land and of the sea no
sexual desires, and do they not conceive young?
Do they not guard, according to their own habits
and their own instinct, the offspring generated
in their wombs? In fine, do men themselves,
whom an active energy with its fi^st impulses has
scattered over habitable lands, not form mar-
riages with due rites? Do they not beget dear
children? do they not attend to public, to in-
dividual, and to family concerns ? Do they not
apply their talents, as each one pleases, to varied
occupations, to different kinds of learning? and
do they not reap the fruit of diligent applica-
tion? Do those to whom it has been so allotted,
not exercise kingly power or military authority?
Are men not every day advanced in posts of
honour, in offices of power ? Do they not pre-
side in the discussions of the law courts ? Do
they not explain the code of law ? do they not
expound the principles of equity? All other
things with which the life of man is surrounded,
in which it consists, do not all men in their own
tribes practise, according to the established order
of their country's manners ?

3. Since this is so, and since no strange influ-
ence has suddenly manifested itself to break the
continuous course of events by interrupting their
succession, what is the ground of the allegation,
that a plague was brought upon the earth after
the Christian religion came into the world, and
after it revealed the mysteries of hidden truth?
But pestilences, say my opponents, and droughts,
wars, famines, locusts, mice, and hailstones, and
other hurtful things, by "which the property of
men is assailed, the gods bring upon us, incensed
as they are by your wrong- doings and by your
transgressions. If it were not a mark of stu-
pidity to linger on matters which are already
clear, and which require no defence, I should
certainly show, by unfolding the history of past


' SoGelenius; MS., fC'i^^'J^wr, " pressed together."


ages, that those ills whicli you speak of were not
unknown, were not sudden in their visitation ;
and that the plagues did not burst upon us, and
the affairs of men begin to be attacked by a
variety of dangers, from the time that our sect^
won the honour ^ of this appellation. For if we
are to blame, and if these plagues have been de-
vised against our sin, whence did antiquity know
these names for misfortunes ? Whence did she
give a designation to wars? By what concep-
tion could she indicate pestilence and hailstorms,
or how could she introduce these terms among
her words, by which speech was rendered plain?
For if these ills are entirely new, and if they
derive their origin from recent transgressions,
how could it be that the ancients coined terms
for these things, which, on the one hand, they
knew that they themselves had never experi-
enced, and which, on the other, they had not
heard of as occurring in the time of their an-
cestors? Scarcity of produce, say my oppo-
nents, and short supplies of grain, press more
heavily on us. For, I would ask, were the former
generations, even the most ancient, at any period
wholly free from such an inevitable calamity?
Do not the very words by which these ills are
characterized bear evidence and proclaim loudly
that no mortal ever escaped from them with
entire immunity? But if the matter were diffi-
cult of belief, we might urge, on the testimony
of authors, how great nations, and what indi-
vidual nations, and how often such nations
experienced dreadful famine, and perished by
accumulated devastation. Very many hailstorms
fall upon and assail all things. For do we not
find it contained and dehberately stated in
ancient literature, that even showers of stones *
often ruined entire districts? Violent rains
cause the crops to perish, and proclaim barren-
ness to countries : — were the ancients, indeed,
free from these ills, when we have known of5
mighty rivers even being dried up, and the mud
of their channels parched? The contagious in-
fluences of pestilence consume the human race :
— ransack the records of history written in
various languages, and you will find that all
countries have often been desolated and de-
prived of their inhabitants. Every kind of crop
is consumed, and devoured by locusts and by
mice : — go through your own annals, and you
will be taught by these plagues how often former
ages were visited by them, and how often they,
were brought to the wretchedness of poverty.


2 Or, " race," gens, i.e., the Christian people.

3 The verb vicreri, used in this passage, has in Roman writers
the idea of merit or excellence of some kind in a person, in virtue of
which he is deemed worthy of some favour or advantage; but m
ecclesiastical Latin it means, as here, to gain something by the mere
favour of God, without any merit of one's own.

'■ See Livy, i. 51, etc.; and Pliny, Nat. Hist., ii. 38.
s The MS. reads, Jlumhia cognoverimus ingentia lim-va-is in-
gentia siccatis, " that mighty rivers shrunk up, leaving the mud.


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


415


Cities shaken by powerful earthquakes totter to
their destruction : — what ! did not bygone days
witness cities with their populations engulphed
by huge rents of the earth? • or did they enjoy
a condition exempt from such disasters ?

4. When was the human race destroyed by a
flood? was it not before us? When was the
world set on fire,^ and reduced to coals and
ashes? was it not before us? When were the
greatest cities engulphed in the billows of the
sea? was it not before us? When were wars
waged with wild beasts, and battles fought with
lions? 3 was it not before us? When was ruin
brought on whole communities by poisonous
serpents ? ^ was it not before us ? For, inasmuch
as you are wont to lay to our blame the cause
of frequent wars, the devastation of cities, the
irruptions of the Germans and the Scythians,
allow me, with your leave, to say, — In your
eagerness to calumniate us, you do not perceive
the real nature of that which is alleged.

5. Did we bring it about, that ten thousand
years ago a vast number of men burst forth from
the island which is called the Atlantis of Nep-
tune,5 as Plato tells us, and utterly ruined and
blotted out countless tribes? Did this form a
prejudice against us, that between the Assyrians
and Bactrians, under the leadership of Ninus and
Zoroaster of old, a struggle was maintained not
only by the sword and by physical power, but
also by magicians, and by the mysterious learn-
ing of the Chaldeans ? Is it to be laid to the
charge of our religion, that Helen was carried
off under the guidance and at the instigation of
the gods, and that she became a direful destiny
to her own and to after times ? Was it because
of our name, that that mad-cap Xerxes let the
ocean in upon the land, and that he marched
over the sea on foot ? Did we produce and stir


' So Tertullian, A/olog'ft., 40, says, — "We have read that the
islands Hiera, Anaphe, Delos, Rhodes, and Cos were destroyed, to-
gether with many human beings."

- Arnobius, no doubt, speaks of the story of Phaethon, as told
by Ovid; on which, cf. Plato, Tim., st. p. 22.

3 Nourry thinks that reference is here made to the contests of
gladiators and athletes with iions and other beasts in the circus. But
it is more likely that ihe author is thinking of African tribes who were
harassed by lions. Thus /Elian (ife Nat Aiiim., xvii. 24) tells of
a Libyan people, the Nomaei, who were entirely destroyed by lions.

< The city of Amyclae in Italy is referred to, which was destroyed
by serpents.

5 In the Timceus of Plato, c. vi. st. p. 24, an old priest of Sai's,
in Egypt, is represented as telling Solon that in times long gone by
the Athenians were a very peaceful and very brave people, and that
9,000 years before that time they had overcome a mighty host which
came rushing from the Atlantic Sea, and which threatened to subju-
gate all Europe and .AsLt. The sea was then navigable, and in front
of the pillars of Hercules (Strait of Gibraltar) lay an island larger
than Africa and Asia together: from it travellers could pass to other
islands, and from these again to the opposite continent. In this
island great kings arose, who made them.selves masters of the whole
island, as well as of other islands, and parts of the continent.
Having already posse.ssions in Libya and Europe, which they wished
to increase, they gathered an immense host; but it was repelled by
the Athenians. Great earthquakes and storms ensued, in which the
island of .Atlantis was submerged, and the sea ever after rendered
impassable by shoals of mud produced by the sunken island. For
other forms of this legend, and explanations of it, see Smith's Dic-
tionary of Gcograp/iy, under A t/antis ; [also Ancient America,
p. 175, Harpers, 1872. This volume, little known, seems to me
" stranger than fiction," and far more interesting].


into action the causes, by reason of which one
youth, starting from Macedonia, subjected the
kingdoms and peoples of the East to captivity
and to bondage ? Did we, forsooth, urge the
deities into frenzy, so that the Romans lately,
like some swollen torrent, overthrew all nations,
and swept them beneath the flood ? But if there
is no man who would dare to attribute to our
times those things which took place long ago,
how can we be the causes of the present mis-
fortunes, when nothing new is occurring, but all
things are old, and were unknown to none of
the ancients?

6. Although you allege that those wars which
you speak of were excited through hatred of our
religion, it would not be difficult to prove, that
after the name of Christ was heard in the world,
not only were they not increased, but they were
even in great measure diminished by the restrain-
ing of furious passions. For since we, a numer-
ous band of men as we are, have learned from
His teaching and His laws that evil ought not to
be requited with evil,^ that it is better to suffer
wrong than to inflict it, that we should rather
shed our own blood than stain our hands and our
conscience with that of another, an ungrateful
world is now for a long period enjoying a bene-
fit from Christ, inasmuch as by His means the
rage of savage ferocity has been softened, and
has begun to withhold hostile hands from the
blood of a fellow-creature. But if all without
exception, who feel that they are men not in
form of body but in power of reason, would lend
an ear for a little to His salutary and peaceful
rules, and would not, in the pride and arrogance
of enlightenment, trust to their own senses rather
than to His admonitions, the whole world, hav-
ing turned the use of steel into more peaceful
occupations, would now be living in the most
placid tranquillity, and would unite in blessed
harmony, maintaining inviolate the sanctity of
treaties.

7. But if, say my opponents, no damage is
done to human affairs by you, whence arise those
evils by which wretched mortals are now op-
pressed and overwhelmed ? You ask of me a
decided statement,^ which is by no means neces-
sary to this cause. For no immediate and pre-
pared discussion regarding it has been undertaken
by me, for the purpose of showing or proving
from what causes and for what reasons each
event took place ; but in order to demonstrate
that the reproaches of so grave a charge are far
removed from our door. And if I prove this, if
by examples and^ by powerful arguments the
truth of the matter is made clear, I care not


6 Cf. Matt. V. 39.

7 The MS. here inserts a mark of interrogation.

8 So the MS., si facto et, corrected, however, by a later copyist,
sifacio ut, " if I cause that," etc.


4i6


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


whence these evils come, or from what sources
and first beginnings they flow.

8. And yet, that I may not seem to have no
opinion on subjects of this kind, that I may not
appear when asked to have nothing to offer, I
may say. What if the primal matter which has
been diffused through the four elements of the
universe, contains the causes of all miseries in-
herent in its own constitution? What if the
movements of the heavenly bodies produce these
evils in certain signs, regions, seasons, and tracts,
and impose upon things placed under them the
necessity of various dangers ? What if, at stated
intervals, changes take place in the universe, and,
as in the tides of the sea, prosperity at one time
flows, at another time ebbs, evils alternating with
it? What if those impurities of matter which we
tread under our feet have this condition imposed
upon them, that they give forth the most noxious
exhalations, by means of which this our atmos-
phere is corrupted, and brings pestilence on our
bodies, and weakens the human race ? What if
— and this seems nearest the truth — whatever
appears to us adverse, is in reality not an evil to
the world itself? And what if, measuring by
our own advantages all things which take place,
we blame the results of nature through ill-formed
judgments? Plato, that sublime head and pillar
of philosophers, has declared in his writings, that
those cruel floods and those conflagrations of the
world are a purification of the earth ; nor did
that wise man dread to call the overthrow of the
human race, its destruction, ruin, and death, a
renewal of things, and to affirm that a youthful-
ness, as it were, was secured by this renewed
strength.'

9. It rains not from heaven, my opponent says,
and we are in distress from some extraordinary
deficiency of grain crops. What then, do you
demand that the elements should be the slaves
of your wants ? and that you may be able to live
more softly and more delicately, ought the com-
pliant seasons to minister to your convenience ?
What if, in this way, one who is intent on voy-
aging complains that now for a long time there
are no winds, and that the blasts of heaven have
for ever lulled ? Is it therefore to be said that
that peacefulness of the universe is pernicious,
because it interferes with the wishes of traders ?
What if one, accustomed to bask himself in the
sun, and thus to acquire dryness of body, simi-
larly complains that by the clouds the pleasure
of serene weather is taken away? Should the
clouds, therefore, be said to hang over with an
injurious veil, because idle lust is not permitted
to scorch itself in the burning heat, and to devise
excuses for drinking? AH these events which
are brought to pass, and which happen under

' Plato, Tim., st. p. 22.


this mass of the universe, are not to be regarded
as sent for our petty advantages, but as consist-
ent with the plans and arrangements of Nature
herself.

10. And if anything happens which does not
foster ourselves or our affairs with joyous success,
it is not to be set down forthwith as an evil, and
as a pernicious thing. The world rains or does
not rain : for itself it rains or does not rain ; and,
though you perhaps are ignorant of it, it either
diminishes excessive moisture by a burning
drought, or by the outpouring of rain moderates
the dryness extending over a very long period.
It raises pestilences, diseases, famines, and other
baneful forms of plagues : how can you tell
whether it does not thus remove that which is in
excess, and whether, through loss to themselves, it
does not fix a limit to things prone to luxuriance ?

11. Would you venture to say that, in this
universe, this thing or the other thing is an evil,
whose origin and cause you are unable to explain
and to analyze ? ^ And because it interferes with
your lawful, perhaps even your unlawful pleasures,
would you say that it is pernicious and adverse ?
What, then, because cold is disagreeable to your
members, and is wont to chill ^ the warmth of
your blood, ought not winter on that account to
exist in the world ? And because you are unable'*
to endure the hottest rays of the sun, is summer
to be removed from the year, and a different
course of nature to be instituted under different
laws ? Hellebore is poison to men ; should it
therefore not grow? The wolf lies in wait by
the sheepfolds ; is nature at all in fault, because
she has produced a beast most dangerous to
sheep ? The serpent by his bite takes away life ;
a reproach, forsooth, to creation, because it has
added to animals monsters so cruel.

12. It is rather presumptuous, when you are
not your own master, even when you are the
property of another, to dictate terms to those
more powerful ; to wish that that should happen
which you desire, not that which you have found
fixed in things by their original constitution.
Wherefore, if you wish that your complaints
should have a basis, you must first inform us
whence you are, or who you are ; whether the
world was created and fashioned for you, or
whether you came into it as sojourners from
other regions. And since it is not in your power
to say or to explain for what purpose you live
beneath this vault of heaven, cease to believe
that anything belongs to you ; since those things
which take place are not brought about in favour
of a part, but have regard to the interest of the
whole.


2 " To analyze " — dissolvcre — is in the MS. marked as spurious.

3 In the MS. we find "to chill and numb" — cougelare, con-
stringere; but the last word, too, is marked as spurious.

'• MS. siistinere (marked as a gloss), "to &\x%\Ava;" pcrferre,
" to endure."


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


417


13. Because of the Christians, my opponents
say, the gods inflict upon us all calamities, and
ruin is brought on our crops by the heavenly
deities. I ask, when you say these things, do
you not see that you are accusing us with bare-
faced effrontery, with palpable and clearly proved
falsehoods? It is almost three hundred years'
— something less or more — since we Christians^
began to exist, and to be taken account of in
the world. During all these years, have wars
been incessant, has there been a yearly failure
of the crops, has there been no peace on earth,
has there been no season of cheapness and
abundance of all things ? For this must first be
proved by him who accuses us, that these calami-
ties have been endless and incessant, that men
have never had a breathing time at all, and that
without any relaxation ^ they have undergone
dangers of many forms.

14. And yet do we not see that, in these years
and seasons that have intervened, victories in-
numerable have been gained from the conquered
enemy, — that the boundaries of the empire
have been extended, and that nations whose
names we had not previously heard, have been
brought under our power, — that very often there
have been the most plentiful yields of grain,
seasons of cheapness, and such abundance of
commodities, that all commerce was paralyzed,
being prostrated by the standard of prices ? For
in what manner could affairs be carried on, and
how could the human race have existed ^ even
to this time, had not the productiveness of nature
continued to supply all things which use de-
manded ?

15. Sometimes, however, there were seasons
of scarcity ; yet they wer^ relieved by times of
plenty. Again, certain wars were carried on
contrary to our wishes. 5 But they were after-
wards compensated by victories and successes.
What shall we say, then ? — that the gods at one
time bore in mind our acts of wrong-doing, at
another time again forgot them? If, when there
is a famine, the gods are said to be enraged at
us, it follows that in time of plenty they are not
wroth, and ill-to-be-appeased ; and so the matter
comes to this, that they both lay aside and resume
anger with sportive whim, and always renew their
wrath afresh by the recollection of the causes of
offence.

16. Yet one cannot discover by any rational
process of reasoning, what is the meaning of
these statements. If the gods willed that the


' See Introduction.

2 [Our author thus identifies himself with Christians, and was,
doubtless, baptized when he wrote these words.]

3 Snri: uU/s /eriis, a proverbial expression, " without any holi-
days; " i.e., without any intermixture of good.

■* For <7?i/</!^rrtr-'' tJrsinus would read quiret durarc; but this
seems to have no MS. authority, though giving better sense and an
easier construction.

5 That IS, unsuccessfully.


Alemanni ^ and the Persians should be overcome
because Christians dwelt among their tribes, how
did they grant victory to the Romans when Chris-
tians dwelt among their peoples also ? If they
willed that mice and locusts should swarm forth
in prodigious numbers in Asia and in Syria be-
cause Christians dwelt among their tribes too,
why was there at the same time no such phe-
nomenon in Spain and in Gaul, although innu-
merable Christians lived in those provinces also ? ^
If among the Ga^tuli and the Tinguitani^ they
sent dryness and aridity on the crops on account
of this circumstance, why did they in that very
year give the most bountiful harvest to the Moors
and to the Nomads, when a similar religion had
its abode in these regions as well? If in any
one state whatever they have caused many to die
with hunger, through disgust at our name, why
have they in the same state made wealthier, ay,
very rich, by the high price of com, not only
men not of our body, but even Christians them-
selves ? Accordingly, either all should have had
no blessing if we are the- cause of the evils, for
we are in all nations ; or when you see blessings
mixed with misfortunes, cease to attribute to us
that which damages your interests, when we in
no respect interfere with your blessings and pros-
perity. For if I cause it to be ill with you, why
do I not prevent it from being well with you ?
If my name is the cause of a great dearth, why
am I powerless to prevent the greatest produc-
tiveness? If I am said to bring the /// luck
of a wound being received in war, why, when
the enemy are slain, am I not an evil augury ;
and why am I not set forth against good hopes,
through the ill luck of a bad omen?

17. And yet, O ye great worshippers and
priests of the deities, why, as you assert that
those most holy gods are enraged at Christian
communities, do you not likewise perceive, do
you not see what base feelings, what unseemly
frenzies, you attribute to your deities ? For, to
be angry, what else is it than to be insane, to
rave, to be urged to the lust of vengeance, and
to revel in the troubles of another's grief, through
the madness of a savage disposition? Your
great gods, then, know, are subject to and feel
that which wild beasts, which monstrous brutes
experience, which the deadly plant natrix con-
tains in its poisoned roots. That nature which
is superior to others, and which is based on the
firm foundation of unwavering virtue, experi-
ences, as you allege, the instability which is in
man, the faults which are in the animals of
earth. And what therefore follows of necessity,


* Alemanni, i.e., the Germans; hence the French Allemagne.

The .MS. has Alamanni.

7 I*' Innumerable Christians: " let this be noted ]

^ The Gcetuil and 7"/K^i/a«/ were African tribes. For Tingiii-

tanos, another reading is tunc Aquitanos; but Tingnitatios is much

to be preferred on every ground.


4i8


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


but that from their eyes flashes dart, flames burs':
forth, a panting breast emits a hurried breathing
from their mouth, and by reason of their burn-
ing words their parched hps become pale ?

1 8. But if this that you say is true, — if it has
been tested and thoroughly ascertained both
that the gods boil with rage, and that an impulse
of this kind agitates the divinities with excite-
ment, on the one hand they are not immortal,
and on the other they are not to be reckoned as
at all partaking of divinity. For wherever, as
the philosophers hold, there is any agitation,
there of necessity passion must exist. Where
passion is situated, it is reasonable that mental
excitement follow. Where there is mental excite-
ment, there grief and sorrow exist. Where grief
and sorrow exist, there is already room for weaken-
ing and decay ; and if these two harass them, ex-
tinction is at hand, viz. death, which ends all things,
and takes away life from every sentient being.

19. Moreover, in this way you represent them
as not only unstable and excitable, but, what all
agree is far removed from the character of deity,
as unfair in their dealings, as wrong-dpers, and, in
fine, as possessing positively no amount of even
moderate fairness. For what is a greater wrong
than to be angry with some, and to injure others,
to complain of human beings, and to ravage the
harmless corn crops, to hate the Christian name,
and to ruin the worshippers of Christ with every
kind of loss?

20. ' Do they on this account wreak their
wrath on you too, in order that, roused by your
own private wounds, you may rise up for their
vengeance ? It seems, then, that the gods seek
the help of mortals ; and were they not pro-
tected by your strenuous advocacy, they are not
able of themselves to repel and to avenge ^ the
insults offered them. Nay rather, if it be true
that they burn with anger, give them an oppor-
tunity of defending themselves, and let them
put forth and make trial of their innate powers,
to take vengeance for their offended dignity.
By heat, by hurtful cold, by noxious winds, by
the most occult diseases, they can slay us, they
can consume ^ us, and they can drive us entirely
from all intercourse with men ; or if it is impoli-
tic to assail us by violence, let them give forth
some token of their indignation,* by which it
may be clear to all that we live under heaven
subject to their strong displeasure.

21. To you let them give good health, to us
bad, ay, the very worst. Let them water your
farms with seasonable showers ; from our little
fields let them drive away all those rains which
are gentle. Let them see to it that your sheep
are multiplied by a numerous progeny ; on our


' The MS. reads at, " but."

^ De/endere is added in the MS., but marked as a gloss.
3 Consutnere is in hke manner m.Tiked as a gloss.
* So Orelli, for the Ui. judicaiiouii, "judgment."


flocks let them bring luckless barrenness. From
your olive-trees and vineyards let them bring
the full harvest ; but let them see to it that from
not one shoot of ours one drop be expressed.
Finally, and as their worst, let them give orders
that in your mouth the products of the earth
retain their natural qualities ; but, on the con-
trary, that in ours the honey become bitter, the
flowing oil grow rancid, and that the wine when
sipped, be in the very lips suddenly changed
into disappointing vinegar.

22. And since facts themselves testify that this
result never occurs, and since it is plain that to
us no less share of the bounties of life ac-
crues, and to you no greater, what inordinate
desire is there to assert that the gods are unfa-
vourable, nay, inimical to the Christians, who,
in the greatest adversity, just as in prosperity,
differ from you in no respect ? If you allow the
truth to be told you, and that, too, without re-
serve, these allegations are but words, — words,
I say ; nay, matters believed on calumnious re-
ports not proved by any certain evidence.

23. But the true 5 gods, and those who are
worthy to have and to wear the dignity of this
name, neither conceive anger nor indulge a
grudge, nor do they contrive by insidious de-
vices what may be hurtful to another party.
For verily it is profane, and surpasses all acts of
sacrilege, to believe that that wise and most
blessed nature, is uplifted in mind if one pros-
trates himself before it in humble adoration ;
and if this adoration be not paid, that it deems
itself despised, and regards itself as fallen from
the pinnacle of its glory. It is childish, weak,
and petty, and scarcely becoming for those whom
the experience of learned men has for a long
time called demigods and heroes,^ not to be
versed in heavenly things, and, divesting them-
selves of their own proper state, to be busied
with the coarser matter of earth.

24. These are your ideas, these are your sen-
timents, impiously conceived, and more impious-
ly believed. Nay, rather, to speak out more
truly, the augurs, the dream interpreters, the
soothsayers, the prophets, and the priestlings,
ever vain, have devised these fables ; for they,
fearing that their own arts be brought to nought,
and that they may extort but scanty contribu-
tions from tlie devotees, now few and infrequent,
whenever they have found you to be willing ?


5 The c.irelessness of some copyist makes the MS. read ve-sl-ri,
" your," corrected as above by Ursmus.

f" So Ursinus, followed by Heraldus, LB., and Orelli, for the MS.
errores, which Stewechius would change into errones — "va-
grants"— referring to the spirits wandering over the earth: most
other edd., following Gelenius,. read, " called demigods, that these
indeed " — dcemonas apjiellat, et hos, etc.

7 So the MS., which is corrected in the first ed. " us to be willing"
— nos velle : Stewechius reads, " us to be making good progress, are
envious, enraged, and cr^' aloud, etc. — ttcs belle prcvenire cotn-
pererunt, invident, indignantur, declatin'iantque, etc. ; to both
of which it is sufficient objection that they do not improve the passage
by their departure from the Ms.


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


419


that their craft should come into disrepute, cry
aloud, The gods are neglected, and in the tem-
ples there is now a very thin attendance. Former
ceremonies are exposed to derision, and the
time-honoured rites of institutions once sacred
have sunk before the superstitions of new reli-
gions. Justly is the human race afflicted by so
many pressing calamities, justly is it racked by
the hardships of so many toils. And men — a
senseless race — being unable, from their inborn
blindness, to see even that which is placed in
open light, dare to assert in their frenzy what
you in your sane mind do not blush to believe.

25. And lest any one should suppose that we,
through distrust in our reply, invest the gods
with the gifts of serenity, that we assign to them
minds free from resentment, and far removed
from all excitement, let us allow, since it is pleas-
ing to you, that they put forth their passion upon
us, that they thirst for our blood, and that now
for a long time they are eager to remove us from
the generations of men. But if it is not trouble-
some to you, if it is not offensive, if it is a
matter of common duty to discuss the points
of this argument not on grounds of partiality,
but on those of truth, we demand to hear from
you what is the explanation of this, what the
cause, why, on the one hand, the gods exercise
cruelty on us alone, and why, on the other, men
burn against us with exasperation. You follow,
our opponents say, profane religious systems,
and you practise rites unheard of throughout
the entire world. What do you, O men, en-
dowed with reason, dare to assert? What do
you dare to prate of? What do you try to bring
forward in the recklessness of unguarded speech ?
To adore God as the highest existence, as the
Lord of all things that be, as occupying the high-
est place among all exalted ones, to pray to Him
with respectful submission in our distresses, to
cling to Him with all our senses, so to speak,
to love Him, to look up to Him with faith, — is
this an execrable and unhallowed religion,' full
of impiety and of sacrilege, polluting by the
superstition of its own novelty ceremonies insti-
tuted of old ?

26. Is this, I pray, that daring and heinous
iniquity on account of which the mighty powers
of heaven whet against us the stings of passion-
ate indignation, on account of which you your-
selves, whenever the savage desire has seized
you, spoil us of our goods, drive us from the
homes of our fathers, inflict upon us capital
punishment, torture, mangle, burn us, and at the
last expose us to wild beasts, and give us to be
torn by monsters? Whosoever condemns that
in us, or considers that it should be laid against
us as a charge, is he deserving either to be called


' [A beautiful appeal, and one sufficient to show that our author
was no longer among catechumens.]


by the name of man, though he seem so to him-
self? or is he to be believed a god, although he
declare himself to be so by the mouth of a thou-
sand^ prophets? Does Trophonius,3 or Jupiter
of Dodona, pronounce us to be wicked? And
will he himself be called god, and be reckoned
among the number of the deities, who either
fixes the charge of impiety on those who serve
the King Supreme, or is racked with envy be-
cause His majesty and His worship are preferred
to his own ?

Is Apollo, whether called Delian or Clarian,
Didymean, Philesian, or Pythian, to be reckoned
divine, who either knows not the Supreme Ruler,
or who is not aware that He is entreated by us
in daily prayers? And although he knew not
the secrets of our hearts, and though he did not
discover what we hold in our inmost thoughts,
yet he might either know by his ear, or might
perceive by the very tone of voice which we use
in prayer, that we invoke God Supreme, and
that we beg from Him what we require.

27. This is not the place to examine all our
traducers, who they are, or whence they are,
what is their power, what their knowledge, why
they tremble at the mention of Christ, why they
regard his disciples as enemies and as hateful
persons ; but 7uith regard to ourselves to state
expressly to those who will exercise common
reason, in terms applicable to all of us alike, — ■
We Christians are nothing else than worshippers
of the Supreme King and Head, under our Mas-
ter, Christ. If you examine carefully, you will
find that nothing else is implied in that religion.
This is the sum of all that we do ; this is the
proposed end and limit of sacred duties. Be-
fore Him we all prostrate ourselves, according
to our custom ; Him we adore in joint prayers ;
from Him we beg things just and honourable,
and worthy of His ear. Not that He needs our
supplications, or loves to see the homage of so
many thousands laid at His feet. This is our
benefit, and has a regard to our advantage. For
since we are prone to err, and to yield to various
lusts and appetites through the fault of our innate
weakness, He allows Himself at all times to be
comprehended in our thoughts, that whilst we
entreat Him and strive to merit His bounties, we
may receive a desire for purity, and may free
ourselves from every stain by the removal of all
our shortcomings.^

28. What say ye, O interpreters of sacred and
of divine law?5 Are they attached to a better
cause who adore the Lares Grundules, the Aii


- So LB. and Orelli ; but the MS. reads, " himself to be like « god
by his prophets," etc. — se esse siitiilem pmfitcatur in •vatibus.

^ .^o corrected by Pithoeus for the MS. profatms

■* [Evidences of our author's Christian status abound in this fine
passage ]

5 So Gelenius, followed by Orelli and others, for the MS., reading
(iiTini iiiterpretis viri (instead oi Juris ) — " O men, interpreters
of the sacred and divme," which is retained by the ist ed., Hilde-
brand, and Oehler.


420


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


Locutii,' and the Limentini,^ than we who wor-
ship God the Father of all things, and demand
of Him protection in danger and distress ? They,
too, seem to you wary, wise, most sagacious, and
not worthy of any blame, who revere Fauni and
Fatuae, and the genii of states,^ who worship
Pausi and Bellonae : — we are pronounced dull,
doltish, fatuous, stupid, and senseless, who have
given ourselves up to God, at whose nod and
pleasure everything which exists has its being,
and remains immoveable by His eternal decree.
Do you put forth this opinion ? Have you or-
dained this law? Do you publish this decree,
that he be crowned with the highest honours
who shall worship your slaves? that he merit
the extreme penalty of the cross who shall offer
prayers to you yourselves, his masters? In the
greatest states, and in the most powerful nations,
sacred rites are performed in the public name to
harlots, who in old days earned the wages of
impurity, and prostituted themselves to the lust
of all ; ■* and yet for this' there are no swellings
of indignation on the part of the deities. Tem-
ples have been erected with lofty roofs to cats,
to beedes, and to heifers : 5 — the powers of the
deities thus insulted are silent ; nor are they
affected with any feeling of envy because they
see the sacred attributes of vile animals put in
rivalry with them. Are the deities inimical to
us alone? To us are they most unrelenting, be-
cause we worship their Author, by whom, if they
do exist, they began to be, and to have the es-
sence of their power and their majesty, from
whom, having obtained their very divinity, so to
speak, they feel that they exist, and realize that
they are reckoned among things that be, at
whose will and at whose behest they are able
both to perish and be dissolved, and not to be
dissolved and not to perish?^ For if we all
grant that there is only one great Being, whom
in the long lapse of time nought else precedes,
it necessarily follows that after Him all things
were generated and put forth, and that they
burst into an existence each of its kind. But if
this is unchallenged and sure, you ^ will be com-
pelled as a consequence to confess, on the one


' Ail Locutii. Shortly before the Gallic invasion, B.C. 390, a voice
was heard at the dead of night announcing the approach of the Gauls,
but the warning was unheeded. After the departure of the Gauls, the
Komans dedicated an altar and sacred enclosure to Aius Lociitius, or
Loquens, i.e., "The Announcing Speaker," at a spot on the Via
Nova, where the voice was heard. The MS. reads aiaceos boetios,
which Gelenius emended Aios Locutios.

2 So emended by Ursinus for the Ms. Ubentinos, which is retained
in the 1st ed., and by Gelenius, Canterus, and others. Cf. iv. 9,
where Libentina is spoken of as presiding over lusts.

3 As a soul was assigned to each individual at his birth, so a gen-
ius was attributed to a state. The genius of the Roman people was
often represented on ancient coins

■* Thus the Athenians paid honours to Lesena, the Romans to Acca
Laurentia and Flora.

5 The superstitions of the Egyptians are here specially referred to.

* That is, by whose pleasure and at whose command they are pre-
served from annihilation.

' So Orelli, adopting a conjecture of Meursius, for the MS.
nobis.


hand, that the deities are created,^ and on the
other, that they derive the spring of their exist-
ence from the great source of things. And if
they are created and brought forth, they are also
doubtless liable to annihilation and to dangers ;
but yet they are believed to be immortal, ever-
existent, and subject to no extinction. This is
also a gift from God their Author, that they have
been privileged to remain the same through
countless ages, though by nature they are fleet-
ing, and liable to dissolution.

29. And would that it were allowed me to de-
liver this argument with the whole world formed,
as it were, into one assembly, and to be placed
in the hearing of all the human race ! Are we
therefore charged before you with an impious
religion? and because we approach the Head
and Pillar 9 of the universe with worshipful ser-
vice, are we to be considered — to use the terms
employed by you in reproaching us — as persons
to be shunned, and as godless ones ? And who
would more properly bear the odium of these
names than he who either knows, or inquires
after, or believes any other god rather than this
of ours? To Him do we not owe this first, that
we exist, that we are said to be men, that, being
either sent forth from Him, or having fallen from
Him, we are confined in the darkness of this
body?'° Does it not come from Him that we
walk, that we breathe and live ? and by the very
power of living, does He not cause us to exist
and to move with the activity of animated being?
From this do not causes emanate, through which
our health is sustained by the bountiful supply
of various pleasures? Whose is that world in
which you live ? or who hath authorized you to
retain its produce and its possession? Who
hath given that common light, enabling us to
see distinctly all things lying beneath it, to handle
them, and to examine them ? Who has ordained
that the fires of the sun should exist for the
growth of things, lest elements pregnant with
life should be numbed by settling down in the
torpor of inactivity ? When you believe that the
sun is a deity, do you not ask who is his founder,
who has fashioned him? Since the moon is a
goddess in your estimation, do you in like man-
ner care to know who is her author and framer?

30. Does it not occur to you to reflect and to
examine in whose domain you live ? on whose
property you are ? whose is that earth which you
till?" whose is that air which you inhale, and

8 That is, not self-existent, but sprung from something previously
in being.

9 Cvhtmen is here regarded by some as equal to ciilmen ; but
the term " pillar " makes a good .sense likewise.

'° This is according to the doctrine of Pythagoras, Plato, Origan,
and others, who taught that the souls of men first existed in heavenly
beings, and that on account of sins of long standing they were trans-
ferred to earthly bodies to suffer punishment. Cf. Clem. Alex.
Strom, iii. p. 433.

" The Peripatetics called God the locus rerum, rnTro! tto-vtuiv,
the " locality and the area of all things; " that is, the being in whom
all else was contained.


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


421


return again in breathing? whose fountains do
you abundantly enjoy? whose water? who has
regulated the blasts of the wind? who has con-
trived the watery clouds ? who has discriminated
the productive powers of seeds by special char-
acteristics ? Does Apollo give you rain ? Does
Mercury send you water from heaven? Has
-(^isculapius, Hercules, or Diana devised the plan
of showers and of storms? And how can this
be, when you give forth that they were born on
earth, and that at a fixed period they received
vital perceptions? For if the world preceded
them in the long lapse of time, and if before they
were born nature already experienced rains and
storms, those who were born later have no right
of rain-giving, nor can they mix themselves up
with those methods which they found to be in
operation here, and to be derived from a greater
Author.

31.0 greatest, O Supreme Creator of things
invisible ! O Thou who art Thyself unseen, and
who art incomprehensible ! Thou art worthy,
Thou art verily worthy — if only mortal tongue
may speak of Thee — that all breathing and in-
telligent nature should never cease to feel and
to return thanks ; that it should throughout the
whole of life fall on bended knee, and offer sup-
plication with never-ceasing prayers. For Thou
art the first cause ; in Thee created things exist,
and Thou art the space in which rest the founda-
tions of all things, whatever they be. Thou art
illimitable, unbegotten, immortal, enduring for
aye, God Thyself alone, whom no bodily shape
may represent, no oudine delineate ; of virtues
inexpressible, of greatness indefinable ; unre-
stricted as to locality, movement, and condition,
concerning whom nothing can be clearly ex-
pressed by the significance of man's words.
That Thou mayest be understood, we must be
silent ; and that erring conjecture may track Thee
through the shady cloud, no word must be ut-
tered. Grant pardon, O King Supreme, to those
who persecute Thy servants ; and in virtue of Thy
benign nature, forgive those who fly from the
worship of Thy name and the observance of Thy
religion. It is not to be wondered at if Thou art
unknown ; it is a cause of greater astonishment
if Thou art clearly comprehended.'

But perchance some one dares — for this re-
mains for frantic madness to do — to be uncer-
tain, and to express doubt whether that God
exists or not ; whether He is believed in on the
prov^ed truth of reliable evidence, or on the im-
aginings of empty rumour. For of those who
have given themselves to philosophizing, we have
heard that some ^ deny the existence of any di-


' [This prayer of Amobius is surely worthy of admiration. ]
^ Diagoras of Melos and Theodorus of Cy rene, called the Atheists.
The former flourished about B c. 430, the latter about b.c 310. See
Cic, Nat. Dear., i. 2. [Note the universal faith, cap. 34, in/ra.\


vine power, that others 3 inquire daily whether
there be or not ; that others •♦ construct the whole
fabric of the universe by chance accidents and by
random collision, and fashion it by the concourse
of atoms of different shapes ; with whom we by
no means intend to enter at this time on a dis-
cussion of such perverse convictions.s For those
who think wisely say, that to argue against things
palpably foolish, is a mark of greater folly.

32. Our discussion deals with those who, ac-
knowledging that there is a divine race of beings,
doubt about those of greater rank and power,
whilst they admit that there are deities inferior
and more humble. What then? Do we strive
and toil to obtain such results by arguments?
Far hence be such madness ; and, as the phrase
is, let the folly, say I, be averted from us. For
it is as dangerous to attempt to prove by argu-
ments that God is the highest being, as it is to
wish to discover by reasoning of this kind that
He exists. It is a matter of indifference whether
you deny that He exists, or affirm it and admit
it ; since equally culpable are both the assertion
of such a thing, and the denial of an unbelieving
opponent.

T,T,. Is there any human being who has not
entered on the first day of his life with an idea
of that Great Head ? In whom has it not been
implanted by nature, on whom has it not been
impressed, aye, stamped almost in his mother's
womb even, in whom is there not a native in-
stinct, that He is King and Lord, the ruler of all
things that be? In fine, if the dumb animals
even could stammer forth their thoughts, if they
were able to use our languages ; nay, if trees, if
the clods of the earth, if stones animated by
vital perceptions were able to produce vocal
sounds, and to utter articulate speech, would
they not in that case, with nature as their guide
and teacher, in the faith of uncorrupted inno-
cence, both feel that there is a God, and pro-
claim that He alone is Lord of all ?

34. But in vain, says one, do you assail us
with a groundless and calumnious charge, as if
we deny that there is a deity of a higher kind,
since Jupiter is by us both called and esteemed
the best and the greatest ; and since we have
dedicated to him the most sacred abodes, and
have raised huge Capitols. You are endeavour-
ing to connect together things which are dissimi-
lar, and to force them into one class, thereby
introducing confusion. For by the unanimous
judgment of all, and by the common consent of
the human race, the omnipotent God is regarded
as having never been born, as having never been
brought forth to new light, and as not having


3 Protagoras of Abdera, b. B.C. 480, d. 411.

■* Democritus of Abdera, b. B.C. 460, and Epicurus, b. B.C. 342,
d. 270.

5 Obstinatione, literally " stubbornness ; " Walker conjectures
opinatione, " imaginings," which Orelli approves.


42 2


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


begun to exist at any time or century. For He
Himself is the source of all things, the Father
of ages and of seasons. For they do not exist of
themselves, but from His everlasting perpetuity
they move on in unbroken and ever endless flow.
Yet Jupiter indeed, as you allege, has both father
and mother, grandfathers, grandmothers, and
brothers : now lately conceived in the womb of
his mother, being completely formed and per-
fected in ten months, he burst with vital sensa-
tions into light unknown to him before. If, then,
this is so, how can Jupiter be God supreme, when
it is evident that He is everlasting, and the for-
mer is represented by you as having had a natal
day, and as having uttered a mournful cry,
through terror at the strange scene?

35. But suppose they be one, as you wish,
and not different in any power of deity and in
majesty, do you therefore persecute us with un-
deserved hatred ? Why do. you shudder at the
mention of our name as of the worst omen, if we
too worship the deity whom you worship? or
why do you contend that the gods are friendly
to you, but inimical, aye, most hostile to us,
though our relations to them are the same ? For
if one religion is common to us and to you, the
anger of the gods is stayed ; ' but if they are
hostile to us alone, it is plain that both you and
they have no knowledge of God. And that that
God is not Jove, is evident by the very wrath of
the deities.

36. But, says my opponent, the deities are not
inimical to you, because you worship the om-
nipotent God ; but because you both allege that
one born as men are, and put to death on the
cross, which is a disgraceful punishment even for
worthless men, was God, and because you be-
lieve that He still lives, and because you worship
Him in daily supplications. If it is agreeable to
you, my friends, state clearly what deities those
are who believe that the worship of Christ by us
has a tendency to injure them? Is it Janus, the
founder of the Janiculum, and Saturn, the author
of the Saturnian state ? Is it Fauna Fatua,^ the
wife of Faunus, who 'is called the Good Goddess,
but who is better and more deserving of praise
in the drinking of wine? Is it those gods In-
digetes who swim in the river, and live in the
channels of the Numicius, in company with frogs
and httle fishes? Is it yEsculapius and father
Bacchus, the former born of Coronis, and the
other dashed by lightning from his mother's
womb ? Is it Mercury, son of Maia, and what is
more divine, Maia the beautiful?. Is it the bow-
bearing deities Diana and Apollo, who were com-


' So the MS.; for which Meursius would read, nobis vobisque,
communis esset (for cessat) — " is to us and to you, the anger of the
gods would be shared in common."

^ So Ursinus, followed by most edd., for tne reading of the MS.
Fenta Faiun, of v. 18. A later writer has corrected the MS. Fanda,
which, Rigaltius says, an old gloss renders " mother."


panions of their mother's wanderings, and who
were scarcely safe in floating islands? Is it
Venus, daughter of Dione, paramour of a man
of Trojan family, and the prostituter of her secret
charms? Is it Ceres, born in Sicilian territory,
and Proserpine, surprised while gathering flowers?
Is it the Theban or the Phoenician Hercules, —
the latter buried in Spanish territory, the other
burned by fire on Mount CEta? Is it the broth-
ers Castor and Pollux, sons of Tyndareus, — the
one accustomed to tame horses, the other an
excellent boxer, and unconquerable with the
untanned gauntlet? Is it the Titans and the
Bocchores of the Moors, and the Syrian ^ deities,
the offspring of eggs? Is it Apis, born in the
Peloponnese, and in Egypt called Serapis? Is
it Isis, tanned by Ethiopian suns, lamenting her
lost son and husband torn hmb from limb?
Passing on, we omit the royal offspring of Ops,
which your writers have in their books set forth
for your instruction, telling you both who they
are, and of what character. Do these, then, hear
with offended ears that Christ is worshipped, and
that He is accepted by us and regarded as a
divine person? And being forgetful of the grade
and state in which they recently were, are they
unwilling to share with another that which has
been granted to themselves? Is this the justice
of the heavenly deities? Is this the righteous
judgment of the gods? Is not this a kind of
malice and of greed ? is it not a species of base
envy, to wish their own fortunes only to rise, —
those of others to be lowered, and to be trodden
down in despised lowliness?

37. We worship one who was bom a man.
What then? do you worship no one who was
born a man? Do you not worship one and an-
other, aye, deities innumerable ? Nay, have you
not taken from the number of mortals all those
whom you now have in your temples ; and have
you not set them in heaven, and among the con-
stellations? For if, perchance, it has escaped
you that they once partook of human destiny,
and of the state common to all men, search the
most ancient literature, and range through the
writings of those who, living nearest to the days
of antiquity, set forth all things with undisguised
truth and without flattery : you will learn in de-
tail from what fathers, from what mothers they
were each sprung, in what district they were
born, of what tribe ; what they made, what they
did, what they endured, how they employed
themselves, what fortunes they experienced of


3 So restored by Salmasius for Dioscuri, and understood by him
as meaning Dea Syria, i e., Venus, because it is said that a large egg
having been found by the fish in the Euphrates, was pushed up by
them to the dry land, when a dove came down, and sat upon it until
the goddess came forth. Such was the form of the legend according
to Nigidius; but Eratosthenes spoke of both Venus and Cupid as
being produced in this manner. The Syrian deities were therefore
Venus, Cupid, and perhaps Adonis. It should be remembered, how-
ever, that the Syrians paid reverence to pigeons and fish as gods
(Xen., Anab., i. 4, 9), and that these may therefore be meant.


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


423


an adverse or of a favourable kind in dischar-
ging their functions. But if, while you know that
they were born in the womb, and that they lived
on the produce of the earth, you nevertheless
upbraid us with the worship of one born like
ourselves, you act with great injustice, in regard-
ing that as worthy of condemnation in us which
you yourselves habitually do ; or what you allow
to be lawful for you, you are unwilling to be in
like manner lawful for others.

38. But in the meantime let us grant, in sub-
mission to your ideas, that Christ was one of us
— similar in mind, soul, body, weakness, and
condition ; is He not worthy to be called and to
be esteemed God by us, in consideration of His
bounties, so numerous as they are ? For if you
have placed in the assembly ' of the gods Liber,
because he discovered the use of wine ; Ceres,
because she discovered the use of bread ; ^scu-
lapius, because he discovered the use of herbs ;
Minerva, because she produced the olive ; Trip-
toleraus, because he invented the plough ; Her-
cules, because he overpowered and restrained
wild beasts and robbers, and water-serpents of
many heads, — with how great distinctions is He
to be honoured by us, who, by instilling His truth
into our hearts, has freed us from great errors ;
who, when we were straying everywhere, as if
bhnd and without a guide, withdrew us from
precipitous and devious paths, and set our feet
on more smooth places ; who has pointed out
what is especially profitable and salutary for the
human race ; who has shown us what God is,^
who He is, how great and how good ; who has
permitted and taught us to conceive and to
understand, as far as our limited capacity can,
His profound and inexpressible depths ; who, in
in His great kindness, has caused it to be known
by what founder, by what Creator, this world was
established and made ; who has explained the
nature of its origin ^ and essential substance,
never before imagined in the conceptions of
any ; whence generative warmth is added to the
rays of the sun ; why the moon, always uninjured +
in her motions, is believed to alternate her light
and her obscurity from intelligent causes ; 5 what
is the origin of animals, what rules regulate
seeds ; who designed man himself, who fashioned


■ So all edd., except those of Hildebrand and Oehler, for the MS.
censuin — " list."

2 That is, that God is a Spirit. [Note our author's spirit of faith
in Christ.]

3 Orelli would refer these words to God; he thinks that with those
immediately following they may be understood of God's spiritual
nature, — an idea which he therefore supposes Arnobius to assert had
never been grasped by the heathen.

* So Gelenius, followed by Orelli and others, for the corrupt read-
ing of the MS., zdi-in }ie qiiis; but possibly both this and the preced-
ing clause have crept into the text from the margin, as in construction
they differ from the rest of the sentence, both that which precedes,
and that which follows.

5 The phrase animalibus causis is regarded by commentators as
equal to aniinatis causis, and refers to the doctrine of the Stoics,
that in the sun, moon, stars, etc., there was an intelligent nature, or a
certain impulse of mind, which directed their movements.


him, or from what kind of material did He com-
pact the very build of bodies ; what the percep-
tions are ; what the soul, and whether it flew to
us of its own accord, or whether it was generated
and brought into existence with our bodies them-
selves ; whether it sojourns with us, partaking of
death, or whether it is gifted with an endless
immortality ; what condition awaits us when we
shall have separated from our bodies relaxed in
death ; whether we shall retain our perceptions,''
or have no recollection of our former sensations
or of past memories ; 7 -who has restrained ^ our
arrogance, and has caused our necks, uplifted
with pride, to acknowledge the measure of their
weakness ; who hath shown that we are creatures
imperfectly formed, that we trust in vain expecta-
tions, that we understand nothing thoroughly, that
we know nothing, and that we do not see those
things which are placed before our eyes ; who
has guided us from false superstitions to the true
religion, — a blessing which exceeds and tran-
scends all His other gifts ; who has raised our
thoughts to heaven from brutish statues formed
of the vilest clay, and has caused us to hold con-
verse in thanksgiving and prayer with the Lord
of the universe.

39. But lately, O blindness, I worshipp>ed im-
ages produced from the furnace, gods made on
anvils and by hammers, the bones of elephants,
paintings, wreaths on aged trees ; ^ whenever I
espied an anointed stone and one bedaubed with
olive oil, as if some power resided in it I wor-
shipped it, I addressed myself to it and begged
blessings from a senseless stock. '° And these
very gods of whose existence I had convinced
myself, I treated with gross insults, when I be-
lieved them to be wood, stone, and bones, or
imagined that they dwelt in the substance of
such objects. Now, having been led into the
paths of truth by so great a teacher, I know
what all these things are, I entertain honourable
thoughts concerning those which are worthy, I
offer no insult to any divine name ; and what
is due to each, whether inferior" or superior,
I assign with clearly-defined gradations, and on
distinct authority. Is Christ, then, not to be
regarded by us as God ? and is He, who in other
respects may be deemed the very greatest, not


6 Lit. " shall see" — visuri, the reading of the MS.; changed in
the first ed. and others to victnri — " shall live."

7 Some have suggested a different construction of these words —
7nemoriam millam nostri scnsus et recordationis hnbitnri, thus
— " have no memory of ourselves and senses of recollection;" but
that adopted above is simpler, and does not force the words as this
seems to do.

8 The MS. and ist and zd Roman edd. read, qtii constringit —
" who restrains."

9 It was a common practice with the Romans to hang the spoils
of an enemy on a tree, which was thus consecrated to .some deity.
Hence such trees were sacred, and remained unhurt even to old age.
Some have supposed that the epithet " old " is applied from the fact
that the heathen used to offer to their gods objects no longer of use
to themselves; thus it was only old trees, past bearing fruit, which
were generally selected to hang the spolia upon.

"^ [This interesting personal confession deserves especial note.]
" V el persona vei capiti.


424


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


to be honoured with divine worship, from whom
we have already received while alive so great
gifts, and from whom, when the day comes, we
expect greater ones ?

40. But He died nailed to the cross. What
is that to the argument? For neither does the
kind and disgrace of the death change His words
or deeds, nor will the weight of His teaching
appear less ; because He freed Himself from the
shackles of the body, not by a natural separation,
but departed by reason of violence offered to
Him. Pythagoras of Samos was burned to death
in a temple, under an unjust suspicion of aiming
at sovereign power. Did his doctrines lose their
peculiar influence, because he breathed forth
his life not willingly, but in consequence of a
savage assault? In like manner Socrates, con-
demned by the decision of his fellow-citizens,
suffered capital punishment : have his discus-
sions on morals, on virtues, and on duties been
rendered vain, because he was unjustly hurried
from life ? Others without number, conspicuous
by their renown, their merit, and their public
character, have experienced the most cruel forms
of death, as Aquilius, Trebonius, and Regulus :
were they on that account adjudged base after
death, because they perished not by the com-
mon law of the fates, but after being mangled
and tortured in the most cruel kind of death ?
No innocent person foully slain is ever disgraced
thereby ; nor is he stained by the mark of any
baseness, who suffers severe punishment, not
from his own deserts, but by reason of the sav-
age nature of his persecutor.'

41. And yet, O ye who laugh because we
worship one who died an ignominious death,
do not ye too, by consecrating shrines to him,
honour father Liber, who was torn limb from
limb by the Titans? Have you not, after his
punishment and his death by lightning, named
^sculapius, the discoverer of medicines, as the
guardian and protector of health, of strength,
and of safety? Do you not invoke the great
Hercules himself by offerings, by victims, and
by kindled frankincense, whom you yourselves
allege to have been burned alive after his pun-
ishment,- and to have been consumed on the
fatal pyres? Do you not, with the unanimous
approbation of the Gauls, invoke as a propitious ^
and as a holy god, in the temples of the Great
Mother, •♦ that Phrygian Atys s who was mangled


■ So all the Inter edd. : but in the MS., ist and 2d Roman edd.,
and in those of Gelenius and Canterus, this clause reads, cruciatoris
perfietittir sievitntem — " but suffers the cruelty of his persecutor."

2 The words post paeiias in the text are regarded as spurious by
Orelli, who supposes them to have crept in from the preceding sen-
tence: but they may be defended as suflRciently expressing the agonies
which Hercules suffered through the fatal shirt of Nessus.

■5 The words deu>n propitiHtu are indeed found in the MS., but
according to Rigaltius are not in the same handwriting as the rest of
the work.

•• Cybele, whose worship was conjoined with that of Atys.

5 So Orelli, but the MS. Aitis.


and deprived of his virility? Father Romulus
himself, who was torn in pieces by the hands of
a hundred senators, do you not call Quirinus
Martins, and do you not honour him with priests
and with gorgeous couches,^ and do you not
worship him in most spacious temples ; and in
addition to all this, do you not affirm that he
has ascended into heaven? Either, therefore,
you too are to be laughed at, who regard as
gods men slain by the most cruel tortures ; or
if there is a sure ground for your thinking that
you should do so, allow us too to feel assured
for what causes and on what grounds we do this,
42. You worship, says jiiy opponent, one who
was born a mere human being. Even if that
were true, as has been already said in former pas-
sages, yet, in consideration of the many liberal
gifts which He has bestowed on us. He ought to
be called and be addressed as God. But since
He is God in reality and without any shadow of
doubt, do you think that we will deny that He
is worshipped by us with all the fervour we are
capable of, and assumed as the guardian of our
body? Is that Christ of yours a god, then?
some raving, wrathful, and excited man will say.
A god, we will reply, and tlie god of the inner
powers ; 7 and — what may still further torture
unbelievers with the most bitter pains — He was
sent to us by the King Supreme for a purpose
of the very highest moment. My opponent,
becoming more mad and more frantic, will per-
haps ask whether the matter can be proved, as
we allege. There is no greater proof than the
credibility of the acts done by Him, than the
unwonted excellence of the virtues He exhibited,
than the conquest and the abrogation of all
those deadly ordinances which peoples and tribes
saw executed in the light of day,'^ with no object-
ing voice ; and even they whose ancient laws or
whose country's laws He shows to be full of
vanity and of the most senseless superstition,
(even they) dare not allege these things to be
false.


6 This refers to the practice of placing the images of the gods on
pillows at feasts. In the temples there -were pulvinaria, or couches,
specially for the purpose.

7 The •phxAiit poteiitiarunt iiiteriorum is not easily understood.
Orelli is of opinion that it means those powers which in the Bible are
called the "powers of heaven," the "army of heaven," i e., the
angels. The Jews and the early Fathers of the Church divided the
heaven into circles or zones, each inhabited by its peculiar powers or
inftlligent natures, differing in dignity and in might. The central
place was assigned to God Him.self, and to Christ, who sat on His
right hand, and who is called by the Fathers of the Church the
" Angel of the Church," and the " Angel of the New Covenant."
Next in order came "Thrones," "Archangels," "Cherubim and
Seraphim," and most remote from God's throne, the " Chorus of
Angels," the tutelar genii of men. The system of zones and powers
seems to have been derived from the Chaldeans, who made a similar
division of the heavens. According to this idea, Amobius speaks of
Christ as nearest to the Father, and God of the " inner powers," who
enjoyed God's immediate presence. Reference is perhaps made to
some recondite doctrine of the Gnostics. It may mean, however,
the more subtile powers of nature, as affecting both the souls of men
and the physical universe.

* So Orelli with most edd., following Ursinus, for the MS. suo ge-
ne-r/'-s stib limine, which might, however, be retained, as if the
sense were that these ordinances were coeval with man's origin, and
translated, '' tribes saw at the beginning of their race."


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


425


43. My opponent will perhaps meet me with
many other slanderous and childish charges
which are commonly urged. Jesus was a Ma-
gian ; ' He effected all these things by secret arts.
From the shrines of the Egyptians He stole the
names of angels of might,^ and the religious
system of a remote country. Why, O witlings,
do you speak of things which you have not ex-
amined, and which are unknown to you, prating
with the garrulity of a rash tongue ? Were, then,
those things which were done, the freaks of
demons, and the tricks of magical arts? Can
you specify and point out to me any one of all
those magicians who have ever existed in past
ages, that did anything similar, in the thousandth
degree, to Christ? Who has done this without
any power of incantations, without the juice of
herbs and of grasses, without any anxious watch-
ing of sacrifices, of libations, or of seasons?
For we do not press it, and inquire what they
profess to do, nor in what kind of acts all their
learning and experience are wont to be com-
prised. For who is not aware that these men
either stvidy to know beforehand things impend-
ing, which, whether they will or not, come of
necessity as they have been ordained ? or to in-
flict a deadly and wasting disease on whom they
choose ; or to sever the affections of relatives ;
or to open without keys places which are locked ;
or to seal the mouth in silence ; or in the chariot
race to weaken, urge on, or retard horses ; or to
inspire in wives, and in the children of strangers,
whether they be males or females, the flames
and mad desires of illicit love ? ^ Or if they
seem to attempt anything useful, to be able to
do it not by their own power, but by the might
of those deities whom they invoke.

44. And yet it is agreed on that Christ per-
formed all those miracles which He wrought
without any aid from external things, without
the observance of any ceremonial, without any
definite mode of procedure, but solely by the
inherent might of His authority ; and as was the
proper duty of the true God, as was consistent with
His nature, as was worthy of Him, in the generos-
ity of His bounteous power He bestowed nothing
hurtful or injurious, but only that which is helpful,
beneficial, and full of blessings good ■* for men.

45. What do you say again, oh you 5 ?

Is He then a man, is He one of us, at whose com-

' Magus, almost equivalent to sorcerer.

^ Arnobius uses nomina, " names," with special significance,
because the Magi in their incantations used barbarous and fearful
names of angels and of powers, by whose influence they thought
strange and unusual things were brought to pass.

^ All these different effects the magicians of old attempted to
produce: to break family ties by bringing plagues into houses, or by
poisons; open doors and unbind chains by charms (Orig., contra
Cels., ii.) ; affect horses in tlie race — of which Hieronymus in his
Life of Hilarion gives an example: and use philters and love
potions to kindle excessive and imlawful desires.

* So Orelli and most edd., following a marginal reading of Ursi-
nus, auxiliaribus plenum bonis (for the Ms. nobis).

5 In the height of his indignation and contempt, the writer stops
short and does not apply to his opponents any new epithet.


mand, at whose voice, raised in the utterance of
audible and intelligible words,^ infirmities, dis-
eases, fevers, and other ailments of the body
fled away ? Was He one of us, whose presence,
whose very sight, that race of demons which
took possession of men was unable to bear, and
terrified by the strange power, fled away? Was
He one of us, to whose order the foul leprosy, at
once checked, was obedient, and left sameness
of colour to bodies formerly spotted? Was He
one of us, at whose light touch the issues of
blood were stanched, and stopped their exces-
sive flow ? 7 Was He one of us, whose hands the
waters of the lethargic dropsy fled from, and that
searching^ fluid avoided; and did the swelling
body, assuming a healthy dryness, find relief?
Was He one of us, who bade the lame run ? Was
it His work, too, that the maimed stretched forth
their hands, and the joints relaxed the rigidity^
acquired even at birth ; that the paralytic rose
to their feet, and persons now carried home their
beds who a little before were borne on the shoul-
ders of others ; the blind were restored to sight,
and men born without eyes now looked on the
heaven and the day?

46. Was He one of us, I say, who by one act
of intervention at once healed a hundred or more
afflicted with various infirmities and diseases ;
at whose word only the raging and maddened
seas were still, the whirlwinds and tempests were
lulled ; who walked over the deepest pools with
unwet foot ; who trod the ridges of the deep, the
very waves being astonished, and nature coming
under bondage ; who with five loaves satisfied
five thousand of His followers ; and who, lest it
might appear to the unbelieving and hard of
heart to be an illusion, filled twelve capacious
baskets with the fragments that remained ? W^as
He one of us, who ordered the breath that had
departed to return to the body, persons buried
to come forth from the tomb, and after three
days to be loosed from the swathings of the un-
dertaker? Was He one of us, who saw clearly in
the hearts of the silent what each was ponder-
ing,'° what each had in his secret thoughts ? Was
He one of us, who, when He uttered a single
word, was thought by nations far removed from
one another and of different speech to be using
well-known sounds, and the peculiar language of
each? " W^as He one of us, who, when He was


^ This is contrasted with the mutterings and strange words used
by the magicians.

7 So the MS. accordjng to Oehler, and seemingly Heraldus; but
according to Orelli, the MS. reads iiniiiodcrati (instead of — as) co-
hibebani Jluores, which Meursius received as equivalent to " the ex-
cessive flow stayed itself."

8 Pcnetrabilis, " searching," i.e., finding its way to all parts o£
the body.

9 So Orelli, LB., Elmenhorst, and Stewechius, adopting a mar-
ginal reading of Ursinus, which prefixes im — to the MS. mobilitatcs
— " looseness " — retained by the other edd.

•° Cf. John ii. 25. |^He often replies to thonghts not uttered.]
" No such miracle is recorded of Christ, and Oehler suggests with
some probability that Arnobius may have here fallen into confusion
as to what is recorded of the apostles on the day of Pentecost.


426


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


teaching His followers the duties of a religion
that could not be gainsaid, suddenly filled the
whole world, and showed how great He was and
who He was, by unveiling the boundlessness of
His authority ? Was He one of us, who, after His
body had been laid in the tomb, manifested Him-
self in open day to countless numbers of men ;
who spoke to them, and listened to them ; who
taught them, reproved and admonished them ;
who, lest they should imagine that they were de-
ceived by unsubstantial fancies, showed Himself
once, a second time, aye frequently, in familiar
conversation ; who appears even now to right-
eous men of unpolluted mind who love Him, not
in airy dreams, but in a form of pure simplicity ; '
whose name, when heard, puts to flight evil
spirits, imposes silence on soothsayers, prevents
men from consulting the augurs, causes the
efforts of arrogant magicians to be frustrated, not
by the dread of His name, as you allege, but by
the free exercise of a greater power?

47. These facts set forth in summary we have
put forward, not on the supposition that the
greatness of the agent was to be seen in these
virtues alone.^ For however great these things
be, how excessively petty and trifling will they
be found to be, if it shall be revealed from what
realms He has come, of what God He is the min-
ister ! But with regard to the acts which were
done by Him, they were performed, indeed, not
that He might boast Himself into empty ostenta-
tion, but that hardened and unbelieving men
might be assured that what was professed was
not deceptive, and that they might now learn to
imagine, from the beneficence of His works, what
a true god was. At the same time we wish this
also to be known,^ when, as was said, an enu-
meration of His acts has been given in summary,
that Christ was able to do not only those things
which He did, but that He could even overcome
the decrees of fate. For if, as is evident, and
as is agreed by all, infirmities and bodily suffer-
ings, if deafness, deformity, and dumbness, if
shrivelling of the sinews and the loss of sight
happen to us, and are brought on us by the de-
crees of fate, and if Christ alone has corrected
this, has restored and cured man, it is clearer
than the sun himself that He was more power-
ful than the fates are when He has loosened and
overpowered those things which were bound
with everlasting knots, and fixed by unalterable
necessity.

48. But, says some one, you -in vain claim so
much for Christ, when we now know, and have

in past times known, of other gods both giving

t

' The Latin is, per fmrre sfeciein simplicitatis, which is not
easily understood, and is less easily expressed.

^ [I have already directed attention to Dominic Diodati's essay,
De Christo Greece loquetite. ed. London, 1843 ]

3 So almost all edd. ; but the MS. and ist and 2d Roman edd. read
scire — " to know," etc.


remedies to many who were sick, and healing
the diseases and the infirmities of many men.
I do not incjuire, I do not demand, what god did
so, or at what time ; whom he relieved, or what
shattered frame he restored to sound health :
this only I long to hear, whether, without the
addition of any substance — that is, of any medi-
cal application — he ordered diseases to fly away
from men at a touch ; whether he commanded
and compelled the cause of ill health to be
eradicated, and the bodies of the weak to re-
turn to their natural strength. For it is known
that Christ, either by applying His hand to the
parts affected, or by the command of His voice
only, opened the ears of the deaf, drove away
blindness from the eyes, gave speech to the
dumb, loosened the rigidity of the joints, gave
the power of walking to the shrivelled, — was
wont to heal by a word and by an order, lepro-
sies, agues, dropsies, and all other kinds of ail-
ments, which some fell power-* has willed that
the bodies of men should endure. What act
like these have all these gods done, by whom
you allege that help has been brought to the
sick and the imperilled ? for if they have at any
time ordered, as is reported, either that medi-
cine or a special diet be given to some, 5 or that
a draught be drunk off, or that the juices of
plants and of blades be placed^ on that which
causes uneasiness or have ordered that persons
should walk, remain at rest, or abstain from
something hurtful, — and that this is no great
matter, and deserves no great admiration, is evi-
dent, if you will attentively examine it — a simi-
lar mode of treatment is followed by physicians
also, a creature earth-born and not relying on
true science, but founding on a system of con--
jecture, and wavering in estimating probabilities.
Now there is no special merit in removing by
remedies those ailments which affect men : the
healing qualities belong to the drugs. — not vir-
tues inherent in him who applies them ; and
though it is praiseworthy to know by what medi-
cine or by what method it may be suitable for
persons to be treated, there is room for this
credit being assigned to man, but not to the
deity. For it is, at least, no discredit that he 7
should have improved the health of man by
things taken from without : it is a disgrace to a
god that he is not able to effect it of himself, but
that he gives soundness and safety only by the aid
of external objects.

49. And since you compare Christ and the
other deities as to the blessings of health be-
stowed, how many thousands of infirm persons


* See book ii. chap. 36, infra.

5 The gods in whose temples the sick lay ordered remedies
through the priests.

*> ho all edd. except LB., which reads with the MS. superponere
— " that (one) place the juices," etc.

7 That is, the physician.


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


427


do you wish to be shown to you by us ; how
many persons affected with wasting diseases,
whom no appliances whatever restored, although
they went as suppliants through all the temples,
although they prostrated themselves before the
gods, and swept the very thresholds with their
lips — though, as long as life remained, they
wearied with prayers, and importuned with most
piteous vows ^sculapius himself, the health-
giver, as they call him ? Do we not know that
some died of their ailments? that others grew
old by the torturing pain of their diseases? that
others began to Hve a more abandoned life after
they had wasted their days ' and nights in in-
cessant prayers, and in expectation of mercy ?2
Of what avail is it, then, to point to one or an-
other who may have been healed, when so many
thousands have been left unaided, and the shrines
are full of all the wretched and the unfortunate ?
Unless, perchance, you say that the gods help
the good, but that the miseries of the wicked are
overlooked. And yet Christ assisted the good
and the bad alike ; nor was there any one re-
jected by Him, who in adversity sought help
against violence and the ills of fortune. For
this is the mark of a true god and of kingly
power, to deny his bounty to none, and not to
consider who merits it or who does not ; since
natural infirmity and not the choice of his desire,
or of his sober judgment, makes a sinner. To
say, moreover, that aid is given by the gods to
the deserving when in distress, is to leave un-
decided and render doubtful what you assert :
so that both he who has been made whole may
seem to have been preserved by chance, and he
who is not may appear to have been unable to
banish infirmity, not because of his demerit, but
by reason of a heaven-sent weakness. ^

50. Moreover, by His own power He not only
performed those miraculous deeds which have
been detailed by us in summary, and not as the
importance of the matter demanded ; but, what
was more sublime. He has permitted many others
to attempt them, and to perform them by the
use of His name. For when He foresaw that you
were to be the detractors of His deeds and of His
divine work, in order that no lurking suspicion
might remain of His having lavished these gifts
and bounties by magic arts, from the immense
multitude of people, which with admiring wonder
strove to gain His favour. He chose fishermen,
artisans, rustics, and unskilled persons of a simi-
lar kind, that they being sent through various
nations should perform all those miracles without
any deceit and without any material aids. By a

■ So the edd., reading tri-v-ernnt, for the MS. tri-bu-erunt —
" given up," which is retained in the first ed.

^ Pietatis, " of mercy," in which sense the word is often used in
late writers. Thus it was from his clemency that Antoninus, the
Roman emperor, received the title of Pius.

3 So most edd , following a marginal reading of Ursinus, which
prefixes in— to the MS./irmitaie,


word He assuaged the racking pains of the aching
members ; and by a word they checked the
writhings of maddening sufferings. By one com-
mand He drove demons from the body, and re-
stored their senses to the lifeless; they, too, by
no different command, restored to health and to
soundness of mind those labouring under the
inflictions of these demons.'' By the applica-
tion of His hand He removed the marks of lep-
rosy ; they, too, restored to the body its natural
skin by a touch not dissimilar. He ordered the
dropsical and swollen flesh to recover its natural
dryness ; and His servants in the same manner
stayed the wandering waters, and ordered them
to glide through their own channels, avoiding
injury to the frame. Sores of immense size,
refusing to admit of healing. He restrained from
further feeding on the flesh, by the interposition
of one word ; and they in like manner, by re-
stricting its ravages, compelled the obstinate and
merciless cancer to confine itself to a scar. To
the lame He gave the power of walking, to the
dark eyes sight, the dead He recalled to life ; and
not less surely did they, too, relax the tightened
nerves, fill the eyes with light already lost, and
order the dead to return from the tombs, revers-
ing the ceremonies of the funeral rites. Nor was
anything calling forth the bewildered admiration
of all done by Him, which He did not freely
allow to be performed by those humble and rustic
men, and which He did not put in their power.
51. What say ye, O minds incredulous, stub-
born, hardened? Did that great Jupiter Capi-
tolinus of yours give to any human being power
of this kind? Did he endow with this right any
priest of a curia, the Pontifex Maximus, nay,
even the Dialis, in whose name he is revealed as
the god of life ? s I shall not say, did he impart
power to raise the dead, to give light to the blind,
restore the normal condition of their members
to the weakened and the paralyzed, but did he
even enable any one to check a pustule, a hang-
nail, a pimple, either by the word of his mouth
or the touch of his hand? Was this, then, a
power natural to man, or could such a right be
granted, could such a licence be given by the
mouth of one reared on the vulgar produce of
earth ; and was it not a divine and sacred gift?
or if the matter admits of any hyperbole, was it


4 " They, too, . . . those labouring under the inflictions of these: "
so LB., with the warm approval of Orelli (who, however, with pre-
vious edd., retains the MS. reading in his te.xt) and others, reading
sub eorum t-ortantes (for Ms./ — ) et illi se cnsiius ; Heraldus
having suggested rotantes. This simple and elegant emendation
makes it unnecessary to notice the harsh and forced readings of earlier
edd.

-' So understood by Orelli, who reads quo Dins est, adopting the
explanation of Dialis given by Festus. The MS., however, according
to Crusius, reads, Dialetn, quod ejus est,JJainiiic»t isto jure dona-
vit ; in which case, from the position of the quod, the meaning might
be, "which term is his," or possibly, "because he (i.e., the priest)
is his," only that in the latter case a pronoun would be expected: the
commentators generally refer it to the succeeding yV/rv, with this
" right," which is his. Canterus reads, quod ntajus est, i.e., than the
Pontifex Maximus. [Compare vol. iv. p. 74, note 7.]


428


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


not more than divine and sacred? For if you
do that which you are able to do, and what is
compatible with your strength and your ability,
there is no ground for the expression of astonish-
ment ; for you will have done that which you
were able, and which your power was bound to
accomplish, m order that there should be a per-
fect correspondence ' between the deed and the
doer. To be able to transfer to a man your own
power, share with the frailest being the ability to
perform that which you alone are able to do, is
a proof of power supreme over all, and holding
in subjection the causes of all things, and the
natural laws of methods and of means.

52. Come, then, let some Magian Zoroaster^
arrive from a remote part of the globe, crossing
over the fiery zone,^ if we believe Hermippus as
an authority. Let these join him too — that
Bactrian, whose deeds Ctesias sets forth in the
first book of his History ; the Armenian, grand-
son of Hosthanes ; ■♦ and Pamphilus, the intimate
friend of Cyrus ; ApoUonius, Damigero, and Dar-
danus ; Velus, Julianus, and Baebulus ; and if
there be any other one who is supposed to have
especial powers and reputation in such magic
arts. Let them grant to one of the people to
adapt the mouths of the dumb for the purposes
of speech, to unseal the ears of the deaf, to give
the natural powers of the eye to those born
without sight, and to restore feeling and life to
bodies long cold in death. Or if that is too diffi-
cult, and if they cannot impart to others the
power to do such acts, let themselves perform
them, and with their own rites. Whatever nox-
ious herbs the earth brings forth from its bosom,
whatever powers those muttered words and ac-
companying spells contain — these let them add,
we envy them not ; those let them collect, we
forbid them not. We wish to make trial and to
discover whether they can effect, with the aid
of their gods, what has often been accomplished
by unlearned Christians with a word only.

■ So the MS. reading cequalitas, which is retained by Hild. and
Oehler: all other editions drop te — " that the quahty of deed and
doer might be one."

2 This passage has furnished occasion for much discussion as to
text and interpretation. In the text Orelli's punctuation has been
followed, who regards Arnobius as mentioning four Zoroasters — the
Assyrian or Chaldean, the Bactrian (cf. c. 5 of this book), the
Armenian, and finally the Pamphylian, or Pamphilos, who, according
to Clem. Alex. {Strom, [vol. ii. p. 469]), is referred to in Plato's Repub-
lic, book X., under the name Er; Meursius and Salmasius, however,
regarding the whole as one sentence, consider that only three persons
are so referred to, the first being either Libyan or Bactrian, and the
others as with Orelli. To seek to determine which view is most
plausible even, would be a fruitless task, as will be evident on con-
sidering what is said in the index under Zoroaster. [Jowett's Plato,
ii. 121]

3 So Orelli, reading veni'at qji-is su-per zgneam zouam. LB.
reads for the second and third words, qua-so per — " let there come,
I pray you, through," etc., from the MS. qua" super ; while Heraldus
would change the last three words into Azonaces, the name of the
supposed teacher of Zoroaster. By the " fiery zone " Salmasius
would understand Libya; but the legends should be borne in mind
which spoke of Zoroaster as having shown himself to a wondering
multitude from a hill blazing with fire, that he might teach them new
ceremonies of worship, or as being otherwi.se distinguished in con-
nection with fire. [Plato, Rep., p. 446, Jowett's trans.]

* So Stewechius, Orelli, and others, for the ms. Zostriani —
" grandson of Zostrianus," retained in the ist ed. and LB.


53. Cease in your ignorance to receive such
great deeds with abusive language, which will in
no wise injure him who did them, but which will
bring danger to yourselves — danger, I say, by
no means small, but one dealing with matters of
great,5 aye, even the greatest importance, since
beyond a doubt the soul is a precious thing, and
nothing can be found dearer to a man than him-
self. There was nothing magical, as you sup-
pose, nothing human, delusive, or crafty in Christ ;
no deceit lurked in Him,^ although you smile in
derision, as your wont is, and though you split
with roars of laughter. He was God on high,
God in His inmost nature, God from unknown
realms, and was sent by the Ruler of all as a
Saviour God ; whom neither the sun himself, nor
any stars, if they have powers of perception, not
the rulers and princes of the world, nor, in fine,
the great gods, or those who, feigning themselves
so, terrify the whole human race, were able to
know or to guess whence and who He was — and
naturally so. But ? when, freed from the body,
which He carried about as but a very small part
of Himself, He allowed Himself to be seen, and
let it be known how great He was, all the ele-
ments of the universe bewildered by the strange
events were thrown into confusion. An earth-
quake shook the world, the sea was heaved up
from its depths, the heaven was shrouded in
darkness, the sun's fiery blaze was checked, and
his heat became moderate ; * for what else could
occur when He was discovered to be God who
heretofore was reckoned one of us?

54. But you do not believe these things ; yet
those who witnessed their occurrence, and who
saw them done before their eyes — the very best
vouchers and the most trustworthy authorities —
both believed them themselves, and transmitted
them to us who follow them, to be believed with
no scanty measure of confidence. Who are these ?
you perhaps ask. Tribes, peoples, nations, and
that incredulous human race ; but ^ if the matter
were not plain, and, as the saying is, clearer than
day itself, they would never grant their assent
with so ready belief to events of such a kind.
But shall we say that the men of that time were
untrustworthy, false, stupid, and brutish to such
a degree that they pretended to have seen what
they never had seen, and that they put forth un-


5 So the edd., reading in rebus eximiis for the MS. exi-%\i-is,
which would, of course, give an opposite and wholly unsuitable
meaning.

* So generally, Heraldus having restored delitii-it in Christo
from the MS., which had omitted -it, for the reading of Gelenius, Can-
terus, and Ursinus, delicti — " no deceit, no sin was," etc.

7 So emended by Salmasius, followed by most later edd. In the
earlier edd. the reading is et merito exutus a corpore (Salm. read-
ing at instead of rt, and inserting a period after tner.) — " and when
rightly freed from the body," etc.

8 It may be instructive to notice how the simpler narrative of the
Gospels is amplified. Matthew (xxvii. 51) says that the earth
trembled, and Luke (xxiii. 45) that the sun was darkened; but they
go no further. [See p. 301, note 4, supra.]

9 Or, " which if . . . itself, would never," etc. [Note the confi-
dence of this appeal to general assent.]


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


429


der false evidence, or alleged with childish assev-
eration things which never took place, and that
when they were able to live in harmony and to
maintain friendly relations with you, they wan-
tonly incurred hatred, and were held in execra-
tion?

55. But if this record of events is false, as you
say, how comes it that in so short a time the
whole world has been filled with such a religion?
or how could nations dwelling widely apart, and
separated by climate and by the convexities of
heaven,' unite in one conclusion? They have
been prevailed upon, saj my opponents, by mere
assertions, been led into vain hopes ; and in their
reckless madness have chosen to incur volunta-
rily the risks of death, although they had hitherto
seen nothing of such a kind as could by its won-
derful and strange character induce them to
adopt this manner of worship. Nay, because
they saw all these things to be done by Christ
Himself and by His apostles, who being sent
throughout the whole world carried with them
the blessings of the Father, which they dispensed
in benefiting^ as well the minds as the bodies of
men ; overcome by the force of the very truth
itself they both devoted themselves to God, and
reckoned it as but a small sacrifice to surrender
their bodies to you and to give their flesh to
be mangled.

56. But our writers, we shall be told, have put
forth these statements with false effrontery ; they
have extolled 3 small matters to an inordinate
degree, and have magnified trivial affairs with
most pretentious boastfulness. And ■♦ would that
all things could have been reduced to writing, —
both those which were done by Himself, and
those which were accomplished by His apostles
with equal authority and power. Such an as-
semblage of miracles, however, would make you
more incredulous ; and perhaps you might be
able to discover a passage from which 5 it would
seem very probable, both that additions were
made to facts, and that falsehoods were inserted
in writings and commentaries. But in nations
which were unknown to the writers, and which
themselves knew not the use of letters, all that
was done could not have been embraced in the
records or even have reached the ears of all
men ; or, if any were committed to written and
connected narrative, some insertions and addi-
tions would have been made by the malevolence


* That is, by the climate and the inclination of the earth's sur-
face.

2 So the ist ed., Ursinus, Elmenhorst, Orelli, and Hildebrand,
reading muner-aiidis, which is found in the MS. in a later handwrit-
ing, fc the original reading of the MS. muiiera lii's.

3 According to Rigaltius the MS. reads I'sta promisentnt in itn-
mensum — " have put forth (i.e., exagger.Ued) these things to an
immense degree falsely, small matters and trivial affairs have magni-
fied, etc ; while by a later hand has been superscribed over in i>n-
vicnsuni, in ink of a different colour, extulere — " have extolled."

* So the MS., ist ed., and Hildebrand, while all others read
atqn-i — " but."

5 So LB., reading quoior the MS. quod.


of the demons and of men like to them, whose
care and study it is to obstruct^ the progress of
this truth : there would have been some changes
and mutilations of words and of syllables, at once
to mar the faith of the cautious and to impair the
moral effect of the deeds. But it will never
avail them that it be gathered from written tes-
timony only who and what Christ was ; for His
cause has been put on such a basis, that if what
we say be admitted to be true. He is by the con-
fession of all proved to have been God.

57. You do not believe our writings, and we
do not believe yours. We devise falsehoods
concerning Oiw'vii, you say ; and you put forth
baseless and false statements concerning your
gods : for no god has descended from heaven,
or in his own person and life has sketched out
your system, or in a similar way thrown discredit
on our system and our ceremonies. These were
written by men ; those, too, were written by men
— set forth in human speech ; and whatever you
seek to say concerning our writers, remember
that about yours, too, you will find these things
said with equal force. What is contained in
your writings you wish to be treated as true ;
those things, also, which are attested in our
books, you must of necessity confess to be true.
You accuse our system of falsehood ; we, too,
accuse yours of falsehood. But ours is more
ancient, say you, therefore most credible and
trustworthy ; as if, indeed, antiquity were not the
most fertile source of errors, and did not herself
put forth those things which in discreditable
fables have attached the utmost infamy to the
gods. For could not falsehoods have been both
spoken and believed ten thousand years ago, or
is it not most probable that that which is near
to our own time should be more credible than
that which is separated by a long term of years?
For these of ours are brought forward on the
faith of witnesses, those of yours on the ground
of opinions ; and it is much more natural that
there should be less invention in matters of re-
cent occurrence, than in those far removed in
the darkness of antiquity.

58. But they were written by unlearned and
ignorant men, and should not therefore be
readily believed. See that this be not rather a
stronger reason for believing that they have not
been adulterated by any false statements, but
were put forth by men of simple mind, who
knew not how to trick out their tales with mere-
tricious ornaments. But the language is mean
and vulgar. For truth never seeks deceitful
polish, nor in that which is well ascertained and
certain does it allow itself to be led away into
excessive prolixity. Syllogisms, enthymemes,
definitions, and all those ornaments by which

6 So most edd., reading intercip-ere for the MS. iatercipi — " it
is that the progress be obstructed," etc.


430


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


men seek to establish their statements, aid those
groping for the truth, but do not clearly mark
its great features. But he who really knows the
subject under discussion, neither defines, nor
deduces, nor seeks the other tricks of words by
which an audience is wont to be taken in, and
to be beguiled into a forced assent to a propo-
sition.

59. Your narratives, my opponent says, are
overrun with barbarisms and solecisms, and dis-
figured by monstrous blunders. A censure,
truly, which shows a childish and petty spirit ;
for if we allow that it is reasonable, let us cease
to use certain kinds of fruit because they grow
with prickles on them, and other growths useless
for food, which on the one hand cannot support
us, and yet do not on the other hinder us from
enjoying that which specially excels, and which
nature has designed to be most wholesome for
us. For how, I pray you, does it interfere with
or retard the comprehension of a statement,
whether anything be pronounced smoothly ■ cr
with uncouth roughness? whether that have the
grave accent which ought to have the acute, or
that have the acute which ought to have the
grave? Or how is the truth of a statement
diminished, if an error is made in number or
case, in preposition, participle, or conjunction?
Let that pomposity of style and strictly regulated
diction be reserved for public assemblies, for
lawsuits, for the forum and the courts of justice,
and by all means be handed over to those who,
striving after the soothing influences of pleasant
sensations, bestow all their care upon splendour
of language. But when we are discussing mat-
ters far removed from mere display, we should
consider what is said, not with what charm it is
said nor how it tickles the ears, but what bene-
fits it confers on the hearers, especially since we
know that some even who devoted themselves
to philosophy, not only disregarded refinement
of style, but also purposely adopted a vulgar
meanness when they might have spoken with
greater elegance and richness, lest forsooth they
might impair the stern gravity of speech and
revel rather in the pretentious show of the Soph-
ists. For indeed it evidences a worthless heart
to seek enjoyment in matters of importance ;
and when you have to deal with those who are
sick and diseased, to pour into their ears dulcet
sounds, not to apply a remedy to their wounds.
Yet, if you consider the true state of the case,
no language is naturally perfect, and in like
manner none is faulty. For what natural reason
is there, or what law written in the constitution
of the world, that paries should be called hic,^
and sella ha;c ? — since neither have they sex


' So Orelli and Hildebrand, reading glabre from a conjecture of
Grotius, for the MS. grave.

^ i.e., that the one should be masculine, the other feminine.


distinguished by male and female, nor can the
most learned man tell me what hie and hcEC are,
or why one of them denotes the male sex while
the other is applied to the female. These con-
ventionalities are man's, and certainly are not
indispensable to all persons for the use of form-
ing their language ; for paries might perhaps
have been called hcee, and sella hie, without any
fault being found, if it had been agreed upon at
first that they should be so called, and if this
practice had been maintained by following gen-
erations in their daily conversation. And yet,
O you who charge our writings with disgraceful
blemishes, have you not these solecisms in those
most perfect and wonderful books of yours?
Does not one of you make the plur. of titer, i/tria ?
another utres ? ^ Do you not also say ea:lus and
eceliim,filiis ^ndfilum, crocus and crocum.fretus
znd /return ? Also hoc pane and hie panis, hie
sanguis and hoe sanguen ? Are not candela-
brum 2Xi^jugulum in like manner yfnii^njugulus
and candelaber ? For if each noun cannot have
more than one gender, and if the same word
cannot be of this gender and of that, for one
gender cannot pass into the other, he commits
as great a blunder who utters masculine genders
under the laws of feminines, as he who applies
masculine articles to feminine genders. And
yet we see you using masculines as feminines,
and feminines as masculines, and those which
you call neuter both in this way and in that,
without any distinction. Either, therefore, it is
no blunder to employ them indifferently, and in
that case it is vain for you to say that our works
are disfigured with monstrous solecisms ; or if
the way in which each ought to be employed is
unalterably fixed, you also are involved in simi-
lar errors, although you have on your side all the
Epicadi, Csesellii, Verrii, Scauri, and Nisi.

60. But, say my opponents, if Christ was
God, why did He appear in human shape, and
why was He cut off by death after the manner
of men? Could that power which is invisible,
and which has no bodily substance, have come
upon earth and adapted itself to the world and
mixed in human society, otherwise than by tak-
ing to itself some covering of a more solid
substance, which might bear the gaze of the
eyes, and on which the look of the least obser-
vant might fix itself? For what mortal is there
who could have seen Him, who could have dis-
tinguished Him, if He had decreed to come upon
the earth such as He is in His own primitive
nature, and such as He has chosen to be in His
own proper character and divinity? He took
upon Him, therefore, the form of man ; and
under the guise of our race He imprisoned His
power, so that He could be seen and carefully


3 i.e., does not one of you make the plural o( uier masc, another
neut.? [Note the opponent's witness to the text of the Gospels.)


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


431


regarded, might speak and teach, and without
encroaching on the sovereignty and government
of the King Supreme, might carry out all those
objects for the accomplishment of which He
had come into the world.

61. What, then, says my opponent, could not
the Supreme Ruler have brought about those
things which He had ordained to be done in the
world, without feigning Himself a man? If it
were necessary to do as you say, He perhaps
would have done so ; because it was not neces-
sary, He acted otherwise. The reasons why He
chose to do it in this way, and did not choose to
do it in that, are unknown, being involved in so
great obscurity, and comprehensible by scarcely
any ; but these you might perhaps have under-
stood if you were not already prepared not to
understand, and were not shaping your course
to brave unbelief, before that was explained to
you which you sought to know and to hear,

62. But, you will say. He was cut off by death
as men are. Not Christ Himself; for it is
impossible either that death should befall what
is divine, or that that should waste away and
disappear in death which is one in its substance,
and not compounded, nor formed by bringing
together any parts. Who, then, you ask, was
seen hanging on the cross? Who dead? The
human form,' / reply, which He had put on,=
and which He bore about with Him. It is a
tale passing belief, you say, and wrapt in dark
obscurity ; if you will, it is not dark, and is
established by a very close analogy.^ If the
Sibyl, when she was uttering and pouring forth
her prophecies and oracular responses, was
filled, as you say, with Apollo's power, had been
cut down and slain by impious robbers,^ would
Apollo be said to have been slain in her? If
Bacis,5 if Helenus, Marcius,^ and other sooth-
sayers, had been in like manner robbed of life
and light when raving as inspired, would any
one say that those who, speaking by their
mouths, declared to inquirers what should be
done, 7 had perished according to the conditions
of human life ? The death of which you speak
was t/iat of the human body which He had as-
sumed,^ not His own — of that which was borne,


' So the MS., followed by Hildebrand and Oehler, reads and punc-
tuates guis tuoriuus ? /lomo, for which all edd. read moriuus est?
" Who died ? "

^ Here, as in the whole discussion in the second book on the ori-
gin and nature of the soul, the opinions expressed are Gnostic, Cerin-
thus saying more precisely that Christ having descended from heaven
in the form of a dove, dwelt in the body of Jesus during His life, but
removed from it before the crucifixion.

3 So the MS. by changing a single letter, with LB. and others,
similitudinc proxim-a (MS. 0) constitiitum ; while the first ed.,
Gelenius, Canterus, Ursinus, Orelli, and others, read -dini proxiine
— " settled very closely to analogy."

■♦ In the original latronibus ; here, as in the next chapter, used
loosely to denote lawless men.

s So emended by Mercerus for the MS. vatis.

* So read in the MS. — not -tins, as in LB. and Orelli.
' Lit., " the ways of things" — vz'as rerum.

* The MS. reads unintelligibly assum/>ti-o homim's _f!tit,'vih\ch
was, however, retained in both Roman edd., although Ursinus sug-
gested the dropping, of the 0, which has been done by all later edd.


not of the bearer ; and not even this death would
He 9 have stooped to suffer, were it not that
a matter of such importance was to be dealt
with, and the inscrutable plan of fate '° brought
to light in hidden mysteries.

6T). What are these hidden and unseen mys-
teries, you will say, which neither men can
know, nor those even who are called gods of
the world can in any wise reach by fancy andi
conjecture; which none can discover,^"- except
those whom Christ Himself has thought fit to
bestow the blessing of so great knowledge upon,
and to lead into the secret recesses of the inner
treasury of wisdom ? Do you then see that if
He had determined that none should do Him
violence. He should have striven to the utmost
to keep off from Him His enemies, even by
directing His power against them?'^ Could not
He, then, who had restored their sight to the
blind, make His enemies blind if it were neces-
sary? Was it hard or troublesome for Him to
make them weak,- who had given strength to the
feeble? Did He who bade '^ the lame walk, not
know how to take from them all power to move
their limbs,"'* by making their sinews stiff? '5
Would it have been difficult for Him who drew
the dead from their tombs to inflict death on
whom He would? But because reason required
that those things which had been resolved on
should be done here also in the world itself, and
in no other fashion than was done, He, with
gentleness passing understanding and belief, re-
garding as but childish trifles the wrongs which
men did Him, submitted to the violence of sav-
age and most hardened robbers ; '^ nor did He
think it worth while to take account of what
their daring had aimed at, if He only showed to
His disciples what they were in duty bound to
look for from Him. For when many things
about the perils of souls, many evils about their
. . . ; on the other hand, the Introducer, '^ the

9 The MS. reads, quavt nee ifisam perpeti snccubuisset vis —
" would his might," i.e., " would He with His great power have
stooped." Orelli simply omits vis as Canterus, and seemingly the
other later edd. do.

'^ The MS. and ist ed. read saii-s, which has clearly arisen from
/ being confounded with the old form oi s.

" The construction is a little involved, y?<<» nuUi nee homines
seife nee ipsi qui appellantur dii mitiidi qneritit — " which none,
neither men can know, nor those ... of the world can reach, except
those whom," etc.

'- In the Latin, ve! potestaic invcrsa. which according to Oehler
is the MS. reading, while Orelli speaks of it as an emendation of LB.
(where it is certainly found, but without any indication of its source),
and with most edd. reads universa — " by His universal power."

'i So the MS. according to Hildebrand, Trading, pmcipi-bat. Most
edd, however, following Gelenius, re3.A/aciebat — " made them lame."

'■• Lit., " to bind fast the motions of the members," adopting the
reading of most edd., motus alli^are mcinbrorum (MS. c-al-igare) .

'5 The MS. reads ncrvcritm duritia-m, for which Ursinus, with
most edd., reads as above, merely dropping m; Hildebrand and
Oehler insert in, and read, from a conjecture of Ursinus adopted by
Elmenhorst, c-flZ-Z/^ar^ — " to bind into stiffness."

"> Ursinus suggested di-, " most terrible," for the MS. durissimis.

'7 So the MS. reading, niuUa mala de illarum contra insinua-
tor {mala is perhaps in the abl., agreeing with a lost word), which
has been regarded by Heraldus and Stewechius, followed by Orelli,
as mutilated, and is so read in the first ed., and by Ursinus and LB.
The passage is in all cases left obscure and doubtful, and we may
therefore be excused discussing its meaning here.


432


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


Master and Teacher directed His laws and ordi-
nances, that they might find their end in fitting
duties ; ' did He not destroy the arrogance of
the proud? Did He not quench the fires of
lust? Did He not check the craving of greed?
Did He not wrest the weapons from their hands,
and rend from them all the sources ^ of every
form of corruption ? To conclude, was He not
Himself gentle, peaceful, easily approached,
friendly when addressed ? -^ Did He not, griev-
ing at men's miseries, pitying with His unexam-
pled benevolence all in any wise afflicted with
troubles and bodily ills,'* bring them back and
restore them to soundness?

64. What, then, constrains you, what excites
you to revile, to rail at, to hate implacably Him
whom no man 5 can accuse of any crime ?^
Tyrants and your kings, who, putting away all
fear of the gods, plunder and pillage the treas-
uries of temples ; who by proscription, banish-
ment,7and slaughter, strip the state of its nobles?
who, with licentious violence, undermine and
wrest away the chastity of matrons and maidens,
— these men you name indigites and divi ; and
you worship with couches, altars, temples, and
other service, and by celebrating their games
and birthdays, those whom it was fitting that
you should assail with keenest * hatred. And all
those, too, who by writing books assail in many
forms with biting reproaches public manners ;
who censure, brand, and tear in pieces your lux-
urious habits and lives ; who carry down to pos-
terity evil reports of their own times 9 in their
enduring writings ; who seek to persuade men
that the rights of marriage should be held in
common ; '° who lie with boys, beautiful, lustful,
naked; who declare that you are beasts, runa-
ways, exiles, and mad and frantic slaves of the
most worthless character, — all these with won-
der and applause you exalt to the stars of heaven,
you place in the shrines of your libraries, you
present with chariots and statues, and as much
as in you hes, gift with a kind of immortality,


• Lit., " to the ends of filling duties."

2 In the original, seminar ia abscidit, — the former word used of
nurseries for plants, while the latter may be either as above (from
fl<J.sr;«t/£)), or may mean " cutoff" (from abscuio); but in both cases
the general meaning is the same, and the metaphor is in either slight-
ly confused.

3 Lit., " familiar to be accosted," — the supine, as in the preced-
ing clause.

* So the edd., reading corporalibus affectos mail's, but the MS.
inserts after malts the word >iiorltis (" with evil bodily diseases") ;
but according to Hildebrand this word is marked as spurious.

5 So the edd., reading nems h-om-i-n-um, e.xcept Hildebrand
and Oehler, who retain the ,\is. om-n-i-unt — " no one of all."

6 John viii. 46: " Which of you convinceth me of sin? "

7 So Heraldus and LB., followed by later edd., rfeading ^j-7?/zV for
the MS. ex-uis, for which Gelenius, Canterus, and Ursinus read et
sui's — " and by their slaughters."

8 Here, as frequently in Arnobius, the comparative is used instead
of the superlative.

9 " To posterity evil reports of their own lime" — sui temporis
posteris notns — so emended by Ursinus, followed by Orelli and
Hildebrand, for the Ms. in teiiififlris t'osteri-s, retained by LB., and
with the omission of i' in the ist ed. ; but this requires our looKing on
the passage as defective.

'° The reference is clearly to the well-known passage in Plato's
Republic. [See the sickening details, book v. p. 282, Jowett's trans.]


as it were, by the witness which immortal titles
bear to them. Christ alone you would tear in
pieces," you would rend asunder, if you could
do so to a god ; nay, Ilim alone you would, were
it allowed, gnaw with bloody mouths, and break
His bones in pieces, and devour Him like beasts
of the field. For what that He has done, tell,
I pray you, for what crime ? " What has He done
to turn aside the course of justice, and rouse you
to hatred made fierce by maddening torments?
Is it because He declared that He was sent by
the only true King to be your soul's guardian,
and to bring to you the immortality which you
believe that you already possess, relying on the
assertions of a few men? But even if you were
assured that He spoke falsely, that He even held
out hopes without the slightest foundation, not
even in this case do I see any reason that you
should hate and condemn Him with bitter re-
proaches. Nay, if you were kind and gentle in
spirit, you ought to esteem Him even for this
alone, that He promised to you things which you
might well wish and hope for ; that He was the
bearer of good news ; that His message was such
as to trouble no one's mind, nay, rather to fill
all with less anxious expectation. '^

65. Oh ungrateful and impious age, prepared "*
for its own destruction by its extraordinary obsti-
nacy ! If there had come to you a physician
from lands far distant and unknown to you before,
offering some medicine to keep off from you
altogether every kind of disease and sickness,
would you not all eagerly hasten to him ? Would
you not with every kind of flattery and honour
receive him into your houses, and treat him
kindly? Would you not wish that that kind
of medicine should be quite sure, and should be
genuine, which promised that even to the utmost
limits of life you should be free from such count-
less bodily distresses? And though it were a
doubtful matter, you would yet entrust yourselves
to him ; nor would you hesitate to drink the
unknown draught, incited by the hope of health
set before you and by the love of safety.'^ Christ
shone out and appeared to tell us news of the
utmost importance, bringing an omen of pros-
perity, and a message of safety to those who


" So Gelenius, LB., and Orelli, reading con-v-ell-e-re for the MS.
cnii-p-cll-a-re, " to accost " or " abuse," which is out of place here.
Canterus suggested com-p-il-are, " to plunder," which also occurs in
the sense " to cudgel."

'- Supply, " do you pursue Him so fiercely ? "

'3 These words are followed in the edition of Gelenius by ch. 2-5
of th« second book, seemingly without any mark to denote transposi-
tion; while Ursinus inserted the same chapters — beginning, how-
ever, with the last sentence of the first chapter (read as mentioned in
the note on it) — but prefi.xed an asterisk, to mark a departure from
the order of the MS. The later editors have not adopted either
change.

'•* So Ursinus suggested in the margin, followed by LB. and Orelli,
reading in privaiam perniciem p-a-r-atum for the MS. p-r-iv-attiin,
which IS clearly derived from the preceding /r/z'a^rt/K, but is, though
unintelligible also, retained m the two Roman edd. The conclusion
of the sentence is, literally, " obstinacy of spirit."

'5 In the original, spe ialutis proposita atque amore iiicohimi-
tatis.


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


433


believe. What, I pray you, means ' this cruelty,
what such barbarity, nay rather, to speak more
truly, scornful^ pride, not only to harass the
messenger and bearer of so great a gift with
taunting words ; but even to assail Him with fierce
hostility, and with all the weapons which can be
showered upon Him, and with all modes of de-
struction? Are His words displeasing, and are
you offended when you hear them ? Count them
as btct a soothsayer's empty tales. Does He
speak very stupidly, and promise foohsh gifts?
Laugh with scorn as wise men, and leave Him
in His folly 3 to be tossed about among His errors.
What means this fierceness, to repeat what has
been said more than once ; what a passion, so
murderous? to declare implacable hostility to-
wards one who has done nothing to deserve it at
your hands ; to wish, if it were allowed you, to
tear Him limb from limb, who not only did no
man any harm, but with uniform kindness ^ told

1 Lit., " \%" — est.

2 So all the edd., reading /astidi-os-um siipercilittm, which
Crusius says the MS. reads with os omitted, i.e., " pride, scorn."

3 So the edd., ■c^z.&.r\% fattiita-tem, for the m'i. fatuita-n-tem,
which may, however, point to a verb not found elsewhere.

•* i.e., to friends and foes alike. The MS. reads eequaliter benig-


His enemies what salvation was being brought
to them from God Supreme, what must be done
that they might escape destruction and obtain
an immortality which they knew not of? And
when the strange and unheard-of things which
were held out staggered the minds of those who
heard Him, and made them hesitate to believe,
though master of every power and destroyer of
death itself He suffered His human form to be
slain, that from the result 5 they might know that
the hopes were safe which they had long enter-
tained about the soul's salvation, and that in no
other way could they avoid the danger of
death.


nus hostibtis dicere, which is retained by Orelli, supposing an ellipsis
oi fiierit, i.e., " He was kind to say," which might be received; but
it is more natural to suppose that -t has dropped oft", and read diceret
as above, with the two Roman editions and LB. Gelenius, followed
by Ursinus, emended omnibus docuerit — "with uniform kindness
taught to all." It may be well to give here an instance of the very
insufficient grounds on which supposed references to Scripture are
sometimes based. Orelli considers that Arnobius here refers {vide-
tur respexisse, he says) to Col. i. 21, 22, " You, that were some-
times alienated and enemies in mind by wicked works, yet now hath
He reconciled in the body of His flesh through death," to which,
though the words which follow might indeed be thought to have a
very distant resemblance, they can in no way be shown to refer.

5 i.e., from His resurrection, which .showed that death's power
was broken by Him.


BOOK 11/


1. Here, if any means could be found, I
should wish to converse thus with all those who
hate the name of Christ, turning aside for a lit-
tle from the defence primarily set up : — If you
think it no dishonour to answer when asked a
question, explain to us and say what is the cause,
what the reason, that you pursue Christ with so
bitter hostility ? or what offences you remember
which He did, that at the mention of His name
you are roused to bursts of mad and savage
fury?^ Did He ever, in claiming for Himself


' There has been much confusion in dealing with the first seven
chapters of this book, owing to the leaves of the ms. having been ar-
ranged in wrong order, as was pointed out at an early period by some
one who noted on the margin that there was some transposition. To
this circumstance, however, Oehler alone seems to have called atten-
tion; but the corruption was so manifest, that the various editors gave
themselves full liberty to re-arrange and dispose the text more cor-
rectly. The first leaf of the MS. concludes with the words sine uUiiis
person!^ discriininibus inrogavit, " without any distinction of per-
son," and is followed by one which begins with the words (A, end of
0. 5) et non omnium iiirtuttivi, " and (not) by an eager longing,"
and ends tanta e.xperiatur ejcamina, " undergoes such countless
ills" (middle of c. 7). The third and fourth leaves begin with the
words (B. end of c. i) i^rnm iji cunctos . . . amoverit? qui si
dignos, " Now if He was not worthy " (see notes), and run on to end
of c. 5, quadavt dulccdine, " by some charm; " while the fifth (C,
middle of c. 7) begins atque tie (or uirumne) ilium, " whether the
earth," and there is no further difficulty. This order is retained in
the first ed., and also by Hildebrand, who supposes three lacunae at
A, B, and C, to account for the abruptness and want of connection;
but it is at once seen that, on changing the order of the leaves, so
that they shall run B A C, the argument and sense are perfectly re-
stored. 1 his arrangement seems to have been first adopted in LB.,
and is followed by the later editors, with the exception of Hildebrand.

* Lit., " boil up with the ardours of furious spirits."


power as king, fill the whole world with bands
of the fiercest soldiers ; and of nations at peace
from the beginning, did He destroy and put an
end to some, and compel others to submit to His
yoke and serve Him ? Did He ever, excited by
grasping 3 avarice, claim as His own by right all
that wealth to have abundance of which men
strive eagerly? Did He ever, transported with
lustful passions, break down by force the barriers
of purity, or stealthily lie in wait for other men's
wives? Did He ever, puffed up with haughty
arrogance, inflict at random injuries and insults,
without any distinction of persons? (B) And
if He was not worthy that you should listen to
and believe J/im, yet He should not have been
despised by you even on this account, that He
showed to you things concerning your salvation,
that He prepared for you a path + to heaven, and
the immortality for which you long ; although s


3 Lit., " by the heats of."

* So Meursius, reading a- for the MS. o-ptaret, which is retained
by LB., Orelli, and others. The MS. reading is explained, along with
the next words vota immortalitatis, by Orelli as meaning '' sought
by His prayers," with reference to John xvii. 24, in which he is clearly
mistaken. Heraldus conjectures p-o-r-ta-s a-p-er-iaret, " opened
paths . . . and the gates of immortality."

5 The words which follow, ut non in cunctos, etc., have been thus
transposed by Heraldus, followed by later editors; but formerly they
preceded the rest of the sentence, and, according to Oehler, the ms.
gives utrunt, thus: " (You ask) whether He has both extended to all
. . . ignorance? who, if He was not," etc. Cf. book i. (this page)
note 3, supra.


434


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


He neither extended the h'ght of life to all, nor
delivered all from the danger which threatens
them through their ignorance.'

2. But indeed, j^iw^ one will Siiy, He deserved
our hatred because He has driven religion ^ from
the world, because He has kept men back from
seeking to honour the gods.^ Is He then de-
nounced as the destroyer of religion and pro-
moter of impiety, who brought true religion into
the world, who opened the gates of piety to men
blind and verily living in impiety, and pointed
out to whom they should bow themselves? Or
is there any truer religion — ofie more service-
able,-* powerful, and right — than to have learned
to know the supreme God, to know how to pray
to God Supreme, who alone is the source and
fountain of all good, the creator,^ founder, and
framer of all that endures, by whom all things
on earth and all in heaven are quickened, and
filled with the stir of life, and without whom
there would assuredly be nothing to bear any
name, and have any substance? But perhaps
you doubt whether there is that ruler of whom
we speak, and rather incli?ie to believe in the
existence of Apollo, Diana, Mercury, Mars.
Give a true judgment ; ^ and, looking round on
all these things which we see, any one will rather
doubt whether all the other gods exist, than hes-
itate with regard to the God whom we all know
by nature, whether when we cry out, O God,
or when we make God the witness of wicked
deeds,'' and raise our face to heaven as though
He saw us.

3. But He did not permit men to make sup-
plication to the lesser gods. Do you, then,
know who are, or where are the lesser gods ? Has


' So the MS., reading periculum i-g-n-ora-tiotiis, for which
Meursius suggests i-n-teri-tionis — "danger of destruction."

3 This seems the true rationale of the sentence, viewed in rela-
tion to the context. Immediately before, Arnnbius suggests that the
hatred of Christ by the heathen is unjustifiable, because they had
suffered nothing at His hands; now an opponent is supposed to rejoin,
" But He has deserved our hatred by assailing our religion." The
introductory particles at eniin fully bear this out, from their being
regularly used to introduce a rejoinder. Still, by Orelli and other
editors the sentence is regarded as interrogative, and in that ca.se
would be, " Has He indeed merited our hatred by driving out," etc.,
which, however, not merely breaks away from what precedes, but also
makes the ne.\t sentence somewhat lame. The older editors, too,
read it without any mark of interrogation.

■* i.e., according to Orelli, to the wants of men; but possibly it
may here have the subjunctive meaning of " more full of service,"
I.e., to God.

5 So the MS., reading perpetuarutn pater, fii7tdator conditor
reriiiit, but all the editions pa-n-ter, " alike," which has helped to
lead Orelli astray. He suggesta et pons est perpetu us pariter-,ex.c.,
" perpetual fountain, ... of all things alike the founder and framer."
It has been also proposed by Oehler (to get rid of the difficulty felt
here) to transfer per metathesin, the idea of " enduring," to God;
but the reference is surely quite clear, viewed as a distinction between
the results of God's working and that of all other beings.

6 So the MS. and almost all edd , reading da vericm judiciunt., for
which Heraldus suggested da natum, or vernm an itnce judicium,
" give the judgment of nature," or " the true judgment of the soul,"
as if appeal were made to the inner sense; but in his later observa-
tions he proposed da puennn judicem, " give a boy as judge,"
which is adopted by Orelli. Meursius, merely transposing d-a, reads
much more naturally ad — " at a true judgment."

' The MS. reading is iilum testem d-e-um constituimus impro-
tarum, retained in the edd. with the change of -arum into -oritm
Perhaps for deum should be read r-e-r-itm, "make him witness of
wicked things." With this passage compare iii. 31-33.


mistrust of them, or the way in which they were
mentioned, ever touched you, so that you are
justly indignant that their worship has been done
away with and deprived of all honour?^ But if
haughtiness of mind and arrogance,^ as it is
called by the Greeks, did not stand in your way
and hinder you, you might long ago have been
able to understand what He forbade to be done,
or wherefore ; within what limits He would have
true religion lie ; '° what danger arose to you from
that which you thought obedience ? or from what
evils you would escape if you broke away from
your dangerous delusion.

4. But all these things will be more clearly and
distinctly noticed when we have proceeded fur-
ther. For we shall show that Christ did not
teach the nations impiety, but delivered ignorant
and wretched men from those who most wickedly
wronged them." We do not believe, you say,
that what He says is true. What, then ? Have
you no doubt as to the things which '^ you say are
not true, while, as they are only at hand, and not
yet disclosed, '3 they can by no means be dis-
proved ? But He, too, does not prove what He
promises. It is so ; for, as I said, there can be
no proof of things still in the future. Since, then, |
the nature of the future is such that it cannot be
grasped and comprehended by any anticipation,"*
is it not more rational,' 5 of two things uncertain
and hanging in doubtful suspense, rather to be-
lieve that which carries witli it some hopes, than
that which brings none at all ? For in the one
case there is no danger, if that which is said to
be at hand should prove vain and groundless ;
in the other there is the greatest loss, even '^ the
loss of salvation, if, when the time has come, it
be shown that there was nothing false /« what
was declared.^''

5. What say you, O ignorant ones, for whom
we might well weep and be sad?'** Are you so
void of fear that these things may be true which
are despised by you and turned to ridicule ? and
do you not consider with yourselves at least, in
your secret thoughts, lest that which to-day with
perverse obstinacy you refuse to believe, time


' It seems necessary for the sake of the argument to read this
interrogatively, but in all the edd. the sentence ends without any
mark of interrogation.
9 Typhus — ri.'^09.

'° Lit., " He chose . . . to stand."

" Lit., " the ignorance of wretched men from the worst robbers,"
i.e., the false prophets and teachers, who made a prey of the ignorant
and credulous. John viii. 46.

■2 Lit., " Are tlie things clear with you which," etc.

'3 So the MS., followed by both Roman edd., Hildebrand and Oeh-
ler, reading /rtj-ifl, which Cujacius (referring it Xo patior, a.s the edit-
ors seem to have done generally) would explain as meaning " past,"
while in all other editions cassa, " vain," is read.

'■* Lit., " the touching of no .anticipation."

'5 Lit., " purer reasoning."

'* Lit., " that is." This clause Meursius rejects as a gloss.

'' i.e.. If you believe Christ's promises, your belief makes you lose
nothing should it prove groundless; but if you disbelieve them, then
the consequences to you will be terrible if they are sure. This would
seem too clear to need remark, were it not for the confusion of Orelli
in particular as to the meaning of the passage.

'^ Lit., " most worthy even of weeping and pity."


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


435


may too late show to be true/ and ceaseless re-
morse punish you ? Do not even these proofs at
least give you faith to believe,^ viz., that already,
in so short and brief a time, the oaths of this vast
army have spread abroad over all the earth ? that
already there is no nation so rude and fierce that
it has not, changed by His love, subdued its
fierceness, and with tranquillity hitherto unknown,
become mild m disposition?^ that rncn endowed
with so great abilities, orators, critics, rhetoricians,
lawyers, and physicians, those, too, who pry into
the mysteries of philosophy, seek to learn these
things, despising those in which but now they
trusted ? that slaves choose to be tortured by their
masters as they please, wives to be divorced, chil-
dren to be disinherited by their parents, rather
than be«imfaithful to Christ and cast off the oaths
of the warfare of salvation ? that although so ter-
rible punishments have been denounced by you
against those who follow the precepts of this re-
ligion, it •♦ increases even more, and a great host
strives more boldly against all threats and the ter-
rors which would keep it back, and is roused to
zealous faith by the very attempt to hinder it?
Do you indeed believe that these things happen
idly and at random ? that these feelings are adopt-
ed on being met with by chance ? 5 Is not this,
then, sacred and divine ? Or do you believe that,
without God'i- grace, their minds are so changed,
that although murderous hooks and other tor-
tures without number threaten, as we said, those
who shall believe, they receive the grounds of
faith with which they have become acquainted,''
as if carried away (A) by some charm, and by an
eager longing for all the virtues, 7 and prefer the
friendship of Christ to all that is in the world?*
6. But perhaps those seem to you weak-
minded and silly, who even now are uniting all
over the world, and joining together to assent


■ Redcrgunt. This sense is not recognised by Riddle and White,
and would theref jre seem to be, if not unique, ai least extremely rare
The derivative rednrgiitio, however, is in late Latin used for " dem-
onstration," and this is evidently the meaning here.

- Fitiein vohisfaci'uit arguincnta credeiidi. Heraldus, joining
the two last words, naturally regards them as a gloss from the margin:
but re.id as above, jouiing the first and last, there is nothing out of
place

2 Lit., " tranquillity being assumed, passed to placid feelings."

•• Res, " the thing."

S Lit., " on chance encounters."

* Rationes cognitas. There is some difficulty as to the meaning
of these words, but it seems best to refer them to the arguinenta cfc-
(^cKi// (beginning of ch.ipter, "do not even these proofs"), and render
as above. HiiiebranJ, however, reads tortiones, " they accept the
tortures which they know will befall them."

^ The MS. reads et iion ovinium, " and by a love not of all the
virtues," changed in mo^t edd. as above into atque omniuin, while
Oehler proposes et iimui omnziim, " and by fresh love of all," etc.
It will be remembereJ that the transposition of leaves in the MS.
(note on ii. i)occurs here, and this seems to account tor the arbitrarj'
reading of Gelenius, which has no MS. authority whatever, but was
added by himself when transposing these chapters to the first book (cf.
P 432, n 14), atqiie Hectare ebrii ciitictn eontemnant — " As if in-
toxicated with a certain sweetness and nectar, they despise all things."
The same circumstance has made the restoration of the passage by
Canterus a connecting of fragments of widely separated sentences and
arguments.

' Lit., " all the things of the world." Here the argument breaks
off, and pas.ses into a new phase, butOrelli includes the next sentence
also in the fifth chapter.


with that readiness of belief at which you mock?
What then? Do you alone, imbued '° with the
true power of wisdom and understanding, see
something wholly different " and profound? Do
you alone perceive that all these things are
trifles? you alone, that those things are mere
words and childish absurdities which we declare
are about to come to us from the supreme
Ruler? Whence, pray, has so much wisdom
been given to you? whence so much subtlety
and wit? Or from what scientific training have
you been able to gain so much wisdom, to derive
so much foresight? Because you are skilled in
declining verbs and nouns by cases and tenses,
and^^ in avoiding barbarous words and expres-
sions ; because you have learned either to express
yourselves in '^ harmonious, and orderly, and fitly-
disposed language, or to know when it is rude
and unpolished ; '4 because you have stamped on
your memory the Fornix of Lucilius,'5 and Mar-
syas of Pomponius ; because you know what the
issues to be proposed in lawsuits are, how many
kinds of cases there are, how many ways of
pleading, what the genus is, what the species,
by what methods an opposite is distinguished
from a contrary, — do you therefore think that
you know what is false, what true, what can or
cannot be done, what is the nature of the lowest
and highest? Have the well-known words never
rung in '^ your ears, that the wisdom of man is
foolishness with God?

7. In the first place, you yourselves, too, '7 see
clearly that, if you ever discuss obscure subjects,
and seek to lay bare the mysteries of nature, on
the one hand you do not know the very things


9 Lit., " to the assent of that credulity."

'" So the MS., reading co'iditi vi mera, for which Orelli would
read with Oudendorp, conditiF — "by the pure force of recondite
wisdom." The MS., however, is supported by the similar phrase in
the beginning of chap. 8, where tincti \^ used.

" So the MS , reading alind, for which Stewechius, adopting a
suggestion of Canterus, conjectures, aUiiis et profitndins — " some-
thmg deeper and more profound." Others propose readings further
removed from the text; while Obbarius, retaining the MS. reading,
explains it as " not common."

'- Lit., " because j'o« are" etc.

" Lit., " either yourselves to utter," etc.

'■• Incoinptus, for which Heraldus would read inconditiis, as in
opposition to "harmonious." This is, however, unnecessary, as the
clause is evidently opposed to the whole of the preceding one.

'5 No trace of either of these works has come down to us, and
therefore, though there has been abundance of conjecture, we can
reach no satisfactory conclusion about them. It seems most n;itural
to suppose the former to be probably part of the lost satires of Lucili-
us, which had dealt with obscene matters, and the author of the latter
to be the Atellane poet of Bononia. As to this there has been some
discussion: but, in our utter ignorance of the work itself, it is as well
to allow that we must remain ignorant of its author al-so. The scope
of both works is suggested clearly enough by their titles — the statue
of Marsyas in the forum overlooking nightly licentious orgies; and
their mention seems intended to suggest a covert argument against
the heathen, in the implied indecency of the knowledge on which they
prided themselves. For Fornicein Lucilianiint (MS. Lucialinuni)
Mcursius reads Ciecilianuin.

■^ Lit , " Has that //;/«^ published never struck," etc. There is
clearly a reference to i Cor. iii. 19, " the wisdom of this world." The
argument breaks offhere, and is taken up from a different point in the
next sentence, which is included, however, in this chapter by Orelli.

''' So Gelenius, followed by Canterus and Orelli, reading /r/«/;</«
et ipsi, by rejecting one word of the MS. {ct quce). Canterus plausi-
bly combines both words into itaque — " therefore " LB. reads
ecquid — " do you at all," etc., with which Orelli so far agrees, that
he makes the whole sentence interrogative.


436


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


which you speak of, which you affirm, which
you uphold very often with especial zeal, and
that each one defends with obstinate resistance
his own suppositions as though they were proved
and ascertained truths. For how can we of
ourselves know whether we ' perceive the truth,
even if all ages be employed in seeking out
knowledge — ive whom some envious power ^
brought forth, and formed so ignorant and
proud, that, although we know nothing at all, we
yet deceive ourselves, and are uplifted by pride
and arrogance so as to suppose ourselves pos-
sessed of knowledge? For, to pass by divine
things, and those plunged in natural obscurity,
can any man explain that which in the Ph^edrus ^
the well-known Socrates cannot comprehend —
what man is, or whence he is, uncertain, change-
able, deceitful, manifold, of many kinds? for
what purposes he was produced ? by whose in-
genuity he was devised? what he does in the
world? (C) why he undergoes such countless
ills? whether the earth gave life to him as to
worms and mice, being affected with decay
through the action of some moisture ; '• or
whether he received 5 these outlines of body,
and this cast of face, from the hand of some
maker and framer? Can he, I say, know these
things, which lie open to all, and are recognisa-
ble by ^ the senses common to all, — by what
causes we are plunged into sleep, by what we
awake ? in what ways dreams are produced, in
what they are seen? nay rather — as to which
Plato in the Thecetetusi is in doubt — whether
we are ever awake, or whether that very state
which is called waking is part of an unbroken
slumber? and what we seem to do when we say
that we see a dream ? whether we see by means
of rays of light proceeding towards the object,^
or images of the objects fly to and alight on the
pupils of our eyes? whether the flavour is in
the things tasted, or arises from their touching


1 So restored by Stewechius; in the first cA. perspiciam (instead
o^ ain-us) " if I perceive the truth," etc.

2 So the MS. very intelligibly and forcibly, res . . . invida, but
the common reading is invid-i-a — " whom something . . . with
envy." The train of thought which is merely started here is pursued
at some length a little later.

i The MS. gives y'frt'ri?, but all editions, except the first, Hilde-
brand, and Oehler, read Pkcednne, referring, however, to a passage
in the first Alcibiades (st. p. izgi, which is manifestly absurd, as in
it, while Alcibiades " cannot tell what man is," Socrates at once pro-
ceeds to lead him to the required knowledge by the usual dialectic.
Nouir>' thinks that there is a general reference to Pluedr., st. p. 230,
— a passage in which Socrates says that he disregards mythological
questions that he may study himself [P. 447, note 2, infra.\

< Lit., "changed with the rottenness of some moisture. The
reference is probably to the statement by Socrates {Pho'do, st. p.
96) of the questions with regard to the origin of life, its progress and
development, which interested him as a young man.

5 So the MS., LB., and Oehler, but the other edd. make the verb
plural, and thus break the connection.

^ Lit., "established in the common senses."

^ Arnobius overstates the fact here. In the passage referred to
{Th., St. p. 158), Socrates is represented as developing the Protago-
rean theory from its author's standpoint, not as staling his own
opinions.

8 Lit., "by the stretching out of rays and of light." This, the
doctrine of the Stoics, is naturally contrasted in the next clause with
that of Epicurus.


the palate? from what causes hairs lay aside
their natural darkness, and do not become gray
all at once, but by adding little by little? why
it is that all fluids, on mingling, form one whole ;
that oil, on the contrary, does not suffer the
others to be poured into it,^ but is ever brought
together clearly into its own impenetrable '" sub-
stance? finally, why the soul also, which is said
by you to be immortal and divine," is sick in
men who are sick, senseless in children, worn
out in doting, silly,'^ and crazy old age? Now
the weakness and wretched ignorance of these
theories is greater on this account, that while it
may happen that we at times say something
which is true, '3 we cannot be sure even of this
very thing, whether we have spoken the truth at
all.

8. And since you have been wont to laugh at
our faith, and with droll jests to pull to pieces
our readiness of belief too, say, O wits, soaked
and filled with wisdom's pure draught, is there
in life any kind of business demanding diligence
and activity, which the doers '"* undertake, engage
in, and essay, without believing that it can he
done ? Do you travel about, do you sail on the
sea without believing that you will return home
when your business is done ? Do you break up
the earth with the plough, and fill it with differ-
ent kinds of seeds without believing that you
will gather in the fruit with the changes of the
seasons? Do you unite with partners in mar-
riage,'s without believing that it will be pure, and
a union serviceable to the husband? Do you
beget children without believing that they will
pass '^ safely through the different stages of life
to the goal of age ? Do you commit your sick
bodies to the hands of physicians, without be-
lieving that diseases can be reheved by their
severity being lessened? Do you wage wars
with your enemies, without believing that you
will carry off the victory by success in battles ?•'
Do you worship and serve the gods without
believing that they are, and that they listen
graciously to your prayers ?

9. What, have you seen with your eyes, and
handled '^ with your hands, those things which
you write yourselves, which you read from time


9 Lit., "oil refuses to suflTer immersion into itself," i.e., of other
fluids.

'° So LB., followed by Orelli, reading impenetrabil-em for the
MS. imfenetrabil-is, which is corrected in both Roman edd. by Ge-
lenius, Canterus, and Elmenhorst -e, to agree with the subject oleum
— " being impenetrable is ever," etc.

" Lit., " a god."

'- So the edd., generally reading /^/«rt for the MS./utitra, which
is clearly corrupt, Hildebrand turns the three adjectives into corre-
sponding verbs, and Heinsius emends deliret (MS. -rd) et /atue et
insane — " Aote?, both sillily and crazily." Arnobius here follows
Lucr., iii. 445 sqq.

'3 Lit., " scrmething of truth."

'* The MS. has a-t-ior-o-s, correclcA by a later writer a-f-^or-ir-j,
which is received in LB. and by Meursius and Orelli.

'5 Lit., " unite marriage partnerships."

'6 Lit., "be safe and come."

" Or, " in successive battles" — praeliorunt succcssionibus.

" Lit., " with ocular inspection, and held touched."


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


437


to time on subjects placed beyond human knowl-
edge ? Does not each one trust this author or
that ? That which any one has persuaded him-
self is said with truth by another, does he not
defend with a kind of assent, as it were, like that
of faith ? Does not he who says that fire ' or
water is the origin of all things, pin his faith to
Thales or Heraclitus? he who places the cause
of all in numbers, to Pythagoras of Samos, and
to Archytas? he who divides the soul, and sets
up bodiless forms, to Plato, the disciple of Soc-
rates? he who adds a fifth element^ to the
primary causes, to Aristotle, the father of the
Peripatetics? he who threatens the world with
destruction by fire, and says that when the time
comes it will be set on fire, to Pansetius, Chry-
sippus, Zeno ? he who is always fashioning worlds
from atoms,^ and destroying them, to Epicurus,
Democritus, Metrodorus ? he who says that noth-
ing is comprehended by man, and that all things
are wrapt in dark obscurity,^ to Archesilas,5 to
Carneades? — to some teacher, in fine, of the
old and later Academy?

lo. Finally, do not even the leaders and
founders of the schools ^ already mentioned, say
those very things ^ which they do say through
belief in their own ideas? For, did Heraclitus
see things produced by the changes of fires?
Thales, by the condensing of water ?^ Did
Pythagoras see them spring from number?^ Did
Plato see the bodiless forms? Democritus, the
meeting together of the atoms? Or do those
who assert that nothing at all can be compre-
hended by man, know whether what they say
is true, so as to '° understand that the very prop-


' " Fire" is wanting in the MS.

^ Arnobius here allows himself to be misled by Cicero {Tusc, i.
lo), who explains ivTtKix^na. as a kind of perpetual motion, evidently
confusing it with ivStKi\eia. (cf. Donaldson, jVeui Crat., § 339 sqq.),
and represents Aristotle as making it a fifth primary cause. The
word has no such meaning, and Aristotle invariably enumerates only
four primary causes: the material from which, the form in which, the
power by which, and the end for which anything exists {Physics, ii.
3; Mctafih.,'w.'2,e\.c.).

3 Lit., " with indivisible bodies."

* PI.

5 So the MS., LB., and Hildebrand, leading A rc/tesiiiz, while the
others read A rcliesilao, forgetting that Arcesilas is the regular Latin
form, although Archesilaus is found.

6 Setitentianim is read in the first ed. by Gelenius, Canterus, and
Ursinus, and seems from Cnisius to be the MS. reading. The other
edd., however, have received from the margin of Ursinus the reading
of the text, sectarum.

7 In the first ed., and that of Ursinus, the reading is, nonne apud
ea, " in those things which they say, do they not say," etc., which
Gelenius emended as in the text, fionne i/>sa ea.

* Cf. Diog. Laert. ix. 9, where Heraclitus is said to have taught
that fire — the first principle — condensing becomes water, water earth,
and conversely; and on Thales, Arist., Met., A, 3, where, however, as
in other places. Thales is merely said to have referred the generation
and maintenance of all things to moisture, although by others he is
represented as teaching the doctrine ascribed to him above. Cf. Cic,
de Nat. Dear., i. 10, and Heraclides, Alleg. Horn., c. 22, where water
evaporating is said to become air, and settling, to become mud.

9 There is some difficulty as to the reading: the ms., first ed., and
Ursinus give iiumero s-c-ire, explained by Canterus as meaning
" that numbers have understanding," i.e., so as to be the cause of all.
Gelenius, followed by Canterus, reads -os scit — "does Pyth. know
numbers," which is absurdly out of place. Heraldus approved of a
reading in the margin of tj rsinus (merely inserting 0 after f), " that
numbers unite," which seems very plausible. The text follows an
emendation of Gronovius adopted by Orelli, -0 ex-ire.

'° So the MS., readmg ut; but Orelli, and all edd. before him, aut
— " or do they."


osition which they lay down is a declaration of
truth?" Since, then, you have discovered and
learned nothing, and are led by credulity to
assert all those things which you write, and com-
prise in thousands of books ; what kind of judg-
ment, pray, is this, so unjust that you mock at
faith in us, while you see that you have it in
common with our readiness of belief? " V>\x\.you
say you believe wise men, well versed in all
kinds of learning ! — those, forsooth, who know
nothing, and agree in nothing which they say ;
who join battle with their opponents on behalf
of their own opinions, and are always contending
fiercely with obstinate hostility ; who, overthrow-
ing, refuting, and bringing to nought the one the
other's doctrines, have made all things doubtful,
and have shown from their very want of agree-
ment that nothing can be known.

II. But, supposing t/iat these things do not
at all hinder or prevent your being bound to
believe and hearken to them in great measure ; '^
and what reasoti is there either that you should
have more libei'ty in this respect, or that we
should have IfSis} You believe Plato,''* Cronius,'5
Numenius, or any one you please ; we believe
and confide in Christ.'^ How unreasonable it is,
that when we both abide '7 by teachers, and have
one and the same thing, belief, in common, you
should wish it to be granted to you to receive
what is so '^ said by them, but should be unwill-
ing to hear and see what is brought forward by
Christ ! And yet, if we chose to compare cause
with cause, we are better able to point out what
we have followed in Christ, than you to point
out what you have followed in the philosophers.
And we, indeed, have followed in him these
things — those glorious works and most potent
virtues which he manifested and displayed in
diverse miracles, by which any one might be led
\.ofeel the necessity of believing, and might de-
cide with confidence that they were not such as
might be regarded as man's, but such as showed
some divine and unknown power. What virtues


" i e., that truth knowable by man exists.

'- So the MS. reading nostra iii-credtilitate, for which Ursinus,
followed by Stewechius, reads nostra cum. Heraldus conjectured
vestra, i.e., " in your readiness of belief," you are just as much ex-
posed to such ridicule.

•^ Heraldus has well suggested that phiri^num is a gloss arising
out of its being met with in the next clause.

'"^ So the MS. and edd., reading Platoni ; but Ursinus suggested
Plotitw, which Heraldus thinks most probably correct. There is,
indeed, an evident suitableness in introducing here the later rather
than the earlier philosopher, which has great weight in dealing with
the next name, and should therefore, perhaps, have some in this case
also.

'5 The MS. and both Roman edd. give Crotonio, rejected by the
others because no Crotonius is known (it has been referred, however,
to Pythagoras, on the ground of his having taught in Croton). In
the margin of Ursinus Cronius was suggested, received by LB. and
Orelli, who is mentioned by Eusebius {Hist. EccL,\\. 19,3) with
Numenius and others as an eminent Pythagorean, and by Porphyry
{de Ant. Nymph., .\xi.), as a friend 01 Numenius, and one of those
who treated the Homeric poems as allegories. Gelenius substitutes
Plotinus, followed by most edd.

'^ [Thus everywhere he writes as a Christian.]

'' Stemiis, the admirable correction of Gelenius for the MS. tcm-
p-us.

'5 Orelli, following Stewechius, would omit ita.


438


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


did you follow in the philosophers, that it was
more reasonable for you to believe them than for
us to believe Christ ? Was any one of them ever
able by one word, or by a single command, I
will not say to restrain, to check ' the madness
of the sea or the fury of the storm ; to restore
their sight to the blind, or give it to men blind
from their birth ; to call the dead back to life ;
to put an end to the sufferings of years ; but —
and this is much easier ^ — to heal by one rebuke
a boil, a scab, or a thorn fixed in the skin? Not
that we deny either that they are worthy of praise
for the soundness of their morals, or that they
are skilled in all kinds of studies and learning ;
for we know that they both speak in the most
elegant language, and that their words flow in
polished periods ; that they reason in syllogisms
with the utmost acuteness ; that they arrange
their inferences in due order ; ^ that they express,
divide, distinguish principles by definitions ; that
they say many things about the different kinds
of numbers, many things about music ; that by
their maxims and precepts •♦ they settle the prob-
lems of geometry also. But what has that to
do with the case ? Do enthymemes, syllogisms,
and other such things, assure us that these men
know what is true ? or are they therefore such
that credence should necessarily be given to
them with regard to very obscure subjects? A
comparison of persons must be decided, not by
vigour of eloquence, but by the excellence of
the works which they have done. He must not 5
be called a good teacher who has expressed
himself clearly,^ but he who accompanies his
promises with the guarantee of divine works.

12. You bring forward arguments against us,
and speculative quibblings,^ which — may I say
this without displeasing Him — if Christ Himself
were to use in the gatherings of the nations, who
would assent? who would listen? who would
say that He decided^ anything clearly? or who,
though he were rash and utterly ^ credulous,
would follow Him when pouring forth vain and
baseless statements ? His virtues have been made

* Hildebrand thinks conipescere here a gloss, but it must be re-
membered that redundancy is a characteristic of Arnobius.

2 The superlative is here, as elsewhere, used by Arnobius instead
of the comparative.

3 i.e., so as to show the relations existing between them.

4 Perhaps " axioms and postulates."

5 According to Crusius, non is not found in the ms.

* White and Riddle translate candidule, " sincerely," but give
no other instance of its use, and here the reference is plainly to the
previous statement of the literary excellence of the philosophers.
Heraldus suggests callidule, " cunningly," of which Orelli approves;
but by referring the adv. to this well-known meaning of its primitive,
all necessity for emendation is obviated.

7 Lit., " subtleties of suspicions." This passage is certainly
doubtful. The reading translated, et suspicioiium argutias profer-
tis, is that of LB., Orelli, and the later edd. generally; while the MS.
reads -atis — "Bring forward arguments to us, and" (for which
Heraldus conjectures very plausibly, nee, " and not") "subtleties,"
etc., which, by changing a single letter, reads in the earlier edd. pro-
fer-etis — " Will you," or, " You will bring forward," etc.

^ Meursius conjectures in- (for ms. y«-) dieare — " pointed out,"
of which Orelli approves.

9 So the MS. and both Roman edd., supported by Heraldus, read-
ing solidce facilitatis, changed by the edd. into stolidce — " stupid."


manifest to you, and that unheard-of power over
things, whether that which was openly exercised
by Him, or that which was used '° over the whole
world by those who proclaimed Him : it has sub-
dued the fires of passion, and caused races, and
peoples, and nations most diverse in character
to hasten with one accord to accept the same
faith. For the deeds can be reckoned up and
numbered which have been done in India,"
among the Seres, Persians, and Medes ; in Ara-
bia, Egypt, in Asia, Syria ; among the Galatians,
Parthians, Phrygians ; in Achaia, Macedonia,
Epirus ; in all islands and provinces on which
the rising and setting sun shines ; in Rome her-
self, finally, the mistress of the world, m\v\-\\z\
although men are '^ busied with the practices in-
troduced by king '^ Numa, and the superstitious
observances of antiquity, they have nevertheless
hastened to give up their fathers' mode of life,'*
and attach themselves to Christian truth. For
they had seen the chariot 'S of Simon Magus, and
his fiery car, blown into pieces by the mouth of
Peter, and vanish when Christ was named. They
had seen him, I say, trusting in false gods, and
abandoned by them in their terror, borne down
headlong by his own weight, lie prostrate with
his legs broken ; and then, when he had been
carried to Brunda,'^ worn out with anguish and
shame, again cast himself down from the roof
of a very lofty house. But all these deeds you
neither know nor have wished to know, nor did
you ever consider that they were of the utmost
importance to you ; and while you trust your own
judgments, and term that wisdom which is over-
weening conceit, you have given to deceivers —
to those guilty ones, I say, whose interest it is
that the Christian name be degraded — an op-
portunity of raising clouds of darkness, and con-
cealing truths of so much importance ; of robbing
you of faith, and putting scorn in its place, in
order that, as they already feel that an end such
as they deserve threatens them, they might excite
in you also a feeling through which you should


'° So all the edd. except Oehler; but as the first verb is plural in
the MS., while the second is singular, it is at least as probable that
the second was plural originally also, and that therefore the relative
should be made to refer both to " virtues " and " power."

" Orelli notes that by India is here meant Ethiopia. If so, it
may be well to remember that Lucan (x. 29 sq.) makes the Seres
neighbours of the Ethiopians, and dwellers at the sources of the
Nile.

I- Instead oi sini, Stewechius would read essent — " were."

13 Instead of the MS. reading, Nu7nce regis artibus et antiguis
superstitiouibus, Stewechius, followed by Heraldus, would read
ritibus — " with the rites of Numa," etc.

'^ So the MS., reading res patrias, for which Heraldus, ritus
patrios — "rites."

•5 So the MS., although the first five edd., by changing r'vWos,
read cur-s-um — " course." This story is of frequent occurrence in
the later Fathers, but is never referred to by the earlier, or by any ex-
cept Christian writers, and is derived solely from the Apostolic Con-
stitutions. In the Greek version of the Apost. Const, the sixth book
opens with a dissertation on schisms and heresies, in which the story
of Simon and others is told; but that this was interpolated by some
compiler seems clear from the arguments brought forward by Bunsen
{Hippplytus and his Age, more particularly vol. ii. pt. 2, § 2, and
the second appendix).

"> Brunda or Brenda, i.e., Brundisium.


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


439


run into danger, and be deprived of tlie divine
mercy.

13. Meantime, however, O you who wonder
and are astonished at tlie doctrines of the learned,
and of philosophy, do you not then think it most
unjust to scoff, to jeer at us as though we say
foolish and senseless things, when you too are
found to say either these or just such things
which you laugh at when said and uttered by
us? Nor do I address those who, scattered
through various bypaths of the schools, have
formed this and that insignificant party through
diversity of opinion. You, you I address, who
zealously follow Mercury,' Plato, and Pythagoras,
and the rest of you who are of one mind, and
walk, in unity in the same paths of doctrine. Do
you dare to laugh at us because we ^ revere and
worship the Creator and Lord 3 of the universe,
and because we commit and entrust our hopes to
Him ? What does your Plato say in the Thecete-
tus, to mention him especially? Does he not
exhort the soul to flee from the earth, and, as
much as in it lies, to be continually engaged in
tliought and meditation about Him?-* Do you
dare to laugh at us, because we say that there
will be a resurrection of the dead? And this
indeed we confess that we say, but maintain that
it is understood by you otherwise than we hold
it. What says the same Plato in the Politicus ?
Does he not say that, when the world has begun
to rise out of the west and tend towards the
east,5 rnen will again burst forth from the bosom
of the earth, aged, grey-haired, bowed down with
years; and that when the remoter^ years begin
to draw near, they will gradually sink down i to
the cradles of their infancy, through the same
steps by which they now grow to manhood?^


' Hermes Trismegistus. See index.

2 So the MS., Elmenh., LB., Hildebrand, and Oehler, reading
quod, for which the other edd. read qui — " who."

3 This seems to be the reading intended by the ms., which accord-
ing to Hild. gives dom, i.e., probably dotninum, which Oehler
adopts, but all other edd. read deum — " god."

* Arnobius rather exaggerates the force of the passage referred to
(st. p. 173), which occurs m the beautiful digression on philosophers.
Plato there says that only the philosopher's body is here on earth,
while his mind, holding politics and the ordinai-y business and amuse-
ments of life unworthy of attention, is occupied with what is above
and beneath the earth, just as Thales, when he fell into a ditch, was
looking at the stars, and not at his steps.

5 /« cardhiem vergere qui orientis est so/is seems to be the
reading of all edd.; but according to Crusius the Ms. reads 7'ertere
— "to turn." Hildebrand, on the contrary, afifirms that instead of
/, the MS. gives c.

* i.e., originally earlier.

7 So most edd., reading desiiuros, for which Stewechius suggests
desulturos — " leap down '. " LB. exituros — " go out.''

8 Reference is here made to one of the most extraordinary of the
Platonic myths {Pol., 269-274), in which the world is represented as
not merely material, but as being further possessed of intelligence.
It is ever in motion, but not always in the same way. For at one
time its motion is directed by a divine governor (tou Travrb; 6 fxiv
Kiifiepi'jjTT)?) ; but this does not continue, for he withdraws from his
task, and thereupon the world loses, or rather gives up its previous
bias, and begins to revolve in the opposite direction, causing among
Other results a reverse development of the phenomena which occurred
before, such as Arnobius describes. Arnobius, however, gives too
much weight to the myth, as in the introduction it is more than
hinted that it may be addressed to the young Socrates, as boys like
such stories, and he is not much more than a boy. With it should be
contrasted the " great year" of the Stoics, in which the universe ful-
filled its course, and then began afresh to pass through the same ex-
perience as before (Nemesius, de Nat. Horn,, c. 38).


Do you dare to laugh at us because we see to
the salvation of our souls? — that is, ourselves
care for ourselves : for what are we men, but souls
shut up in bodies ? — You, indeed, do not take
evety pains for their safety,^ in that you do not
refrain from all vice and passion ; about this you
are anxious, that you may cleave to your bodies
as though inseparably bound to them.'° — What
mean those mystic rites," in which you beseech
some unknown powers to be favourable to you,
and not put any hindrance in your way to
impede you when returning to your native
seats ?

14. Do you dare to laugh at us when we speak
of hell,'^ and fires '^ which cannot be quenched,
into which we have learned that souls are cast by
their foes and enemies? What, does not your
Plato also, in the book which he wrote on the
immortality of the soul, name the rivers Acheron,
Styx,'"* Cocytus, and Pyriphlegethon, and assert
that in them souls are rolled along, engulphed,
and burned up ? But though a man of no little
wisdom, '5 and of accurate judgment and discern-
ment, he essays a problem which cannot be
solved ; so that, while he says that the soul is
immortal, everlasting, and without bodily sub-
stance, he yet says that they are punished, and
makes them suffer pain.'^ But what man does
not see that that which is immortal, which is
simple,''' cannot be subject to any pain ; that that,
on the contrary, cannot be immortal which does
suffer pain? And yet his opinion is not very far
from the truth. For although the gentle and
kindly disposed man thought it inhuman cruelty
to condemn souls to death, he yet not unreason-
ably '^ supposed that they are cast into rivers
blazing with masses of flame, and loathsome from
their foul abysses. For they are cast in, and
being annihilated, pass away vainly in '9 everlast-
ing destruction. For theirs is an intermediate ^^
state, as has been learned from Christ's teach-
ing ; and they are such that they may on the
one hand perish if they have not known God,
and on the other be delivered from death if they


9 LB. makes these words interrogative, but the above arrange-
ment is clearly vindicated by the tenor of the argument: You laugh
at our care for our souls' salvation; and truly you do not see to their
safety by such precautions as a viituous life, but do you not seek that
which you think salvation by mystic rites ?

'° Lit., " fastened with beam " (i.e., large and strong) " nails."

" Cf. on the intercessory prayers of the Magi, c. 62, infra.

'2 PI. Cf. Milman's note on Gibbon, vol. 2, c. xi. p. 7.

'3 Lit., " certain fires."

'•» Plato, in the passage referred to {Phisdo, St. p. 113, § 61), speaks
of the Styx not as a river, but as the lake into which the Cocytus
falls. The fourth river which he mentions in addition to the Acheron,
Pyriphlegethon, and Cocytus, which he calls Stygian, is the Ocean
stream.

•s So the MS., according to Hild., reading /arr^?/ but ace. to
Rigaltius and Crusius, it gwes, pravce — "of no mean."

"> So LB., Hild., and Oehler, reading doloris afficiat sensu, by
merely dropping m from the MS. sensu-m ; while all the other
edd. read doloribus sensuum — "affects with the pains of the
senses."

" i.e., not compounded of soul and body.

'8 Or, " not unsuitably," absone.

'9 Lit., " in the failure (or ' disappointment ' ) of," etc.

2° i.e., neither immortal nor necessarily mortal.


440


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


have given heed to His threats " and proffered
favours. And to make manifest^ what is un-
known, this is man's real death, this which leaves
nothing behind. Yox that which is seen by the
eyes is only a separation of soul from body,*not
the last end — annihilation : ^ this, I say, is
man's real death, when souls which know not
God shall •♦ be consumed in long-protracted tor-
ment with raging fire, into which certain fiercely
cruel beings shall ^ cast them, who were unknown 5
before Christ, and brought to light only by His
wisdom.

15. Wherefore there is no reason that that^
should mislead us, should hold out vain hopes to
us, which is said by some men till now unheard
of,'' and carried away by an extravagant opinion
of themselves, that souls are immortal, next in
point of rank to the God and ruler of the world,
descended from that parent and sire, divine,
wise, learned, and not within reach of the body
by contact.^ Now, because this is true and cer-
tain, and because we have been produced by Him
who is perfect without flaw, we live unblame-
ably, / suppose, and therefore without blame ;
are good, just, and upright, in nothing depraved ;
no passion overpowers, no lust degrades us ; we
maintain vigorously the unremitting practice of
all the virtues. And because all our souls have
one origin, we therefore think exactly alike ; we do
not differ in manners, we do not differ in beUefs ;
we all know jGod ; and there are not as many
opinions as there are men in the world, nor are
these divided in infinite variety.^

16. But, they say, while we are moving swiftly
down towards our mortal bodies,'" causes pursue
us from the world's circles," through the working
of which we become bad, ay, most wicked ;
burn with lust and anger, spend our life in shame-
ful deeds, and are given over to the lust of all


' So Gelenius emended the unintelligible MS. reading se-mina by
merely adding s, followed by all edd., although Ursinus in the margin
suggests se niiam, i e., mi-sericordiam — "pity;" and Heraldus
conjectures m-unia — " gifts."

^ So almost all edd., from a conjecture of Gelenius, supplying ut,
which is wanting in the MS., first ed., and Oehler.

3 It is worth while to contrast Augustine's words : " The death
which men fear is the separation of the soul from the body. The
true death, which men do not fear, is the separation of the soul from
God" (Aug. in Ps. xlviii., quoted by Elmenhorst).

* In the first ed., Gelenius, Canterus, Ursinus, and Orelli, both
verbs are made present, but all other edd. follow the MS. as above.

5 Lit., " and unknown." Here Arnobius shows himself ignorant
of Jewish teaching, as in iii. 12.

6 So the MS. and LB., followed by Oehler; in the edd. id is
omitted.

7 The MS. reading is a no-h-is guibusdam, for which LB. reads
nobis a qn. — "to us," and Hild. a tiotis — "by certain known; "
but all others, as above, from a conjecture of Gelenius, a no-v-is, al-
though Orelli shows his critical sagacity by preferring an emendation
in the margin of Ursinus, a bonis — "by certain good men," in which
he sees a happy irony !

8 Lit., " not touchable by any contact of body," neque ulla cor-
poris attrectatione contiguas.

9 Arnobius considers the reductio ad absurduni so very plain,
that he does not trouble himself to state his argument more directly.

'° There has been much confusion as to the meaning of Arnobius
throughout this discussion, which would have been obviated if it had
been remembered that his main purpose in it is to show how unsatis-
factory and unstable are the theories of the philosophers, and that he
is not therefore to be identified with the views brought forward, but
rather with the objections raised to them.

'' Cf. c. 28, p. 440, note 2.


by the prostitution of our bodies for hire. And
how can the material unite with the immaterial?
or how can that which God has made, be led
by weaker causes to degrade itself through the
practice of vice ? Will you lay aside your habit-
ual arrogance,'^ O men, who claim God as your
Father, and maintain that you are immortal, just
as He is ? Will you inquire, examine, search what
you are yourselves, whose you are, of what par-
entage you are supposed to be, what you do in
the world, in what way you are born, how you
leap to life ? Will you, laying aside all partiality,
consider in the silence of your thoughts that we
are creatures either quite like the rest, or sepa--
rated by no great difference ? For what is there
to show that we do not resemble them ? or what
excellence is in us, such that we scorn to be
ranked as creatures ? Their bodies are built up
on bones, and bound closely together by sinews ;
and our bodies are in like manner built up on
bones, and bound closely together by sinews.
They inspire the air through nostrils, and in
breathing expire it again ; and we in like man-
ner drew in the air, and breathed it out with
frequent respirations. They have been arranged
in classes, female and male ; we, too, have been
fashioned by our Creator into the same sexes. '^
Their young are born from the womb, and are
begotten through union of the sexes ; and we
are born from sexual embraces, and are brought
forth and sent into life from our mothers' wombs.
They are supported by eating and drinking, and
get rid of the filth which remains by the lower
parts ; and we are supported by eating and drink-
ing, and that which nature refuses we deal with
in the same way. Their care is to ward off
death-bringing famine, and of necessity to be on
the watch for food. What else is our aim in the
business of life, which presses so much upon us,''*
but to seek the means by which the danger of
starvation may be avoided, and carking anxiety
put away? They are exposed to disease and
hunger, and at last lose their strength by reason
of age. What, then? are we not exposed to
these evils, and are we not in like manner weak-
ened by noxious diseases, destroyed by wasting
age ? But if that, too, which is said in the more
hidden mysteries is true, that the souls of wicked
men, on leaving their human bodies, pass into
cattle and other creatures, '5 it is even more clearly
shown that we are allied to them, and not sepa-
rated by any great inten'al, since it is on the
same ground that both we and they are said to
be living creatures, and to act as such.


12 So the MS., followed by Orelli and others, reading iiistituium
su/'ercilitimque — " habit and arrogance," for the first word of which
LB. reads istum typhuin — "that pride of yours;" Meursius, isti
iyphitin — " Lay aside pride, O ye."

■3 So the edd., reading in totident sexus for the MS. sexu —
" into so many kinds in sex."

■•* Lit., " in so great occupations of life."

« Cf. Plato, Phado, st. p. 8i.


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


441


17. But we have reason, one lu ill say, and ex-
cel the whole race of dumb animals in under-
standing. I might believe that this was quite
true, if all men lived rationally and wisely, never
swerved aside from their duty, abstained from
what is forbidden, and withheld themselves from
baseness, and if no one through folly and the
blindness of ignorance demanded what is inju-
rious and dangerous to himself. I should wish,
however, to know what this reason is, through
which we are more excellent than all the tribes
of animals. Is it because we have made for
ourselves houses, by which we can avoid the
cold of winter and heat of summer ? What ! do
not the other animals show forethought in this
respect? Do we not see some build nests as
dwellings for themselves in the most convenient
situations ; others shelter and secure themselves
in rocks and lofty crags ; others burrow in the
ground, and prepare for themselves strongholds
and lairs in the pits which they have dug out?
But if nature, which gave them life, had chosen
to give to them also hands to help them, they
too would, without doubt, raise lofty buildings
and strike out new works of art.' Yet, even in
those things which they make with beaks and
claws, we see that there are many appearances
of reason and wisdom which we men are unable
to copy, however much we ponder them, al-
though we have hands to serve us dexterously in
every kind of work.

18. They have not learned, / will be told, to
make clothing, seats, ships, and ploughs, nor, in
fine, the other furniture which family life requires.
These are not the gifts of science, but the sug-
gestions of most pressing necessity ; nor did the
arts descend with men's souls from the inmost
heavens, but here on earth have they all been
painfully sought out and brought to light,^ and
gradually acquired in process of time by careful
thought. But if the soul^ had in itself the
knowledge which it is fitting that a race should
have indeed which is divine and immortal, all
men would from the first know everything ; nor
would there be an age unacquainted with any
art, or not furnished with practical knowledge.
But now a life of want and in need of many
things, noticing some things happen accidentally
to its advantage, while it imitates, experiments,
and tries, while it fails, remoulds, changes, from
continual failure has procured for itself"* and


^ So, by a later writer in the margin of the MS., who gives artifi-
ciosa-s novitati's, adopted by Stewechius and Oehler, the s being
omitted in the text of the MS. itself, as in the edd., which drop the
final i- in the ne.\t word also — "would raise and with unknown art
strike out lofty buildings."

2 Lit., " born."

3 Throughout this discussion, Arnobius generally uses the plural,
animae — " souls."

■♦ So Elmenhorst, Oberthiir, and Orelli, reading par-a-v-it sibi
et for the MS. pa>~v-as et, " from continual failure has wrought out
indeed slight smattering of the arts," etc., which is retained in both
Roman edd., LB., and Hild.; while Gelenius and Canterus merely
substitute siiz for ci, " wrought out for itself slight," etc.


wrought out some slight acquaintance with the
arts, and brought to one issue the advances of
many ages.

19. But if men either knew themselves thor-
oughly, or had the slightest knowledge of God,5
they would never claim as their own a divine
and immortal nature ; nor would they think
themselves something great because they have
made for themselves gridirons, basins, and bowls,^
because they have made under-shirts, outer-shirts,
cloaks, plaids, robes of state, knives, cuirasses
and swords, mattocks, hatchets, ploughs. Never,
I say, carried away by pride and arrogance,
would they believe themselves to be deities of
the first rank, and fellows of the highest in his
exaltation,? because they* had devised the arts
of grammar, music, oratory, and geometry. For
we do not see what is so wonderful in these arts,
that because of their discovery the soul should
be believed to be above the sun as well as all
the stars, to surpass both in grandeur and essence
the whole universe, of which these are parts.
For what else do these assert that they can
either declare or teach, than that we may learn
to know the rules and differences of nouns, the
intervals in the sounds of different tones, that we
may speak persuasively in lawsuits, that we may
measure the confines of the earth ? Now, if the
soul had brought these arts with it from the
celestial regions, and it were impossible not to
know them, all men would long before this be
busied with them over all the earth, nor would,
any race of men be found which would not be
equally and similarly instructed in them all. But
now how i&\^ musicians, logicians, and geometri-
cians are there in the world ! how few orators,
poets, critics ! From which it is clear, as has
been said pretty frequently, that these things
were discovered under the pressure of time and
circumstances, and that the soul did not fly
hither divinely 9 taught, because neither are all
learned, nor can all learn ; and '° there are very
many among them somewhat deficient in shrewd-
ness, and stupid, and they are constrained to
apply themselves to learning only by fear of
stripes. But if it were a fact that the things
which we learn are but reminiscences" — as has
been maintained in the systems of the ancients —
as we start from the same truth, we should all have
learned alike, and remember alike — not have di-
verse, very numerous, and inconsistent opinions.


5 Lit., "or received understanding of God by the breath of any
suspicion."

6 The MS. gives c-etera-gue , " and the rest," which is retained
in both Roman edd., and by Gelenius and Canterus, though rather
out of place, as the enumeration goes on.

'■ Lit., " equal to the highness {summitati) of the prince."
^ So Lb. and Orelli, rending qui-a; the rest, qui — "who."
9 So Gelenius, reading dhnnitus for the MS. divinas, i.e.," with
a divine nature and origin," which is retained in the first ed. and
Orelli.

1° The MS., both Roman edd., Hild., and Oehler, read ut, "so
that there are."

" Cf. on this Platonic doctrine, ch. 24, p. 443, infra.


442


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


Now, howev'er, seeing that we each assert differ-
ent things, it is clear and manifest that we have
brought nothing from heaven, but become ac-
quainted with what has arisen here, and main-
tain what has taken firm root in our thoughts.

20. And, that we may show you more clearly
and distinctly what is the worth of man, whom
you believe to be very like the higher power, con-
ceive this idea ; and because it can be done if
we come into direct contact with it, let us con-
ceive it just as if we came into contact. Let
us then imagine a place dug out in the earth,
fit for dwelling in, formed into a chamber, en-
closed by a roof and walls, not cold in winter,
not too warm in summer, but so regulated and
equable that we suffer neither cold' nor the vio-
lent heat of summer. To this let there not
come any sound or cry whatever,^ of bird, of
beast, of storm, of man — of any noise, in fine,
or of the thunder's ^ terrible crash. Let us next
devise a way in which it may be lighted not by
the introduction of fire, nor by the sight of the
sun, but let there be some counterfeit^ to imitate
sunlight, darkness being interposed.s Let there
not be one door, nor a direct entrance, but let it
be approached by tortuous windings, and let it
never be thrown open unless when it is abso-
lutely necessary.

2 1 . Now, as we have prepared a place for our
idea, let us next receive some one born to dwell
there, where there is nothing but an empty
void,^ — one of the race of Plato, namely, or
Pythagoras, or some one of those who are re-
garded as of superhuman wit, or have been
declared most wise by the oracles of the gods.
And when this has been done, he must then be
nourished and brought up on suitable food. Let
us therefore provide a nurse also, who shall come
to him always naked, ever silent, uttering not a
word, and shall not open her mouth and lips to
speak at all, but after suckling him, and doing
what else is necessary, shall leave him fast asleep,
and remain day and night before the closed
doors ; for it is usually necessary that the nurse's
care should be near at hand, and that she should
watch his varying motions. But when the child
begins to need to be supported by more substan-
tial food, let it be borne in by the same nurse, still
undressed, and maintaining the same unbroken
silence. Let the food, too, which is carried in
be always precisely the same, with no difference
in the material, and without being re-cooked by

' Lit., " a feeling of cold."

^ Lit., " sound of voice at all."

3 Lit., "of heaven terribly crashing."

* So the later edd., adopting the emendation of Scaliger, noihum
— " spurious," which here seems to approach in meaning to its use
by Lucretius {v. 574 sq), of the moon's light as borrowed from the
sun. The MS. and first four edd. read upturn, " known."

5 According to Huet (quoted by Oehler), " between that spurious
and the true light; " but perhaps the idea is that of darkness inter-
posed at intervals to resemble the recurrence of night.

6 Lit., " born, and that, too {et wanting in almost all edd.), into
the hospice of that place which has nothing, and is inane and empty."


means of different flavours ; but let it be either
pottage of millet, or bread of spelt, or, in imita-
tion of the ancients, chestnuts roasted in the hot
ashes, or berries plucked from forest trees. Let
him, moreover, never learn to drink wine, and
let nothing else be used to quench his thirst than
pure cold water from the spring, and //lat if pos-
sible raised to his lips in the hollow of his hands.
For habit, growing into second nature, will be-
come familiar from custom ; nor will his desire
extend ^ further, not knowing that there is any-
thing more to be sought after.

22. To what, then, _)'(?« ask, do these things
tend? We have brought them foriuani in order
that — as it has been believed that the souls of
men are divine, and therefore immortal, and that
they come to their human bodies with all knowl-
edge — we may make trial from this cliilJ, whom
we have supposed to be brought up in this way,
whether this is credible, or has been rashly be-
lieved and taken for granted, in consequence of
deceitful anticipation. Let us suppose, then,
that he grows up, reared in a secluded, lonely
spot, spending as many years as you choose,
twenty or thirty, — nay, let him be brought into
the assemblies of men when he has lived through
forty years ; and if it is true that he is a part of
the divine essence, and^ lives here sprung from
the fountains of life, before he makes acquaint-
ance with anything, or is made familiar with hu-
man speech, let him be questioned and answer
who he is, or from what father ; in what regions
he was bom, how or in what way brought up ;
with what work or business he has been engaged
during the former part of his life. Will he not,
then, stand speechless, with less wit and sense
than any beast, block, stone ? Will he not, when
brought into contact with 9 strange and previ-
ously unknown things, be above all ignorant of
himself? If you ask, will he be able to say what
the sun is, the earth, seas, stars, clouds, mist,
showers, thunder, snow, hail? Will he be able
to know what trees are, herbs, or grasses, a
bull, a horse, or ram, a camel, elephant, or
kite ? '°

23. If you give a grape to him when hungry,
a must-cake, an onion, a thistle," a cucumber, a
fig, will he know that his hunger can be appeased
by all these, or of what kind each should be to
be fit for eating ? '^ If you made a very great fire,
or surrounded him with venomous creatures, will
he not go through the midst of flames, vipers.


7 So most edd., x^-xUmz porrigeturiax the MS. corrigetu) "be

corrected," i.e., need to be corrected, which is retamed m the first ed.
^ So Gelenius, followed by Canterus, Elmenh., and Oberthiir,
reading portimic-m et, while the words tarn laiam, " that he is so
joyous a part," are inserted before et by Stewechius and the rest,
except both Roman edd., which retam the i\s. portione jam Iceta.

9 Lit., " sent to."

'° So the MS., reading mi'h'us, for which all edd. (except Ober-
thuer) since Stewechius read 7nulus, " a mule."

" Cardnus, no doubt the esculent thistle, a kind of artichoke.

I- So, according to an emendation in LB., esui, adopted by Orelli
and others, instead of the MS. reading et sui.


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


443


tarantulae/ without knowing that they are dan-
gerous, and ignorant even of fear? But again,
if you set before him garments and furniture,
both for city and country life, will he indeed be
able to distinguish - for what each is fitted ? to
discharge what service they are adapted ? Will
he declare for what purposes of dress the stragula ^
was made, the coif,-* zone, 5 fillet, cushion, hand-
kerchief, cloak, veil, napkin, furs,^ shoe, sandal,
boot ? What, if you go on to ask what a wheel
is, or a sledge,^ a winnowing-fan, jar, tub, an oil-
mill, ploughshare, or sieve, a mill-stone, plough-
tail, or light hoe ; a curved seat, a needle, a
strigil, a laver, an open seat, a ladle, a platter, a
candlestick, a goblet, a broom, a cup, a bag ;
a lyre, pipe, silver, brass, gold,^ a book, a rod, a
roll,'' and the rest of the equipment by which
the life of man is surrounded and maintained ?
Will he not in such circumstances, as we said,
like an ox '° or an ass, a pig, or any beast more
senseless, look " at these indeed, observing their
various shapes, but '^ not knowing what they all
are, and ignorant of the purpose for which they
are kept? If he were in any way compelled to
utter a sound, would he not with gaping mouth
shout something indistinctly, as the dumb usually
do?

24. Why, O Plato, do you in the A/eno '^ put
to a young slave certain questions relating to the
doctrines of number, and strive to prove by his
answers that what we learn we do not learn, but
that we merely call back to memory those things
which we knew in former times? Now, if he
answers you correctly, — for it would not be be-
coming that we should refuse credit to what you
say, — he is led to do so not by his real knowl-
edge,"* but by his intelligence ; and it results
from his having some acquaintance with num-
bers, through using them every day, that when
questioned he follows your meaning, and that the
very process of multiplication always prompts
him. But if you are really assured that the souls


' There has been much discussion as to whether the solifuga or
solipiiga here spoken of is an ant or spider.

2 The MS. reads discri»tinare, discernere, with the latter word,
however, marked as spurious.

3 A kind of rug.
*■ Mitra.

S Strophium, passing round the breast, by some regarded as a
kind of corset.

'> Mastruca, a garment made of the skins of the miiflone, a Sar-
dinian wild sheep.

7 Tribula, for rubbing out the com.

8 Aurum is omitted in all edd., except those of LB., Hild., and
Oehler.

9 Liber, a roll of parchment or papyrus, as opposed to the pre-
ceding codex, a book of pages.

'=> The MS. reads vohis unintelligibly, corrected by Meursius bovi's.

'^ So Orelli and modern edd.; but Crusius gives as the ms. reading
conspici-etur (not -et) , as given by Ursinus, and commonly received
— " Will he not ... be seen ? "

'2 The MS. and first five edd. read et — " and," changed in LB. to
sed.

'3 In this dialogue (st. p. 8i) Socrates brings forward the doctrine
of reminiscence as giving a reasonable ground for the pursuit of
knowledge, and then proceeds to give a practical illustration of it
by leading an uneducated slave to solve a mathematical problem by
means of question and answer.

'* Lit., " his knowledge of things."


of men are immortal and endowed with knowl-
edge when they fly hither, cease to question that
youth whom you see to be ignorant '5 and accus-
tomed to the ways of men : ''' call to you that
man of forty years, and ask of him, not anything
out of the way or obscure about triangles, about
squares, not what a cube is, or a second power, '?
the ratio of nine to eight, or finally, of four to
three ; but ask him that with which all are ac-
quainted — what twice two are, or twice three.
We wish to see, we wish to know, what answer
he gives when questioned — whether he solves
the desired problem. In such a case will he per-
ceive, although his ears are open, whether you
are saying anything, or asking anything, or re-
quiring some answer from him? and will he not
stand like a stock, or the Marpesian rock,'^ as the
saying is, dumb and speechless, not understand-
ing or knowing even this — whether you are talk-
ing with him or with another, conversing with
another or with him ; '9 whether that is intelligi-
ble speech which you utter, or merely a cry hav-
ing no meaning, but drawn out and protracted
to no purpose?

25. What say you, O men, who assign to your-
selves too much of an excellence not your own ?
Is this the learned soul which you describe, im-
mortal, perfect, divine, holding the fourth place
under God the Lord of the universe, and under
the kindred spirits,^" and proceeding from the
fountains of life? 2' This is that precious being
man, endowed ^^ with the loftiest powers of rea-
son, who is said to be a microcosm, and to be
made and formed after the fashion of the whole
V7iiv'erse, superior, as has been seen, to no brute,
more senseless than stock or stone ; for he is
unacquainted with men, and always lives, loiters
idly in the still deserts although he were rich,^^
lived years without number, and never escaped
from the bonds of the body. But when he goes
to school, ji'i?/^ say, and is instructed by the teach-
ing of masters, he is made wise, learned, and
lays aside the ignorance which till now clung to
him. And an ass, and an ox as well, if corn-


's So the MS. and edd., reading i-gnarntn rcrum, except LB.,
which by merely omitting the i gives the more natural meaning,
" acquainted with the things," etc.

"> Lit., " established in the limits of humanity."

'^ i.e., a square numerically or algebraically. The MS., both Ro-
man edd., and Cameras read dt-bus aut dynam-ns, the former word
being defended by Meursius as equivalent to biiiio, " a doubling," —
a sense, however, in which it does not occur. In the other edd., cubus
aut dynamis has been received from the margin of Ursinus.

'8 y^neid, vi. 472.

■9 This clause is with reason rejected by Meursius as a gloss,

2° Founded on Plato's words \Phadr>ts, st p. 247), tw 6" (i.e.
Zeus) eTrerac (rrpaTid 6itMV re Kiii Saiixoi'iui', the doctrine became
prevalent that under the supreme God were lesser gods made by Him,
beneath whom again were daemons, while men stood next. To this
Orelli supposes that Arnobius here refers.

^' The vessels in which, according to Plato {TimcEiis, St. p. 41),
the Supreme Being mixed the vital essence of all being. Cf. c. 52.

^^ Lit., " and endowed."

^3 The text and meaning are both rather doubtful, and the edd. vary
exceedingly. The reading of Orelli, demoretur iners, valeat in
cere qiinin-'is, has been translated as most akin to the MS., with
which, accordmg to Oehler, it agrees, although Orelli himself gives
the MS. readmg as aer-io.


444


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


pelled by constant practice, learn to plough and
grind ; a horse, to submit to the yoke, and obey
the reins in running ; ' a camel, to kneel down
when being either loaded or unloaded ; a dove,
when set free, to fly back to its master's house ;
a dog, on finding game, to check and repress its
barking ; a parrot, too, to articulate words ; and
a crow to utter names.

26. But when I hear the soul spoken of as
something extraordinary, as akin and very nigh
to God, a/iJ as coming hither knowing all about
past times, I would have it teach, not learn ; and
not go back to the rudiments, as the saying is,
after being advanced in knowledge, but hold
fast the truths it has learned when it enters its
earthly body.^ p'or unless it were so, how could
it be discerned whether the soul recalls to mem-
ory or learns /<?r the first time that which it hears ;
seeing that it is much easier to believe that it
learns what it is unacquainted with, than that it
has forgot what it knew but a little before, and
that its power of recalling former things is lost
through the interposition of the body? And
what becomes of the doctrine that souls, being
bodiless, do not have substance ? For that which
is not connected with^ any bodily form is not
hampered by the opposition of another, nor can
anything be led '• to destroy that which cannot
be touched by what is set against it. For as a
propordon established in bodies remains un-
affected and secure, though it be lost to sight in
a thousand cases ; so must souls, if they are riot
material, as is asserted, retain their knowledge s
of the past, however thoroughly they may have
been enclosed in bodies.^ Moreover, the same
reasoning not only shows that they are not incor-
poreal, but deprives them of all 7 immortaUty
even, and refers them to the limits within which
life is usually closed. For whatever is led by
some inducement to change and alter itself, so
that it cannot retain its natural state, must of
necessity be considered essentially passive. But
that which is liable and exposed to suffering, is
declared to be corruptible by that very capacity
of suffering.

27. So then, if souls lose all their knowledge
on being fettered with the body, they must expe-
rience something of such a nature that it makes
them become blindly forgetful.^ For they can-
not, without becoming subject to anything what-


* Lit., " acknowledge turnings in the course."

2 Lit., " but retaining its own things, bind itself in earthly
bodies."

i Lit., "of."

* So the MS. and edd., reading .fKa-(/^-»-/, for which Oehler reads
very neatly sua de vi — " can anything of its own power destroy,"
etc.

5 Lit., " not suffer forgetfulness."

* Lit , " however the most solid unions of bodies may have bound
them round."

' So the edd., reading privat immortalitate has onini, for
which, according to Hildebrand, the ms. reads -tatein has omnis —
" all these of immortality."

^ Lit., " put on the blindness of oblivion."


ever, either lay aside their knowledge while they
maintain their natural state, or without change
in themselves pass into a different state. Nay,
we rather think that what is one, immortal, sim-
ple, in whatever it may be, must always retain its
own nature, and that it neither should nor could
be subject to anything, if indeed it purposes to
endure and abide within the limits of true immor-
tality. For all suffering is a passage for death
and destruction, a way leading to the grave, and
bringing an end of hfe which may not be escaped
from ; and if souls are liable to it, and yield to
its influence and assaults, they indeed have life
given to them only for present use, not as a
secured possession,^ although some come to
other conclusions, and put faith in their own
arguments with regard to so important a matter.
28. And yet, that we may not be as ignorant
when we leave you as be/ore, let us hear from
you '° how you say that the soul, on being en-
wrapt in an earthly body, has no recollection of
the past ; while, after being actually placed in
the body itself, and rendered almost senseless by
union with it, it holds tenaciously and faithfully
the things which many years before, eighty if
you choose to say so, or even more, it either
did, or suffered, or said, or heard. For if,
through being hampered by the body, it does
not remember those things which it knew long
ago, and before it came into this world," there is
more reason that it should forget those things
which it has done from time to time since being
shut up in the body, than those which // did be-
fore entering it,'^ while not yet connected with
men. For the same body which '^ deprives of
memory the soul which enters it,'-* should cause
what is done within itself also to be wholly for-
gotten ; for one cause cannot bring about two
results, and these opposed to each other, so as to
make some things to be forgotten, and allow
others to be remembered by him who did them.
But if souls, as you call them, are prevented and
hindered by ihtxr fleshly members from recalling
their former knowledge, '5 how do they remember
what has been arranged '^ in these very bodies,


9 Cf. Lucretius, iii. 969, where life is thus spoken of.

'° The MS. reads ne videamu-s, changed in both Roman edd. into

-atnu) " that we may not \>e. seen by you (as ignorant), how say

you," etc. Gelenius proposed the reading of the text, attdiamits,
which has been received by Canterus and Orelli. It is clear from the
ne.\t words — queinadmcdniii dicitis — that in this case the verb
must be treated as a kind of interjection, " How say you, let us hear."
LB. reads, to much the same purpose, scire avemits, " we desire to
know."

" Lit., " before man."

'- Lit., " placed outside."

13 Quod enim.

■'' Rebus ingressis.

'5 So read by Orelli, artes suas aniiquas, omitting «/y?/f, which,
he says, follows in the .MS. It is read after suns, however, in the first
ed , and those of Gelenius, Canterus, Hildebrand; and according to
Oehler, it is so given in the MS., " its own and ancient." Oberthiir
would supply res — " its own arts and ancient things."

'*" So the MS , reading coitstitui-a, followed by all edd. except those
of Ursinus, Hildebrand, and Oehler, who read -ie, " how do they
remember when established in the bodies," which is certainly more ia
accordance with the context.


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN,


445


and know that they are spirits, and have no
bodily substance, being exaUed by their condi-
tion as immortal beings ? ' how do they know
what rank they hold in the universe, in what
order they have been set apart y)^^^ other beings ?
how they have come to these, the lowest parts
of the universe ? what properties they acquired,
and from what circles,^ in gliding along towards
these regions ? How, I say, do they know that
they were very learned, and have lost their knowl-
edge by the hindrance which their bodies afford
them ? For of this very thing also they should
have been ignorant, whether their union with the
body had brought any stain upon them ; for to
know what you were, and what to-day you are
not, is no sign that you have lost your mem-
ory,3 but a proof and evidence that it is quite
sound.-*

29. Now, since it is so, cease, I pray you, cease
to rate trifling and unimportant things at immense
values. Cease to place man in the upper ranks,
since he is of the lowest \ and in the highest
orders, seeing that his person only is taken ac-
count of,5 that he is needy, poverty-stricken in
his house and dwelling,^ and was never entitled
to be declared of illustrious descent. For while,
as just men and upholders of righteousness, you
should have subdued pride and arrogance, by
the evils '' of which we are all uplifted and puffed
up with empty vanity ; you not only hold that
these evils arise naturally, but — and this is much
worse — you have also added causes by which
vice should increase, and wickedness remain in-
corrigible. For what man is there, although of
a disposition which ever shuns what is of bad
repute and shameful, who, when he hears it said
by very wise men that the soul is immortal, and
not subject to the decrees of the fates,^ would
not throw himself headlong into all kinds of vice,
and fearlessly 9 engage in and set about unlawful
things ? who would not, in short, gratify his de-
sires in all things demanded by his unbridled
lust, strengthened even further by its security
and freedom from punishment? '° For what will
hinder him from doing so? The fear of a power
above and divine judgment? And how shall he
be overcome by any fear or dread who has been
persuaded that he is immortal, just as the su-
preme God Himself, and that no sentence can
be pronounced upon him by God, seeing that
there is the same immortality in both, and that


* Lit., "of immortality."
^ Cf. ch. 16, p. 440.

3 Lit., " of a lost memory."

* Lit., "of (a memory) preserved."
S Capite cum censeatttr.

* Lit., " poor in hearth, and of a poor hut."

' So the MS., reading malt's, for which Ursinus suggested alis,
" on the wings of which."

8 i.e., to death.

9 The MS. reads securus, intrepidus — "heedless, fearless; " the
former word, however, being marked as a gloss. It is rejected in all
edd., except LB.

'° Lit., " by the freedom of impunity."


the one immortal being cannot be troubled by
the other, which is only its equal? "

30. But will he not be terrified by '- the punish-
ments in Hades, of which we have heard, assum-
ing also, as they do, many forms of torture ? And
who '3 will be so senseless and ignorant of conse-
quences,'^ as to believe that to imperishable spirits
either the darkness of Tartarus, or rivers of fire,
or marshes with miry abysses, or wheels sent
whirling through the air,'5 can in any wise do
harm ? For that which is beyond reach, and not
subject to the laws of destruction, though it be
surrounded by all the flames of the raging streams,
be rolled in the mire, overwhelmed by the fall
of overhanging rocks and by the overthrow of
huge mountains, must remain safe and untouched
without suffering any deadly harm.

Moreover, that conviction not only leads on
to wickedness, from the very freedom to sin
which it suggests, but even takes away the ground
of philosophy itself, and asserts that it is vain to
undertake its study, because of the difficulty of
the work, which leads to no result. For if it is
true that souls know no end, and are ever '^ ad-
vancing with all generations, what danger is there
in giving themselves up to the pleasures of sense
— despising and neglecting the virtues by regard
to which life is more stinted in its pleasures, and
becomes less attractive — and in letting loose
their boundless lust to range eagerly and un-
checked through '7 all kinds of debauchery? Is
it the danger of being worn out by such pleas-
ures, and corrupted by vicious effeminacy?' And
how can that be corrupted which is immortal,
which always exists, and is subject to no suffer-
ing? Is it the danger of being polluted by foul
and base deeds? And how can that be defiled
which has no corporeal substance ; or where can
corruption seat itself, where there is no place on
which the mark of this very corruption should
fasten ?

But again, if souls draw near to the gates of
death, '^ as is laid down in the doctrine of Epicu-


" Lit., " the one (immortality) . . . in respect of the equality of
condition of the other" — 7icc in aUerius {iinmortalitatis) altera
{imviortalitatas) possit cequalitate conditionis vexari ; the refer-
ence being clearly lo the immediately preceding clause, with which it
is so closely connected logically and grammatically. Orelli, however,
would supply attiina, a.vo toO koivov, as he puts it, of which nothing
need be said. Meursius, with customary boldness, emends nee vi
alterius altera, " nor by the power of one can the other," etc.

'- So the ellipse is usually supplied, but it seems simpler and is
more natural thus: " But punishments (have been) spoken of" (;«^-
moratee) , etc.

'3 So MS. and Oehler, for which the edd. read ec guis, "will any
one."

'* Lit., " the consequences of things."

'5 Lit., " the moving of wheels whirling."

'^ Lit., " in the unbroken course of ages " — perpetttitnte t^vorum.

'7 Lit., " and to scatter the unbridled eagerness of boundless lust
through," etc.

'8 Lucretius (iii. 417 sqq.) teaches at great length that the soul and
mind are mortal, on the ground that they consist of atoms smaller than
those of vapour, so that, like it, on the breaking of their case, they
will be scattered abroad; next, on the ground of the analogy between
them and the body in regard to disease, suffering, etc. ; of their igno-
rance of the past, and want of developed qualities; and finally, on the
ground of the adaptation of the soul to the body, as of a fish to the
sea, so that life under other conditions would be impossible.


446


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


rus, in this case, too, there is no sufficient reason
why philosophy should be sought out, even if it
is true that by it ' souls are cleansed and made
pure from all uncleanness.^ For if they all 3 die,
and even in the body* the feeling characteristic
of life perishes, and is lost ; 5 it is not only a very
great mistake, but shows stupid blindness, to
curb innate desires, to restrict your mode of life
within narrow limits, not yield to your inclina-
tions, and do what our passions have demanded
and urged, since no rewards await you for so
great toil when the day of death comes, and
you shall be freed from the bonds of the
body.

31. A certain neutral character, then, and
undecided and iloubtful nature of the soul, has
made room for philosophy, and found out a rea-
son for its being sought after : while, that is, that
lellow'^ is full of dread because of evil deeds
of which he is guilty ; another conceives great
hopes if he shall do no evil, and pass his life in
obedience to ^ duty and justice. Thence it is
that among learned men, and men endowed with
excellent abihties, there is strife as to the nature
of the soul, and some say that it is subject to
death, and cannot take upon itself the divine
substance ; while others tnainJain that it is im-
mortal, and cannot sink under the power of
death.^ But this is brought about by the law
of the souFs neutral character : ^ because, on the
one hand, arguments present themselves to the
one party by which it is found that the soul '° is
capable of suffering, and perishable ; and, on the
other hand, are not wanting to their opponents,
by which it is shown that the soul is divine and
immortal.

32. Since these things are so, and we have
been taught by the greatest teacher that souls
are set not far from the gaping" jaws of death ;
that they can, nevertheless, have their lives pro-
longed by the favour and kindness of the Supreme
Ruler if only they try and study to know Him,
— for the knowledge of Him is a kind of vital


' The MS", and first four edd. read has, " that these souls," etc. ;
in the other edd., /tac is received as above from the margin of Ursi-
nus.

2 Cf. Plato, Phiedo (st. p. 64 sq.), where death is spoken of as
only a carrying further of thai separation of the soul from the pleas-
ures and imperfections of the body which the philosopher strives to
effect in this life.

3 Lit., " in common."
< PI.

S This refers to the second argument of Lucretius noticed above.

* i.e., the abandoned and dissolute immortal spoken of in last
chapier.

7 Lit., "with."

^ Lit., " degenerate into mortal nature."

9 Arnobius seems in this chapter to refer to the doctrine of the
Stoics, that the soul must be material, because, unless body and soul
were of one substance, there could be no common feeling or mutual
affection (so Cleanthes in Nenies. de Nat. Horn., ii. p 33) ; and to
that held by some of them, that only the souls of the wise remained
after death, and these only till the conflagration (.Stob., Eel. P/iys.,
p. 372) which awaits the world, and ends the .'^toic great year or
cycle Others, however, held that the souls of the wise became
daemons and demigods (Diog., Laeri., vii. 157 and 151).

'^ Lit. , " they " — ens.

" Lit., " from the gapings and," etc.


leaven '^ and cement to bind together that which
would otherwise fly apart, — let them, '3 then,
laying aside their savage and barbarous nature,
return to gentler ways, that they may be able to
be ready for that which shall be given. '•♦ What
reason is there that we should be considered by
you brutish, as it were, and stupid, if we have
yielded and given ourselves up to God our de-
liverer, because of these fears? We often seek
out remedies for wounds and the poisoned bites
of serpents, and defend ourselves by means of
thin plates 's sold by PsylU '^ or Marsi, and other
hucksters '^ and impostors ; and that we may not
be inconvenienced by cold or intense heat,'^ we
provide with anxious and careful diligence cov-
erings in "■'> houses and clothing.

T,T,. Seeing that the fear of death, that is, the
ruin of our souls, menaces ^° us, in what are we
not acting, as we all are wont, from a sense of
what will be to our advantage,^' in that we hold
Him fast who assures us that He will be our
deliverer from such danger, embrace Him, and
entrust our souls to His care,^^ if only that^^ inter-
change is right ? You rest the salvation of your
souls on yourselves, and are assured that by your
own exertions alone ^^ you become gods ; but we,
on the contrary, hold out no hope to ourselves
from our own weakness, for we see that our na-
ture has no strength, and is overcome by its own
passions in every strife for anything.^s You think
that, as soon as you pass away, freed from the
bonds of your fleshly members, you will find
wings ^^ with which you may rise to heaven and
soar to the stars. We shun such presumption,
and do not think -^ that it is in our power to reach
the abodes ^^ above, since we have no certainty
as to this even, whether we deserve to receive


1


'^ There may be here some echo of the words (John xvii. 3) , " This
is eternal life, that they may know Thee, the only true God," etc.;
but there is certainly not sufficient similarity to found a direct refer-
ence on, as has been done by Orelli and others.

'3 i.e., souls.

■'' This passage presents no difficulty in itself, its sense being ob-
viously that, as by God's grace life is given to those who serve Him,
we must strive to fit ourselves to receive His blessing. The last
words, however, have seemed to some fraught with mystery, and have
been explained by Heraldus at some length as a veiled or confused
reference to the Lord's Supper, as following upon baptism and bap-
tismal regeneration, which, he supposes, are referred to in the preced-
ing words, " laying aside," etc. [It is not, however, the language of
a mere catechumen.]

'5 These " thin plates," lamince, Orelli has suggested, were amu-
lets worn as a charm against serpents.

16 MS. Phyllis.

■^ So the edd., reading instit-oribiis for the MS. insiit-ut-oribus,
" makers."

•^ Lit., " that colds and violent suns may not," etc.

'9 Lit., "of."

"° Lit., " is set before."

"' So the MS., first ed., Gelenius, Canterus, Hildebrand, reading
ex comnzodi sensu, for which all the other edd., following Ursinus
and Meursius, read ex communi — " from common sense," i.e.,
wisely.

22 Perhaps, as Orelli evidently understands it, "prefer Him to our
own souls " — animis pmponitnns.

23 So Oehler, reading ea for the MS. ut, omitted in all edd.
2< Lit., " by your own and internal exertion."

25 Lit., " of things."
^* Lit., " wings will be at hand."

'^^ The MS. reads a'/-cimus, " say; " corrected du, as above.
28 The first four edd. read res, " things above," for which Stewe-
chius reads, as above, sedes.


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


447


life and be freed from the law of death. You
suppose that without the aid of others ' you will
return to the master's palace as if to your own
home, no one hindering you ; but we, on the
contrary, neither have any expectation that this
can be unless by the will of the Lord of all, nor
think that so much power and licence are given
to any man.

34. Since this is the case, what, pray, is so
unfair as that we should be looked on by you as
silly in that readiness of belief at which you scoff,
while we see that you both have like beliefs, and
entertain the same hopes? If we are thought
deserving of ridicule because we hold out to our-
selves such a hope, the same ridicule awaits you
too, who claim for yourselves the hope of im-
mortality. If you hold and follow a rational
course, grant to us also a share in it. If Plato
in the Fhcsdrus,^ or another of this band 0/ phi-
losophers, had promised these joys to us — that
is, a way to escape death, or were able to provide
it and bring us to the end which he had prom-
ised,2 it would have been fitting that we should
seek to honour him from whom we look for so
great a gift and favour. Now, since Christ has
not only promised it, but also shown by His vir-
tues, which were so great, that it can be made
good, what strange thing do we do, and on what
grounds are we charged with folly, if we bow
down and worship His name ^ and majesty from
whom we expect to r-eceive both these blessings',
that we may at once escape a death of suffering,
and be enriched with eternal life ? 5

35. But, say my opponents, if souls are mortal
and *^ of neutral character, how can they from
their neutral properties become immortal? If
we should say that we do not know this, and
only believe it because said by ^ One mightier
than we, when will our readiness of belief seem
mistaken if we believe** that to the almighty
King nothing is hard, nothing difficult, and
that 9 what is impossible to us is possible to
Him and at His command? '° For is there
anything which may withstand His will, or does

' Sponte.

2 Here, as in c. 7, p. 436, n. 3, the edd. read Phcedone, with the
exception of the first ed., LB., Hildebrand, and Oehler, who follow
the MS. as above.

3 Lit., " to the end of promising."

< Meursius suggests numini, "deity," on which it may be well
to remark once for all, that notnen and numen are in innumerable
places interchanged in one or other of the edd. The change, how-
ever, is usually of so little moment, that no further notice will be
taken of it.

5 So the MS., according to Rigaltius and Hildebrand, reading vitcE
atertiitatc, while Crusius asserts that the MS. gives vita et — "with
life and eternity."

* The MS. reading is, tiiortalis est qualitatis. The first five edd.
merely drop est — " of mortal, of neutral," etc.; LB. and the others
read, es et, as above.

' Lit., " heard from."

* So the MS., according to Crusius, the edd. reading cred-id-imus
— " have believed."

9 Lit , " if we believe that."

'° So the MS., reading ad >nodum obsecutionis faratum — " pre-
pared to the mode of compliance; " for which the edd. read adm. exe-
cutioni — " quite prepared for performing," except Hildebrand, who
gives adm. obsecutioni — " for obedience."


it not follow" of necessity that what He has
willed must be done ? Are we to infer from our
distinctions what either can or cannot be done ;
and are we not to consider that our reason is as
mortal as we ourselves are, and is of no im-
portance with the Supreme? And yet, O ye
who do not believe that the soul is of a neutral
character, and that it is held on the line midway
between life and death, are not all whatever
whom fancy supposes to exist, gods, angels,
daemons, or whatever else is their name, them-
selves too of a neutral character, and liable to
change '^ in the uncertainty of their future ? '3
For if we all agree that there is one Father of
all, who alone is immortal and unbegotten, and
if nothing at all is found before Him which
could be named, ''♦ it follows as a consequence
that all these whom the imagination of men
believes to be gods, have been either begotten
by Him or produced at His bidding. Are they 'S
produced and begotten? they are also later in
order and time ; if later in order and time, they
must have an origin, and beginning of birth and
life ; but that which has an entrance into and
beginning of life in its first stages, it of neces-
sity follows, should have an end also.

36. But the gods are said to be immortal.
Not by nature, then, but by the good-will and
favour of God their Father. In the same way,
then, in which the boon '^ of immortality is God's
gift to these who were assuredly produced,' ? will
I He deign to confer eternal life upon souls also,
although fell death seems able to cut them off
! and blot them out of existence in utter anni-
hilation.'^ The divine Plato, many of whose
thoughts are worthy of God, and not such as
the vulgar hold, in that discussion and treatise
entitled the Timceus, says that the gods and the
world are corruptible by nature, and in no wise
beyond the reach of death, but that their being
is ever maintained '9 by the will of God, their
King and Prince : ^° for that that even which has
been duly clasped and bound together by the
surest bands is preserved only by God's good-


'' So the MS., according to Crusius, but all edd. read sequ-a-tur
(for i) — " Is there anything which He has willed which it does not
follow," etc.

'-So all edd., reading muinbiles, except the two Roman edd. and
Oehler, who gives, as the reading of the MS., 7tn. — " tottering."

'i Lit., " in the doubtful condition of their lot."

■^ Lit., " which may have been of a name."

'S LB., followed by the later edd., inserted si, " if they are," which
is certainly more consistent with the rest of the sentence.

'^ The MS. reading is utterly corrupt and meaningless — i)ninor-
talitatis largiter est donuvi dci certa prolatis. Gelenius, followed
by Canterus, Obcrthiir, and Orelli, emended largi-tio . . . certe, as
above. The two Roman edd. read, -iateiii largitns . . . certani —
" bestowed, assured immortality as God's gift on," etc.

''' i.e., who must therefore have received it if they have it at all.

'^ Lit., " out, reduced to nothing with annihilation, not to be re-
turned from."

'9 Lit., " they are held in a lasting bond," i.e., of being.

-° Plato makes the supreme God, creator of the inferior deities,
assure these lesser gods that their created nature being in itself sub-
ject to dissolution. His will is a surer ground on which to rely for
immortality, than the substance or mode of their own being ( Tiintrtis,
St. p. 41 ; translated by Cicero, de Univ., xi., and criticised de Nat,
Dear., i. 8 and iii. 12).


448


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


ness ; and that by no other than ' by Him who
bound their elements together can they both be
dissoh'ed if necessary, and have the command
given which preserves their being.^ If this is
the case, then, and it is not fitting to think or
beHeve otherwise, why do you wonder that we
speak of the soul as neutral in its character,
when Plato says that it is so even with the dei-
ties,3 but that their life is kept up by God's ■*
grace, without break or end ? For if by chance
you knew it not, and because of its novelty it
was unknown to you before, now, though late,
receive and learn from Him who knows and has
made it known, Christ, that souls are not the
children of the Supreme Ruler, and did not
begin to be self-conscious, and to be spoken of
in their own special character after being cre-
ated by Him ; s but that some other is their
parent, far enough removed from the chief in
rank and power, of His court, however, and dis-
tinguished by His high and exalted birthright.

37. But if souls were, as is said, the Lord's
children, and begotten by^ the Supreme Power,
nothing would have been wanting to make them
perfect, as they would have been born with the
most perfect excellence : they would all have
had one mind, and been of one accord ; they
would always dwell in the royal palace ; and
would not, passing by the seats of bliss in which
they had learned and kept in mind the noblest
teachings, rashly seek these regions of earth,
that ^ they might live enclosed in gloomy bodies
amid phlegm and blood, among these bags of
filth and most disgusting ^ vessels of urine. But,
an oppotient will say, it was necessary that these
parts too should be peopled, and therefore Al-
mighty God sent souls hither ioform some colo-
nies, as it were. And of what use are men to
the world, and on account of what are they
necessary,^ so that they may not be believed to
have been destined to live here and be the


* The MS. and both Roman edd. read negiee tillo ab-olitio-nis unin-
telligibly, for which Gelenius proposed ncxusqtie abolitio7ie — "and by
the destruction of the bond; " but the much more suitable reading in
the margin of Ursinus, translated above, ullo ab alio nis-i, has been
adopted by later edd.

2 Lit., "be gifted with a saving order." So the MS., reading
salutari ntssione, followed by both Rom. edd. ; LB. and Orelli read
vitictione — "bond; " Gelenius, Canterus, Elmenh., and Oberthijr,
m-issione — " dismissal."

3 Lit., " that to the gods themselves the natures are inter-
mediate."

* Lit., " supreme " — principali.

5 Cf. i. 48. On this passage Orelli quotes Irenaeus, i. zi, where
are enumerated several gnostic theories of the creation of the world
and men by angels, who are themselves created by the " one unknown
Father." Arnobius is thought, both by Orelli and others, to share in
these opinions, and in this discussion to hint at them, but obscurely,
lest his cosmology should be confounded by the Gentiles with their
own polytheistic system. It seems much more natural to suppose that
we have here the indefinite statement of opinions not thoroughly di-
gested.

6 Lit., " a generation of."

' Canterus, Elmenhorst, Oberthlir, and Orelli omit ut, which is
retained as above by the rest.

8 Lit., " obscene."

9 Elmenhorst endeavours to show that Arnobius coincides in this
argument with the Epicureans, by quoting Lucr. v. 165 sqq. and Lact.
vii. 5, where the Epicurean argument is brought forward. What profit
has God in man, that He should have created him? In doing this, it


tenants of an earthly body for no purpose?
They have a share, my opponent says, in per-
fecting the completeness of this immense mass,
and without their addition this whole universe
is incomplete and imperfect. What then? If
there were not men, would the world cease to
discharge its functions? would the stars not go
through their changes ? would there not be sum-
mers and winters ? would the blasts of the winds
be lulled? and from the clouds gathered and
hanging ovej'head would not the showers come
down upon the earth to temper droughts ? But
now '° all things must go on in their own courses,
and not give up following the arrangement es-
tablished by nature, even if there should be no
name of man heard in the world, and this earth
should be still with the silence of an unpeo-
pled desert. How then is it alleged that it was
necessary that an inhabitant should be given
to these regions, since it is clear that by man
comes nothing to aid in perfecting the world,
and that all his exertions regard his private con-
venience always, and never cease to aim at his
own advantage ?

38. For, to begin with what is important, what
advantage ib it to the world that the mightiest
kings are here? What, that there are tyrants,
lords, a7id other innumerable and very illustrious
powers? What, that there are generals of the
greatest experience in war, skilled in taking
cities ; soldiers steady and utterly invincible in
battles of cavalry, or in fighting hand to hand
on foot? What, that there are orators, gram-
marians, poets, writers, logicians, musicians, bal-
let-dancers, mimics, actors, singers, trumpeters,
flute and reed players? What, that there are
runners, boxers, charioteers, vaulters," walkers on
stilts, rope-dancers, jugglers? What, that there
are dealers in salt fish, salters, fishmongers, per-
fumers, goldsmiths, bird-catchers, weavers of
winnowing fans and baskets of rushes? What,
that there are fullers, workers in wool, embroid-
erers, cooks, confectioners, dealers in mules,
pimps, butchers, harlots ? What, that there are
other kinds of dealers ? What do the other kinds
of professors and arts, for the enumeration of
j which all life would be too short, contribute to
the plan and constitution '^ of the world, that we
should believe '^ that it could not have been
founded without men, and would not attain its
completeness without the addition of '■' a wretched
and useless being's exertion? '5


seems not to have been observed that the question asked by Arnobius
is a very different one: What place has man in the world, that God
should be supposed to have sent him to fill it?

'° i.e., so far from this being the case.

'' i e., from one horse to another — desultores.

'2 Rationibus et constitutiotiibus.

'3 Lit., " it should be believed."

'"• Lit., " unless there were joined."

'5 So the MS., reading content io, which Orelli would understand as
meaning " contents," which may be correct. LB. reads conditio —
" condition," ineptly; and Ursinus in the mdiT^m, completio — "the
filling up."


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


449


39. But perhaps, some one will urge, the Ruler
of the world sent hither souls sprung from Him-
self for this purpose — a very rash thing for a
man to say ' — that they which had been divine ^
with Him, not coming into contact with the
body and earthly limits,^ should be buried in
the germs of men, spring from the womb, burst
into and keep up the silliest wailings, draw the
breasts in sucking, besmear and bedaub them-
selves with their own filth, then be hushed by
the swaying •♦ of the frightened nurse and by the
sound of rattles. 5 Did He send souls hither for
this reason, that they which had been but now
sincere and of blameless virtue should learn as ^^ '
men to feign, to dissemble, to lie, to cheat,7 to
deceive, to entrap with a flatterer's abjectness ;
to conceal one thing in the heart,^ express an-
other in the countenance ; to ensnare, to be-
guile '^ the ignorant with crafty devices, to seek
out poisons by means of numberless arts sug-
gested by bad feelings, and to be fashioned '° with
deceitful changeableness to suit circumstances?
Was it for this He sent souls, that, living //// then
in calm and undisturbed tranquillity, they might
find in " their bodies causes by which to become
fierce and savage, cherish hatred and enmity,
make war upon each other, subdue and over-
throw states ; load themselves with, and give
themselves up to the yoke of slavery ; and finally,
be put the one in the other's power, having
changed the condition '- in which they were
born ? Was it for this He sent souls, that, being
made unmindful of the truth, and forgetful of
what God was, they should make supplication to
images which cannot move ; address as super-
human deities pieces of wood, brass, and stones ;
ask aid of them '3 with the blood of slain animals ;
make no mention of Himself: nay more, that
some of them should doubt their own existence,
or deny altogether that anything exists ? Was it
for this He sent souls, that they which in their
own abodes had been of one mind, equals in
intellect and knowledge, after that they put on


■ So the later edd., from the margin of Ursinus, reading quod
temeritatis est maximce for the MS. qjiem — "whom it shows the
greatest rashness to speak of."

2 Lit., " goddesses."

3 So Gelenius (ace. to Orelli) , reading as in the margin of Ursinus,
terrenes circumscriptionis, for the uninteUigible reading of the .MS.,
temerarice, retained in both Roman edd., Canterus, and (ace. to
Oehler) Gelenius. LB. reads ineiarice — "a limiting by boundaries."

* Lit., " motions."

S Cf. Lucr., V. 229 sq. The same idea comes up again in iv. 21.

* Lit., " in."

7 According to Hildebrand, the Ms. reads dissiinnlar-ent cir-
eiimscribere, so that, by merely dropping nt, he reads, " to dissem-
ble and cheat; " but according to Crusius, iri is found in the MS.
between these two words, so that by prefixing /« Sabaeus in the first
ed. read vi-ent-iri Z'^ above, followed by all other edd.

^ Lit., " to roll ... in the mind."

9 Rigaltius and Hildebrand regard decipere as a gloss.

'° So the MS., reading foriitari, followed by Hildebrand and Oeh-
ler; but all the other edd. give the active form, -are.

" Lit., " from."

'- The condition, i.e., of freedom.

'3 LB., seemingly received by Orelli, though not inserted into his
text, reads poscerent eos for the MS. -entur, which Hildebrand
modifies -ent ea as above.


mortal forms, should be divided by differences
of opinion ; should have different views as to
what is just, useful, and right ; should contend
about the objects of desire and aversion ; should
define the highest good and greatest evil differ-
ently ; that, in seeking to know the truth of
things, they should be hindered by their obscur-
ity ; and, as if bereft of eyesight, should see
nothing clearly,'+ and, wandering from the truth,'5
should be led through uncertain bypaths of
fancy ?

40. Was it for this He sent souls hither, that
while the other creatures are fed by what springs
up spontaneous!}', and is produced without being
sown, and do not seek for themselves the pro-
tection or covering of houses or garments, they
should be under the sad necessity '^ of building
houses for themselves at very great expense and
with never-ending toils, preparing coverings for
their limbs, making different kinds of furniture
for the wants '^ of daily life, borrowing help for '^
their weakness from the dumb creatures ; using
violence to the earth that it might not give forth
its own herbs, but might send up the fruits re-
quired ; and when they had put forth all their
strength "^ in subduing the earth, should be com-
pelled to lose the hope with which they had
laboured -° through blight, hail, drought ; and at
last forced by^' hunger to throw themselves on
human bodies ; and when set free, to be parted
from their human forms by a wasting sickness ?
Was it for this that they which, while they abode
with Him, had never had any longing for property,
should have become exceedingly covetous, and
with insatiable craving be inflamed to an eager
desire of possessing ; that they should dig up
lofty mountains, and turn the unknown bowels
of the earth into materials, and to purposes of a
different kind ; should force their way to remote
nations at the risk of life, and, in exchanging
goods, always catch at a high '^xxco. for what they
sell, and a low one—y^r what they buy, take in-
terest at greed) and excessive rates, and add to
the number of their sleepless nights spent in
reckoning up thousands ^3 wrung from the life-
blood of wretched men ; should be ever extend-
ing the limits of their possessions, and, though


'"t Lit., " certain."

'= Lit., " by error."

''' Lit., " the sad necessity should be laid upon them, that," etc.

■7 Lit., "for the want of daily things," diufnorum egestati, for
which Stewechius would read diurna egcsiate — " from daily neces-
sity."

'8 Lit., "of."

'9 Lit., " poured forth all their blood."

^° Lit., " of their labour."

^' Lit., " at last by force of"

^^ So the MS. and edd., reading vilitatem, for which Meursius pro-
posed very needlessly iitititatctn — "and at an advantage."

^3 So, adhering verj' closely to the MS., which gives e-t sanguine
supputandis augerc-t ijisomtiia iiiilzbns, the i of e-i being omitted
and }i inserted by all. The first five edd. read, -tandi se angerent
insatiia: millibus — "harass themselves with the madness of reck-
oning; by miles should extend," etc., — the only change in Heraldus
and Orelli being a return to insotnuia — "harass with sleepless-
ness," etc.


450


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


they were to make whole provinces one estate,
should weary the forum with suits for one tree,
for one furrow ; should hate rancorously their
friends and brethren?

41. Was it for this He sent souls, that they
which shortly before had been gentle and igno-
rant of what it is to be moved by fierce passions,
should build for themselves markets and amphi-
theatres, places of blood and open wickedness, in
the one of which they should see men devoured
and torn in pieces by wild beasts, and themselves
slay others for no demerit but to please and
gratify the spectators,' and should spend those
very days on which such wicked deeds were
done in general enjoyment, and keep holiday
with festive gaiety ; while in the other, again,
they should tear asunder the flesh of wretched
animals, some snatch one part, others another,
as dogs and vultures do, should grind them
with their teeth, and give to their utterly insa-
tiable ^ maw, and that, surrounded by^ faces so
fierce and savage, those should bewail their lot
whom the straits of poverty withheld from such
repasts ; ■* that their life should be 5 happy and
prosperous while such barbarous doings defiled
their mouths and face ? Was it for this He sent
souls, that, forgetting their importance and dig-
nity as divine, they should acquire gems, pre-
cious stones, pearls, at the expense of their puri-
ty ; should entwine their necks with these, pierce
the tips of their ears, bind ^ their foreheads with
fillets, seek for cosmetics ^ to deck their bodies,^
darken their eyes with henna ; nor, though in
the forms of men, blush to curl their hair with
crisping-pins, to make the skin of the body
smooth, to walk with bare knees, and with every
other kind of wantonness, both to lay aside the
strength of their manhood, and to grow in effem-
inacy to a woman's habits and luxury ?

42. Was it for this He sent souls, that some
should infest the highways and roads,'^ others
ensnare the unwary, forge '° false wills, prepare
poisoned draughts ; that they should break open
houses by night, tamper with slaves, steal and


drive away, not act uprightly, and betray their
trust perfidiously ; that they should strike out
delicate dainties for the palate ; that in cooking
fowls they should know how to catch the fat as it
drips ; that they should make cracknels and
sausages," force-meats, tit-bits, Lucanian sau-
sages, with these " a sow's udder and iced -3 pud-
dings ? Was it for this He sent souls, that beings '■♦
of a sacred and august race should here prac-
tise singing and piping ; that they should swell
out their cheeks in blowing the flute ; that they
should take the lead in singing impure songs,
and raising the loud din of the castanets, 's by
which another crowd of souls should be led in
their wantonness to abandon themselves to
clumsy motions, to dance and sing, form rings
of dancers, and finally, raising their haunches
and hips, float along with a tremulous motion
of the loins?

Was it for this He sent souls, that in men they
should become impure, in women harlots, players
on the triangle "^ and psaltery ; that they should
prostitute their bodies for hire, should abandon
themselves to the lust of all,''' ready in the
brothels, to be met with in the stews,'^ ready to
submit to anything, prepared to do violence to
their mouth even ? "?

43. What say you, O offspring and descendants
of the Supreme Deity? Did these souls, then,
wise, and sprung from the first causes, become
acquainted with such forms of baseness, crime,
and bad feeling ? and were they ordered to dwell
here,^° and be clothed with the garment of the
human body, in order that they might engage in,
might practise these evil deeds, and that very
frequently ? And is there a man with any sense
of reason who thinks that the world was estab-
lished because of them, and not rather that it


' So restored by Cujacius, followed by LB. and Orelli, reading
in grat-i-am (ms. wants i) voluptatemqiie, while the first five edd.
ip.erely drop -que — " to the grateful pleasure," etc.

- Lit., " most cruel."

3 Lit., " among," in oris, the MS. reading, and that of the first
four edd., for which the others have received from the margin of Ur-
sinus moribics — " (indulging) in so fierce and savage customs."

''■ Lit., " tables."

5 Lit., " they should live."

^ Lit., " lessen."

7 In the MS. this clause follows the words " loss of their purity,"
where it is very much in the way. Orelli has followed Heraldus in
disposing of it as above, while LB. inserts it after " tips of their
ears." The rest adhere to the arrangement of the MS., Ursinus sug-
gesting instead of his — "with these," catenis — "with chains;"
Heraldus, linis — "with strings (of pearls) ; " Stewechius, tteniis —
■" with fillets."

8 So LB. and Orelli, reading con-fic-iejidis corporibits for the
MS. con-sp-iendis, for which the others read -s/>ic-, " to win atten-
tion." A conjecture by Oudendorp, brought forward by Orelli, is
worthy of notice — con-spii-e/idis, "to cover," i.e., so as to hide
defects.

9 Lit , " passages of ways."
'° Lit., " substitute."


" So the later edd., reading botulos; the MS. and early edd. give
bolctos — " mushrooms."

'2 For his, Heinsius proposes hiris — " with the intestines."

'3 Lit., " in a frozen condition." As to the meaning of this there
is difference of opinion: some supposing that it means, as above,
preserved by means of ice, or at least frozen: while others interpret
figuratively, " as hard as ice." [Our Scottish translators have used
their local word, " iced haggises: " I have put puddings instead,
which gives us, at least, an idea of something edible. To an Ameri-
can, what is iced conveys the idea of a drink. The budinariiis,
heretofore noted, probably made these iced saucisses.\
■ '•• Lit., "things" — res.

'S Scabilla were a kind of rattles or castanets moved by the feet.

'f" Sa)nbnca, not corresponding to the modern triangle, but a
stringed instrument of that shape. Its notes were shrill and disagree-
able, and those who played on it of indifferent character.

'7 So the MS. and first four edd., reading virilitatcm sui popnlo
publicarent. Meursius emended utilitniem — " made common the
use," etc.; and Orelli, from the margin of Ursinus, iiilitateni —
" their vileness."

'5 The MS. reads infornicibiis obvi-t-ce, which, dropping ;", is the
reading translated, and was received by Elmenhorst, LB., and Hilde-
brand, from the margin of Ursinus. The other edd. insert }tc before
/ — " bound."

'9 The translation does not attempt to bring out the force of the
■vioxA'i ad oris stuprum paratce,\\\\\z\\ are read by Orelli after Ur-
sinus and Gelenius. The te.xt is so corrupt, and the subject so ob-
scene, that a bare reference to the practice may be sufficient.

2° The MS. reads, habitare atqite habitare jiiss-e-r-unt. All
edd. omit the first two words, the first ed. without further change; but
the active verb is clearly out of place, and therefore all other edd.
rs3LAjHSSie sunt, as above. Oehler, however, from habitare om\XXe&
by the others, would emend aditare, " to approach," — a conjecture
with very little to recommend it.


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


451


was set up as a seat and home, in which every
kind of wickedness should be committed daily,
all evil deeds be done, plots, impostures, frauds,
covetousness, robberies, violence, impiety, all
that is presumptuous, indecent, base, disgrace-
ful,' and all the other evil deeds which men
devise over all the earth with guilty purpose, and
contrive for each other's ruin ?

44. But, you say, they came of their own ac-
cord, not sent- by their lord. And ^ where was
the Almighty Creator, where the authority of His
royal and exalted place,* to prevent their depart-
ure, and not suffer them to fall into dangerous
pleasures ? For if He knew that by change of
place they would become base — and, as the
arranger of all things,5 He must have known —
or that anything would reach them from without
which would make them forget their greatness
and moral dignity, — a thousand times would I
beg of Him to pardon my words, — the cause
of all is no other than Himself, since He allowed
them to have freedom to wander^ who He fore-
saw would not abide by their state of innocence ;
and thus it is brought about that it does not
matter whether they came of their own accord,
or obeyed His command, since in not preventing
what should have been prevented, by His inaction
He made the guilt His own, and permitted it be-
fore // was done by neglecting to withhold them
from action.

45. But let this monstrous and impious fancy
be put ^ far f7-o?n lis, that Almighty God, the
creator and framer, the author^ of things great
and invisible, should be believed to have begotten
souls so fickle, with no seriousness, firmness, and
steadiness, prone to vice, inclining to all kinds
of sins ; and while He knew that they were such
and of this character, to have bid '5 them enter
into bodies, imprisoned in which, "° they should
live exposed to the storms and tempests of for-
tune every day, and now do mean things, now
submit to lewd treatment ; that they might per-
ish by shipwreck, accidents, destructive conflagra-
tions ; that poverty might oppress some, beggary,
others ; that some might be torn in pieces by
wild beasts, others perish by the venom of flies ; "


' These are all substantives in the original.

2 So the MS., reading non tnissione — " not by the sending; " but,
unaccountably enough, all edd. except Hildebrand and Oehler read
jussione — " not by the command."

3 So the MS.

■* Lit., " royal sublimity."

s Lit., " causes."

^ The MS. and both Roman edd. read abscondere — "to hide,"
for which the other edd. read, as above, abscedere, from the margin
of L'rsinus.

^ Lit., "go."

8 By Hildebrand and Oehler, procreator is with reason regarded
as a gloss.

9 The MS., both Roman edd., and Hildebrand read j itssissei ; but
this would throw the sentence into confusion, and the other edd. there-
fore drop i.

'" LB., Hildebrand, and Oehler read qiiortim i/idii-c-tce carceri-
bus — "led into the prisons of which," all other edd. omitting c as
above. According to Oehler, the .MS. has the former reading.

" The MS. and both Roman edd. read i7i-f-ernarum paterentut
alia^ laniatus muscularjim, which has no meaning, and is little


that some might limp in walking, others lose their
sight, others be stiff with cramped '^ joints ; in
fine, that they should be exposed to all the
diseases which the wretched and pitiable human
race endures with agony caused by '^ different
sufferings ; then that, forgetting that they have
one origin, one father and head, they should
shake to their foundations and violate the rights
of kinship, should overthrow their cities, lay
waste their lands as enemies, enslave the free, do
violence to maidens and to other men's wives,
hate each other, envy the joys and good fortune
of others ; and further, all malign, carp at, and
tear each other to pieces with fiercely biting
teeth.

46. But, to say the same things again and
again,'* let this belief, so monstrous and impious,
be put {dir from us, that God, who preserves '5 all
things, the origin of the virtues and chief in '^
benevolence, and, to exalt Him with human
praise, most wise, just, making all things perfect,
and that permanently, '^ either made anything
which was imperfect and not quite correct,''^ or
was the cause of misery or danger to any being,
or arranged, commanded, and enjoined the very
acts in which man's life is passed and employed
to flow from His arrangement. These things are
unworthy of "^ Him, and weaken the force of His
greatness ; and so far from His being believed to
be their author, whoever imagines that man is
sprung from Hiin is guilty of blasphemous im-
piety, 7nan, a being miserable and wretched, who
is sorry that he exists, hates and laments his
state, and understands that he was produced for
no other reason than lest evils should, not have
something ^° through which to spread themselves,
and that there might always be wretched ones
by whose agonies some unseen and cruel power,^'
adverse to men, should be gratified.

47. But, you say, if God is not the parent
and father of souls, by what sire have they been
begotten, and how have they been produced?
If you wish to hear unvarnished statements not
spun out with vain ostentation of words, we,
too,^^ admit that we are ignorant of this, do not


improved by Galenius changing ut into ur, as no one knows what
" infernal flies " are. LB. and Orelli, adopting a reading in the mar-
gin of Ursinus, change intern. m\.o fcrarum , and join ntusc. with
the words which follow as above. Another re.iding, also suggested
by Ursinus, seems preferable, however, internorum . . • musculo-
rum— "suffer rendings (i.e., spasms) of the inner muscles."

'^ Lit., " bound."

'3 Lit., " dilaceration of."

'"* Lit., "again and more frequently."

'5 Lit., " the salvation of."

•6 Lit., " height of."

"7 Lit., " things perfect, and preserving the measure of their com-
pleteness; " i.e., continuing so.

•^ So the MS., LB., Oberthiir, and Oehler, reading claudum et
quod minus esset a recto. All other edd. read eminus — "at a
distance from the right."

19 Lit., " less than."

2° Lit., " material."

^' Lit., " some power latent and cruelty."

22 So the MS. and all edd. ; but Orelli would change item into
iterum, not seeing that the reference is to the indicated preference of
his opponents for the simple truth.


452


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


know it ; ■ and we hold that, to know so great a
matter, is not only beyond the reach of our
weakness and frailty, but beyond that also of
all the powers which are in the world, and which
have usurped the place of deities in men's behef.
But are we bound to show whose they are, be-
cause we deny that they are God's ? That by no
means = follows necessarily ; for if we were to deny
that flies, beetles, and bugs, dormice, weevils,
and moths,3 are made by the Almighty King, we
should not be required in consequence to say
who made and formed them ; for without incur-
ring any censure, we may not know who, indeed,
gave them being, and _)'<?/ assert that not by the
Supreme ^ Deity were creatures produced so use-
less, so needless, so purposeless, 5 nay more,
at times even hurtful, and causing unavoidable
injuries.

48. Here, too, in like manner, when we deny
that souls are the offspring of God Supreme, it
does not necessarily follow that we are bound to
declare from what parent they have sprung, and
by what causes they have been produced. For
who prevents us from being either ignorant of
the source from which they issued and came, or
aware that they are not God's descendants? By
what method, you say, in what way? Because
it is most true and certain ^ that, as has been
pretty frequently said, nothing is effected, made,
determined by the Supreme, except that which
it is right and fitting should be done ; except
that which is complete and entire, and wholly
perfect in its ^ integrity. But further, we see that
men, that is, these very souls — for what are men
but souls .bound to bodies? — themselves show
by perversely falling into ^ vice, times without
number, that they belong to no patrician race,
but have sprung from insignificant families. For
we see some harsh, vicious, presumptuous, rash,
reckless, blinded, false, dissemblers, liars, proud,
overbearing, covetous, greedy, lustful, fickle, weak,
and unable to observe their own precepts ; but
they would assuredly not be so, if their original
goodness defended ^ them, and they traced their
honourable descent from the head of the universe.

49. But, you will say, there are good men also
in the world, — wise, upright, of faultless and
purest morals. We raise no question as to
whether there ever were any such, in whom this


' Nescire Hildebrand, with good reason, considers a gloss.

^ Nihil for ihe lis. milii _ which makes nonsense of the sentence.

3 This somewhat wide-spread opinion found an amusing counter-
part m the doctrines of Rorarins (mentioned by Bayle, Diet. Phil.),
who affirmed that the lower animals are gifted with reason and speech,
as we are.

* Lit., " superior."

s Lit., " tending to no reasons."

*> Omni vera 7'erissimum est certogue certissimiem — the super-
lative for the comparative.

7 Lit., " finished with the perfection of."

^ Lit., "by perversity" — s-c-rF7'itate, the readin.g of the MS.,
LB., Orelli, Hild., and Oehler, all others omitting <r— " by the rage; "
except Stewechius, who reads serviiiite — " slavery."

9 Or, perhaps, " the goodness of the Supreme planted" — gene-
fositas COS adsereret principalis.


very integrity which is spoken of was in nothing
imperfect. Even if they are very honourable
fnen, and have been worthy of praise, have
reached the utmost height of perfection, and
their life has never wavered and sunk into sin,
yet we would have you tell us how many there
are, or have been, that we may judge from their
number whether a comparison ■° has been made
which is just and evenly balanced." One, two,
three, four, ten, twenty, a hundred, yet are they
at least limited in number, and it may be within
the reach of names.'- But it is fitting that the
human race should be rated and weighed, not
by a very few good men, but by all the rest as
well. For the part is in the whole, not the whole
in a part ; and that which is the whole should
draw to it its parts, not the whole be brought to
its parts. For what if you were to say that a
man, robbed of the use of all his limbs, and
shrieking in bitter agony,'^ was quite well, be-
cause in ■■* one httle nail he suffered no pain ? or
that the earth is made of gold, because in one
hillock there are a few small grains from which,
when dissolved, gold is produced, and wonder
excited at it when formed into a lump? '5 The
whole mass shows the nature of an element, not
particles fine as air ; nor does the sea become
forthwith sweet, if you cast or throw into // a
few drops of less bitter water, for that small
quantity is swallowed up in its immense mass ;
and it must be esteemed, not merely of little
importance, but even of none, because, being
scattered throughout all, it is lost and cut off in
the immensity of the vast body of water.

50. You say that there are good men in the
human race ; and perhaps, if we compare them
with the very wicked, we may be led '^ to believe
that there are. Who are they, pray? Tell us.
The philosophers, I suppose, who '^ assert that
they alone are most wise, and who have been
uplifted with pride from the meaning attached to
this name,'^ — those, forsooth, who are striving
with their passions every day, and struggling to
drive out, to expel deeply-rooted passions from
their minds by the persistent '^ opposition of
their better quahties ; who, that it may be im-
possible for them to be led into wickedness at
the suggestion of some opportunity, shun riches


'° Lit., "opposition; " i.e., " the setting of one party against the
other."

'' Lit., "weighed with balancing of equality."

'- Lit., " bounded by the comprehensions of names; " i.e., possi-
bly, " the good are certainly few enough to be numbered, perhaps
even to be named."

'3 So LB., reading ex cruciatibics for the MS. scriic.

i-t Lit., " of."

15 Lit., " admiration is sought for by the putting together" — con-
gregatione.

■'' Lit., " a comparison of the worst may effect that we," etc.

'7 So all edd. except Hildebrand, who gives as the reading of the
MS., qui-d — " what! do they assert."

'8 Lit., " by the force of," vi, — an emendation of Heraldus for
the MS. in.

•9 So most edd., rea.Amg periitiaci for the MS. -?«?« — "by tl.l
opposition of persistent virtues," which is retained in both Roman
edd., Gelenius, Canterus, Hildebrand, and Oehler.


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


453


and inheritances, that they may remove ' from
themselves occasions of stumbling ; but in doing
this, and being solicitous about it, they show
very clearly that their souls are, through their
weakness, ready and prone to fall into vice. In
our opinion, however, that which is good natu-
rally, does not require to be either corrected or
reproved ; ^ nay more, it should not know what
evil is, if the nature of each kind would abide
in its own integrity, for neither can two contra-
ries be implanted in each other, nor can equality
be contained in inequality, nor sweetness in
bitterness. He, then, who struggles to amend
the inborn depravity of his inclinations, shows
most clearly that he is imperfect,^ blameable,
although he may strive with all zeal and stedfast-
ness.

51. But you laugh at our reply, because, while
we deny that souls are of royal descent, we do
not, on the other hand, say in turn from what
causes and beginnings they have sprung. But
what kind of crime is it either to be ignorant of
anything, or to confess quite openly that you do
not know that of which you are ignorant? or
whether does he rather seem to you most deserv-
ing of ridicule who assumes to himself no knowl-
edge of some dark subject ; or he who thinks
that he "* knows most clearly that which tran-
scends human knowledge, and which has been
involved in dark obscurity? If the nature of
everything were thoroughly considered, you too
are in a position like that which you censure in
our case. For you do not say anything which
has been ascertained and set most clearly in the
light of truth, because you say that souls descend
from the Supreme Ruler Himself, and enter into
the forms of men. For you conjecture, do not
perceive s this ; surmise, do not actually know
it ; for if to know is to retain in the mind that
which you have yourself seen or known, not one
of those things which you affirm can you say
that you have ever seen — that is, that souls
descend from the abodes and regions above.
You are therefore making use of conjecture, not
trusting clear information. But what is con-
jecture, except a doubtful imagining of things,
and directing of the mind upon nothing accessi-


' So Stevvechius and later edd., reading «^ . . . aiifet-a)if, except
Hildebrand, who gives as the MS. reading, rf . . . -itnt — "shun . . .
and remove," etc. The first four edd. read ne . . . afferant —
" that they may not bring upon themselves," etc.

- So the MS. and first four edd., Orelli (who, however, seems to
have meant to give the other reading) , and Oehler, reading corri-J>-i,
for which the others read -z^/— " corrected," except Hildebrand,
who without due reason gives -rumpi — " corrupted."

3 In the MS. iinperjecttiin is marked as a gloss, but is retained in
all edd., while i>nprobabilci7i is omitted, except in LB., when im is
omitted, ^wA. probabileni joined to the next clause — "however he
may strive to be acceptable," in order to provide an object for
" strive; " and with a similar purpose Orelli thiusts in contrarizcni,
although it is quite clear that the verb refers to the preceding clause,
" struggles to amend."

* The MS. reads se esse, without meaning, from which LB., fol-
lowed by Hildebrand, and Oehler derived se ex se — " himself of
himself." The rest simply omit esse as above.

S Lit., "hold."


ble ? He, then, who conjectures, does not com-
prehend,s nor does he walk in the "^ light of
knowledge. But if this is true and certain in
the opinion of proper and very wise judges,
your conjectures, too, in which you trust, must
be regarded as showing your ignorance.

52. And yet, lest you should suppose that
none but yourselves can make use of conjectures
and surmises, we too are able to bring them for-
ward as well, 7 as your question is appropriate to
either side.^ Whence, you say, are men ; and
what or whence are the souls of these men?
Whence, we will ask, are elephants, bulls, stags,
mules,9 asses? Whence lions, horses, dogs,
wolves, panthers ; and what or whence are the
souls of these creatures ? For it is not credible
that from that Platonic cup,'° which Tim^eus pre-
pares and mixes, either their souls came, or that
the locust," mouse, shrew, cockroach, frog, centi-
pede, should be believed to have been quickened
and to live, because '^ they have a cause and
origin of birth in '^ the elements themselves, if
there are in these secret and very little known
means ''^ for producing the creatures which live
in each of them. For we see that some of the
wise say that the earth is mother of men, that
others join with it water,'5 that others add to
these breath of air, but that some say that the
sun is their framer, and that, having been quick-
ened by his rays, they are filled with the stir of
life.'^ What if it is not these, and is something
else, another cause, another method, another
power, in fine, unheard of and unknown to us
by name, which may have fashioned the human
race, and connected it with things as established ; '^
may it not be that men sprang up in this way,
and that the cause of their birth does not go
back to the Supreme God? For what reason do
we suppose that the great Plato had — a man
reverent and scrupulous in his wisdom — when
he withdrew the fashioning of man from the
highest God, and transferred it to some lesser
deities, and when he would not have the souls of
men formed '^ of that pure mixture of which he


^ Lit., " set in the."

^ Lit., " utter the same (conjectures)," ^^.y^/^w, the reading of LB.
and Hildebrand, who says that it is .so in the MS. ; while Crusius as-
serts that the MS. has idem, which, with Orelli's punctuation, gives
— "we have the same power; since it is common (i.e., a general
right) to bring forth what you ask," i.e., to put similar questions.

8 i.e., may be retorted upon you.

9 Here, as elsewhere, instead of vi7ili, the MS. reads inilvi —
" kites."

1° Cf. Plato, Timceus, st. p. 41, already referred to.

'' Or, perhaps, " cray-fish," locnsta.

'- The MS. reads guidon — '^ iwAeeA," retained by the first four
edd., but changed into quia — " because," by Elmenhorst, LB., and
Orelli, while Oehler suggests very happily si quidem — " if indeed,"
i.e., because.

•3 Lit., " from."

i^ RatiO)ies.

'5 Cf. chs. 9 and 10 [p 416, supra\,

'*> Orelli, retaining this as a distinct sentence, would yet enclose it
in brackets, for what purpose does not appear; more especially as the
next sentence follows directly from this in logical sequence.

'7 Lit., " the constitutions of things."

'^ Lit., " did not choose the souls of the human race to be mixtures
of the same purity," >wluit, received from the margin of Ursinus by


454


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


had made the soul of the universe, except that
he thought the forming of man unworthy of God,
and the fashioning of a feeble being not beseem-
ing His greatness and excellence?

53. Since this, then, is the case, we do noth-
ing out of place or foolish in believing that the
souls of men are of a neutral character, inasmuch
as they have been produced by secondary beings,'
made subject to the law of death, and are of
little strength, and that perishable ; and that
they are gifted with immortality, if^ they rest
their hope of so great a gift on God Supreme,
who alone has power to grant such blessings, by
putting away corruption. But this, you say, we
are stupid in believing. What is that to you?
In so believing, we act most absurdly, sillily. In
what do we injure you, or what wrong do we do
or inflict upon you, if we trust that Almighty
God will take care of us when we leave ^ our
bodies, and from the jaws of hell, as is said,
deliver us ?

54. Can, then, anything be made, some one
will say, without God's will ? We ■* must con-
sider carefully, and examine with no little pains,
lest, while we think that we are honouring God s
by such a question, we fall into the opposite sin,
doing despite to His supreme majesty. In what
way, you ask, on what ground -* Because, if all
things are brought about by His will, and noth-
ing in the world can either succeed or fail con-
trary to His pleasure, it follows of necessity that
it should be understood that ^ all evils, too, arise
by His will. But if, on the contrary, we chose to
say that He is privy to and produces no evil, not
referring to Him the causes of very wicked deeds,
the worst things will begin to seem to be done
either against His will, or, a monstrous thing to
say, while He knows it not, but is ignorant and
unaware of them. But, again, if we choose to say
that there are no evils, as we find some have be-
lieved and held, all races w'ill cry out against us
and all nations together, showing us their suffer-
ings, and the various kinds of dangers with which
the human race is every moment ^ distressed and

all except the first four edd., which retain the Ms. voluit — "did
choose," which is absurd. Arnobius here refers again to the passage
in the Tiuk^iis, p. 41 sq., but to a different part, with a different
purpose. He now refers to the conclusion of the speech of the Su-
preme God, the first part of which is noticed in ch. 36 (cf. p. 447, n.
20). There the Creator assures the gods He has made of immortality
through His grace; now His further mvitation that they in turn should
form men is alluded to. That they might accomplish this task, the
dregs still left in the cup, in which had been mixed the elements of
the world's soul, are diluted and given to form the souls of men, to
which they attach mortal bodies.

' Lit., " things not principal." Orelli here quotes from Tertullian,
de Aniin., xxiii., a brief summarj' of Gnostic doctrines on these points,
which he considers Arnobius to have followed throughout this discus-
sion.

2 5/ was first inserted in LB., not being found in the IMS , though
demanded by the context.

3 Lit., " have begun to leave."

'■ The MS. and first three edd. xe'sAvobis — " you," corrected «o^/i,
as above, by Ursinus.

5 So the MS. ; but most edd., following the Brussels transcript, read
dominiitn — " Lord."

^ Ut is omitted in the MS., first four edd., and Hild.

' So LB., reading /-?<«c^rt for the MS. c-uncta.


afflicted. Then they will ask of us. Why, if there
are no evils, do you refrain from certain deeds
and actions? Why do you not do all that eager
lust has required or demanded ? Why, finally, do
you establish punishments by terrible laws for the
guilty ? For what more monstrous ^ act of folly
can be found than to assert that there are no
evils, and at the same time to kill and condemn
the erring as though they were evil ? 9

55. But when, overcome, we agree that there
are these things,'" and expressly allow that all
human affairs are full of them, they will next ask,
Why, then, the Almighty God does not take away
these evils, but suff"ers them to exist and to go on
without ceasing through all the ages ? " If we have
learned of God the Supreme Ruler, and have re-
solved not to wander in a maze of impious and
mad conjectures, we must answer that we do not
know these things, and have never sought and
striven to know things which could be grasped by
no powers which we have, and that we, even think-
ing it '- preferable, rather remain in ignorance and
w^ant of knowledge than say that without God
nothing is made, so that it should be understood
that by His will '^ He is at once both the source
of evil ''^ and the occasion of countless miseries.
Whence then, you will say, are all these evils?
From the elements, say the wise, and from their
dissimilarity • but how it is possible that things
which have not feeling and judgment should be
held to be wicked or criminal ; or that he should
not rather be wicked and criminal, who, to bring
about some result, took what was afterwards to
become very bad and hurtful,'^- — is for them to
consider, who make the assertion. What, then,
do we say? whence? There is no necessity that
we should answer, for whether we are able to say
whence evil springs, or our power fails us, and we
are unable, in either case it is a small matter in
our opinion ; nor do we hold it of much impor-
tance either to know or to be ignorant of it, being
content to have laid down but one thing, — that

^ So the MS., Hild., and Oehler, reading imman-ior ; LB., from
the margin of Ursinus, }tiajo7 — "greater; "the rest, uianior —
" more foolish."

9 The difficulty felt by Arnobius as to the origin of evil perplexed
others also; and, as Elmenhorst has observed, some of the Fathers
attempted to get rid of it by a distinction between the evil of guilt and
of punishment, — God being author of the latter, the devil of the
former (Tertullian, adv. Marcionein, ii. 14). It would have been
simpler and truer to have distinguished deeds, which can be done only
if God will, from wickedness, which is in the sinful purpose of man's
heart.

10 i.e , ills.

" Lit., " with all the ages, in steady continuance."

'2 The MS., followed by Oehler alone, reads diicetis — " and you
will think ; " while all the other edd. read, as above, dncentes.

'3 Here, too, there has been much unnecessary labour. These
words — per 7Jolu7itatein — as they immediately follow sine dec dicere
nihil fieri — "to say that without God nothing is made" — were
connected with the preceding clause. To get rid of the nonsense thus,
created, LB. emended ^r/ . . . vohmtate — "without God's will;"
while Heraldus regards them as an explanation of sitie dco, and
therefore interprets the sentence much as LB. Orelli gets rid of the
difficulty by calling them a gloss, and bracketing them. They are,
however, perfectly in place, as will be seen above.

U PI.

'5 It would not' be easy to understand why Orelli omitted these:
words, if we did not know that they had been accidentally omitted by
Oberthiir also.


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


455


nothing proceeds from God Supreme which is
hurtful and pernicious. This we are assured of,
this we know, on this one truth of knowledge and
science we take our stand, — that nothing is made
by Him except that which is for the well-being
of all, which is agreeable, which is very full of
love and joy and gladness, which has unbounded
and imperishable pleasures, which every one may
ask in all his prayers to befall him, and think
that otherwise ' life is pernicious and fatal.

56. As for all the other things which are usu-
ally dwelt upon in inquiries and discussions —
from what parents they have sprung, or by whom
they are produced — we neither strive to know,^
nof care to inquire or examine : we leave all
things to their own causes, and do not consider
that they have been connected and associated
with that which we desire should befall us.^ For
what is there which men of ability do not dare
to overthrow, to destroy, •♦ from love of contra-
diction, although that which they attempt to
invalidate is unobjectionable 5 and manifest, and
evidently bears the stamp of truth? Or what,
again, can they not maintain with plausible argu-
ments, although it may be very manifestly untrue,
although it may be a plain and evident falsehood ?
For when a man has persuaded himself that
there is or is not something, he likes to affirm
what he thinks, and to show greater subtlety
than others, especially if the subject discussed
is out of the ordinary track, and by nature
abstruse and obscure.^ Some of the wise think
that the world was not created, and will never
perish ; ^ some that it is immortal, although
they say that it was created and made ; ^
while a third party have chosen to say that
it both was created and made, and will perish
as other things must.9 And while of these
three opinions one only must be true, they nev-
ertheless all find arguments by which at once to

' Lit., " that apart from these it is pernicious."

2 It must be observed that this sentence is very closely connected
with the last words of the preceding chapter, or the meaning may be
obscured. The connection may be shown thus: This one thing —
that God is author of no evil — we are assured of; but as for all other
questions, we neither know, nor care to know, about them.

3 This seems the most natural arrangement: but the edd. punc-
tuate thus: " have been connected and associated with us for that
which we desire." The last part of the sentence is decidedly ob-
scure: but the meaning may perhaps be, that the circumstances of
man's life which absorb so much attention and cause such strife, have
no bearing, after all, upon his salvation.

* So the MS., reading labe_factare dissolverc; the latter word,
however, being marked as spurious.

5 Lit., " pure."

*" Lit., "hidden and enwrapt in darkness of nature," abdita et
caligute involuta nattirei, — the reading of all edd. except Hild. and
Oehler, who follow the MS. abditce cal. — " enwrapt in darkness of
hidden nature."

' This has been supposed to refer to Heraclitus, as quoted by
Clem. Ale.x., Stroinata, v. p. 469 B., where his words are, " Neither
God nor man made the world: but there was always, and is, and will
be, an undying flame laying hold of its limits, and destroying them; "
on which cf. p. 437. n. 8, supra. Here, of course, fire does not mean
that perceived by the senses, but a subtle, all-penetrating energy.

^ Cf ch. 52, p. 453.

9 Lit., "by ordinary necessity." The Stoics (Diog. Laert., vii.
134) said that the world was made by God working on uncreated
matter, and that it was perishable (§ 141), because made through
that of which perception could take cognizance. Cf. ch. 31, n. 9,
p. 446.


uphold their own doctrines, and undermine and
overthrow the dogmas of others. Some teach
and declare that this same world is composed
of four elements, others of two,'° a third party of
one ; some say that // is composed of none of
these, and that atoms are that from which it is
formed," and its primary origin. And since of
these opinions only one is true, but "^ not one
of them certain, here too, in like manner, argu-
ments present themselves to all with which they
may both establish the truth of what they say,
and show that there are some things false '^ in
the others' opinions. So, too, some utterly deny
the existence of the gods ; others say that they
are lost in doubt as to whether they exist any-
where ; others, however, say that they do exist,
but do not trouble themselves about human
things ; nay, others maintain that they both take
part in the affairs of men, and guide the course
of earthly events.''*

5 7. While, then, this is the case, and it can-
not but be that only one of all these opinions
is true, they all nevertheless make use of argu-
ments in striving with each other, — and not one
of them is without something plausible to say,
whether in affirming his own views, or objecting
to the opinions of others. In exactly the same
way is the condition of souls discussed. For
this one thinks that they both are immortal, and
survive the end of our earthly life ; that one be-
lieves that they do not survive, but perish with
the bodies themselves : the opinion of another,
however, is that they suffer nothing immediately,
but that, after the form of man has been laid
aside, they are allowed to live a little longer,'^
and then come under the power of death. And
while all these opinions cannot be alike true,
yet all who hold them so support their case by
strong and very weighty arguments, that you can-
not find out anything which seems false to you,
although on every side you see that things are
being said altogether at variance with each other,
and inconsistent from their opposition to each
other ; '^ which assuredly would not happen, if
man's curiosity could reach any certainty, or if
that which seemed to one to have been really


'° Orelli thinks that there is here a confusion of the parts of the
world with its elements, because he can nowhere find that any phi-
losopher has fixed the number of the elements either above or below
four. The Stoics, however (Diog. Laert. , vii. 134), said "that the
elements (apxa?) of the world are two — the active and passive;"
while, of course, the cosmic theories of the early philosophers aflSrm
that the world sprang from one, and it seems clear enough that Ar-
nobius here uses the word " element " in this sense.

'' Lit., " its material."

I- .\ conjecture of Meursius adopted by Oehler, merely dropping
7c from aiit — " or," which is read in the MS. and edd.

'3 Lit., " refute falsities placed."

■■* Cf. Cicero, de Nat. Dear., i. i, 12, 19, 23, etc.

'5 Lit., " something IS given to them to life." So the Stoics taught,
although Chrysippus (cf. n. 9, ch. 31, p. 446) held that only the souls
of the wise remained at all after death.

'6 The MS., first four edd., and Oehler read ct rerutn contrarie-
tatibus dissonare — " and that they disagree from the oppositions of
things." Hild. reads dissonora^ a word not met with elsewhere, while
the other edd. merely drop the last two letters, -re, as above; a read-
ing suggested in the margin of Ursinus.


456


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


discovered, was attested by the approval of all
the others. It is therefore wholly ' vain, a use-
less task, to bring forward something as though
you knew it, or to wish to assert that you know
that which, although it should be true, you see
can be refuted ; or to receive that as true which
it may be is not, and is brought forward as
if by m.en raving. And it is rightly so, for we
do not weigh and guess at^ divine things by
divine, but by human methods ; and just as we
think that anything should have been made, so
we assert that it must be.

58. What, then, are we alone ignorant? do we
alone not know who is the creator, who the form-
er of souls, what cause fashioned man, whence
ills have broken forth, or why the Supreme Ruler
allows them both to exist and be perpetrated,
and does not drive them from the world? have
you, indeed, ascertained and learned any of
these things with certainty? If you chose to
lay aside audacious ^ conjectures, can you unfold
and disclose whether this world in which we
dwelH was created or founded at some time?
if it was founded and made, by what kind of
work, pray, or for what purpose ? Can you bring
forward and disclose the reason why it does not
remain fixed and immoveable, but is ever being
carried round in a circular motion? whether it
revolves of its own will and choice, or is turned
by the influence of some power ? what the place,
too, and space is in which it is set and revolves,
boundless, bounded, hollow, ors solid? whether
it is supported by an axis resting on sockets at
its extremities, or rather itself sustains by its own
power, and by the spirit within it upholds itself?
Can you, if asked, make it clear, and show most
skilfully,^ what opens out the snow into feathery
flakes ? what was the reason and cause that day
did not, in dawning, arise in the west, and veil
its light in the east? how the sun, too, by one
and the same influence, ^ produces results so dif-
ferent, nay, even so opposite ? what the moon is,
what the stars? why, on the one hand, it does
not remain of the same shape, or why it was
right and necessary that these particles of fire
should be set all over the world ? why some ^ of
them are small, others large and greater, — these
have a dim light, those a more vivid and shining
brightness ?


' Lit., " a most vain thing," etc.

- So the MS., LB., Elmenh., Hild., and Oehler, reading coiijccta-
»«?<j, the other edd. reading cominetamiir or -itniir —" mea%ure,"
e.\cept Gelenius and Canterus, who read cointnentajiiur — " muse
upon."

•5 Lit., " audacity of."

^ Lit., " world which holds us."

5 The first five edd. insert the mark of interrogation after " hol-
low: " " Whether does a solid a.xis," etc.

6 So the edd. except. Hild., who retains the MS. reading in scien-
tissiDie — " most unskilfully" (the others omitting z'«-), and Oehler,
who changes e into / — " and being most witless show," etc.

7 Lit., " touch."

^ So the later edd., reading from the margin of Ursinus _/?^i" .?
cur alia, for the MS. _^g'?eraiia, except LB., which leads _^£^urari
— " be formed."


59. If that which it has pleased us to know is
within reach, and if such knowledge is open to
all, declare to us,9 and say how and by what
means showers of rain are produced, so that
water is held suspended in the regions above and
in mid-air, although by nature it is apt to glide
away, and so ready to flow and run downwards.
Explain, I say, and tell what it is which sends
the hail whirling through the air, which makes
the rain fall drop by drop, which has spread out
rain and feathery flakes of snow and sheets of
lightning ; '° whence the wind rises, and what it
is ; why the changes of the seasons were estab-
lished, when it might have been ordained that
there should be only one, and one kind of cH-
mate, so that there should be notliing wanting
to the world's completeness. What is the cause,
what the reason, that the waters of the sea are
salt ; " or that, of those on land, some are sweet,
others bitter or cold ? From what kind of mate-
rial have the inner parts of men's bodies been
formed and built up into firmness ? From what
have their bones been made solid? what made
the intestines and veins shaped like pipes, and
easily passed through ? Why, when it would be
better to give us light by several eyes, to guard
against the risk of blindness, are we restricted
to two ? For what purpose have so infinite and
innumerable kinds of monsters and serpents been
either formed or brought forth ? what purpose do
owls serve in the world, — falc jns, hawks ? what
other birds '^ and winged creatures ? what the dif-
ferent kinds of ants and worms springing up to
be a bane and pest in various ways? what fleas,
obtrusive flies, spiders, shrew, and other mice,
leeches, water-spinners ? what thorns, briers, wild-
oats, tares ? what the seeds of herbs or shrubs,
either sweet to the nostrils, or disagreeable in
smell? Nay more, if you think that anything
can be known or comprehended, say what wheat
is, — spelt, barley, millet, the chick-pea, bean,
lentil, melon, cumin, scallion, leek, onion? For
even if they are useful to you, and are ranked
among the different kinds of food, it is not a
light or easy thing to know what each is, — why
they have been formed with such shapes ; whether
there was any necessity that they should not have
had other tastes, smells, and colours than those
which each has, or whether they could have taken
others also ; further, what these very things are,
— taste, I mean, '3 and the rest; and from what
relations they derive their differences of quality.
From the elements, you say, and from the first
beginnings of things. Are the elements, then,


i So the MS.; but all edd. except Hild. and Oehler omit nobis.

'' So the MS., read'vng/olgora dilatarit, followed by LB.

" Salsa, corrected from the MS. sola.

'- Alitcs et z'olucrcs ; i.e., according to Orelli, the birds from
whose flight auguries were drawn, as opposed to the others.

'3 So Heraldus, whose punctuation also is here followed, omitting

id est sap07 " that is, taste," which Meursius and LB., followed

by Orelli, amend, ut est — " as taste is " in each thing.


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


457


bitter or sweet ? have they any odour or ' stench,
that we should beheve that, from their uniting,
quaUties were implanted in their products by
which sweetness is produced, or something pre-
pared offensive to the senses?

60. Seeing, then, that the origin, the cause,
the reason of so many and so important things,
escapes you yourselves also, and th^t you can
neither say nor explain what has been made, nor
why and wherefore it should not have been other-
wise, do you assail and attack our timidity, who
confess that we do not know that which cannot
be known, and who do not care to seek out and
inquire into those things which it is quite clear
cannot be understood, although human conjec-
ture should extend and spread itself through a
thousand hearts? And therefore Christ the di-
vine, — although you are unwilling to allow it, —
Christ the divine, I repeat, for this must be said
often, that the ears of unbelievers may burst and
be rent asunder, speaking in the form of man
by command of the Supreme God, because He
knew that men are naturally - blind, and cannot
grasp the truth at all, or regard as sure and cer-
tain what they might have persuaded themselves
as to things set before their eyes, and do not
hesitate, for the sake of their ^ conjectures, to
raise and bring up questions that cause much
strife, — bade us abandon and disregard all these
things of which you speak, and not waste our
thoughts upon things which have been removed
far from our knowledge, but, as much as possi-
ble, seek the Lord of the universe with the
whole mind and spirit ; be raised above these
subjects, and give over to Him our hearts, as
yet hesitating whither to turn ; ■* be ever mind-
ful of Him ; and although no imagination can set
Him forth as He is, 5 yet form some faint con-
ception of Him. For Christ said that, of all
who are comprehended in the vague notion of
what is sacred and divine,^ He alone is beyond
the reach of doubt, alone true, and one about
whom only a raving and reckless madman can
be in doubt ; to know whom is enough, although
you have learned nothing besides ; and if by
knowledge you have indeed been related to ^
God, the head of the world, you have gained
the true and most important knowledge.


' Ve/ is here inserted in all edd., most of which read, as above,
oloris, which is found in the MS., in later writing, for the original,
coloris — " colour," retained by Ursinus, LB., and Oehler.

^ Lit., " that the nature of man is."

3 So the MS., according to Crusius, reading ne'e pro sm's ; while,
according to Hild., the reading is prorsns — " and are utterly with-
out hesitation," adopted in the edd. with the substitution of et for 7iee
— " and that they altogether hesitate," which, besides departing from
the MS., runs counter to the sense.

* Lit., " transfer to Him the undecided conversions of the
breast."

5 Lit., " He can be formed by no imagination."

'' Lit., " which the obscurity of sacred divinity contains; " which
Orelli interprets, " the most exalted being holds concealed from mor-
tals."

7 Lit., " and being fi.\ed on."


61. What business of yours is it, He^ says, to
examine, to inquire who made man ; what is the
origin of souls ; who devised the causes of ills ;
whether the sun is larger than the earth, or meas-
ures only a foot in breadth : ^ whether the moon
shines with borrowed light, or from her own
brightness, — things which there is neither profit
in knowing, nor loss in not knowing? Leave
these things to God, and allow Him to know
what is, wherefore, or whence ; whether it must
have been or not ; whether something always
existed, '° or whether it was produced at the first ;
whether it should be annihilated or preserved,
consumed, destroyed, or restored in fresh vig-
our. Your reason is not permitted to involve
you in such questions, and to be busied to no
purpose about things so much out of reach.
Your interests are in jeopardy, — the salvation, I
mean," of your souls ; and unless you give your-
selves to seek to know the Supreme God, a cruel
death awaits you when freed from the bonds of
body, not bringing sudden annihilation, but de-
stroying by the bitterness of its grievous and
long-protracted punishment.

62. And be not deceived or deluded with vain
hopes by that which is said by some ignorant
and most presumptuous pretenders,'^ that they
are born of God, and are not subject to the de-
crees of fate ; that His palace hes open to them
if they lead a life of temperance, and that after
death as men, they are restored without hin-
drance, as if to their father's abode ; nor by that
which the Magi '^ assert, that they have interces-
sory prayers, won over by which some powers
make the way easy to those who are striving to
mount to heaven ; nor hy that which Etruria
holds out in the Acherontic books,'* that souls
become divine, and are freed from the law 's of
death, if the blood of certain animals is offered
to certain deities. These are empty delusions,
and excite vain desires. None but the Almighty
God can preserve souls ; nor is there any one
besides who can give them length of days, and
grant to them also a spirit which shall never
die,'*^ except He who alone is immortal and ever-


8 i.e., Christ.

9 As Heraclitus is reported to have said.

'"^ The MS., first five edd., and Oehler xc.idsupert!atit7n, for which
the other edd. read, as above, semper ?iat!im, from the margin of
Ursinus. The soul is referred to.

" So the later edd., following Elmenhorst, who emended dico for
the MS. dici, omitted by the first four edd.

■- So most edd., reading scw/Ss, from the emendation of Gelenius;
but the MS., first five edd., Hild., and Oehler read seholis — "by
some schools, and (these) arrogating very much to themselves."

'■5 Cf. ch. 13, p. 439; riato, Rep.^ ii. £t. p. 364, where Glaucon
speaks of certain fortune-telling vagrant seers, who persuade the
rich that they have power with the gods, by means of charms and
sacrifices, to cleanse from guilt; and also Origen, contra Cels., i. 6g,
where the Magi are spoken of as being on familiar terms with evil
powers, and thus able to accomplish whatever is within these spirits'
power.

■* Mentioned by Servius (on j^n., viii. 399) as composed by Tages,
cap. 69 [p. 460, supra], and seemingly containing directions as to ex-
piatory sacrifices.

'' P'-

'f" Lit , '" a ^^pirit of perpetuity."


458


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


lasting, and restricted by no limit of time. For
since all the gods, whether those who are real,
or those who are merely said to be from hearsay
and conjecture, are immortal and everlasting by
His good-will and free gift, how can it be that
others ' are able to give that which they them-
selves have,^ while they have it as the gift of
another, bestowed by a greater power? Let
Etruria sacrifice what victims it may, let the wise
deny themselves all the pleasures of life,^ let the
Magi soften and soothe all lesser powers, yet,
unless souls have received from the Lord of all
things that which reason demands, and does so
by His command, it •♦ will hereafter deeply re-
pent having made itself a laughing-stock,^ when
it begins to feel the approach ^ of death.

63. But if, my opponents say, Christ was sent
by God for this end, that He might deliver un-
happy souls from ruin and destruction, of what
crime were former ages guilty which were cut
off in their mortal state before He came? Can
you, then, know what has become of these souls 7
of men who lived long ago?*^ whether they, too,
have not been aided, provided, and cared for in
some way? Can you, I say, know that which
could have been learned through Christ's teach-
ing ; whether the ages are unlimited in number
or not since the human race began to be on the
earth ; when souls were first bound to bodies ;
who contrived that binding,9 nay, rather, who
formed man himself; whither the souls of men
who lived before us have gone ; in what parts or
regions of the world they were ; whether they
were corruptible or not ; whether they could
have encountered the danger of death, if Christ
had not come forward as their preserver at their
time of need ? Lay aside these cares, and aban-
don questions to which you can find no answer. '°
The Lord's compassion has been shown to them,
too, and the divine kindness ' ' has been extended
to '- all alike ; they have been preserved, have
been delivered, and have laid aside the lot and
condition of mortality. Of what kind, my oppo-
nents ask, what, when? If you were free from
presumption, arrogance, and conceit, you might
have learned long ago from this teacher.

64. But, my opponents ask, if Christ came as


' i.e., than the Supreme God.

2 Lit., " are."

3 Lit., " all human things."

* i.e., reason.

5 The MS. reads _/7<?'.rj? v:e ristiz, which has no meaning; cor-
rected,y?^/.ri(? zm'sui'm most edd., and dcris2u' hy Meursius, Hild.,
and Oehler, — the sense being in either case as above.

^ Lit., " when it begins to approach to the feeling," cu7>i ad sen-
sum ; so read by Gelenius for the unintelligible ms. cum absens
cum.

' So the edd., reading quid sii cum eis aniviis actum for the
MS. cu7n ejus nimis.

* Lit., " of ancient and very old men."

9 So the MS., LB., Hild., and Oehler, reading vinctionis ; the
other edd. junctionis — " union."
'° Lit., " unknown questions."
■J PI.
'^ Lit., " has run over."


the Saviour of men, as '3 you say, why '* does He
not, with uniform benevolence, free all without
exception? / 7'eply, does not He free all alike
who invites all alike ? or does He thrust back or
repel any one from the kindness of the Supreme
who gives to all alike the power of coming to
Him, — to men of high rank, to the meanest
slaves, to women, to boys ? To all. He says, the
fountain of life is open.'s and no one is hindered
or kept back from drinking.'^ If you are so fas-
tidious as to spurn the kindly '^ offered gift, nay,
more, if your wisdom is so great that you term
those things which are offered by Christ ridicu-
lous and absurd, why should He keep on inviting'*
you, while His only duty is to make the enjoy-
ment of His bounty depend upon your own free
choice ? '9 God, Plato says, does not cause any
one to choose his lot in life ; -° nor can another's
choice be rightly attributed to any one, since
freedom of choice was put in His power who
made it. Must you be even implored to deign
to accept the gift of salvation from God ; and
must God's gracious mercy be poured into your
bosom while you reject it with disdain, and flee
very far from it ? Do you choose to take what is
offered, and turn it to your own advantage ? You
will in that case have consulted your own inter-
ests. Do you reject with disdain, hghtly esteem,
and despise it ? You will in this case have robbed
yourself of the benefit of the gift.^' God com-
pels no one, terrifies no one with overpowering
fear. For our salvation is not necessary to Him,
so that He would gain anything or suffer any
loss, if He either made us divine,^^ or allowed
us to be annihilated and destroyed by corrup-
tion.

65. Nay, my opponent says, if God is powerful,
merciful, willing to save us, let Him change our
dispositions, and compel us to trust in His prom-
ises, lliis, then, is violence, not kindness nor
the bounty of the Supreme God, but a childish


"3 So the MS. and Oehler, reading jit, which is omitted in all other
edd.; in this case, the words in italics are unnecessary.

'■< So Orelli, reading cur {tjuurm most edd.) for the MS. gnos.
Instead of )ion — " not," which follows, the MS., according to Oehler,
reads iios, and he therefore changes guos into queeso — " I ask, does
He free all of us altogether ? "

'5 There is clearly no reference here to a particular passage of
Scripture, but to the general tone of Christ's teaching: "Him that
Cometh unto me, I will in nowise cast out." Orelli, however, with
his usual infelicity, wishes to see a direct reference, either to Christ's
words to the woman of Samaria (John iv. 13-15), or, which is rather
extraordinary, to John vi. 35-37: " I am the bread of life," etc. Cf.
n. 9, p. 459.

■6 Lit., " the right of drmking.

'^^ Lit., " the kindness of."

^8 Lit., " what waits He for, inviting," qiiid invitans expectat ;
the reading of the ms., both Roman edd., and Oehler. Gelenius, fol-
lowed by Canterus and Elmcnhorst, changed the last word \x\\.o pcccat

— " in what does He sin," adopted by the other edd. , with the addition
of in tc — "against you."

'9 " Lit., " e.\poses under decision of your own right."

2° Cf Plato, Rep., ii. st. p. 379: "of a few things God would be
the cause, but of many He would not: " and x. st. p. 617 fin.

=' So LB., Orelli, Oehler, adopting the emendation of Ursinus, tu
te muncris comtnoditaie privaveris, for the unintelligible reading
of the MS., tuti m. c. frobaveris.

2^ i.e., immortal, deos, so corrected by Gelenius for the ms. dens

— " if either God made us."


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


459


and vain ' strife in seeking to get the mastery.
For what is so unjust as to force men who are
reluctant and unwilling, to reverse their inclina-
tions ; to impress forcibly on their minds what
they are unwilling to receive, and shrink from ; to
injure before benefiting, and to bring to another
way of thinking and feeling, by taking away the
former ? You who wish yourself to be changed,^
and to suffer violence, that you may do and may
be compelled to take to yourself that which you
do not wish, why do you refuse of your own
accord to select that which you wish to do, when
changed and transformed? I am unwilling. He
says, and have no wish. What, then, do you
blame' God as though He failed you? do you wish
Him to bring you help,^ whose gifts and bounties
you not only reject and shun, but term empty*
words, and assail with jocose witticisms ? Unless,
then, my opponent says, I shall be a Christian, I
cannot hope for salvation. It is just as you
yourself say. For, to bring salvation and impart
to souls what should be bestowed and must be
added, C/^m/ alone has had given into His charge
and entrusted 5 to Him by God the Father, the
remote and more secret causes being so disposed.
For, as with you, certain gods have fixed offices,
privileges, powers, and you do not ask from any
of them what is not in his power and permitted
to him, so it is the right of '^ Christ alone to give
salvation to souls, and assign them everlasting
life. For if you believe that father Bacchus can
give a good vintage, but cannot give relief from
sickness ; \{ you believe that Ceres can give good
crops, ^sculapius health, Neptune one thing,
Juno 7 another, that Fortune, Mercury, Vulcan,
are each the giver of a fixed and particular thing,
— this, too, you must needs receive from us,^
that souls can receive from no one life and sal-
vation, except from Him to whom the Supreme
Ruler gave this charge and duty. The ^^mighty
Master of the world has determined that this
should be the way of salvation, — this the door,
so to say, of life ; by Him 9 alone is there access
to the light : nor may men either creep in or
enter elsewhere, all other ways being shut up
and secured by an impenetrable barrier.


' So most edd., reading inanis for the MS. anijni ; retained, though
not very intelligible, in LB., while Hild. reads anilr's — " foolish."

^ So the MS. now reads verti ; but this word, according to Pithos-
us, is in a later handwriting, and some letters have been erased.

3 So the edd., reading tibi desit? opetii desidcras tibi, except
Hild. and Oehler, who retain the MS. reading, t. d. o. dcsideranti —
" as though He failed you desiring Him to bring help."

■* So Ursinus, reading in ania cognoi/iines for the MS. in alia,
which Orelli would interpret, " call the reverse of the truth."

5 Lit., " For the parts of bringing . . . has enjoined and given
ove.'s" partes . . . injjinctum habet et tradiimn, where it will be
important to notice that Arnobius, writing rapidly, had carried with
him only the general idea, and forgotten the mode m which this was
expressed.

* Pontificium.

'' Here, too, according to Pithoeus, there are signs of erasure.

8 i.e., admit.

9 This passage at once suggests John x. 9 and xiv. 6, and it is
therefore the more necessary to notice the way in which Arnobius
speaks (" so to say"), which is certainly not the tone of one quoting
a passage with which he is well acquainted. [Elucidation L]


66. So, then, even if you are pure, and have
been cleansed from every stain of vice, have
won over and charmed '° those powers not to
shut the ways against you and bar your passage
when returning to heaven, by no efforts will you
be able to reach the prize of nnmortality, unless
by Christ's gift you have perceived what consti-
tutes this very immortality, and have been al-
lowed to enter on the true Hfe. For as to that
with which you have been in the habit of taunt-
ing us, that our religion is new,'' and arose a few
days ago, almost, and that you could not aban-
don the ancient faith which you had inherited
from your fathers, and pass over to barbarous
and foreign rites, this is urged wholly without
reason. For what if in this way we chose to
blame tiie preceding, even the most ancient
ages, because when they discovered how to raise
crops,'^ they despised acorns, and rejected with
scorn the wild strawberry ; because they ceased
to be covered with the bark of trees and clad
in the hides of wild beasts, after that garments
of cloth were devised, more useful and con-
venient in wearing ; or because, when houses
were built, and more comfortable dwellings
erected, they did not cling to their ancient
huts, and did not prefer to remain under rocks
and caves like the beasts of the field? It is a
disposition possessed by all, and impressed on
us almost from our cradles even, to prefer good
things to bad, useful to useless things, and to
pursue and seek that with more pleasure which
has been generally regarded '^ as more than usu-
ally precious, and to set on that our hopes for
prosperity and favourable circumstances.

67. Therefore, when you urge against us that
we turn away from the religion '■* of past ages, it
is fitting that you should examine why it is done,
not what is done, and not set before you what
we have left, but observe especially what we
have followed. For if it is a fault or crime to
change an opinion, and pass from ancient cus-
toms to new conditions and desires, this accusa-
tion holds against you too, who have so often
changed your habits and mode of life, who have
gone over to other customs and ceremonies, so
that you are condemned by '5 past ages as well
as we. Do you indeed have the people dis-
tributed into five '^ classes, as your ancestors once
had ? Do you ever elect magistrates by vote of
the people ? Do you know what military, urban,,


1° Lit., "bent."

" Cf. i. 13 and 58.

'- Lit., " crops being invented."

'3 So the later edd., reading coiistiterit from the margin of Ursi-
nus; but in the MS. and first four edd. the reading is constituerit —
" has established," for which there is no subject.

'■* So the later edd., reading aversionem ex (LB., and preceding
edd. «) religione for the MS. et reUgionem — " against us the hatred
and rehgion of past ages."

•5 Lit., " with the condemnation of."

i& This shows that the division of the people into classes was obso-
lete in the time of Arnobius.


460


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


and common ' comitia are ? Do you watch the
sky, or put an end to pubhc business because
€vil omens are announced? When you are pre-
paring for war,- do you hang out a flag from the
citadel, or practise the forms of the Fetiales,
solemnly^ demanding the return of what has
been carried off? or, when encountering the
dangers of war, do you begin to hope also,
because of favourable omens from the points of
the spears ? ^ In entering on office, do you still
observe the laws fixing the proper times ? with
regard to gifts and presents to advocates, do you
vbserve the Cincian and the sumptuary laws in re-
stricting your expenses? Do you maintain fires,
ever burning, in gloomy sanctuaries ? 5 Do you
consecrate tables by putting on them salt-cellars
and images of the gods ? When you marry, do
you spread the couch with a toga, and invoke
the genii of husbands ? do you arrange the hair
of brides with the hasta ccelibaris ? do you bear
the maidens' garments to the temple of Fortuna
Virginalis? Do your matrons work in the halls of
your houses, showing their industry openly? do
they refrain from drinking wine ? are their friends
and relations allowed to kiss them, in order to
show that they are sober and temperate ?

68. On the Alban hill, it was not allowed in
ancient times to sacrifice any but snow-white
bulls : have you not changed that custom and
religious observance, and has it not been enacted
by decree of the senate, that reddish ones may
be offered ? While during the reigns of Romu-
lus and Pompilius the inner parts, having been
quite thoroughly cooked and softened, were
burnt up in sacrificing to the gods, did you not
begin, under, king Tullius,^ to hold them out
half-raw and slightly warm, paying no regard to
the former usage ? While before the arrival of
Hercules in Italy supplication was made to
father Dis and Saturn with the heads of men
by Apollo's advice ; have you not, in like man-
ner, changed this custom too, by means of
cunning deceit and ambiguous names ? ^ Since,
then, yourselves also have followed at one time
these customs, at another different laws, and
have repudiated and rejected many things on
either perceiving your mistakes or seeing some-
thing better, what have we done contrary to com-


' Turnebus has explained this as merely another way of saying the
comitia centuriata, curiata and tributa.

2 So the edd., reading cum paratis bella (Oehler reads refaran-
tes) for the MS. reparatis.

3 i.e. , per darigationem, the solemn declaration of war, if restitu-
tion was not made within thirty-three days.

* This seems the most natural way to deal with the clause ct ex
acujuinibus anspicaiis, looking on the last word as an adjective, not
a verb, as most edd. seem to hold it. There is great diversity of opin-
ion as to what this omen was.

5 The MS. reads z« penetralibus et coligi?iis. LB., followed by
Orelli, merely omits et, as above, while the first five edd. read iti
pL'ti. Vestce ignis — "do you maintain the hearths of Vesta's fire."
Many other readings and many explanations of the passage are also
proposed.

'' i.e., Servius TuUius. The first four edd. read Tullo, i.e., Tul-
lus Hosiilius.

7 Cf. V. c. I.


mon sense and the discretion all men have, if
we have chosen what is greater and more cer-
tain, and have not suffered ourselves to be held
back by unreasoning respect for impostures ?

69. But our name is new, we are told, and
the religion which we follow arose but a few
days ago. Granting for the present that what
you urge against us is not untrue, what is there,
/ would ask, among the affairs of men that is
either done by bodily exertion and manual
labour, or attained by the mind's learning and
knowledge, which did not begin at some time,
and pass into general use and practice since
then ? Medicine,^ philosophy, music, and all
the other arts by which social life has been built
up and refined, — were these born with men,
and did they not rather begin to be pursued,
understood, and practised lately, nay, rather, but
a short time since ? Before the Etruscan Tages
saw the 9 light, did any one know or trouble
himself to know and learn what meaning there
was in the fall of thunderbolts, or in the veins
of the victims sacrificed ? '° When did the mo-
tion of the stars or the art of calculating nativities
begin to be known ? Was it not after Theutis ' '
the Egyptian ; or after Atlas, as some say, the
bearer, supporter, stay, and prop of the skies ?

70. But why do I speak of these trivial things ?
The immortal gods themselves, whose temples
you now enter with 7-everence, whose deity you
suppliantly adore, did they not at certain times,
as is handed down by your writings and traditions,
begin to be, to be known and to be invoked by
names and titles which were given to them ? For
if it is true that Jupiter with his brothers was
born of Saturn and his wife, before Ops was mar-
ried and bore children Jupiter had not existed
both the Supreme and the Stygian,'^ no, nor the
lord of the sea, nor Juno, nay more, no one
inhabited the heavenly seats except the two par-
ents ; but from their union the other gods were
conceived and born, and breathed the breath of
life. So, then, at a certain time the god Jupiter
began to be, at a certain time to merit worship
and sacrifices, at a certain time to be set above
his brothers in power.'^ But, again, if Liber,
Venus, Diana, Mercury, Apollo, Hercules, the
Muses, the Tyndarian brothers,'^ and Vulcan the
lord of fire, were begotten by father Jupiter, and
born of a parent sprung from Saturn, before that
Memory, Alcmena, Maia, Juno, Latona, Leda,
Dione, and Semele also bore children to Dies-


I


^ The MS. reads edi in filosophin ; the first four edd., Philos.;
Elmenh. and Orelli, Etcnim phil. — '' For were phil. ; " LB. , Ede an
pliil. — " say whether phil.," which is, however, faulty in construc-
tion, as the indicative follows. Rigaltius, followed by Oehler, emended
as above, Medicina phil.

9 Lit., " reached the coasts of."

'^ Lit., "of the intestines" — extorum.

'I In both Roman edd., 7y2^?<^a^<?;«, i.e., Theutas. Cf. Plato, /'/tt?-
dnts, St. p. 274.

'- i.e., Pluto.

"PI.

'•• Lit., " Castors," i.e., Castor and Pollux.


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


461


piter ; these deities, too, were nowhere in the
world, nor in any part of the universe, but by
Jupiter's embraces they were begotten and born,
and began to have some sense of their own ex-
istence. So then, these, too, began to be at a
certain time, and to be summoned among the
gods to the sacred rites. This we say, in hke
manner, of Minerva. For if, as you assert, she
burst forth from Jupiter's head ungenerated,' be-
fore Jupiter was begotten, and received in his
mother's womb the shape and outhne of his
body," it is quite certain that Minerva did not
exist, and was not reckoned among things or as
existing at all ; but from Jove's head she was
born, and began to have a real existence. She
therefore has an origin at the first, and began to
be called a goddess at a certain time, to be set
up in temples, and to be consecrated by the in-
violable obligations of religion. Now as this is
the case, when you talk of the novelty of our re-
ligion, does your own not come into your thoughts,
and do you not take care to examine when your
gods sprung up, — what origins, what causes they
have, or from what stocks they have burst forth
and sprung? But how shameful, how shameless
it is to censure that in another which you see
that you do yourself, — to take occasion to re-
vile and accuse others for things which can be
retorted upon you in turn !

7 1 . But our rites are ^ new ; yours are ancient,
and of excessive antiquity, we are told. And
what help does that give you, or how does it
damage our cause and argument? The beliefs
which we hold is new ; some day even it, too,
will become old : yours is old ; but when it
arose, it was new and unheard of. The credi-
bility of a religion, however, must not be deter-
mined by its age, but by its divinity ; and you
should consider not when, but what you began
to worship. Four hundred years ago, my op-
ponent says, your religion did not exist. And
two thousand years ago, / reply, your gods did
not exist. By what reckoning, you ask, or by
what calculations, can that be inferred? They
are not difficult, not intricate, but can be seen
by any one who will take them in hand even, as
the saying is. Who begot Jupiter and his broth-
ers ? Saturn with Ops, as you relate, sprung from
Coelus and Hecate. Who begot Picus, the father
of Faunus and grandfather of Latinus ? Saturn,
as you again hand down by your books and teach-
ers? Therefore, if this is the case, Picus and
Jupiter are in consequence united by the bond
of kinship, inasmuch as they are sprung from one
stock and race. It is clear, then, that what we
say is true. How many steps are there in com-


i.e., shie ullius se^ninis jactu.

Lit., " forms of bodily circumscription."

Lit., " what we do is."

Lit., " thing."


ing downs from Jupiter and Picus' to Latinus?
Three, as the line of succession shows. Will you
suppose Faunus, Latinus, and Picus to have each
lived a hundred and twenty years, for beyond
this it is affirmed that man's life cannot be pro-
longed ? The estimation is well grounded and clear.
There are, then, three hundred and sixty years,
after these ?*" It is just as the calculation shows.
Whose father-in-law was Latinus ? .Eneas'.
Whose father was he ? ^ He was father of the
founder of the town Alba. How many years
did kings reign in Alba? Four hundred and
twenty almost. Of what age is the city Rome
shown to be in the annals ? It reckons ten '^ hun-
dred and fifty years, or not much less. So, then,
from Jupiter, who is the brother of Picus and
father of the other and lesser gods, down to the
present time, there are nearly, or to add a little
to the time, altogether, two thousand years. Now
since this cannot be contradicted, not only is the
religion to which you adhere shown to have
sprung up lately ; but // is also shown that the
gods themselves, to whom you heap up bulls and
other victims at the risk of bringing on disease,
are young and little children, who should still be
fed with their mothers' milk.9

72. But your religion precedes ours by many
years, and is therefore, you say, truer, because it
has been supported by the authority of antiquity.
And of what avail is it that it should precede
ours as many years as you please, since it began
at a certain time ? or what '° are two thousand
years, compared with so many thousands of ages ?
And yet, lest we should seem to betray our cause
by so long neglect, say, if it does not annoy you,
does the Almighty and Supreme God seem to you
to be something new ; and do those who adore
and worship Him seem to you to support and
introduce an unheard-of, unknown, and upstart
religion ? Is there anything older than Him ? or
can anything be found preceding Him in being,"
time, name? Is not He alone uncreated, im-
mortal, and everlasting? Who is the head '^ and
fountain of things ? is not He ? To whom does
eternity owe its name? is it not to Him? Is
it not because He is everlasting, that the ages
go on without end ? This is beyond doubt, and
true : the religion which we follow is not new,
then, but we have been late in learning what we
should follow and revere, or where we should

5 Lit., " how many steps are there of race."

6 i.e., Jupiter and Picus.

7 The MS. reads genitor . . . Latinus cujns, some letters hav-
ing been erased. The reading followed above — genitor is cujns —
was suggested to Canterus by his friend Gifanius, and is found in the
margin of Ursinus and Orelli.

8 Cf. above, " four hundred years ago," etc., and i. ch. 13. It is
of importance to note that Arnobius is inconsistent in these state-
ments. [In the Edinburgh edition we have here " fifteen hundred
years;" but it was changed, in the Errata, to ten hundred and fifty.]

9 Lit., " be nursed with the breasts and dropt milk."
'° Lit., " of what space."

" i.e., re.

'2 So the MS., according to Crusius and Livineius, reading ac ; all
edd. except Oehler read aut — " head (i.e., source) or fountain."


462


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


both fix our hope of salvation, and employ the aid
given to save us. For He had not yet shone forth
who was to point out the way to those wandering
from it, and give the light of knowledge to those
who were lying in the deepest darkness, and dis-
pel the blindness of their ignorance.

73. But are we alone in this position ? ■ What !
have you not introduced into the number of
your gods the Egyptian deities named Serapis
and Isis, since the consulship of Piso and Gabi-
nius ? ^ What ! did you not begin both to know
and be acquainted with, and to worship with re-
markable honours, the Phrygian mother — who,
it is said, was first set up as a goddess by Midas
or Dardanus — when Hannibal, the Carthagin-
ian, was plundering Italy and aiming at the em-
pire of the world ? ^ Are not the sacred rites of
mother Ceres, which were adopted but a little
while ago, called Graeca because they were un-
known to you, their name bearing witness to
their novelty ? Is it not said ^ in the writings of
the learned, that the rituals of Numa Pompilius
do not contain the name of Apollo? Now it is
clear and manifest from this, that he, too, was un-
known to you, but that at some time afterwards
he began to be known also. If any one, there-
fore, should ask you why you have so lately be-
gun to worship those deities whom we mentioned
just now, it is certain that you will reply, either
because we were //// lately not aware that they
were gods, or because we have now been warned
by the seers, or because, in very trying circum-
stances, we have been preserved by their favour
and help. But if you think that this is well said
by you, you must consider that, on our part, a
similar reply has been made. Our religion has
sprung up just now ; for now He has arrived who
was sent to declare it to us, to bring us to its
truth ; to show what God is ; to summon us from
mere conjectures, to His worship.

74. And why, my opponent says, did God, the
Ruler and Lord of the universe, determine that a
Saviour, Christ, should be sent to you from the
heights of heaven a few hours ago, as it is said ?
We ask you too, on the other hand, what cause,
what reason is there that the seasons sometimes
do not recur at their own months, but that win-
ter, summer, and autumn come too late? why,
after the crops have been dried up and the corn 5
has perished, showers sometimes fall which should


' The MS. reads unintelligibly vcrtitur salts; for which LB., fol-
lowed by tha later edd., reads, as above, vertimur soli.

2 Dr. Schmitz ^'Smith's Dici.,^, v. Isis) speaks of these consuls as
heading the revolt against the decree of the senate, that the statues of
Isis and S»rapis should be removed from the Capitol. The words of
Tertullian (quoting Varro as his authority) are very distinct: "The
consul Gabinius . . . gave more weight to the decision of the senate
than the popular impulse, and forbade their altars (i.e., those of Sera-
pis, Isis, Arpocrates, and Anubis) to be set up" {ad Naiiones, i. lo,
cf Apol.,(>).

■5 Cf. vii. 49.

* Lit., " contained."

s PI.


have dropped on them while yet uninjured, and
made provision for the wants of the time ? Nay,
this we rather ask, why, if it were fitting that
Hercules should be born, ^sculapius. Mercury,
Liber, and some others, that they might be both
added to the assemblies of the gods, and might
do men some service, — why they were produced
so late by Jupiter, that only later ages should
know them, while the past ages ^ of those who
went before knew them not ? You will say that
there was some reason. There was then some
reason here also that the Saviour of our race
came not lately, but to-day. What, then, you
ask, is the reason ? We do not deny that we do
not know. For it is not within the power of
any one to see the mind of God, or the way in
which He has arranged His plans.^ Man, a
blind creature, and not knowing himself even,
can ** in no way learn what should happen, when,
or what its nature is : the Father Himself, the
Governor and Lord of all, alone knows. Nor,
if I have been unable to disclose to you the
causes why something is done in this way or
that, does it straightway follow, that what has
been done becomes not done, and that a thing
becomes incredible, which has been shown to be
beyond doubt by such^ virtues and '° powers.

75. You may object and rejoin, Why was the
Saviour sent forth so late ? In unbounded, eter-
nal ages, we reply, nothing whatever should be
spoken of as late. For where there is no end
and no beginning, nothing is too soon," nothing
too late. For time is perceived from its begin-
nings and endings, which an unbroken line and
endless '^ succession of ages cannot have. For
what if the things themselves to which it was
necessary to bring help, required that as a fitting
time? For what if the condition of antiquity
was different from that of later times ? What if
it was necessary to give help to the men of old
in one way, to provide for their descendants in
another? Do ye not hear your own writings
read, telling that there were once men who
were demi-gods, heroes with immense and huge
bodies? Do you not read that infants on their
mothers' breasts shrieked like Stentors,'^ whose
bones, when dug up in different parts of the


6 Lit., " antiquity."
^ Lit., " things."

8 So Gelenius emended the MS., reading /oto/j — "being able,"
which he changed into potest, as above, followed by later edd.

9 Lit., " by such kinds of"

■° The MS. and first edd. read et potestatibns potestatiitn — "and
by powers of powers; " the other edd. merely omit potestatibus, as
above, except Oehler, who, retaining it, changes potestatuni into
protestata — "being witnessed to by," etc.; but there is no instance
adduced in which the participle of this verb is used passively.

" These words having been omitted by Oberthiir, are omitted by
Orelli also, as in previous instances.

I- The MS. and first ed. read etiani moderata continuatio ; cor-
rected, et immod. con. by Gelenius.

^3 So the edd., reading infantes stentoreos, except Oehler, who
retains the ms. reading centcnarios, which he explains as " having a
hundred" heads or hands, as the case might be, e.g., Typhon, Bria-
reus, etc.


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


463


earth, have made the discoverers almost doubt
that they were the remains of human Umbs?
So, then, it may be that Ahnighty God, the only
God, sent forth Christ then indeed, after that the
human race, becoming feebler, weaker, began to
be such as we are. If that which has been done
now could have been done thousands of years
ago, the Supreme Ruler would have done it ; or
if it had been proper, that what has been done
now should be accomplished as many thousands
after this, nothing compelled God to anticipate
the necessary lapse ' of time. His plans ^ are
executed in fixed ways ; and that which has
been once decided on, can in no wise be changed
again. 2'

76. Inasmuch then, you say, as you serve the
xAlmighty God, and trust that He cares for your
safety and salvation, why does He suffer you to
be exposed to such storms of persecution, and
to undergo all kinds of punishments and tor-
tures? Let us, too, ask in reply, why, seeing
that you worship so great and so innumerable
gods, and build temples to them, fashion images
of gold, sacrifice herds of animals, and all heap
up •* boxfuls of incense on the already loaded
altars, why you live subject to so many dangers
and storms of calamity, with which many fatal
misfortunes vex you every day? Why, I say, do
your gods neglect to avert from you so many
kinds of disease and sickness, shipwrecks, down-
falls, conflagrations, pestilences, barrenness, loss
of children, and confiscation of goods, discords,
wars, enmities, captures of cities, and the slavery
of those who are robbed of their rights of free
birth ? 5 But, my opponent says, in such mis-
chances we, too, are in no wise helped by God.
The cause is plain and manifest. For no hope
has been held out to us with respect to this life,
nor has any help been promised or'^ aid decreed
us for what belongs to the husk of this flesh, —
nay, more, we have been taught to esteem and
value lightly all the threats of fortune, whatever
they be ; and if ever any very grievous calamity
has assailed us, to count as pleasant in that mis-
fortune 7 the end which must follow, and not to
fear or flee from it, that we may be the more


I Lit., " measure."

^ Lit., " things."

3 Lit., " can be changed with no novelty."

■* Lit., " provide," con/iciatis,vih.\c\\, however, some would un-
derstand " consume."

5 Lit., " slaveries, their free births being taken away."

^ Lit., " and."

7 So the MS., first five edd., Hild., and Oehler, reading ad-
scribere injortunio vohiptatem, which is omitted in the other edd.
as a gloss which may have crept in from the margin.


easily released from the bonds of the body, and
escape from our darkness and ^ blindness.

77. Therefore that bitterness of persecution of
which you speak is our deliverance and not per-
secution, and our ill-treatment will not bring evil
upon us, but will lead us to the light of liberty.
As if some senseless and stupid fellow were to
think that he never punished a man who had
been put into prison 9 with severity and cruelty,
unless he were to rage against the very prison,
break its stones in pieces, and burn its roof, its
wall, its doors ; and strip, overthrow, and dash
to the ground its other parts, not knowing that
thus he was giving light to him whom he seemed
to be injuring, and was taking from him the ac-
cursed darkness : in like manner, you too, by the
flames, banishments, tortures, and monsters with
which you tear in pieces and rend asunder our
bodies, do not rob us of life, but relieve us of
our skins, not knowing that, as far as you assault and
seek to rage against these our shadows and forms,
so far you free us from pressing and heavy chains,
and cutting our bonds, make us fly up to the light.

78. Wherefore, O men, refrain from obstruct-
ing what you hope for by vain questions ; nor
should you, if anything is otherwise than you
think, trust your own opinions rather than that
which should be reverenced. '° The times, full of
dangers, urge us, and fatal penalties threaten us ;
let us flee for safety to God our Saviour, without
demanding the reason of the offered gift. When
that at stake is our souls' salvation and our own
interests, something must be done even without
reason, as Arrhianus approves of Epictetus having
said." We doubt, we hesitate, and suspect the
credibility of what is said ; let us commit our-
selves to God, and let not our incredulity prevail
more with us than the greatness of His name
and power, lest, while we are seeking out argu-
ments for ourselves, through which that may
seem false which we do not wish and deny to be
true, the last day steal upon us, and we be found
in the jaws of our enemy, death.


^ Lit., " our dark."

9 The MS. and both Roman edd. read in carcerem natutn I'ttc-
gressum ; LB. and later edd. have received from the margin of
Ursinus the reading translated above, datum, omitting the last word
altogether, which Oehler, however, would retain as equivalent to
" not to be passed from."

'° Lit., " than an august thing."

■' Orelli refers to Arrh., i. 12; but the doctrine there insisted on is
the necessity of submission to what is unavoidable. Oehler, in addi-
tion, refers to Epict., xxxii. 3, where, however, it is merely attempted
to show that when anything is withheld from us, it is just as goods
are unless paid for, and that we have therefore no reason to complain.
Neither passage can be referred to here, and it seems as though
Arnobius has made a very loose reference which cannot be specially
identified.


464


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


BOOK III.


1. All these charges, then, which might truly
be better termed abuse, have been long answered
with sufficient fulness and accuracy by men of
distinction in this respect, and worthy to have
learned the truth ; and not one point of any
inquiry has been passed over, without being
determined in a thousand ways, and on the
strongest grounds. We need not, therefore, lin-
ger further on this part of the case. For neither
is the Christian religion unable to stand though
it found no advocates, nor will it be therefore
proved true if it found many to agree with it,
and gained weight through its adherents.' Its
own strength is sufficient for it, and it rests on
the foundations of its own truth, without losing
its power, though there were none to defend it,
nay, though all voices assailed and opposed it,
and united with common rancour to destroy all
faith ^ in it.

2. Let us now return to the order from which
we were a little ago compelled to diverge, that
our defence may not, through its being too long
broken off, be said to have given our detractors
cause to triumph in the establishing of their
charge. For they propose these questions : If
you are in earnest about religion, why do you
not serve and worship the other gods with us, or
share your sacred rites with your fellows, and
put the ceremonies of the different religions on
an equality ? We may say for the present : In
essaying to approach the divine, the Supreme
Deity ^ suffices us, — the Deity, I say, who is
supreme, the Creator and Lord of the universe,
who orders and rules all things : in Him we serve
all that requires our service ; in Him we worship
all that should be adored, — venerate** that which
demands the homage of our reverence. For as
we lay hold of the source of the divine itself,
from which the very divinity of all gods whatever
is derived, 5 we think it an idle task to approach
each personally, since we neither know who they
are, nor the names by which they are called ;
and are further unable to learn, and discover,
and establish their number.

3. And as in the kingdoms of earth we are in
no wise constrained expressly to do reverence


' The MS., followed by Oehler, reads neque enim res stare . . .
non potest, Christiana religio ^k^ — " for neither can a thing not
stand, . . . nor will the Christian religion," etc., while L.B. merely
changes aut into et — " for neither can a thing, i e., the Christian re-
ligion, . . . nor will it," etc. All other edd. read as above, omitting
et.

^ According to Crusius and others, the MS. reads finem ; but,
according to iiild. , _^tiem , as above.

^ Deits prinncs, according to Nourry, in relation to Christ; but
manifestly from the scope of the chapter, God as the fountain and
source of all things.

* Lit., " propitiate with venerations."

5 So the MS., reading ditcitnr ; for which Oberthiir, followed by
Orelli, reads dicitur — " is said."


to those who form the royal family as well as
to the sovereigns, but whatever honour belongs to
them is found to be tacitly^ implied in the hom-
age offered to the kings themselves ; in just the
same way, these gods, whoever they be, for whose
existence you vouch, if they are a royal race, and
spring from the Supreme Ruler, even though we
do not expressly do them reverence, yet feel that
they are honoured in common with their Lord,
and share in the reverence shown to Him. Now
// must he remembei-ed that we have made this
statement, on the hypothesis only that it is clear
and undeniable, that besides the Ruler and Lord.
Himself, there are still other beings, ^ who, when
arranged and disposed in order, form, as it were,
a kind of plebeian* mass. But do not seek to
point out to us pictures instead of gods in your
temples, and the images which you set up, for
you too know, but are unwilling and refuse to
admit, that these are formed of most worthless
clay, and are childish figures made by mechanics.
And when we converse with you on religion, we
ask you to prove this, that there are other gods
than the one Supreme Deity in nature, power,
name, not as we see them manifested in images,
but in such a substance as it might fittingly be
supposed that perfection of so great dignity
should reside.

4. But we do not purpose delaying further on
this part of the subject, lest we seem desirous to
stir up most violent strife, and engage in agitat-
ing contests.

Let there be, as you affirm, that crowd of
deities, let there be numberless families of gods ;
we assent, agree, and do not examine too closely,
nor in any part of the subject do we assail
the doubtful and uncertain positions you hold.
This, however, we demand, and ask you to tell
us, whence you have discovered, or how you
have learned, whether there are these gods,^
whom you believe to be in heaven and serve, or
some others unknown by reputation and name ?
For it may be that beings exist whom you do
not believe to do so ; and that those of whose
existence you feel assured, are found nowhere in
the universe. For you have at no time been
borne aloft to the stars of heaven, at no time


^ Lit., " whatever belongs to them feels itself to be comprehended
with a tacit rendering also of honour in," etc., tacita et se seiitit
honorificefitia, read by later edd. for the MS. ut se seniit — " but as
whatever," retained by Hild. and Oehler; while the first four edd.
read vi — " feels itself with a silent force comprehended in the honour
in," etc.

'> So LB. and Orelli, reading aUa ctiamtuim capita for the MS.
alieumn capita, read in the first five edd., alia 11011. capita — "are
others not chiefs; " Hild., followed by Oehler, proposes alia dcimi
capita — " other gods."

s According to Orelli's punctuation, " whether there are these
gods in heaven whom," etc.


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


46.


have seen the face and countenance of each ;
and then established here the worship of the
same gods, whom you remembered to be there,
as having been known and seen by you. But
this, too, we again would learn from you, whether
they have received these names by which you call
them, or assumed them themselves on the days
of purification.' If these are divine and celestial
names, who reported them to you? But if, on
the other hand, these names have been applied
to them by you, how could you give names to
those whom you never saw, and whose character
or circumstances you in no wise - knew ?

5. But let it be assumed that there are these
gods, as you wish and believe, and are persuaded ;
let them be called also by those names by which
the common people suppose that those meaner
i,'-(v/j- 3 are known.-* Whence, however, have you
learned who make up the list of gods under these
names ? 5 have any ever become familiar and
known to others with whose names you were not
acquainted?^ For it cannot be easily known
whether their numerous body is settled and fixed
/// number ; or whether their multitude cannot be
summed up and limited by the numbers of any
computation. For let us suppose that you do
reverence to a thousand, or rather five thousand
gods ; but in the universe it may perhaps be
that there are a hundred tnousand ; there may
be even more than this, — nay, as we said a little
before, it may not be possible to compute the
number of the gods, or limit them by a definite
number. Either, then, you are yourselves im-
pious who serve a few gods, but disregard the
duties which you owe to the rest ; 7 or if you
claim that your ignorance of the rest should be
pardoned, you will procure for us also a similar
pardon, if in just the same way^ we refuse to
worship those of whose existence we are wholly
ignorant.

6. And yet let no one think that we are per-
versely determined not to submit to '■* the other
deities, whoever they are ! For we lift up pious
minds, and stretch forth our hands in prayer,'°

' So LB. and later edd., from a conj. of Meursius, reading diebus
lustricis for the MS. ludtbrits; read by some, and understood by
others, as htdicrzs, i.e., festal days.

2 The MS., followed by Hild. and Oehler, reads negtee . . . in
uUa cogiiatioiie — " in no relationship," for which the other edd. give
cogiiziione, as above.

3 So all edd., reading populares, e.xcept Hild. and Oehler, who
receive the conj. of Rigaltiiis, populatim — "among all nations;"
the MS. reading poptt!are>n.

* Censer i, i.e., " written in the list of gods. '

5 Otherwise, " how many make up the list of this name."

^ So Orelli, receiving the emendation of Barth, inco^niti nomine,
for the MS. in cognitiofie, -one being an abbreviation for nomitte.
Examples of such deities are the Novensiles, Consentes, etc., cc.
38-41.

' Lit., "who, except a few gods, do not engage in the services
of the rest."

^ Orelli would explain /r^ /« rz'f consiviili 2,^ equivalent to pro
uno vera Deo — " for the one true God."

9 Lit., " take the oaths of allegiance," or military oaths, using a
very common metaphor applied to Christians in the preceding book,
c. 5-

■° Lit., " suppliant hands." It has been thought that the word
suppUces is a gloss, and that the idea originally was that of a band


and do not refuse to draw near whithersoever you
may have summoned us ; if only we learn who
those divine beings are whom you press upon
us, and with whom it may be right to share the
reverence which we show to the king and prince
who is over all. It is Saturn, 7ny opponent says,
and Janus, Minerva, Juno, Apollo, Venus, Trip-
tolemus, Hercules, ^sculapius, and all the others,
to whom the reverence of antiquity dedicated
magnificent temples in almost every city. You
might, perhaps, have been able to attract us to
the worship of these deities you mention, had
you not been yourselves the first, with foul and
unseemly fancies, to devise such tales about
them as not merely to stain their honour, but,
by the natures assigned to them, to prove that
they did not exist at all. For, in the first place,
we cannot be led to beheve this, — that that
immortal and supreme nature has been divided
by sexes, and that there are some male, others
female. But this point, indeed, has been long
ago fully treated of by men of ardent genius,
both in Latin and Greek ; and TuUius, the most
eloquent among the Romans, without dreading
the vexatiousness of a charge of impiety, has
above all, with greater piety," declared — boldly,
firmly, and frankly — what he thought of such
a fancy ; and if you would proceed to receive
from him opinions written with true discernment,
instead of merely brilliant sentences, this case
would have been concluded ; nor would it re-
quire at our weak hands '- a second pleading, '^
as it is termed.

7. But why should I say that men seek from
him subtleties of expression and splendour of
diction, when I know that there are many who
avoid and flee from his books on this subject,
and will not hear his opinions read,'-* overthrow-
ing their prejudices ; and when I hear others
muttering angrily, and saying that the senate
should decree the destruction '= of these writings
by which the Christian religion is maintained,
and the weight of antiquity overborne? But,
indeed, if you are convinced that anything you
say regarding your gods is beyond doubt, point
out Cicero's error, refute, rebut his rash and
impious words, ''' and show that they are so. For
when you would carry off writings, and suppress
a book given forth to the public, you are not


of soldiers holding out their hands as they swore to be true to their
country and leaders ; but there is no want of simplicity and congruity
in the sentence as it stands, to warrant us in rejecting the word.

" i.e., than the inventors of such fables had shown.

'- Lit., " from us infants; " i.e., as compared with such a man as
Cicero.

'^ Secundas actiones. The reference is evidently to a second
speaker, who makes good his predecessor's defects.

'^^ Lit., " are unwilling to admit into their ear the reading of opin-
ions," etc.

'3 Both Christians and heathen, it is probable, were concerned in
the mutilation of de Nat. Deormn.

'* So Gelenius, reading dicta for the MS. dictitare. The last verb
is comprohate, read reprobate — " condemn," by all edd. except Hild.
and Oehler.


466


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


defending the gods, but dreading the evidence
of the truth.

8. And yet, that no thoughtless person may
raise a false accusation against us, as though we
believed Ciod whom we worship to be male, —
for this reason, that is, that when we speak of
Him we use a masculine word, — let him under-
stand that it is not sex which is expressed, but
His name, and its meaning according to custom,
and the way in which we are in the habit of
using words.' For the Deity is not male, but
His name is of the masculine gender : but in
your ceremonies you cannot say the same ; for
in your prayers you have been wont to say
luhether thou art god or goddess {■ and this uncer-
tain description shows, even by their opposition,
that you attribute sex to the gods. We cannot,
then, be prevailed on to believe that the divine
is embodied ; for bodies must needs be distin-
guished by difference of sex, if they are male
and female. For who, however mean his capa-
city,3 does not know that the sexes of different
gender have been ordained and formed by the
Creator of the creatures of earth, only that, by
intercourse and union of bodies, that which is
fleeting and transient may endure being ever
renewed and maintained ? "*

9. What, then, shall we say? That gods be-
get and are begotten? 5 and that therefore they
have received organs of generation, that they
might be able to raise up offspring, and that, as
each new race springs up, a substitution, regu-
larly occurring,*" should make up for all which
had been swept away by the preceding age ? If,
then, it is so, — that is, if the gods above beget
other gods, and are subject to these conditions
of sex,'' and are immortal, and are not worn out
by the chills of age, — it follows, as a conse-
quence, that the world ^ should be full of gods,
and that countless heavens could not contain
their multitude, inasmuch as they are both them-
selves ever begetting, and the countless multi-
tude of their descendants, always being increased,
is augmented by means of their offspring ; or if,
as is fitting, the gods are not degraded by being
subjected to sexual impulses,^ what cause or
reason will be pointed out for their being distin-
guished by those members by which the sexes
are wont to recognise each other at the sugges-
tion of their own desires ? For it is not likely
that they have these metnbers without a purpose,


' Lit., " with familiarity of speech."

- A formula used when they sought to propitiate the author of
some event which could not be traced to a particular deity; referring
also to the cases in which there were different opinions as to the sex
of a deity.

3 Lit., " even of mean understanding."

* Lit., "by the renewing of perpetual succession."
5 Lit., " that gods are born."

* Lit., " recurring," " arising again."

^ Lit., " make trial of themselves by these laws of sex."

* Lit., " all things," etc.

9 Lit., " if the impurity of .se.xiia! union is wanting to the gods."


or that nature had wished in them to make sport
of its own improvidence,"-' in providing them with
members for which there would be no use. For
as the hands, feet, eyes, and other members
which form our body," have been a.rranged for
certain uses, each for its own end, so we may
well '- believe that these members have been pro-
vided to discharge their office ; or it must be
confessed that there is something without a pur-
pose in the bodies of the gods, which has been
made uselessly and in vain.

10. What say you, ye holy and pure guardians
of religion ? Have the gods, then, sexes ; and
are they disfigured by those parts, the very men-
tion of whose names by modest lips is disgrace-
ful? What, then, now remains, but to believe
that they, as unclean beasts, are transported with
violent passions, rush with maddened desires
into mutual embraces, and at last, with shattered
and ruined bodies, are enfeebled by their sen.su-
ality? And since some things are peculiar to
the female sex, we must believe that the god-
desses, too, submit to these conditions at the
proper time, conceive and become pregnant with
loathing, miscarry, carry the full time, and some-
times are prematurely delivered. O divinity,
pure, holy, free from and unstained by any dis-
honourable blot ! The mind longs '^ and burns
to see, in the great halls and palaces of heaven,
gods and goddesses, with bodies uncovered and
bare, the full-breasted Ceres nursing lacchus,'^ as
the muse of Lucretius sings, the Hellespontian
Priapus bearing about among the goddesses,
virgin and matron, those parts '5 ever prepared
for encounter. It longs, I say, to see goddesses
pregnant, goddesses with child, and, as they daily
increase in size, faltering in their steps, through
the irksomeness of the burden they bear about
with them ; others, after long delay, bringing to
birth, and seeking the midwife's aid ; others,
shrieking as they are attacked by keen pangs
and grievous pains, tormented,'^ and, under all
these influences, imploring the aid of Juno Lu-
cina. Is it not much better to abuse, revile, and
otherwise insult the gods, than, with pious pre-
tence, unworthily to entertain such monstrous
beliefs about them ?

1 1 . And you dare to charge us with offending
the gods, although, on examination, it is found
that the ground of offence is most clearly in
yourselves, and that it is not occasioned by the


'° So the first five edd.

" Lit., " the other arrangement of members."

■- Lit., " it is fitting to believe."

'3 The MS., followed by Hild., reads habet et atiimum — "has it
a mind to, and does it," etc.; for which Gelenius, followed by later
edd., reads, as above, avet animus.

'< Cererem ah /accho, either as above, or "loved by lacchus."
Cf. Lucret. iv. 1160: At tuntida et mammosa Ceres est ipsa ab
laccho.

'5 Sensu obscceno.

'6 The first five edd. read hortari — "exhorted," for which LB.,
followed by later edd., received tortari, as above, — a conjecture of
Canterus.


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


467


insult which you think ' ive offer them. For if
the gods are, as you say, moved by anger, and
bum with rage in their minds, why should we
not suppose that they take it amiss, even in the
highest degree, that you attribute to them sexes,
as dogs and swine have been created, and that,
since this is your belief, they are so represented,
and openly exposed in a disgraceful manner?
This, then, being the case, you are the cause
of all troubles — you lead the gods, you rouse
them to harass the earth with every ill, and
every day to devise all kinds of fresh misfor-
tunes, that so they may avenge themselves, being
irritated at suffering so many wrongs and insults
from you. By your insults and affronts, I say,
partly in the vile stories, partly in the shameful
beliefs which your theologians, your poets, you
yourselves too, celebrate in disgraceful ceremo-
nies, you will find that the affairs of men have
been ruined, and that the gods have thrown
away the helm, if indeed it is by their care that
the fortunes of men are guided and arranged.
For with us, indeed, they have no reason to be
angry, whom they see and perceive neither to
mock, as it is said, nor worship them, and to
think,^ to believe much more worthily than you
with regard to the dignity of their name.

12. Thus far of sex. Now let us come to
the appearance and shapes by which you believe
that the gods above have been represented, with
which, indeed, you fashion, and set them up in
their most splendid abodes, your temples. And
let no one here bring up against us Jewish fables
and those of the sect of the Sadducees,^ as though
we, too, attribute to the Deity forms ; •* for this
is supposed to be taught in their writings, and
asserted as if with assurance and authority. For
these stories either do not concern us, and have
nothing at all in common with us, or if they are
shared in by us, as you believe, you must seek
out teachers of greater wisdom, through whom
you may be able to learn how best to overcome
the dark and recondite sayings of those writings.
Our opinion on the subject is as follows : — that
the whole divine nature, since it neither came
into existence at any time, nor will ever come to
an end of Ufe, is devoid of bodily features, and
does not have anything like the forms with which
the termination of the several members usually
completes the union of parts. 5 For whatever is
of this character, we think mortal and perish-


' So Orelli, reading nee in contumelia quam opinamini stare
for the MS. et, which is retained by all other edd. ; Oehler, however,
inserts alia before quam — "and that it is found in an insult other
than you think."

^ So later edd., omitting quam, which is read in the ms., both
Roman edd., Hild.,and Oehler, "to think much more . . . than you
believe."

3 It is evident that Arnobius here confuses the sceptical Saddu-
cees with iheir opponents the Pharisees, and the Talmudists.

* The MS. reads tribiiant et nos unintelligibly, for which LB. and
Hild. read et os — "as though they attribute form and face;" the
other edd., as above, tribuamus et nos.

5 Lit., " the joinings of the members."


able ; nor do we believe that that can endure for
ever which an inevitable end shuts in, though the
boundaries enclosing it be the remotest.

13. But it is not enough that you limit the
gods by forms : — you even confine them to the
human figure, and with even less decency enclose
them in earthly bodies. What shall we say then ?
that the gods have a head modelled with perfect
symmetry,'" bound fast by sinews to the back
and breast, and that, to allow the necessary bend-
ing of the neck, it is supported by combinations
of vertebra, and by an osseous foundation ? But
if we believe this to be true, it follows that they
have ears also, pierced by crooked windings ;
rolling eyeballs, overshadowed by the edges of
the eyebrows ; a nose, placed as a channel, 7
through which waste fluids and a current of air
might easily pass ; teeth to masticate food, of
three kinds, and adapted to three services ;
hands to do their work, moving easily by means
of joints, fingers, and flexible elbows ; feet to
support their bodies, regulate their steps, and
prompt the first motions in walking. But if
the gods bear these things which are seen, it is
fitting that they should bear those also which
the skin conceals under the framework of the
ribs, and the membranes enclosing the viscera ;
windpipes, stomachs, spleens, lungs, bladders,
livers, the long-entwined intestines, and the
veins of purple blood, joined with the air-pas-
sages,^ coursing through the whole viscera.

14. Are, then, the divine bodies free from
these deformities ? and since they do not eat the
food of men, are we to believe that, like chil-
dren, they are toothless, and, having no internal
parts, as if they were inflated bladders, are with-
out strength, owing to the hollowness of their
swollen bodies? Further, if this is the case,
you must see whether the gods are all alike, or
are marked by a difference in the contour of
their forms. For if each and all have one and
the same likeness of shape, there is nothing
ridiculous in believing that they err, and are de-
ceived in recognising each other.^ But if, on
the other hand, they are distinguished by their
countenances, we should, consequently, under-
stand that these differences have been implanted
for no other reason than that they might indi-
vidually be able to recognise themselves by the
peculiarites of the different marks. We should
therefore say that some have big heads, promi-
nent brows, broad brows, thick lips ; that others
of them have long chins, moles, and high noses ;
that these have dilated nostrils, those are snub-


* Lit.," with smooth roundness." [Cf. Xenoph.,i?/<';«., i. cap. 4.]
' Lit., " the raised gutter of the nose, easily passed by," etc.

8 The veins were supposed to be for the most part filled with
blood, mixed with a little air; while in the arteries air was supposed
to be in excess. Cf. Cicero, de Nat. Dear. ii. 55: "Through the
veins blood is poured forth to the whole body, and air through the
arteries."

9 Lit., " in the apprehension of mutual knowledge."


468


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


nosed ; some chubby from a swelling of their
jaws or growth of their cheeks, dwarfed, tall, of!
middle size, lean, sleek, fat ; some with crisped j
and curled hair, others shaven, with bald and
smooth heads. Now your workshops show and
point out that our opinions are not false, inas-
much as, when you form and fashion gods, you
represent some with long hair, others smooth and
bare, as old, as youths, as boys, swarthy, grey-
eyed, yellow, half-naked, bare ; or, that cold may
not annoy them, covered with flowing garments
thrown over them.

15. Does any man at all possessed of judg-
ment, believe that hairs and down grow on the
bodies of the gods? that among them age is
distinguished? and that they go about clad in
dresses and garments of various shapes, and
shield themselves from heat and cold? But if
any one believes that, he must receive this also
as true, that some gods are fullers, some barbers ;
the former to cleanse the sacred garments, the
latter to thin their locks when matted with a thick
growth of hair. Is not this really degrading,
most impious, and insulting, to attribute to the
gods the features of a frail and perishing animal ?
to furnish them with those members which no
modest person would dare to recount, and de-
scribe, or represent in his own imagination, with-
out shuddering at the excessive indecency? Is
this the contempt you entertain, — this the proud
wisdom with which you spurn us as ignorant, and
think that all knowledge of religion is yours?
You mock the mysteries of the Egyptians, be-
cause they ingrafted the forms of dumb animals
upon their divine causes, and because they Avor-
ship these very images with much incense, and
whatever else is used in such rites : you your-
selves adore images of men, as though they were
powerful gods, and are not ashamed to give to
these the countenance of an earthly creature, to
blame others for their mistaken folly, and to be
detected in a similarly vicious error.

16. But you will, perhaps, say that the gods
have indeed other forms, and that you have
given the appearance of men to them merely by
way of honour, and for form's sake ; ' which is
much more insulting than to have fallen into any
error through ignorance. For if you confessed
that you had ascribed to the divine forms that
which you had supposed and believed, your er-
ror, originating in prejudice, would not be so
blameable. But now, when you believe one
thing and fashion another, you both dishonour
those to whom you ascribe that which you con-
fess does not belong to them, and show your
impiety in adoring that which you fashion, not
that which you think really is, and which is in


' The MS. and first four edd. read dotis causa — " for the sake
of a dowry : " corrected as above, dicis cansa in the later edd.


very truth. If asses, dogs, pigs,^ had any human
wisdom and skill in contrivance, and wished to
do us honour also by some kind of worship, and
to show respect by dedicating statues to us, with
what rage would they inflame us, what a tempest
of passion would they excite, if they determined
that our images should bear and assume the
fashion of their own bodies ? How would they,
I repeat, fill us with rage, and rouse our pas-
sions, if the founder of Rome, Romulus, were to
be set up with an ass's face, the revered Pom-
pilius with that of a dog, if under the image of
a pig were written Cato's or Marcus Cicero's
name? So, then, do you think that your stu-
pidity is not laughed at by your deities, if they
laugh at all ? or, since you believe that they may
be enraged, do you think that they are not roused,
maddened to fury, and that they do not wish to
be revenged for so great wrongs and insults, and
to hurl on you the punishments usually dictated
by chagrin, and devised by bitter hatred ? How
much better it had been to give to them the
forms of elephants, panthers, or tigers, bulls, and
horses ! For what is there beautiful in man, —
what, I pray you, worthy of admiration, or come-
ly, — unless that which, some poet ^ has main-
tained, he possesses in common with the ape ?

17. But, they say, if you are not satisfied with
our opinion, do you point out, tell us yourselves,
what is the Deity's form. If you wish to hear
the truth, either the Deity has no form ; or if He
is embodied in one, we indeed know not what it
is. Moreover, we think it no disgrace to be ig-
norant of that which we never saw ; nor are we
therefore prevented from disproving the opinions
of others, because on this we have no opinion
of our own to bring forward. For as, if the
earth be said to be of glass, silver, iron, or gath-
ered together and made from brittle clay, we
cannot hesitate to maintain that this is untrue,
although we do not know of what it is made ; so,
when the form of God is discussed, we show
that it is not what you maintain, even if we are
still less able to explain what it is.

18. What, then, some one will say, does the
Deity not hear? does He not speak? does He
not see what is put before Him? has He not
sight? He may in His own, but not in our
way. But in so great a matter we cannot know
the truth at all, or reach it by speculations ; for
these are, it is clear, in our case, baseless, de-
ceitful, and like vain dreams. For if we said
that He sees in the same way as ourselves, it
follows that it should be understood that He has


' This argument seems to have been suggested by the saying of
Xenophanes, that the o.x or hon, if possessed of man's power, would
have represented, after the fashion of their own bodies, the gods they
would worship. ["The ia.\x hu7izanities oi o\A religion." — Coler-
idge (Schiller).]

^ Ennius (Cic, de Nat. Dear., i. 35): Simia giiam siinziis,
tiirpissiina bestia, nobis.


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


469.


eyelids placed as coverings on the pupils of the
eyes, that He closes them, winks, sees by rays or
images, or, as is the case in all eyes, can see
nothing at all without the presence of other
light. So we must in like manner say of hear-
ing, and form of speech, and utterance of words.
If He hears by means of ears, these, too, we
must say, He has, penetrated by winding paths,
through which the sound may steal, bearing the
meaning of the discourse ; or if His words are
poured forth from a mouth, that He has lips and
teeth, by the contact and various movement of
which His tongue utters sounds distinctly, and
forms His voice to words.

19. If you are willing to hear our conclusions,
then learn that we are so far from attributing
bodily shape to the Deity, that we fear to ascribe
to so great a being even mental graces, and the
very excellences by which a few have been
allowed with difficulty to distinguish themselves.
For who will say that God is brave, firm, good,
wise ? who will say that He has integrity, is tem-
perate, even that He has knowledge, understand-
ing, forethought? that He directs towards fixed
moral ends the actions on which He determines?
These things are good in man ; and being op-
posed to vices, have deserved the great reputa-
tion which they have gained. But who is so
foolish, so senseless, as to say that God is great
by merely human excellences? or that He is
above all in the greatness of His name, because
He is not disgraced by vice ? Whatever you
say, whatever in unspoken thought you imagine
concerning God, passes and is corrupted into a
human sense, and does not carry its o^vn mean-
ing, because it is spoken in the words which we
use, and which are suited only to human affairs.
There is but one thing man can be assured of
regarding God's nature, to know and perceive
that nothing can be revealed in human language
concerning God.

20. This, then, this matter of forms and sexes,
is the first affront which you, noble advocates in
sooth, and pious writers, offer to your deities.
But what is the next, that you represent to us '
the gods, some as artificers, some physicians,
others working in wool, as sailors,- players on
the harp and flute, hunters, shepherds, and, as
there was nothing more, rustics ? And that god,
he says, is a musician, and this other can divine ;
for the other gods cannot,^ and do not know
how to foretell what will come to pass, owing to
their want of skill and ignorance of the future.
One is instructed in obstetric arts, another trained


' So the MS., followed by Oehler, reading nobis, for wKich all
other edd. give vobzs — " to you."

2 Meursius would read naccas — " fullers," for 7iantas ; but the
latter term may, properly enough, be applied to the gods who watch
over seamen.

3 Or, " for the others are not gods," i.e., cannot be gods, as they
do not possess the power of divination. Cf. Lact., i. ii: Sin aiitem
divinus non sit, ne dens qiddem sit.


up in the science of medicine. Is each, then,
powerful in his own department ; and can they
give no assistance, if their aid is asked, in what
belongs to another? This one is eloquent in
speech, and ready in linking words together ;
for the others are stupid, and can say nothing
skilfully, if they must speak.

21. And, I ask, what reason is there, what
unavoidable necessity, what occasion for the gods
knowing and being acquainted with these handi-
crafts as though they were worthless mechanics ?
For, are songs sung and music played in heaven,
that the nine sisters may gracefully combine and
harmonize pauses and rhythms of tones? Are
there on the mountains "♦ of the stars, forests,
woods, groves, that 5 Diana may be esteemed
very mighty in hunting expeditions? Are the
gods ignorant of the immediate future ; and do
they live and pass the time according to the lots
assigned them by fate, that the inspired son of
Latona may explain and declare what the mor-
row or the next hour bears to each? Is he
himself inspired by another god, and is he
urged and roused by the power of a greater
divinity, so that he may be rightly said and es-
teemed to be divinely inspired? Are the gods
liable to be seized by diseases ; and is there
anything by which they may be wounded and
hurt, so that, when there is occasion, he ^ of
Epidaurus may come to their assistance ? Do
they labour, do they bring forth, that Juno may
soothe, and Lucina abridge the terrible pangs
of childbirth? Do they engage in agriculture,
or are they concerned with the duties of war,
that Vulcan, the lord of fire, may form for them
swords, or forge their rustic implements? Do
they need to be covered with garments, that the
Tritonian 7 maid may, with nice skill,^ spin,
weave cloth for them, and make ^ them tunics
to suit the season, either triple-twilled, or of
silken fabric? Do they make accusations and
refute them, that the descendant '° of Atlas may
carry off the prize for eloquence, attained by
assiduous practice?

22. You err, my opponent says, and are de-
ceived ; for the gods are not themselves artificers,
but suggest these arts to ingenious men, and
teach mortals what they should know, that their
mode of life may be more civilized. But he who
gives any instruction to the ignorant and unwil-
hng, and strives to make him intelligently expert


^ The MS., followed by LB. and Hild., reads sidereis motibus —
" in the motions of the stars; " i.e., can these be in the stars, owing
to their motion? Oehler conjectures molibus — "in the masses of
the stars; " the other edd. read moniibzis, as above.

s The MS., both Roman edd., and Oehler read habetur Diaii^t
— " is Diana esteemed; " the other edd., ut habeatur, as above.

* i.e., .iEsculapius.

7 i.e., Minerva. [Elucidation II. Conf. n. 4, p. 467, supra.]

5 "With nice skill ... for them," curiose iis ; for which the
MS. and first five edd. read ciiriosius — " rather skilfully."

9 The MS. reads unintelligibly et imponere, for which Meursius
emended coinponat, as above.

'° Mercurj', grandson of Atlas by Maia.


470


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


in some kind of work, must himself first know
that which he sets the other to practise. For no
one can be capable of teaching a science without
knowing the rules of that which he teaches, and
having grasped its method most thoroughly. The
gods are, then, the first artificers ; whether be-
cause they inform the minds of men with knowl-
edge, as you say yourselves, or because, being
immortal and unbegotten, they surpass the whole
race of earth by their length of life.' This, then,
is the question ; there being no occasion for these
arts among the gods, neither their necessities nor
nature requiring in them any ingenuity or me-
chanical skill, why you should say that they are
skilled,^ one in one craft, another in another,
and that individuals are pre-eminently expert ^ in
particular departments in which they are distin-
guished Dy acquaintance with the several branches
of science?

23. But you will, perhaps, say that the gods
are not artificers, but that they preside over these
arts, and have their oversight ; nay, that under
their care all things have been placed, which we
manage and conduct, and that their providence
sees to the happy and fortunate issue of these.
Now this would certainly appear to be said justly,
and with some probability, if all we engage in,
all we do, or all we attempt in human affairs,
sped as we wished and purposed. But since
every day the reverse is the case, and the results
of actions do not correspond to the purpose of
the will, it is trifling to say that we have, set as
guardians over us, gods invented by our super-
stitious fancy, not grasped with assured certainty.
Portunus'* gives to the sailor perfect safety in
traversing the seas ; but why has the raging sea
cast up so many cruelly-shattered wrecks ? Cen-
sus suggests to our minds courses safe and ser-
viceable : and why does an unexpected change
perpetually issue in results other than were looked
for ? Pales and Inuus 5 are set as guardians over
the flocks and herds ; why do they, with hurtful
laziness,'' not take care to avert from the herds
in their summer pastures, cruel, infectious, and
destructive diseases? The harlot Flora,^ vener-
ated in lewd sports, sees well to it that the fields
blossom ; and why are buds and tender plants
daily nipt and destroyed by most hurtful frost?
Juno presides over childbirth, and aids travailing


' Lit., "by the long duration of time."

- Lit., "skilled in notions" — pcrccptionibits ; for which pree-
eeptionibiis, i.e., " the precepts of the different arts," has been sug-
gested in the margin of Ursinus.

^ Lit., " and have skill {sollertias") in which individuals excel."

* According to Ochler, ("ortunus (Portumnus or Palaemon — " the
god who protects harbours") does not occur in the MS., which, he
says, reads /^r inaria prcestant — " through the seas they afford; "
emended as above by Ursinus, prcestat Portunus. Oehler himself
proposes /<'r;«(zr/'«i' — " the sea gods afford."

5 Pales, i.e., the feeding one; Inuus, otherwise Faunus and Pan.

* Otherwise, " from the absence of rain."

' So the margin of Ursinus, reading meretrix ; but in the first
four edd. , LB. , and Oberthiir, genet rijc — " mother," is retained from
the MS.


mothers ; and why are a thousand mothers every
day cut off in murderous throes ? Fire is under
Vulcan's care, and its source is placed under
his control \ and why does he, very often, suffer
temples and parts of cities to fall into ashes de-
voured by flames ? The soothsayers receive the
knowledge of their art from the Pythian god ;
and why does he so often give and afford answers
equivocal, doubtful, steeped in darkness and ob-
scurity? /Esculapius presides over the duties
and arts of medicine ; and why cannot 7nen in
more kinds of disease and sickness be restored
to health and soundness of body? while, on the
contrary, they become worse under the hands
of the physician. Mercury is occupied with^
combats, and presides over boxing and wrestling
matches ; and why does he not make all invinci-
ble who are in his charge ? why, when appointed
to one office, does he enable some to win the
victory, while he suffers others to be ridiculed for
their disgraceful weakness ?

24. No one, says my opponent, makes suppli-
cation to the tutelar deities, and they therefore
withhold their usual favours and help. Cannot
the gods, then, do good, except they receive in-
cense and consecrated offerings ?9 and do they
quit and renounce their posts, unless they see
their altars anointed with the blood of cattle ?
And yet I thought but now that the kindness of
the gods was of their own free will, and that the
unlooked-for gifts of benevolence flowed unsought
from them. Is, then, the King of the universe
solicited by any libation or sacrifice to grant to
the races of men all the comforts of life ? Does
the Deity not impart the sun's fertilizing warmth,
and the season of night, the winds, the rains,
the fruits, to all alike, — the good and the bad,
the unjust and the just,'° the free-born and the
slave, the poor and the rich ? For this belongs
to the true and mighty God, to show kindness,
unasked, to that which is weary and feeble, and
always encompassed by misery of many kinds.
For to grant your prayers on the offering of
sacrifices, is not to bring help to those who ask
it, but to sell the riches of their beneficence.
We men trifle, and are foolish in so great a
matter; and, forgetting what " God is, and the
majesty of His name, associate with the tutelar
deities whatever meanness or baseness our mor-
bid credulity can invent.

25. Unxia, my opponent says, presides over
the anointing of door-posts ; Cinxia over the
loosening of the zone ; the most venerable Victa '^
and Potua attend to eating and drinking. O


8 So LB., reading cura-t, the MS. omitting the last letter.

9 Lit., "salted fruits," the grits mixed with salt, strewed on the
victim.

'° Supplied by Ursinus.

I' So the edd. readmg quid, except Hild. and Oehler, who retain
the MS. qui — " who."
'^ The MS. reads Vita.


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


4/1


rare and admirable interpretation of the divine
powers ! would gods not have names ' if brides
did not besmear their husbands' door-posts with
greasy ointment ; were it not that husbands,
when now eagerly drawing near, unbind the
maiden-girdle ; if men did not eat and drink ?
Moreover, not satisfied to have subjected and
involved the gods in cares so unseemly, you also
ascribe to them dispositions fierce, cruel, savage,
ever rejoicing in the ills and destruction of
mankind.

26. We shall not here mention Laverna, god-
dess of thieves, the Bellonse, Discordise, Furi^e ;
and we pass by in utter silence the unpropitious
deities whom you have set up. We shall bring
forward Mars himself, and the fair mother of
the Desires ; to one of whom you commit wars,
to the other love and passionate desire. My
opponent says that Mars has power over wars ;
whether to quell those which are raging, or to
revive them when interrupted, and kindle them
in time of peace ? For if he calms the madness
of war, why do wars rage every day ? but if he
is their author, we shall then say that the god, to
satisfy his own inclination, involves the whole
world in strife ; sows the seeds of discord and
variance between far-distant peoples ; gathers so
many thousand men from different quarters, and
speedily heaps up the field with dead bodies ;
makes the streams flow with blood, sweeps away
the most firmly-founded empires, lays cities in the
dust, robs the free of their liberty, and makes
them slaves ; rejoices in civil strife, in the bloody
death of brothers who die in conflict, and, in
fine, in the dire, murderous contest of children
with their fathers.

27. Now we may apply this very argument to
Venus in exactly the same way. For if, as you
maintain and believe, she fills men's minds with
lustful thoughts, it must be held in consequence
that any disgrace and misdeed arising from such
madness should be ascribed to the instigation
of Venus. Is it, then, under compulsion of the
goddess that even the noble too often betray their
own reputation into the hands of worthless har-
lots ; that the firm bonds of marriage are broken ;
that near relations burn with incestuous lust ;
that mothers have their passions madly kindled
towards their children ; that fathers turn to them-
selves their daughters' desires ; that old men,
bringing shame upon their grey hairs, sigh with
the ardour of youth for the gratification of filthy
desires ; that wise and brave ^ men, losing in ef-
feminacy the strength of their manhood, disre-
gard the biddings of constancy ; that the noose
is twisted about their necks ; that blazing pyres


' [i.e., these names are derived from their offices to men. Have
they no names apart from these services ?1

^ i.e., those who subdue their own spirits. " Constancy " is the
iii-naOna of the Stoics.


are ascended ; ^ and that in different places
men, leaping voluntarily, cast themselves head-
long over very high and huge precipices ?*

28. Can any man, who has accepted the first
principles even of reason, be found to mar or
dishonour the unchanging nature of Deity with
morals so vile? to credit the gods with natures
such as human kindness has often charmed away
and moderated in the beasts of the field ? How,5
I ask, can it be said that the gods are far re-
moved from any feeUng of passion? that they
are gentle, lovers of peace, mild? that in the
completeness of their excellence they reach "^ the
height of perfection, and the highest wisdom
also ? or, why should we pray them to avert from
us misfortunes and calamities, if we find that
they are themselves the authors of all the ills by
which we are daily harassed? Call us impious
as much as you please, contemners of religion,
or atheists, you will never make us believe in
gods of love and war, that there are gods to sow
strife, and to disturb the mind by the stings of
the furies. For either they are gods in very
truth, and do not do what you have related ; or
if 7 they do the things which you say, they are
doubtless no gods at all.

29. We might, however, even )et be able to
receive from you these thoughts, most full of
wicked falsehoods, if it were not that you your-
selves, in bringing forward many things about
the gods so inconsistent and mutually destruc-
tive, compel us to withhold our minds from as-
senting. For when you strive individually to
excel each other in reputation for more recondite
knowledge, you both overthrow the very gods in
whom you believe, and replace them by others
who have clearly no existence ; and different
men give different opinions on the same sub-
jects,* and you write that those \vhom general
consent has ever received as single persons are
infinite in number. Let us, too, begin duly, then,
with father Janus, whom certain of you have de-
clared to be the world, others the year, some the
sun. But if we are to believe that this is true,
it follows as a consequence, that it should be
understood that there never was any Janus, who,
they say, being sprung from Coelus and Hecate,
reigned first in Italy, founded the town Janicu-
lum, was the father of Fons,^ the son-in-law of
Vulturnus, the husband of Juturna ; and thus
you erase the name of the god to whom in all
prayers you give the first place, and whom you
believe to procure for you a hearing from the


3 Referring to Dido.

■* As despairing lovers are said to have sought relief in death, by
leaping from the Leucadian rock into the sea.

5 Lit., " where, I ask, is the (assertion) that," etc.

6 Lit., "hold."

' In the MS. these words, aut si, are wanting.

' Stewechius and Orelli would omit rebus, and interpret " about
the same gods." Instead ai tic — " aboiit," the MS. has deos.

9 The MS. reads/oHti, correcteil by Mcursius Foiitis, as above.


472


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


gods. But, again, if Janus be the year, neither
thus can he be a god. For who does not know
that the year is a fixed space ' of time, and that
there is nothing divine in that which is formed ^
by the duration of months and lapse of days?
Now this very argument may, in Hke manner, be
appHed to Saturn. For if time is meant under
this title, as the expounders of Grecian ideas
think, so that that is regarded as Kronos,^ which
is chronos,-* there is no such deity as Saturn. For
who is so senseless as to say that time is a god,
when it is but a certain space measured offs in
the unending succession of eternity ? And thus
will be removed from the rank of the immortals
that deity too, whom the men of old declared,
and handed down to their posterity, to be born
of father Coelus, the progenitor of the dii inagni,
the planter of the vine, the bearer of the prun-
ing-knife.-'

30. But what shall we say of Jove himself,
whom the wise have repeatedly asserted to be
the sun, driving a winged chariot, followed by a
crowd of deities ; " some, the ether, blazing
with mighty flames, and wasting fire which can-
not be extinguished ? Now if this is clear and
certain, there is, then, according to you, no
Jupiter at all ; who, born of Saturn his father
and Ops his mother, is reported to have been
concealed in the Cretan territory, that he might
escape his father's rage. But now, does not a
similar mode of thought remove Juno from the
list of gods ? For if she is the air, as you have
been wont to jest and say, repeating in reversed
order the syllables of the Greek name,^ there
will be found no sister and spouse of almighty
Jupiter, no Fluonia,^ no Pomona, no Ossipagina,
no Februtis, Populonia, Cinxia, Caprotina ; and
thus the invention of that name, spread abroad
with a frequent but vain '° belief, will be found to
be wholly " useless.

31. Aristotle, a man of most powerful intel-
lect, and distinguished for learning, as Granius
tells, shows by plausible arguments that Minerva
is the moon, and proves it by the authority of
learned men. Others have said that this very
goddess is the depth of ether, and utmost height ;
some have maintained that she is memory,
whence her name even, Miner\^a, has arisen, as
if she were some goddess of memory. But if
this is credited, it follows that there is no daugh-
ter of Mens, no daughter of Victory, no dis-


' Lit., " circuit."

^ Lit., " finished."

3 i.e., the god.

■* i.e., time.

5 Lit., " the measuring of a certain space included in," etc.

* Cf. vi. 12.

7 Cf. Plato, Pha-dr., st. p. 246.

* Lit., "the reversed order of the Greek name being repeated,"
i.e., instead of ri-pa, a-)jp.

9 The MS. gives Fluvionia.

'° Lit., "with the frequency (or fame) of vain," etc.

'' Lit., " very."


coverer of the Olive, born from the head of
Jupiter, no goddess skilled in the knowledge of
the arts, and in different branches of learning.
Neptune, they say, has received his name and
title because he covers the earth with water. If,
then, by the use of this name is meant the out-
spread water, there is no god Neptune at all ;
and thus is put away, and removed fi'om us, the
full brother of Pluto and Jupiter, armed with the
iron trident, lord of the fish, great and small,
king of the depths of the sea, and shaker of the
trembling earth.'-

32. Mercury, also, has been named as though
he were a kind of go-between ; and because
conversation ]3asses between two speakers, and
is exchanged by them, that which is expressed
by this name has been produced. '^ If this, then,
is the case. Mercury is not the name of a god,
but of speech and words exchanged by tn'o
pei'sons ; and in this way is blotted out and
annihilated the noted Cyllenian bearer of the
caduceus, born on the cold mountain top,'-* con-
triver of words and names, the god who presides
over markets, and over the exchange of goods
and commercial intercourse. Some of you have
said that the earth is the Great Mother, '5 because
it provides all things living with food ; others
declare that the same ea?-th is Ceres, because it
brings forth crops of useful fruits ; ''' while some
maintain that it is Vesta, because it alone in the
universe is at rest, its other members being, by
their constitution, ever in motion. Now if this
is propounded and maintained on sure grounds,
in like manner, on your interpretation, three
deities have no existence : neither Ceres nor
Vesta are to be reckoned in the number '7 of the
gods ; nor, in fine, can the mother of the gods
herself, whom Nigidius thinks to have been mar-
ried to Saturn, be rightly declared a goddess, if
indeed these are all names of the one earth, and
it alone is signified by these titles.

2,2,- We here leave Vulcan unnoticed, to avoid
prolixity ; whom you all declare to be fire, with
one consenting \'oice. IVe pass by Venus, named
because lust assails all, and Proserpina, named
because plants steal gradually forth into the light,
— where, again, you do away with three deities ;
if indeed the first is the name of an element,
and does not signify a living power ; the second,
of a desire common to all living creatures ; while
the third refers to seeds rising above ground,
and the upward movements '^ of growing crops.
What ! when you maintain that Bacchus, Apollo,
the Sun, are one deity, increased in number by

'2 So Meursius emended the MS. sali — " sea."
'3 Lit., " the quality of this name has been adjusted."
'* So Orelli, reading iiwnte vcrtice; the last word, according to
Oehler, not being found in the MS.

'5 i.e., Cybele. Cf Lucr., ii. 991 sqq.

'* Lit., " seeds."

•7 Fasti — "list," "register."

'^ Lit., " motions."


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


473


the use of three names, is not the number of the
gods lessened, and their vaunted reputation over-
thrown, by your opinions ? For if it is true that
the sun is also Bacchus and Apollo, there can
consequently be in the universe no Apollo or
Bacchus; and thus, by yourselves, the son of
Semele and the Pythian god are blotted out and
set aside, — one the gi\er of drunken merriment,
the other the destroyer of Sminthian mice.

34. Some of your learned men ' — men, too,
who do not chatter merely because their humour
leads them — maintain that Diana, Ceres, Luna,
are but one deity in triple union ; " and that
there are not three distinct persons, as there are
three different names ; that in all these Luna is
invoked, and that the others are a series of sur-
names added to her name. But if this is sure,
if this is certain, and the facts of the case show
it to be so, again is Ceres but an empty name,
and Diana : and thus the discussion is brought
to this issue, that you lead and advise us to
believe that she whom you maintain to be the
discoverer of the earth's fruits has no existence,
and Apollo is robbed of his sister, whom once
the horned hunter ^ gazed upon as she washed
her limbs from impurity in a pool, and paid the
penalty of his curiosity.

35. Men worthy to be remembered in the
study of philosophy, who have been raised by
your praises to its highest place, declare, with
commendable earnestness, as their conclusion,
that the whole mass of the world, by whose folds
we all are encompassed, covered, and upheld,
is one animal ■* possessed of wisdom and reason ;
yet if this is a true, sure, and certain opinion, s
they also will forthwith cease to be gods whom
you set up a little ago in its parts without change
of name.*" For as one man cannot, while his
body remains entire, be divided into many men ;
nor can many men, while they continue to be
distinct and separate from each other,'' be fused
into one sentient individual : so, if the world is
a single animal, and moves from the impulse of
one mind, neither can it be dispersed in several
deities ; nor, if the gods are parts of it, can they
be brought together and changed into one living
creature, with unity of feeling throughout all its
parts. The moon, the sun, the earth, the ether,
the stars, are members and parts of the world ;
but if they are parts and members, they are


' Cf. Servius ad Virg., Georg., i. 5: " The Stoics say that Luna,
Diana, Ceres, Juno, and Proserpina are one; following whom, Virgil
invoked Liber and Ceres for Sol and Luna."

' Trhnali — "common," "vulgar," seems to be here used for
triplici.

3 ActsEOn.

'» Plato, Timaits, st. p. 30.

5 Lit., " of which things, however, if the opinion," etc.

^ i.e., deifying parts of the universe, and giving them, as deities,
the same names as before.

'' Lit., "the difference of their disjunction being preserved" —
itnilii disjjinctionis differentia conservata, suggested in the mar-
gin of Ursinus for the MS. iniiltitiidinis junctioiiis d. c, retained m
the first five edd.


certainly not themselves^ living creatures; for
in no thing can parts be the very thing which
the whole is, or think and feel for themselves,
for this cannot be effected by their own actions,
without the whole creature's joining in ; and this
being established and settled, the whole matter
comes back to this, that neither Sol, nor Luna,
nor ^ther, Tellus, and the rest, are gods. For
they are parts of the world, not the proper names
of deities ; and thus it is brought about that, by
your disturbing and confusing all divine things,
the world is set up as the sole god in the uni-
verse, while all the rest are cast aside, and that
as having been set up vainly, uselessly, and with-
out any reality.

36. If we sought to subvert the belief in your
gods in so many ways, by so many arguments,
no one would doubt that, mad with rage and
fury, you would demand for us the stake, the
beasts, and swords, with the other kinds of tor-
ture by which you usually appease your thirst in
its intense craving for our blood. But while you
yourselves put away almost the whole race of
deities with a pretence of cleverness and wis-
dom, you do not hesitate to assert that, because
of us, men suffer ill at the hands of the gods ; ^
although, indeed, if it is true that they anywhere
exist, and burn with anger and '° rage, there can
be no better reason for their showing anger
against you," than that you deny their existence,
and say that they are not found in any part of
the universe.

37. We are told by Mnaseas that the Muses
are the daughters of Tellus and Coelus ; others
declare that they are Jove's by his wife Memorj',
or Mens ; some relate that they were virgins,
others that they were matrons. For now we
wish to touch briefly on the points where you
are shown, from the difference of your opinions,
to make different statements about the same
thing. Ephorus, then, says that they are three '^
in number ; Mnaseas, whom we mentioned, tJiat
they are four ; '^ Myrtilus '■* brings forward seven ;
Crates asserts that there are eight ; finally Hesiod,
enriching heaven and the stars with gods, comes
forward with nine names. '5

If we ^-e not mistaken, such want of agree-
ment marks those who are wholly ignorant of
the truth, and does not spring from the real


8 Lit., " of their own name."

9 Lit., " for the sake of our name,, men's affairs are made haras-
sing."

'° Lit., " with flames of," etc.

'' The MS., according to Crusius, reads nos — "us."

'2 Three was the most ancient number; and the names preserved
by Pausanias, are MeAeri;, 'AoiSr;, Mfrjfirj.

'3 Cicero {de Nat. Dear., iii. 21, a passage where there is some
doubt as to the reading) enumerates as the four Muses, Thel.xiope,
Aoede, Arche, Melete.

•4 The MS. reads Murtyhts. Seven are said to have been men-
tioned by Epicharmus, — Neilous, Tritone, Asopous, Heptapolis,
Achelo'is, Tiuoplous, and Rhodia.

'S The nine are Clio, Euterpe, Thalia, Melpomene, Terpsichore,
Erato, Polymnia, Ourania, and Calliope {Theog., 77-79).


474


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


state of the case. For if their number were
clearly known, the voice of all would be the
same, and the agreement of all would tend to
and find issue in the same conclusion.'

^8. How, then, can you give to religion its
whole power, when you fall into error about the
gods themselves? or summon us to their sol-
emn worship, while you give us no definite infor-
mation how to conceive of the deities themselves ?
For, to take no notice of the other ^ authors,
either the firsts makes away with and destroys
six divine Muses, if they are certainly nine ; or
the last 4 adds six who have no existence to the
three who alone really are ; so that it cannot be
kncnvn or understood what should be added,
what taken away ; and in the performance of
religious rites we are in danger 5 of either wor-
shipping that which does not exist, or passing that
by which, it may be, does exist. Piso believes
that the Novensiles are nine gods, set up among
the Sabines at Trebia.^ Granius thinks that
they are the Muses, agreeing with ^lius ; Varro
teaches that they are nine,^ because, in doing
anything, t/iaf number is always reputed most
powerful and greatest ; Cornificius,*^ that they
watch over the renewing of things,'' because, by
their care, all things are afresh renewed in
strength, and endure ; Manilius, that they are
the nine gods to whom alone Jupiter gave power
to wield his thunder.'" Cincius declares them to
be deities brought from abroad, named from
their very newness, because the Romans were in
the habit of sometimes individually introducing
into their families the rites " of conquered cities,
while some they publicly consecrated ; and lest,
from their great number, or in ignorance, any
god should be passed by, all alike were briefly
and compendiously invoked under one name —
Novensiles.

39. There are some, besides, who assert that
those who from being men became gods, are
denoted by this name, — as Hercules, Romulus,
yEsculapius, Liber, ^neas. These are all, as is
clear, different opinions ; and it cannot be, in the
nature of things, that those who differ in opinion
can be regarded as teachers of one truth. For
if Piso's opinion is true, ^-Elius and Granius say
what is false ; if what they say is certain, Varro,


' Lit., " into the end of the same opinion."

* Lit., " in the middle," " intermediate."
3 i.e., Ephorus.

* i.e., Hesiod.

5 Lit., " the undertaking of religion itself is brought into the dan-
ger," etc.

* An Umbrian village.

7 Lit., "that the number is nine." [i.e., a triad of triads; the
base a triad, regarded, even by heathen, as of mystical power.]

' A grammarian who lived in the time of Augustus, not to be con-
founded with Cicero's correspondent.

9 Novitation.

'" The Etruscans held (Pliny, H. N., ii. 52) that nine gods could
thunder, the bolts being of different kinds: the Romans so far main-
tained this distinction as to regard thunder during the day as sent by
Jupiter, at night by Summanus.

" So LB., reading reiig- for the MS. reg tones.


with all his skill,'^ is mistaken, who substitutes
things most frivolous and vain for those which
really exist. If they are named Novensiles be-
cause their number is nine,'^ Cornificius is shown
to stumble, who, giving them might and power
not their own, makes them the divine overseers
of renovation.'-* But if Cornificius is right in his
belief, Cincius is found to be not wise, who con-
nects with the power of the dii Novensiles the
gods of conquered cities. But if they are those
whom Cincius asserts them to be, Manilius will
be found to speak falsely, who comprehends
those who wield another's thunder under this
name. '5 But if that which Manilius holds is true
and certain, they are utterly mistaken who sup-
pose that those raised to divine honours, and
deified mortals, are thus named because of the
novelty of their rank. But if the Novensiles are
those who have deserved to be raised to the
stars after passing through the life of men,'^ there
are no dii Novensiles at all. For as slaves, sol-
diers, masters, are not names of persons compre-
hended under them,''' but of officers, ranks, and
duties, so, when we say that Novensiles is the
name '^ of gods who by their virtues have be-
come "^ gods from being men, it is clear and evi-
dent that no individual persons are marked out
particularly, but that newness itself is named by
the title Novensiles.

40. Nigidius taught that the dii Penates were
Neptune and Apollo, who once, on fixed terms,
girt Ilium -° with walls. He himself again, in
his sixteenth book, following Etruscan teaching,
shows that there are four kinds of Penates ; and
that one of these pertains to Jupiter, another to
Neptune, the third to the shades below, the fourth
to mortal men, making some unintelligible asser-
tion. Caesius himself, also, following this teach-
ing, thinks that they are Fortune, and Ceres, the
genius Jovialis,^' and Pales, but not the female
deity commonly received,-^ but some male attend-
ant and steward of Jupiter. Varro thinks that
they are the gods of whom we speak who are
within, and in the inmost recesses of heaven,
and that neither their number nor names are
known. The Etruscans say that these are the
Consentes and Complices,^^ and name them be-


'2 Lit., " the very skilful."

'3 Lit., " if the number nine bring on the name of," etc.

'■t Lit., " gives another's might and power to gods presiding."

'5 Lit., " the title of this name."

"> Lit., " after they have finished the mortality of life," i.e., either
as .ibove, or " having endured its perishableness."

•^ Lit., " lying under."

IS So most edd., following Gelenius, who reads esse iiotnen for
the MS. si 07nnes istud.

'9 Lit., " who have deserved to," etc.

^° The MS. reads itnmortalhim, corrected in the edd. urhem
Iliutn.

2' Supposed to be either the genius attending Jupiter; the family
god as sent by him; or the chief among the genii, sometimes men-
tioned simply as Genius.

^^ Lit., " whom the commonalty receives."

^3 Conse7ites (those who are together, or agree together, i e., coun-
cillors) and Complices (confederate, or agreeing) are said by some to
be the twelve gods who composed the great council of heaven ; and, in


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


475


cause they rise and fall together, six of them
being male, and as many female, with unknown
names and pitiless dispositions,' but they are
considered the counsellors and princes of Jove
supreme. There were some, too, who said that
Jupiter, Juno, and Minerva were the dii Penates,
without whom we cannot live and be wise, and
by whom we are ruled within in reason, passion,
and thought. As you see, even here, too, noth-
ing is said harmoniously, nothing is settled with
the consent of all, nor is there anything reliable
on which the mind can take its stand, drawing
by conjecture very near to the truth. For their
opinions are so doubtful, and one supposition so
discredited - by another, that there is either no
truth in them all, or if it is uttered by any, it is
not recognised amid so many different statements.

41. We can, if it is thought proper, speak
briefly of the Lares also, whom the mass think
to be the gods of streets and ways, because the
Greeks name streets laiirce. In different parts
of his writings, Nigidius speaks of thetn now as
the guardians of houses and dwellings ; now as
the Curetes, who are said to have once con-
cealed, by the clashing of cymbals,^ the infantile
cries of Jupiter ; now the five Digiti Samothracii,
who, the Greeks tell us, were named Idcei Dac-
tyli. Varro, with like hesitation, says at one
time that they are the Manes,-* and therefore the
mother of the Lares was named Mania ; at
another time, again, he maintains that they are
gods of the air, and are termed heroes ; at an-
other, following the opinion of the ancients, he
says that the Lares are ghosts, as it were a kind
of tutelary demon, spirits of dead s men.

42. It is a vast and endless task to examine
each kind separately, and make it evident even
from your religious books that you neither hold
nor believe that there is any god concerning
whom you have not '' brought forward doubtful
and inconsistent statements, expressing a thou-
sand different beliefs. But, to be brief, and
avoid prolixity,^ it is enough to have said what
has been said ; it is, further, too troublesome to


accordance with this, the words Jina oriatitur et occidant una might
be translated " rise and sit down together," i.e., at the council table.
But then, the names and number of these are known; while Arnobius
says, immediately after, that the names of the dii Consentes are not
known, and has already quoted Varro, to the effect that neither names
nor number are known. Schelling {ilber die Gotth. v. Saiuolkr.,
quoted by Orelli) adopts the reading (see following note), " of whom
very little mention is made," i.e., in prayers or rites, because they
are merely Jove's councillors, and exercise no power over men, and
identifies them with the Samothracian Cabiri — Ka^eipot and Con-
.sentes being merely Greek and Latin renderings of the name.

' So the MS. and all edd. reading iiiiserationis parcissintce, ex-
cept Gelenius, who reads nationis barbarissiince — " of a most bar-
barous nation: " while Ursinus suggested vieinoratz'oiiis pare. —
" of whom very little mention is made," — the reading approved by
Schelling "

- Lit., " shaken to its foundations."

' Airibus. Cf. Lucretius, ii. 633-636.

* The MS. reads manas, corrected as above by all edd. except
Hild., who reads Manias.

5 The MS. reads effunciorum; LB. e^_/««<r/., from the correction
of Stewechius; Gelenius, with most of the other edd., de/.

^ The MS. and first ed. omit non.

' Lit., " because of aversion."


gather together many things into one mass, since
it is made manifest and evident in different ways
that you waver, and say nothing with certainty
of these things which you assert. But you will
perhaps say, Even if we have no personal knowl-
edge of the Lares, Novensiles, Penates, still the
very agreement of our authors proves their exist-
ence, and that such a race ^ takes rank among
the celestial gods. And how can it be known
whether there is any god, if what he is shall be
wholly unknown ? 9 or how can it avail even to
ask for benefits, if it is not settled and determined
who should be invoked at each inquiry ? '° For
every one who seeks to obtain an answer from
any deity, should of necessity know to whom he
makes supplication, on whom he calls, from whom
he asks help for the affairs and occasions of hu-
man life ; especially as you yourselves declare
that all the gods do not have all power, and "
that the wrath and anger of each are ap})eased
by different rites.

43. For if this deity"-^ requires a black, that '3
a white skin ; if sacrifice must be made to this
one with veiled, to that with uncovered head ; ''^
this one is consulted about marriages, '5 the other
relieves distresses, — may it not be of some im-
portance whether the one or the other is Noven-
silis, since ignorance of the facts and confusion
of persons displeases the gods, and leads neces-
sarily to the contraction of guilt ? For suppose
that I myself, to avoid some inconvenience and
peril, make supplication to any one of these
deities, saying. Be present, be near, divine Pe-
nates, thou Apollo, and thou, O Neptune, and in
your divine clemency turn away all these evils,
by which I am annoyed, '*" troubled, and tor-
mented : will there be any hope that I shall
receive help from them, if Ceres, Pales, Fortune,
or the genius yovia/is,'^ not Neptune and Apol-
lo, shall be the dii Penates ? Or if I invoked
the Curetes instead oi the Lares, whom some of
your writers maintain to be the Digiti Samo-
thracii, how shall I enjoy their help and favour,
when I have not given them their own names,
and have given to the others names not their
own ? Thus does our interest demand that we
should rightly know the gods, and not hesitate
or doubt about the power, the name of each ;


* Lit., " the form of their race."
9 i e , ignorahitiir et fiescietur.

'° The MS. xeadiS consolationent — " for each consolation," i.e., to
comfort m every distress.

" The MS. omits et.

'^ The dii inferi.

'3 The dii sufieri.

'■* Saturn and Hercules were so worshipped.

15 Apollo.

''' The MS., first five edd., and Oehler read terreof " terrified; "

the others tor., as above, from the conjecture of Gifanius.

'^ Cf. ch. 40, note 21. It may further be observed that the Etrus-
cans held that the superior and inferior gods and men were linked
together by a kind of intermediate beings, through whom the gods
took cognizance of human affairs, without themselves descending to
earth. These were divided into four classes, assigned to Tina (Jupi-
ter), Neptune, the gods of the nether world, and men respectncly.


476


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


lest,' if they be invoked with rites and titles not
their own, they have at once their ears stopped
against our p7-ayers, and hold us involved in
guilt which may not be forgiven.

44. Wherefore, if you are assured that in the
lofty palaces of heaven there dwells, there is,
that multitude of deities whom you specify, you
should make your stand on one proposition,^
and not, divided by different and inconsistent
opinions, destroy belief in the very things which
you seek to establish. If there is a Janus, let


' So LB., Hild., and Oehler, reading nojiiine ne ; all
the MS. having no conjunction.

^ Lit., " it is fitting that you stand in the limits of," etc.


Janus be ; if a Bacchus, let Bacchus be ; if a
Summanus,3 let Summanus be : for this is to
confide, this to hold, to be settled in the knowl-
edge of something ascertained, not to say after
the manner of the blind and erring, The Noven-
siles are the Muses, in truth they are the Trebian
gods, nay, their number is nine, or rather, they
are the protectors of cities which have been
overthrown ; and bring so important matters into
this danger, that while you remove some, and
put others in their place, it may well be doubted
of them all if they anywhere exist.


3 i.e., Summus Manium, Pluto.


BOOK IV.


1. We would ask you, and you above all, O
Romans, lords and princes of the world, whether
you think that Piety, Concord, Safety, Honour,
Virtue, Happiness, and other such names, to
which we see you rear ' altars and splendid
temples, have divine power, and live in heaven ?-
or, as is usual, have you classed them with the
deities merely for form's sake, because we desire
and wish these blessings to fall to our lot ? For
if, while you think them empty names without
any substance, you yet deify them with divine
honours,^ you will have to consider whether that
is a childish frolic, or tends to bring your deities
into contempt,'^ when you make equal, and add
to their number vain and feigned names. But if
you have loaded them with temples and couches,
holding with more assurance that these, too, are
deities, we pray you to teach us in our ignorance,
by what course, in what way. Victory, Peace,
Equity, and the others mentioned among the
gods, can be understood to be gods, to belong
to the assembly of the immortals ?

2. For we — but, perhaps, you would rob and
deprive us of common-sense — feel and perceive
that none of these has divine power, or possesses
a form of its own ; s but that, ofi the contrary,
they are the excellence of manhood,'^ the safety
of the safe, the honour of the respected, the vic-
tory of the conqueror, the harmony of the allied,
the piety of the pious, the recollection of the
observant, the good fortune, indeed, of him who
lives happily and without exciting any ill-feeling.
Now it is easy to perceive that, in speaking thus.


' Lit., " see altars built."

^ Lit., " in the regions of heaven."

3 The MS. reads ia7>t (corrected by the first four edd. iameti) in
regionibits — "in the divine seats;" corrected, reltgiotiibus, as
above, by Ursinus.

■• Lit., " to the deluding of your deities."

5 Lit., " is contained in a form of its own kind."

^ i.e., manliness.


we speak most reasonably when we observe ? the
contrary qualities opposed to them, misfortune,
discord, forgetfulness, injustice, impiety, baseness
of spirit, and unfortunate^ weakness of body.
For as these things happen accidentally, and ^
depend on human acts and chance moods, so
their contraries, named '° after more agreeable
qualities, must be found in others ; and from
these, originating in this wise, have arisen those
invented names.

3. With regard, indeed, to your bringing for-
ward to us other bands of unknown " gods, we
cannot determine whether you do that seriously,
and from a belief in its certainty; or, merely
playing with empty fictions, abandon yoursehes
to an unbridled imagination. The goddess Lu-
perca, you tell us on the authority of Varro, was
named because the fierce wolf spared the exposed
children. Was that goddess, then, disclosed, not
by her own power, but by the course of events ?
and was it only after the wild beast restrained its
cruel teeth, that she both began to be herself
and was marked by '^ her name ? or if she was
already a goddess long before the birth of Romu-
lus and his brother, show us what was her name
and title. Prsestana was named, according to
you, because, in throwing the javelin, Quirinus
excelled all in strength ; '^ and the goddess Pan-
da, or Pantica, was named because Titus Tatius
was allowed to open up and make passable a


7 Lit., "which it is easy to perceive to be said by us with the
greatest truth from," etc., — so most edd. reading tiobis ; biit the
MS., according to Crusius, gives vobis — " yo\x," as in Orelli and
Oberthiir.

^ Lit., " less auspicious."

9 The MS., first four edd., and Elmenhorst, read guts — " which; "
the rest, as above, qjic.

'° Lit., " what is opposed to them named," nominattttii ; a cor-
rection by Oehler for the MS. jioininatur — " is named."

" The MS. and both Roman edd. read sigiiatortim — " sealed; "
the others, except Hild., ignotorum, as above.
'- Lit., " drew the meaning of her name."
'3 Lit., "excelled the might of ali."


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


477


road, that he might take the Capitohne. Before
these events, then, had the deities never existed ?
and if Romulus had not held the first place in
casting the javelin, and if the Sabine king had
been unable to take the Tarpeian rock, would
there be no Pantica, no Pr^estana? And if you
say that they ' existed before that which gave
rise to their name, a question which has been
discussed in a preceding section,- tell us also
what they were called.

4. Pellonia is a goddess mighty to drive back
enemies. Whose enemies, say, if it is conven-
ient? Opposing armies meet, and fighting to-
gether, hand to hand, decide the battle ; and to
one this side, to another that, is hostile. Whom,
then, will Pellonia turn to flight, since on both
sides there will be fighting? or in favour of whom
will she incline, seeing that she should afford to
both sides the might and services of her name ?
But if she indeed ^ did so, that is, if she gave
her good-will and favour to both sides, she would
destroy the meaning of her name, which was
formed with regard to the beating back of one
side. But you will perhaps say, She is goddess
of the Romans only, and, being on the side of
the Quirites alone, is ever ready graciously to
help them.-* We wish, indeed, that it were so,
for we like the name ; but it is a very doubtful
matter. What ! do the Romans have gods to
themselves, who do not help 5 other nations ?
and how can they be gods, if they do not exer-
cise their divine power impartially towards all
nations everywhere ? and where, I pray you, was
this goddess Pellonia long ago, when the national
honour was brought under the yoke at the Cau-
dine Forks? when at the Trasimene lake the
streams ran with blood? when the plains of
Diomede ^ were heaped up with dead Romans ?
when a thousand other blows were sustained in
countless disastrous battles? Was she snoring
and sleeping ; ^ or, as the base often do, had she
deserted to the enemies' camp ?

5. The sinister deities preside over the regions
on the left hand only, and are opposed to those ^
on the right. But with what reason this is said,
or with what meaning, we do not understand
ourselves ; and we are sure that you cannot in
any degree cause it to be clearly and generally
understood.9 For in the first place, indeed, the
world itself has in itself neither right nor left,
neither upper nor under regions, neither fore nor


' MS., " that these, too," i.e., as well as Luperca.

2 No such discussion occurs in the preceding part of the work, but
the subject is brought forward in the end of chap. 8, p. 478, infra.

3 In the first sentence the MS. reads utriqiie, and in the second
iitique, which is reversed in most edd., as above.

■• Lit., " ever at hand with gracious assistances."
5 Lit., " are not of."
'' i.e., the field of Cannse.
^ [i Kings xviii. 27.]
^ Lit., " the parts."

9 Lit., "it cannot be brought into any light of general under-
standing by you."


after parts. For whatever is round, and bounded
on every side by the circumference '° of a solid
sphere, has no beginning, no end ; where there
is no end and beginning, no part can have " its
own name and form the beginning. Therefore,
when we say, This is the right, and that the left
side, we do not refer to anything '^ in the world,
which is everywhere very much the same, but to
our own place and position, we being '^ so formed
that we speak of some things as on our right
hand, of others as on our left ; and yet these
very things which we name left, and the others
which we name right, have in us no continuance,
no fixedness, but take their forms from our sides,
just as chance, and the accident of the moment,
may have placed us. If I look towards the ris-
ing sun, the north pole and the north are on my
left hand ; and if I turn my face thither, the
west will be on my left, for it will be regarded
as behind the sun's back. But, again, if I turn
my eyes to the region of the west, the wind and
country of the south are now said to be on '•♦ my
left. And if I am turned to this side by the
necessary business of the moment, the result is,
that the east is said to be on the left, owing to a
further change of position, 's — from which it can
be very easily seen that nothing is either on our
right or on our left by nature, but from position,
time,"^ and according as our bodily position with
regard to surrounding objects has been taken up.
But in this case, by what means, in what way,
will there be gods of the regions of the left, when
it is clear that the same regions are at one time
on the right, at another on the left? or what
have the regions of the right done to the immor-
tal gods, to Reserve that they should be without
any to care for them, while they have ordained
that these should be fortunate, and ever accom-
patiied by lucky omens ?

6. Lateranus,''' as you say, is the god and ge-
nius of hearths, and received this name because
men build that kind of fireplace of unbaked
bricks. What then? if hearths were made of
baked clay, or any other material whatever, will
they have no genii ? and will Lateranus, whoever
he is, abandon his duty as guardian, because the
kingdom which he possesses has not been formed
of bricks of clay? And for what purpose,'^ I
ask, has that god received the charge of hearths ?
He runs about the kitchens of men, examin-


'° Lit., " convexity."

" Lit., "be of."

'- Lit., " to the state of the world."

'3 Lit., "who have been so formed, that some things are said by
us," nobis, the reading of Oberthiir and Orelli for the MS. in nos —
" with regard to us," which is retained by the first four edd., Elm.,
Hild., and Oehler.

'■* i.e., transit in vocabiiluvi sinistri ; in being omitted in the
MS. and both Roman edd.

'5 Lit., " the turning round of the body being changed."

'6 So Oehler, reading /(Ji-//;'o«t', sed tempore sed, for the MS. posi-
tionis et temporis et.

'7 No mention is made of this deity by any other author.

'^ Lit., " that he may do what."


478


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


ing and discovering with what kinds of wood
the heat in their fires is produced ; he gives
strength ' to earthen vessels, that they may not
fly in pieces, overcome by the violence of the
flames ; he sees that the flavour of unspoilt
dainties reaches the taste of the palate with their
own pleasantness, and acts the part of a taster,
and tries whether the sauces have been rightly
prepared. Is not this unseemly, nay — to speak
with more truth — disgraceful, impious, to intro-
duce some pretended deities for this only, not
to do them reverence with fitting honours, but to
appoint them over base things, and disreputable
actions ? ^

7. Does Venus Militaris, also, preside over the
evil-doing 3 of camps, and the debaucheries of
young men? Is there one Perfica,^ also, of the
crowd of deities, who causes those base and
filthy delights to reach their end with uninter-
rupted pleasure? Is there also Pertunda, who
presides over the marriage s couch ? Is there
also Tutunus, on whose huge members *" and
horrent fascinum you think it auspicious, and
desire, that your matrons should be borne ? But
if facts themselves have very little effect in sug-
gesting to you a right understanding of the truth,
are you not able, even from the very names, to
understand that these are the inventions of a
most meaningless superstition, and the false gods
of fancy? 7 Puta, you say, presides over the
pruning of trees, Peta over prayers ; Nemes-
trinus "^ is the god of groves ; Patellana is a deity,
and Patella, of whom the one has been set over
things brought to light, the other over those yet
to be disclosed. Nodutis is spoken of as a god,
because he ^ brings that which has been sown to
the knots ; and she who presijies over the tread-
ing out of grain, Noduterensis ; '° the goddess
Upibilia ' ' delivers from straying from the 7-ight
paths ; parents bereaved of their children are
under the care of Orbona, — those very near


' Lit., "^Of'f^ condition," habitudijiem.

' Lit., " a disreputable act."

'■ So the MS., xc^drng Jlagitu's, followed by all edd. except LB.
and Orelli, who read //n^/i's — " kidnapping."

* Of this goddess, also, no other author makes mention but the
germ may be perhaps found in Lucretius (ii. 1116-7), where nature
is termed /erfica, i.e., " perfecting," or making all things complete.
[The learned translator forgets Tertullian, who introduces us to this
name in the work Arnobius imitates throughout. See vol. iii. p. 140.]

5 i.e., z'« cubiculis prasto est virginaletn scrobcin effodienti-
bus tnaritis.

6 The first five edd. read Mutumis. Cf. ch. 11. [I think it a
mistake to make .Miuunus=; Priapus. Their horrible deformities are
diverse, as I have noted in European collections of antiquities.
"YVe specialty of Mutunus is noted by our author, and is imspeak-
ably abominable. All this illustrates, therefore, the Christian scru-
ples about marriage-feasts, of which see vol. v. note i, p. 435.]

7 Lit., the " fancies " or " imaginations " of false gods. Meursius
proposed to transpose the whole of this sentence to the end of the
chapter, which would give a more strictly logical arrangement; but
it must be remembered that Arnobius allows himself much liberty in
this respect.

^ Of these three deities no other mention is made.

9 The MS., LB., Hild., and Oehler read qiti — "who brings;"
the other edd., as above, quia.

'° So the MS. (cf. ch. 11), first five edd., Oberlh., Hild., and
Oehler; the other edd. read A''<?(^7<//;« Ter.

" So the MS., both Roman edd., and Oehler; the other edd. read-
ing f 'ziJ///a, except Hild., Viabilia.


to death, under that of Naenia. Again, '^ Ossi-
lago herself is mentioned as she who gives firm-
ness and solidity to the bones of young children.
Mellonia is a goddess, strong and powerful in
regard to bees, caring for and guarding the sweet-
ness of their honey.

8. Say, I pray you, — that Peta, Puta, Patella
may graciously favour you, — if there were no '^
bees at all on the earth then, or if we men were
born without bones, like some worms, would
there be no goddess Mellonia ; '■* or would Ossi-
lago, who gives bones their solidity, be without
a name of her own? I ask truly, and eagerly
inquire whether you think that gods, or men, or
bees, fruits, twigs, and the rest, are the more
ancient in nature, time, long duration ? No man
will doubt that you say that the gods precede all
things whatever by countless ages and genera-
tions. But if it is so, how, in the nature of
things, can it be that, from things produced
afterwards, they received those names which are
earlier in point of time ? or that the gods were
charged with the care 's of those things which
were not yet produced, and assigned to be of
use to men? Or were the gods long without
names ; and was it only after things began to
spring up, and be on the earth, that you thought
it right that they should be called by these
names'^ and titles? And whence could you
have known what name to give to each, since
you were wholly ignorant of their existence ;
or that they possessed any fixed powers, seeing
that you were equally unaware which of them
had any power, and over what he should be
placed to suit his divine might?

9. What then? you say; do you declare that
these gods exist nowhere in the world, and have
been created by unreal fancies ? Not we alone,
but truth itself, and reason, say so, and that
common-sense in which all men share. For who
is there who believes that there are gods of gain,
and that they preside over the getting of it, see-
ing that it springs very often from the basest
employments, and is always at the expense of
others ? Who believes that Libentina, who that
Burnus,'^ is set over those lusts which wisdom
bids us avoid, and which, in a thousand ways,
vile and filthy wretches '** attempt and practise ?
Who that Limentinus and Lima have the care
of thresholds, and do the duties of their keepers,
when every day we see the thresholds of temples


'2 The MS. reads vam — " for," followed by all edd. except Orelli,
who readsyiTw as above, and Oehler, who reads etiam — "also."

•3 Orelli omits 7ion, following OberthUr.

'■* Both in this and the preceding chapter the MS. reads Melonia.

'5 Lit., "obtained by lot the wardships."

'6 Lit., " signs."

'7 So the MS., both Roman edd., Hild., and Oehler; the others
reading Liburniim, except Elm., who reads -am, while Meursius
conjectured Liberjttn — " Bacchus."

'" Lit., "shameful impurity seeks after;" expetit read by Gele-
nius, Canterus, and OberthUr, for the unintelligible MS. reading expe-
ditur, retained in both Roman edd.; the others reading if.i/^rzVB''
— " tries."


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


479


and private houses destroyed and overthrown,
and that the infamous approaches to stews are
not without them ? Who beHeves that the Limi '
watch over obhquities ? who that Saturnus pre-
sides over the sown crops ? who that Montinus
is the guardian of mountains ; Murcia,^ of the
slothful ? Who, finally, would believe that Money
is a goddess, whom your writings declare, as
thougTi she were the greatest deity, to give golden
rings,^ the front seats at games and shows, hon-
ours in the greatest number, the dignity of the
magistracy, and that which the indolent love
most of all, — an undisturbed ease, by means of
riches.

10. But if you urge that bones, different kinds
of honey, thresholds, and all the other things
which we have either run over rapidly, or, to
avoid prolixity, passed by altogether, have ■* their
own peculiar guardians, we may in like manner
introduce a thousand other gods, who should
care for and guard innumerable things. For why
should a god have charge of honey only, and
not of gourds, rape, cunila, cress, figs, beets,
cabbages? Why should the bones alone have
found protection, and not the nails, hair, and all
the other things which are placed in the hidden
parts and members of which we feel ashamed,
and are exposed to very many accidents, and
stand more in need of the care and attention of
the gods ? Or if you say that these parts, too,
act under the care of their own tutelar deities,
there will begin to be as many gods as there are
things ; nor will the cause be stated why the
divine care does not protect all things, if you
say that there are certain things over which the
deities preside, and for which they care.

11. What say you, O fathers of new religions,
and powers? 5 Do you cry out, and complain
that these gods are dishonoured by us, and neg-
lected with profane contempt, viz., Lateranus,
the genius of hearths ; Limentinus, who presides
over thresholds ; Pertunda,^ Perfica, Noduteren-
sis : 7 and do you say that things have sunk into
ruin, and that the world itself has changed its
laws and constitution, because we do not bow


• The MS. reads Lemons ; Hild. and Oehler, Livtoncs : the
others, Limos, as above.

2 The MS., LB., Hild., and Oehler read Murcidatn ; the others,
Murciavi, as above.

3 i.e., equestrian rank.

■* The MS. reading is quid si haberet in sedibus suos, retained
by the first five edd., with the change oi -ret into -rettt — "what if
in their seats the bones had their own peculiar guardians; " Ursinus
in the margin, followed by Hild. and Oehler, reads in se divos suos
— " if for themselves the bones had gods as their own peculiar," etc.;
the other edd. reading, as above, si habere insisiitis suos.

- i.e., deities. So LB. and Orelli, reading quid fotestatuni ? —
what, O fathers of powers." The MS. gives qui — " what say you,
O fathers of new religions, who cry out, and complain that gods of
powers are indecently dishonoured by us, and neglected with impious
contempt," etc. Heraldus emends thus: "... fathers of great re-
ligions and powers? Do you, then, cry out," etc. " Fathers," i.e.,
those who discovered, and introduced, unknown deities and forms of
worship.

** The MS. reads pertus quie- (marked as spurious) dam ; and,
according to Hild., naeniavi is written over the latter word.

'' So the MS. Cf. ch. 7 [note 10, p. 478, supra\.


humbly in supplication to Mutunus^ and Tutunus ?
But now look and see, lest while you imagine
such monstrous things, and form such concep-
tions, you may have offended the gods who most
assuredly exist, if only there are any who are
worthy to bear and hold that most exalted titles
and it be for no other reason that those evils, of
which you speak, rage, and increase by accessions
every day.^ Why, then, some one of you will
perhaps say, do you maintain '° that it is not true
that these gods exist? x\nd, when invoked by
the diviners, do they obey the call, and come
when summoned by their own names, and give
answers which may be relied on, to those who
consult them ? We can show that what is said is
false, either because in the whole matter there
is the greatest room for distrust, or because we,
every day, see many of their predictions either
prove untrue, or wrested with baffled expectation
to suit the opposite issues.

12. But let them" be true, as you maintain,
yet will you have us also believe '- that Mellonia,
for example, introduces herself into the entrails,
or Limentinus, and that they set themselves to
make known '■' what you seek to learn? Did you
ever see their face, their deportment, their coun-
tenance ? or can even these be seen in lungs or
livers ? May it not happen, may it not come to
pass, although you craftily conceal it, that the one
should take the other's place, deluding, mock-
ing, deceiving, and presenting the appearance of
the deity invoked ? If the magi, who are so much
akin to '■* soothsayers, relate that, in their incanta-
tions, pretended gods '5 steal in frequently instead
of those invoked ; that some of these, moreover,
are spirits of grosser substance,'^ who pretend
that they are gods, and delude the ignorant by
their lies and deceit, — why ^^ should we not simi-
larly believe that here, too, others substitute
themselves for those who are not, that they may
both strengthen your superstitious beliefs, and
rejoice that victims are slain in sacrifice to them
under names not their own ?

13. Or, if you refuse to believe this on account
of its novelty,'^ how can you know whether there
is not some one, who comes in place of all whom
you invoke, and substituting himself in all parts


* The MS. is here very corrupt and imperfect, — supplices hoc
est itno procuntbiinus atque est ututto (Orelli omits tit-), emended
by Gelenius, with most edd., snpp. Mut-tmo proc. atqjte Tutuno, as
above; Elm. and LB. merely insert humi — "on the ground," after
supp. [See p. 478, note 6, sjipra.]

9 Meursius is of opinion that some words have slipped out of the
text here, and that some arguments had been introduced about
augury and divination.

1° Contendis, not found in the MS.

" i.e., the predictions.

'^ Lit., " will you make the same belief."

'3 Lit., " adapt themselves to the significations of the things
which."

'* Lit., "brothers of."

" i.e., demons.

'6 Perhaps " abilities " — tnateriis.

f The MS. reads cum — "with similar reason we may believe,"
instead o^ cur, as above.

" Lit., " novelty of the thing."


48o


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


of the world,' shows to you what appear to be ^

many gods and powers ? Who is that one ? some
one will ask. We may perhaps, being instructed
by truthful authors, be able to say ; but, lest you
should be unwilling to believe us, let my op-
Donent ask the Egyptians, Persians, Indians,
Chaldeans, Armenians, and all the others who
have seen and become acquainted with these
things in the more recondite arts. Then, indeed,
you will learn who is the one God, or who the very
many under Him are, who pretend to be gods,
and make sport of men's ignorance.

Even now we are ashamed to come to the
point at which not only boys, young and pert,
but grave men also, cannot restrain their laugh-
ter, and men who have been hardened into a
strict and stern humour.^ For while we have all
heard it inculcated and taught by our teachers,
that in declining the names of the gods there
was no plural number, because the gods were
individuals, and the ownership of each name
could not be common to a great many ; 4 you
in forge tfulness, and putting away the memory
of your early lessons, both give to several gods
the same names, and, although you are else-
where more moderate as to their number, have
multiplied them, again, by community of names ;
which subject, indeed, men of keen discernment
and acute intellect have before now treated both
in Latin and Greek. 5 And that might have les-
sened our hiboiir^ if it were not that at the same
time we see that some know nothing of these
books ; and, also, that the discussion which we
have begun, compels us to bring forward some-
thing on these subjects, although // lias been
already laid hold of, and related by those
wi'iters.

14. Your theologians, then, and authors on
unknown antiquity, say that in the universe there
are three Joves, one of whom has ^ther for his
father ; another, Coelus ; the third, Saturn, born
and buried ^ in the island of Crete. They speak
of five Suns and five Mercuries, — of whom, as
they relate, the first Sun is called the son of Ju-
piter, and is regarded as grandson of ^^ther ;
the second is also Jupiter's son, and the mother
who bore him Hyperiona ; ^ the third the son of


' Lit., " of places and divisions," i.e., places separated from each
other.

^ T.it., " affords to you the appearance of."

3 Lit., " a severity of stern manner " — moris for the Ms. marcs.

* Orelli here introduces the sentence, " For it cannot be," etc.,
with which this book is concluded in the Ms. Cf. ch. 37, n. 4, infra.

s There can be no doubt that Arnobius here refers to Clemens
Alexandrinus (Aoyos IIpoTpeTrriKos Trpbs 'EAAijj'as), and Cicero {de
Nat. Dcor.), from whom he borrows most freely in the following
chapters, quoting them at times very closely. AVe shall not indicate
particular references without some special reason, as it must be un-
derstood these references would be required with every statement.
[Compare Clement, vol. ii. pp. 305-13, and TertuUian, vol. iii. p. 34.]

'■ Lit., "given to us an abridging," i.e., an opportunity of abridg-
ing.

' Lit., " committed to sepulture and born in," etc.

8 Arnobius repeats this statement in ch. 22, or the name would
have been regarded as corrupt, no other author making mention of
such a goddess; while Cicero speaks of one Sun as born of Hyperion.


Vulcan, not Vulcan of Lemnos, but the son of

the Nile ; the fourth, whom Acantho bore at
Rhodes in the heroic age, was the father of
lalysus ; tahile the fifth is regarded as the son
of a Scythian king and subtle Circe. Again,
the first Mercury, who is said to have lusted
after Proserpina,^ is son of Coelus, who is above
all. Under the earth is the second, who boasts
that he is Trophonius. The third was born of
Maia, his mother, and the third Jove ; '° the fourth
is the offspring of the Nile, whose name the
people of Egypt dread and fear to utter. The
fifth is the slayer of Argus, a fugitive and ex-
ile, and the inventor of letters in Egypt. But
there are five Minervas also, they say, just as
there are five Suns and Mercuries ; the first of
whom is no virgin, but the mother of Apollo by
Vulcan j the second, the offspring of the Nile,
who is asserted to be the Egyptian Sais ; the
third is descended from Saturn, and is the one
who devised the use of arms ; the fourth is
sprung from Jove, and the Messenians name her
Coryphasia ; and the fifth is she who slew her
lustful " father, Pallas.

15. And lest it should seem tedious and pro-
lix to wish to consider each person singly, the
same theologians say that there are four Vulcans
and three Dianas, as many ^sculapii and five
Dionysi, six Hercules and four Venuses. three
sets of Castors and the same number of Muses,
three winged Cupids, and four named Apollo ; '^
whose fathers they mention in like manner, in
like manner their mothers, and the places where
they were born, and point out the origin and
family of each. But if it is true and certain,
and is told- in earnest as a Wif/Z-known matter,
either they are not all gods, inasmuch as there
cannot be several under the same name, as we
have been taught ; or if there is one of them, he
will not be known and recognised, because he is
obscured by the confusion of very similar names.
And thus it results from your own action, how-
ever unwilling you may be that it should be so,
that religion is brought into difficulty and con-
fusion, and has no fixed end to which it can turn
itself, without being made the sport of equivocal
illusions.

16. For suppose that it had occurred to us.


It would appear, therefore, to be very probable that Arnobius, in writ-
ing from memory or otherwise, has been here in some confusion as to
wiiat Cicero did say, and thus wrote the name as we have it. It has
also been proposed to read "born of Regina " (or, with Gelenius,
Rhea), "and his father Hyperion," because Cybele is termed
^ao-tAeia; for which reading there seems no good reason. — Imme-
diately below, lalysus is made the son, instead of, as in Cicero, the
grandson of the fourth; and again, Circe is said to be mother, while
Cicero speaks of lier as the daughter of the fifth Sun. These varia-
tions, viewed along with the general adherence to Cicero's statements
{de N. D., iii. 21 sqq.), seem to give good grounds for adopting the
explanation given above.

9 i.e., in Proserpinant genitalibiis adhimiivisse snbrectis.

'° Lit., "of Jupiter, but the third."

" i.e., inci'stonitn appetitorcin.

'- So Cicero (iii. 23) ; but Clemens [vol. ii. p. 179] speaks of five,
and notes that a sixth had been mentioned.


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


481


moved either by suitable influence or violent
fear of you,' to worship Minerva, for example,
with the rights you deem sacred, and the usual
ceremony : if, when we prepare sacrifices, and
approach to make the offerings appointed for her
on the flaming altars, all the Minervas shall fly
thither, and striving for the right to that name,
each demand that the ofierings prepared be given
to herself; what drawn-out animal shall we place
among them, or to whom shall we direct the
sacred ofiflces which are our duty ? - For the first
one of whom we spoke will perhaps say : " The
name Minerva is mine, mine ■'' the divine majesty,
who bore Apollo and Diana, and by the fruit of my
womb enriched heaven with deities, and multi-
plied the number of the gods." " Nay, Minerva,"
the fifth will say, •'• are you speaking,-* who, being
a wife, and so often a mother, have lost the sanc-
tity of spotless purity? Do you not see that in
all temples 5 the images of Minervas are those
of virgins, and that all artists refrain from giving
to them the figures of matrons?*^ Cease, there-
fore, to appropriate to yourself a name not right-
fully 7 yours. For that I am Minerva, begotten
of father Pallas, the whole band of poets bear
witness, who call me Pallas, the surname being
derived from my father." The second will cry
on hearing this : •' What say you? Do you, then,
bear the name of Minerva, an impudent parri-
cide, and one defiled by the pollution of lewd
lust, who, decking yourself with rouge and a
harlot's arts, roused upon yourself even your
father's passions, full of maddening desires ? Go
further, then, seek for yourself another name ;
for this belongs to me, whom the Nile, greatest
of rivers, begot from among his flowing waters,
and brought to a maiden's estate from the con-
densing of moisture.^ But if you inquire into
the credibility of the matter, I too will bring as
witnesses the Eg}'ptians, in whose language I
am called Neith, as Plato's Tinmiis'^ attests."
What, then, do we suppose will be the result?
^Vill she indeed cease to say that she is Minerva,

' Lit., " by the violence of your terror." The preceding words are
read in the MS. ideo viotos — "so moved by authority," and were
emended idonea, as in the text, by Gelenius.

2 Lit., "to what parts shall we transfer the duties of pious
service."

3 The MS. reads cum nuinen; Rigaltius, followed by Oehler,
emending, as above, meitm; the first fouredd., with Oberthlir, Uim
— "then the deity is mine;" while the rest read cum iiumine —
" with the deity."

•* So LB., Orelli, and Oehler, reading tic tinnis for the MS.
tutuiiis.

5 Capitoliis. Li the Capitol were three shrines, — to Jove, Juno,
and Minerva; and Roman colonies followed the mother-state's e.xam-
ple. Hence the present general application of the term, which is
found elsewhere in ecclesiastical Latin.

'' Lit., " Nor are the forms of married persons given to these by
all artists; " iiec read in all edd. for the MS. et — " and of married,"
etc., which is opposed to the context.

" Lit., " not of your own right."

^ Concrctionc roris — a strange phrase. Cf. Her., iv. i8o:
" They say that Minerva is the daughter of Poseidon and the Tri-
tonian lake."

9 St. p. 21. The MS. reads quorum Nili lingua latonis; the two
Roman edd. merely insert/., Plat. ; Gelenius and Canterus adding
dicof — "in whose language I am called the Nile's," Nili being
changed into Ncith by Elmenhorst and later edd.


who is named Coryphasia, either to mark her
mother, or because she sprung forth from the
top of Jove's head, bearing a shield, and girt
with the terror of arms ? Or are we to sup-
pose that she who is third will quietly surrender
the name ? and not argue '° and resist the as-
sumption of the first tiuo with such words as
these : " Do you thus dare to assume the honour
of my name, O Sais," sprung from the mud and
eddies of a stream, and formed in mir_\' places ?
Or do you usurp '- another's rank, who falsely
say that you were born a goddess from the head
of Jupiter, and persuade very silly men that you
are reason ? Does he conceive and bring forth
children from his head? That the arms you
bear might be forged and formed, was there even
in the hollow of his head a smith's workshop?
were there anvils, hammers, furnaces, bellows,
coals, and pincers ? Or if, as you maintain, it is
true that you are reason, cease to claim for your-
self the name which is mine ; for reason, of which
you speak, is not a certain form of deity, but
the understanding of difficult questions." If,
then, as we have said, five Minervas should meet
us when we essay to sacrifice, '^ and contending
as to whose this name is, each demand that
either fumigations of incense be offered to her,
or sacrificial wines poured out from golden cups ;
by what arbiter, by what judge, shall we dispose
of so great a dispute? or what examiner will
there be, what umpire of so great boldness as to
attempt, with such personages, either to give a
just decision, or to declare their causes not
founded on right ? Will he not rather go home,
and, keeping himself apart from such matters,
think it safer to have nothing to do with them,
lest he should either make enemies of the rest,
by giving to one what belongs to all, or be
charged with folly for yielding ''* to all what should
be the property of one ?

I 7. ^^^e may say the very same things of the
Mercuries, the Suns. — indeed of all the others
whose numbers 3'ou increase and multiply. But
it is sufficient to know from one case that the
same principle applies to the rest ; and, lest our
prolixity should chance to weary our audience,
we shall cease to deal with individuals, lest, while
we accuse you of excess, we also should ourselves
be exposed to tlie charge of excessive loquacity.
What do you say, you who, by the fear ^bodily
tortures, urge us to worship the gods, and con-
strain us to undertake the service of your deities ?
We can be easily won, if only something befitting
the conception of so great a race be shown to
us. Show us Mercurv, but onlv one ; give us


'° Lit., " take accoimt of her.self "

" So tJrsinus suggested in the margin for the MS. siveruin.
'^ The third Minerva now addresses the fourth.
'3 Lit., " approaching the duties of religion."

'■* According to the MS. sic — " for so (i.e., as you do) yielding,"
etc.


482


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


Bacchus, but only one ; one Venus, and in like
manner one Diana. For you will never make us
believe that there are four Apollos, or three
Jupiters, not even if you were to call Jove him-
self as witness, or make the Pythian god your
authority.

1 8. But some one on the opposite side says,
How do we know whether the theologians have
written what is certain and well known, or set
forth a wanton fiction,' as they thought and
judged? That has nothing to do with the mat-
ter ; nor does the reasonableness of your argu-
ment depend upon this, — whether the facts are
as the writings of the theologians state, or are
otherwise and markedly different. For to us it
is enough to speak of things which come before
the public ; and ive 7ieed not inquire what is true,
but only confute and disprove that which lies
open to all, and which men's thoughts have gen-
erally received. But if they are liars, declare
yourselves what is the truth, and disclose the
unassailable mystery. And how can it be done
when the services of men of letters are set aside ?
For what is there which can be said about
the immortal gods that has not reached men's
thoughts from what has been written by men
on these subjects?- Or can you relate anything
yourselves about their rights and ceremonies,
which has not been recorded in books, and made
known by what authors have written ? Or if you
think these of no importance, let all the books
be destroyed which have been composed about
the gods for you by theologians, pontiffs, aiid
even some devoted to the study of philosophy ;
nay, let us rather suppose that from the foun-
dation of the world no man ever wrote ^ anything
about the gods : we wish to find out, and desire
to know, whether you can mutter or murmur
in mentioning the gods,-* or conceive those in
thought to whom no idea s from any book gave
shape in your minds. But when it is clear that
you have been informed of their names and
powers by the suggestions of books,^ it is unjust
to deny the reliableness of these books by whose
testimony and authority you establish what you
say.

19. But perhaps these things will turn out to
be false, and what you say to be true. By what
proof, by what evidence, will it be shown ? For
since both parties are men, both those who have
said the one thing and those who have said the
other, and on both sides the discussion was of
doubtful matters, it is arrogant to say that that is


' So all the edd., though Orelli approves q>{ fictione (edd. -efn),
which is, he says, the MS. reading, " set forth with wanton fiction."

^ The MS. and earlier edd., with Hild. and Oehler, read ex homi-
jutm lie scriptis; LB. and Orelli inserting his after de, as above.

3 The MS. and both Roman edd. read esse, which is clearly cor-
rupt; for which LB. gives scripsisse (misprinted scripse), as above.

■* i.e., " speak of them at all."

S Lit., " an idea of no writing."

^ Lit., " been informed by books suggesting to you," etc.


true which seems so to you, but that that which
offends your feelings manifests wantonness and
falsehood. By the laws of the human race, and
the associations of mortality itself, when you
read and hear. That god was born of this father
and of that mother, do you not feel in your mind^
that something is said which belongs to man, and
relates to the meanness of our earthly race ? Or,
while you think that it is so,^ do you conceive no
anxiety lest you should in something offend the
gods themselves, whoever they are, because you
believe that it is owing to filthy intercourse . . .'>
that they have reached the light they knew not
of, thanks to lewdness? For we, lest any one
should chance to think that we are ignorant of,
do not know, what befits the majesty of that
name, assuredly '° think that the gods should not
know birth ; or if they are born at all, we hold
and esteem that the Lord and Prince of the uni-
verse, by ways which He knew Himself, sent
them forth spotless, most pure, undefiled, igno-
rant of sexual pollution," and brought to the full
perfection of their natures as soon as they were
begotten ? '-

20. But you, on the contrary, forgetting how
great '^ their dignity and grandeur are, associate
with them a birth,'-'and impute A? ///^;;; a descent,'-*
which men of at all refined feelings regard as
at once execrable and terrible. From Ops, you
say, his mother, and from his father Saturn, Dies-
piter was born with his brothers. Do the gods,
then, have wives ; and, the matches having been
previously planned, do they become subject to
the bonds of marriage? Do they take upon
themselves '5 the engagements of the bridal couch
by prescription, by the cake of spelt, and by a
pretended sale? '^ Have they their mistresses,'^
their promised wives, their betrothed brides,
on settled conditions? And what do we say
about their marriages, too, when indeed you say
that some celebrated their nuptials, and enter-
tained joyous throngs, and that the goddesses
sported at these ; and that some threw all things
into utter confusion with dissensions because
they had no share in singing the Fescennine
verses, and occasioned danger and destruction '^
to the next generation of men ? '^

7 Lit., " does it not touch the feeling of your mind."
^ Ursinus would supply eos — " that they are so."
9 Atque ex seminis, actu, or jactu, as the edd. except Hild.
read it.

■° The MS. reads dignitatis aiit ; corrected, as above, d. sane, in
the first five edd., Oberthiir, and Orelli. [John .\. 35.]

" QucEsit foeditas ista coeitndi.

'- Lit., " as far as to themselves, their first generation being com-
pleted."

i^ Lit., " forgetting the so great majesty and sublimity."

I* Both plural,

'5 The MS., first four edd., and Oberthiir read conduciint —
" unite ; " for which the rest read condic-unt, as above.

'6 i.e., usu,/arre, coejnptione.

'7 The word here translated mistresses, speratas, is used of maidens
loved, but not yet asked in marriage.

'8 Lit., " dangers of destructions."

'9 Instead of " occasioned," sevisse, which the later editions give,
the MS. and first four edd. read seevisse — " that danger and destruc-
tion raged against," etc.


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


48:


21. But perhaps this foul pollution may be
less apparent in the rest. Did, then, the ruler
of the heavens, the father of gods and men, who,
by the motion of his eyebrow, and by his nod,
shakes the whole heavens and makes them trem-
ble, — did he find his origin in man and woman ?
And unless both sexes abandoned tlicmselves to
degrading pleasures ni sensual embraces,' would
there be no Jupiter, greatest of all ; and even
to this time would the divinities have no king,
and heaven stand without its lord? And why
do we marvel that you say Jove sprang from a
woman's womb, seeing that your authors relate
that he both had a nurse, and in the next place
maintaified the life given to him by nourishment
drawn from a foreign ^ breast ? What say you,
O men? Did, then, shall I repeat, the god who
makes the thunder crash, lightens and hurls the
thunderbolt, and draws together terrible clouds,
drink in the streams of the breast, wail as an
infant, creep about, and, that he might be
persuaded to cease his crying most fooUshly
protracted, was he made silent by the noise of
rattles,^ and put to sleep lying in a very soft
cradle, and lulled with broken words ? O devout
assertion of the existence of gods, pointing out
and declaring the venerable majesty of their
awful grandeur ! Is it thus in your opinion, I
ask, that the exalted powers ■* of heaven are pro-
duced? do your gods come forth to the light
by modes of birth such as these, by which asses,
pigs, dogs, by which the whole of this unclean
herd 5 of earthly beasts is conceived and be-
gotten ?

22. And, not content to have ascribed these
carnal unions to the venerable Saturn,^ you affirm
that the king of the world himself begot children
even more shamefully than he was himself born
and begotten. Of Hyperiona,^ as his mother,
you say, and Jupiter, who wields the thunder-
bolt, was born the golden and blazing Sun ; of
Latona and the same, the Delian archer, and
Diana,** who rouses the woods ; of Leda and the
same,9 those named in Greek Dioscori ; of Alc-
mena and the same, the Theban Hercules, whom
his club and hide defended ; of him and Semele,
Liber, who is named Bromius, and was born a


' Copulatis corporihiis.

2 i.e., not his mother's, but the dug of the goat Amalthea.

3 Lit., " rattles heard."

^ Lit., " the eminence of the powers."

•5 Lit., " inundation."

* Lit., " Saturnian gravity."

7 Cf. ch. 14, note 8, supra.

' It is worth while to compare this passage with ch. 16. Here
Arnobius makes Latona the mother of Apollo and Diana, in accord-
ance with the common legend; but there he represents the first Mi-
nerva as claiming them as her children.

9 In the ms. there is here an evident blunder on the part of the
copyist, who has inserted the preceding line (" the archer Apollo, and
of the woods ") after " the same." Omitting these words, the Ms.
reading is literally, " the name in Greek is to the Dioscori." Before
"the name " some word is pretty generally supposed to have been
lost, some conjecturing "to whom; " others (among them Orelli, fol-
lowing Salmasius) " Castores." But it is evidently not really neces-
sary to supplement the text.


second time from his father's thigh ; of him,
again, and Maia, Mercury, eloquent in speech,
and bearer of the harmless snakes. Can any
greater insult be put upon your Jupiter, or is
there anything else which will destroy and ruin
the reputation of the chief of the gods, further
than that you believe him to have been at times
overcome by vicious pleasures, and to have
glowed with the passion of a heart roused to
lust after women ? And what had the Saturnian
king to do with strange nuptials? Did Juno
not suffice him ; and could he not stay the
force of his desires on the queen of the deities,
although so great excellence graced her, such
beauty, majesty of countenance, and snowy and
marble whiteness of arms ? Or did he, not con-
tent with one wife, taking pleasure in concubines,
mistresses, and courtezans, a lustful god, show '"
his incontinence in all directions, as is the cus-
tom with dissolute" youths; and in old age,
after intercourse with numberless persons, did
he renew his eagerness for pleasures now losing
their zest ? What say you, profane ones ; or
what vile thoughts do you fashion about your
Jove? Do you not, then, observe, do you not
see with what disgrace you brand him ? of what
wrong-doing you make him the author? or what
stains of vice, how great infamy you heap upon
him?

23. Men, though prone to lust, and inclined,
through weakness of character, to yield to the
allurements of sensual pleasures, still punish adul-
tery by the laws, and visit with the penalty of
death those whom they find to have possessed
themselves of others' rights by forcing the mar-
riage-bed. The greatest of kings, hotaever, you
tell us, did not know how vile, how infamous the
person of the seducer and adulterer was ; and
he who, as is said, examines our merits and
demerits, did not, owing to the reasonings of his
abandoned heart, see what was the fitting course
for him to resolve on. But this misconduct
might perhaps be endured, if you were to con-
join him with persons at least his equals, and //
he were made by you the paramour of the im-
mortal goddesses. But what beauty, what grace
was there, I ask you, in human bodies, which
could move, which could turn to it '- the eyes of
Jupiter? Skin, entrails, phlegm, and all that
filthy mass placed under the coverings of the in-
testines, which not Lynceus only with his search-
ing gaze can shudder at, but any other also can
de made to turn from even by merely thinking.
O wonderful reward of guilt, O fitting and pre-
cious joy, for which Jupiter, the greatest, should
become a swan, and a bull, and beget white eggs !


'° Lit., "scatter."

'* Orelli reads, with the MS., LB., and Hild., babecali, which he
interprets belli, i.e., " handsome."

'^ MS. and first five edd. read inde — " thence; " the others iti se,
as above. [Elucidation III.]


484


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


24. If you will open your minds' eyes, and
see the real ' truth without gratifying any private
end, you will find that the causes of all the
miseries by which, as you say, the human race
has long been afflicted, flow from such beliefs
which you held in former times about your gods ;
and which you have refused to amend, although
the truth was placed before your eyes. For
what about them, pray, have we indeed ever
either imagined which was unbecoming, or put
forth in shameful writings that the troubles which
assail men and the loss of the blessings of life -
should be used to excite a prejudice against us?
Do we say that certain gods were produced from
eggs,3 like storks and pigeons ? Do we say that
the radiant Cytherean Venus grew up, having
taken form from the sea's foam and the severed
genitals of Coelus ? that Saturn was thrown into
chains for parricide, and relieved from their
weight only on his own days ? ^ that Jupiter was
saved from death 5 by the services of the Curetes ?
that he drove his father from the seat of power,
and by force and fraud possessed a sovereignty
not his own ? Do we say that his aged sire, when
driven out, concealed himself in the territories
of the Itali, and gave his name as a gift to La-
tium,^ because he had been tJiere protected from
his son ? Do we say that Jupiter himself incestu-
ously married his sister? or, instead of pork,
breakfasted in ignorance upon the son of Lycaon,
when invited to his table? that Vulcan, limping
on one foot, wrought as a smith in the island of
Lemnos? that yEsculapius was transfixed by a
thunderbolt because of his greed and avarice, as
the Boeotian Pindar ^ sings ? that Apollo, having
become rich, by his ambiguous responses, de-
ceived the very kings by whose treasures and
gifts he had been enriched? Did we declare
that Mercury was a thief? that Laverna is so also,
and along with him presides over secret frauds ?
Is the wTiter Myrtilus one of us, who declares
that the Muses were the handmaids of Megalcon,^
daughter of Macarus?^

25. Did we say '" that Venus was a courtezan,
deified by a Cyprian king named Cinyras ? Who


' Orelli, without receiving into the text, approves of the reading
of Stewechius,/ro;«//rt»«, "evident," for the lAi,., p7-opriai>i.

- Lit., " the benefits diminished by which it is lived."

3 The MS. reads ex Jovis; the first five edd. Jove — " from Jove,"
which is altogether out of place; the others, as above, e.x ovis. Cf.
i. 36.

■* The MS. reads et abliii diebiis taiitis . . . elevari; LB., Hild.,
and Oehler, statis or statu tis . . . ct Ici'ari — " and was loosed and
released on fixed days; " Elm., Oberthiir, and Orelli receive the con-
jecture of Ursinus, et siiz's diebus tantutn . . . ret., as above.

5 Cf. iii. [cap. 41, p. 475, and cap. 30, p. 472].

^ i.e., hiding-place. Virg., /En., viii. 322: Quoniatn latuisset
tut lis in oris.

'' Pyth., iii. 102 sq.

8 MS. Mcglac.

9 The MS. and most edd. g'ne^lias, making the Muses daughters
of Macarus; but Orelli, Hild., and Oehler adopt, as above, the read-
ing of Canterus, Jztiee, in accordance with Clem. Alex.

'° So the MS. reading niimqicid dictatuvi, which would refer this
sentence to the end of the last chapter. Gelenius, with Canth.,
Oberth., and Orelli, reads qnis ditatam, and joins with the following
sentence thus: "Who related that Venus, a courtezan enriched by
C , was deified . . . ? who that the palladium," etc. Cf. v. 19.


reported that the palladium was formed from
the remains of Pelops ? Was it not you ? Who
that Mars was Spartanus ? was it not your writer
Epicharmus ? Who that he was born within the
confines of Thrace? was it not Sophocles the
Athenian, with the assent of all his spectators ?
Who thai he was born in Arcadia ? was it not
you? W^ho that he w^as kept a prisoner for thir-
teen months?" was it not the son of the river
Meles ? Who said that dogs were sacrificed to
him by the Carians, asses by the Scythians ? was
it not Apollodorus especially, along with the
rest? Who that in wTonging another's marriage
couch, he was caught entangled in snares? was
it not your writings, your tragedies? Did we
ever write that the gods for hire endured slavery,
as Hercules at Sardis '^ for lust and wantonness ;
as the Delian Apollo, who served Admetus, as
Jove's brother, who served the Trojan Laomedon,
whom the Pythian also served, but with his uncle ;
as Minerva, who gives light, and trims the lamps
to secret lovers ? Is not he one of your poets,
who represented Mars and Venus as wounded
by men's hands ? Is not Panyassis one of you,
w'ho relates that father Dis and queenly Juno
were wounded by Hercules ? Do not the writ-
ings of your Polemo say that Pallas '^ was slain, '••
covered with her own blood, overwhelmed by
Ornytus? Does not Sosibius declare that Her-
cules himself was afflicted by the wound and
pain he suffered at the hands of Hipocoon's chil-
dren ? Is it related at our instance that Jupiter
was committed to the grave in the island of
Crete ? Do we say that the brothers, '5 who were
united in their cradle, were buried in the terri-
tories of Sparta and LacedcCmon? Is the author
of our number, who is termed Patrocles the
Thurian in the titles of his writings, who relates
that the tomb and remains of Saturn are found '*"
in Sicily? Is Plutarch of Chceronea '" esteemed
one of us, who said that Hercules was reduced
to ashes on the top of Mount Gilta, after his loss
of strength through epilepsy ?

26. But what shall I say of the desires with
which it is written in your books, and contained
in your writers, that the holy immortals lusted
after women? For is it by us that the king of


" The MS. reads quis mensibus in Arcadia tribus et decent
vinctunt — "Who that he was bound thirteen months in Arcadia?
was it not the son," etc. To which there are these two objections,

— that Homer never says so ; and thai Clemens Alexandrinus [vol.
ii. p. 179, this series], from whom Arnobius here seems to draw,
speaks of Homer as saying only that Mars was so bound, without
referring to Arcadia. The MS. reading may have arisen from care-
lessness on the part of Arnobius in quoting (cf. ch. 14, n. 2), or may
be a corruption of the copyists. The reading translated is an emen-
dation by Jortin, adopted by Orelli.

■- Sardibus, — a conjecture of Ursinus, adopted by LB., Hild.,
and Oehler for the MS. sordibiis; for which the others read sordidi

— " for the sake of base lust."
'3 Lit., " the masculine one."

'■* As this seems rather extravagant when said of one of the im-
mortals, Icesain, " hurt," has been proposed by Meursius.

'5 Castor and Pollux.

'^ Lit., " contained."

17 The MS. reads Hieronymus PI — "is Hier., is PI.," whilf
Clem. Alex, mentions only " Hieronymus the philosopher."


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


485


the sea is asserted in the heat of maddened
passion to have robbed of their virgin purity
Amphitrite,' Hippothoe, Amymone, Menahppe,
Alope?'^ that the spotless Apollo, Latona's son,
most chaste and pure, with the passions of a
breast not governed by reason, desired Arsinoe,
^thusa, Hypsipyle, Marpessa, Zeuxippe, and
Prothoe, Daphne, and Sterope ? ' Is it shown
in our poems that the aged Saturn, already long
covered with grey hair, and now cooled by
weight of years, being taken by his wife in adul-
tery, put on the form of one of the lower animals,
and neighing loudly, escaped in the shape of a
beast? Do you not accuse Jupiter himself of
having assumed countless forms, and concealed
by mean deceptions the ardour of his wanton
lust? Have we ever written that he obtained his
desires by deceit, at one time changing into gold,
at another mto a sportive satyr ; into a serpent,
a bird, a bull ; and, to pass beyond all limits of
disgrace, into a little ant, that he might, forsooth,
make Clitor's daughter the mother of Myrmidon,
in Thessaly? Who represented him as having
watched over Alcmena for nine nights without
ceasing ? was it not you ? — that he indolently
abandoned himself to his lusts, forsaking his post
in heaven? was it not you? And, indeed, you
ascribe ^ to him no mean favours ; since, in your
opinion, the god Hercules was born to exceed
and surpass in such matters his father's powers.
He in nine nights begot •♦ with difficulty one son ;
but Hercules, a holy god, in one night taught the
fifty daughters of Thestius at once to lay aside
their virginal title, and to bear a mother's bur-
den. Moreover, not content to have ascribed
to the gods love of women, do you also say that
they lusted after men ? Some one loves Hylas ;
another is engaged with Hyacinthus ; that one
burns with desire for Pelops ; this one sighs
more ardently for Chrysippus ; Catamitus is
carried off to be a favourite and cup-bearer ;
and Fabius, that he may be called Jove's darling,
is branded on the soft parts, and marked in the
hinder.

27. But among you, is it only the males who
lust ; and has the female sex preserved its puri-
ty ?5 Is it not proved in your books that Titho-
nus was loved by Aurora ; that Luna lusted after
Endymion ; the Nereid after yEacus ; Thetis
after Achilles' father ; Proserpina after Adonis ;
her mother, Ceres, after some rustic Jasion, and
afterwards Vulcan, Phaeton,^ Mars ; Venus her-
self, the mother of yEneas, and founder of the


' These names are all in the plural in the original.

2 So LB. and Orelli, reading Alopas, from Clem. k\e.x.., for the
MS. Alcyonas.

3 Lit., "you add."

"» In the original, somewh.it at large — unam pottiit prolan ex-
tundere, concijinare, compingere.

5 All edd. read this without mark of interrogation.

*> The MS. reads Pkcetontem: for which, both here and in Clem.,
Potter proposed Phaotiem, because no such amour is mentioned else-
where.


Roman power, to marry Anchises ? While, there-
fore, you accuse, without making any exception,
not one only by name, but the whole of the gods
alike, in whose existence you beheve, of such
acts of extraordinary shamefulness and baseness,
do you dare, without violation of modesty, to
say either that we are impious, or that you are
pious, although they receive from you much
greater occasion for offence on account of all
the shameful acts which you heap up to their
reproach, than in connection with the service
and duties required by their majesty, honour,
and worship? For either all these things are
false which you bring forward about them indi-
vidually, lessening their credit and reputation ;
and it is in that case a matter quite deserving,
that the gods should utterly destroy the race of
men ; or if they are true and certain, and per-
ceived without any reasons for doubt, it comes to
this issue, that, however unwilling you may be,
we believe them to be not of heavenly, but of
earthly birth.

28. For where there are weddings, marriages,
births, nurses, arts,^ and weaknesses ; where there
are liberty and slavery ; where there are wounds,
slaughter, and shedding of blood ; where there
are lusts, desires, sensual pleasures ; where there
is every mental passion arising from disgusting
emotions, — there must of necessity be nothing
godlike there ; nor can that cleave to a superior
nature which belongs to a fleeting race, and to
the frailty of earth. For who, if only he recog-
nises and perceives what the nature of that power
is, can believe either that a deity had the genera-
tive members, and was deprived of them by a
very base operation ; or that he at one time cut
off the children sprung from himself, and was
punished by suffering imprisonment ; or that he,
in a way, made civil war upon his father, and
deprived him of the right of governing ; or that
he, filled with fear of one younger when over-
come, turned to flight, and hid in remote soli-
tudes, like a fugitive and exile ? Who, I say, can
believe that the deity reclined at men's tables,
was troubled on account of his avarice, deceived
his suppliants by an ambiguous reply, excelled
in the tricks of thieves, committed adultery,
acted as a slave, was wounded, and in love, and
submitted to the seduction of impure desires in
all the forms of lust? But yet you declare all
these things both were, and are, in your gods ;
and you pass by no form of vice, wickedness,
error, without bringing it forward, in the wanton-
ness of your fancies, to the reproach of the gods.
You must, therefore, either seek out other gods,
to whom all these reproaches shall not apply, for
they are a human and earthly race to whom they


^ i.e., either the arts which belong to each god (cf the words in
ii. 18: " these (arts) are not the gifts of science, but the discoveries
of necessity"), or, referring to the words immediately preceding,
obstetric arts.


486


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


apply ; or if there are only these whose names
and character you have declared, by your be-
liefs you do away with them : for all the things
of which you speak relate to men.

29. And here, indeed, we can show that all
those whom you represent to us as and call gods,
were but men, by quoting either Euhemerus of
Acragas,' whose books were translated by Ennius
into Latin that all might be thoroughly acquaint-
ed ivith them ; or Nicanor^ the Cyprian ; or the
Pellaean Leon ; or Theodorus of Gyrene ; or
Hippo and Diagoras of Melos ; or a thousand
other writers, who have minutely, industriously, j
and carefully ^ brought secret things to light with
noble candour. We may, I repeat, at pleasure, !
declare both the acts of Jupiter, and the wars of j
Minerva and the virgin ■* Diana ; by what strata- j
gems Liber strove to make himself master of the I
Indian empire ; what was the condition, the duty, ]
the gain s of Venus ; to whom the great mother
was bound in marriage ; what hope, what joy
was aroused in her by the comely Attis ; whence
came the Egyptian Serapis and Isis, or for what
reasons their very names ^ were formed.

30. But in the discussion which we at present
maintain, we do not undertake this trouble or
service, to show and declare who all these were.
But this is what we proposed to ourselves, that
as you call us impious and irreligious, and, on
the other hand, maintain that you are pious and
serve the gods, we should prove and make mani-
fest that by no men are they treated with less
respect than by you. But if it is proved by the
very insults that it is so, it must, as a conse-
quence, be understood that it is you who rouse
the gods to fierce and terrible rage, because you
either listen to or believe, or yourselves invent
about them, stories so degrading. For it is not
he who is anxiously thinking of religious rites, ^
and slays spotless victims, who gives piles of in-
cense to be burned with fire, not he must be
thought to worship the deities, or alone discharge
the duties of religion. True worship is in the
heart, and a belief worthy of the gods ; nor does
it at all avail to bring blood and gore, if you
believe about them things which are not only far
remote from and unlike their nature, but even to
some extent stain and disgrace both their dignity
and virtue.

31. We wish, then, to question you, and in-
vite you to answer a short question. Whether
you think it a greater offence to sacrifice to them


' Lit., " Euhemerus being opened."

2 So Elm. and Orelli, reading Nicanore for the MS. Nicagora,
retained by all other edd.

^ Lit., " with the care of scrupulous diligence."

•• Meursius would join virgiiiis to Minerva, thinking it an allu-
sion to her title \\ap6ivo<i,

5 These terms are employed of hetserse.

^ Lit., " the title itself of their names was."

7 Qiti soUicite re'egii. Rclegit is here used by Amobius to de-
note the root of religio, and has therefore some such meaning as that
given above. Cf. Cicero, de Nat. Deorum, ii. 28.


no victims, because you think that so great a
being neither wishes nor desires these ; or, with
foul beliefs, to hold opinions about them so de-
grading, that they might rouse any one's spirit
to a mad desire for revenge? If the relative
importance of the matters be weighed, you will
find no judge so prejudiced as not to believe it
a greater crime to defame by manifest insults
any one's reputation, than to treat it with silent
neglect. For this, perhaps, may be held and
believed from deference to reason ; but the other
course manifests an impious spirit, and a blind-
ness despaired of in fiction. If in your cere-
monies and rites neglected sacrifices and expia-
tory offerings may be demanded, guilt is said to
have been contracted ; if by a momentary for-
getfulness '^ any one has erred either in speaking
or in pouring wine ; 9 or again, '° if at the solemn
games and sacred races the dancer has halted,
or the musician suddenly become silent, — you
all cry out immediately that something has
been done contrary to the sacredness of the cere-
monies ; or if the boy termed patrimus let go
the thong in ignorance," or could not hold to the
earth : '^ and yet do you dare to deny that the
gods are ever being wronged by you in sins so
grievous, while you confess yourselves that, in
less matters, they are often angry, to the national
ruin ?

32. But all these things, they say, are the fic-
tions of poets, and games arranged for pleasure.
It is not credible, indeed, that men by no means
thoughtless, who sought to trace out the char-
acter of the remotest antiquity, either did not '^
insert in their poems the fables which survived
in men's minds '•♦ and common conversation ; '5
or that they would have assumed to themselves
so great licence as to foolishly feign what was
almost sheer madness, and might give them
reason to be afraid of the gods, and bring them
into danger with men. But let us grant that
the poets are, as you say, the inventors and
authors of tales so disgraceful ; you are not,
however, even thus free from the guilt of dis-
honouring the gods, who either are remiss in
punishing such offences, or have not, by passing
laws, and by severity of punishments, opposed


8 Lit., " an error of inadvertence."

9 Lit., " with the sacrificial bowl."

1° So the MS., both Roman edd.. Elm., Hild., and Oehler, reading
rursics; the others in ciirsu — "in the course."

'' Patritmis, i.e., one whose father is alive, is probably used
loosely for patrimus et tnatrimits, to denote one both of whose
parents were alive, who was therefore eligible for certain religious
services.

'- So the MS. reading terrain tencrc, for which Hild would read
tensain, denoUng the car on which were borne the images of the
gods, the thongs or reins of which were held by the fatritnus ef
matriimis; Lipsius, siserrain, the sacrificial victim. The reading
of the text has been explained as meaning to touch the ground with
one's hands; but the general meaning is clear enough, — that it was
unlucky if the boy made a slip, either with hands or feet.

'3 Oberthiir and Orelli omit non.

'■* Lit., " notions."

'S Lit., " placed in their ears."


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


487


such indiscretion, and determined ' that no man
should henceforth say that which tended to the
dishonour,- or was unworthy of the glory of the
gods. 3 ■ For whoever allows the wrongdoer to
sin, strengthens his audacity ; and it is more in-
sulting to brand and mark any one with false
accusations, than to bring forward and upbraid
their real offences. For to be called what you
are, and what you feel yourself to be, is less
offensive, because your resentment is checked by
the evidence supplied against you on privately
reviewing your life ; "♦ but that wounds very
keenly which brands the innocent, and defames
a man's honourable name and reputation.

2,T^. Your gods, it is recorded, dine on celes-
tial couches, and in golden chambers, drink,
and are at last soothed by the music of the
lyre, and singing. You fit them with ears not
easily wearied ; 5 and do not think it unseemly
to assign to the gods the pleasures by which
earthly bodies are supported, and which are
sought after by ears enervated by the frivolity of
an unmanly spirit. Some of them are brought
forward in the character of lovers, destroyers of
purity, to commit shameful and degrading deeds
not only with women, but with men also. You
take no care as to what is said about matters of
so much importance, nor do you check, by any
fear of chastisement at least, the recklessness
of your wanton literature ; others, through mad-
ness and frenzy, bereave themselves, and by the
slaughter of their own relatives cover themselves
with blood, just as though it were that of an
enemy. You wonder at these loftily expressed
imipieties ; and that which it was fitting should
be subjected to all punishments, you extol with
praise that spurs them on, so as to rouse their
recklessness to greater vehemence. They mourn
over the wounds of their bereavement, and with
unseemly wailings accuse the cruel fates ; you
are astonished at the force of their eloquence,
carefully study and commit to memory that
which should have been wholly put away from
human society,^ and are solicitous that it should
not perish through any forgetfulness. They are
spoken of as being wounded, maltreated, mak-
ing war upon each other with hot and furious
contests ; you enjoy the description ; and, to
enable you to defend so great daring in the
writers, pretend that these things are allegories,
and contain the principles of natural science.


' Lit., " and it has not been established by you," — a very abrupt
transition in the structure of the sentence.

^ Lit., " which was very near to disgrace."

3 So the margin of Ursinus, followed by later edd., prefixing^
before the ms. -eorieitt.

* Lit., " has less bile, being weakened by the testimony of silent
reviewing," recogjiitionis.

s Lit., " most enduring."

* Coetu. The ms. and most edd. read coalitu, — a word not
occurring elsewhere; which Gesner would explain, " put away that
it may not be established among men," the sense being the same in
cither case.


34. But why do I complain that you have
disregarded the insults ^ offered to the other
deities? That very Jupiter, whose name you
should not have spoken without fear and trem-
bhng over your whole body, is described as con-
fessing his faults when overcome by lust ^ of his
wife, and, hardened in shamelessness, making
known, as if he were mad and ignorant,'^ the mis-
tresses he preferred to his spouse, the concu-
bines he preferred to his wife ; you say that
those who have uttered so marvellous things are
chiefs and kings among poets endowed with god-
like genius, that they are persons most holy ;
and so utterly have you lost sight of your duty
in the matters of religion which you bring for-
ward, that words are of more importance, in
your opinion, than the profaned majesty of the
immortals. So then, if only you felt any fear of
the gods, or believed with confident and unhesi-
tating assurance that they existed at all, should
you not, by bills, by popular votes, by fear of
the senate's decrees, have hindered, prevented,
and forbidden any one to speak at random of
the gods otherwise than in a pious manner ? '°
Nor have they obtained this honour even at your
hands, that you should repel insults offered to
them by the same laws by which you ward them
off from yourselves. They are accused of trea-
son among you who have whispered any evil
about your kings. To degrade a magistrate, or
use insulting language to a senator, you have
made by decree a erime, followed by the severest
punishment. To write a satirical poem, by which
a slur is cast upon the reputation and character
of another, you determined, by the decrees of
the decemvirs, should not go unpunished ; and
that no one might assail your ears with too wan-
ton abuse, you established formulae ' ' for severe
affronts. With you only the gods are unhon-
oured, contemptible, vile ; against whom you
allow^ any one liberty to say what he will, to ac-
cuse them of the deeds of baseness which his
lust has invented and devised. And yet you do
not blush to raise against us the charge of want
of regard for deities so infamous, although it is
much better to disbelieve the existence of the gods
than to think they are such, and of such repute.

35. But is it only poets whom you have thought
proper '^ to allow to invent unseemly tales about
the gods, and to turn them shamefully into
sport? What do your pantomimists, the actors,
that crowd of mimics and adulterers? '^ Do
they '4 not abuse your gods to make to themselves


7 Lit., "complain of the neglected insults of the other gods."

8 Lit., " as a lover by." Cf. Homer, /L, 14, 312.

9 i.e., of himself.

'° Lit., " except that which was full of religion."
" i.e., according to which such offences should be ptmished.
I- Lit., " have willed."

■3 Lit., " full-grown race," exoleti, a word frequently used, as
here, sensu obscoeiio.
'■• i.e., the actors, etc.


488


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


gain, and do not the others ' find enticing pleas-
ures in- the wrongs and insults offered to the
gods ? At the public games, too, the colleges of
all the priests and magistrates take their places,
the chief Pontiffs, and the chief priests of the
curiae ; the Quindecemviri take their places,
crotoned with wreaths of laurel, and the flamines
diales with their mitres ; the augurs take their
jjlaces, who disclose the divine mind and will ;
and the chaste maidens also, who cherish and
guard the ever-burning fire ; the whole people
and the senate take their places ; the fathers
who have done service as consuls, princes next
to the gods, and most worthy of reverence ; and,
shameful to say, Venus, the mother of the race
of Mars, and parent of the imperial people, is
represented by gestures as in love,^ and is de-
lineated with shameless mimicry as raving like a
Bacchanal, with all the passions of a vile harlot/
The Great Mother, too, adorned with her sacred
fillets, is represented by dancing ; and that Pess-
inuntic Dindymene 5 is, to the dishonour of her
age, represented as with shameful desire using
passionate gestures in the embrace of a herds-
man ; and also in the Trachiniae of Sophocles,^
that son of Jupiter, Hercules, entangled in the
toils of a death-fraught garment, is exhibited
uttering piteous cries, ov^ercome by his violent
suffering, and at last wasting away and being
consumed, as his intestines soften and are dis-
solved.^ But in these tales even the Supreme
Ruler of the heavens Himself is brought forward,
without any reverence for His name and majesty,
as acting the part of an adulterer, and changing
His countenance for purposes of seduction, in
order that He might by guile rob of their chas-
tity matrons, who were the wives of others, and
putting on the appearance of their husbands, by
assuming the form of another.

36. But this crime is not enough : the per-
sons of the most sacred gods are mixed up with
farces also, and scurrilous plays. And that the
idle onlookers may be excited to laughter and
jollity, the deities are hit at in jocular quips, the
spectators shout and rise up, the whole pit re-
sounds with the clapping of hands and applause.
And to the debauched scoffers ^'^ at the gods gifts
and presents are ordained, ease, freedom from
public burdens, exemption and relief, together
with triumphal garlands, — a crime for which no
amends can be made by any apologies. And
after this do you dare to wonder whence these

' i.e., the crowd of adulterers, as Orelli suggests.

^ Lit., " draw enticements of pleasures from."

3 Or, " Venus, the mother . . . and loving parent," etc.

* Lit., " of meretricious vileness."

5 i.e., Cybele, to whom Mount Dindymus in Mysia was sacred,
whose rites, however, were celebrated at Pessinus also, a very ancient
city of Galatia.

^ MS. Sqfocles, corrected in LB. Sophocles. Cf. Trach. 1022 sqq.

7 Lit., "towards {ill) the last of the wasting consumed by the
softening of his bowels flowing apart."

* Lit., " debauched and scoffers."


ills come with which the human race is deluged
and overwhelmed without any interval, while
you daily both repeat and learn by heart all
these things, with which are mixed up libels
upon the gods and slanderous sayings ; and
when 9 you wish your inactive minds to be oc-
cupied with useless dreamings, demand that
days be given to you, and exhibition made with-
out any interval? But if you felt any real in-
dignation on behalf of your rehgious beliefs,
you should rather long ago have burned these
writings, destroyed those books of yours, and
overthrown these theatres, in which evil reports
of your deities are daily made public in shame-
ful tales. For why, indeed, have our writings
deserved to be given to the flames ? our meet-
ings to be cruelly broken up,'° in which prayer is
made to the Supreme God, peace and pardon
are asked for all in authority, for soldiers, kings,
friends, enemies, for those still in life, and those
freed from the bondage of the flesh ; " in which
all that is said is such as to make men humane,'-
gentle, modest, virtuous, chaste, generous in
dealing with their substance, and inseparably
united to all embraced in our brotherhood? '■''

37. But this is the state of the case, that as
you are exceedingly strong in war and in military
power, you think you excel in knowledge of the
truth also, and are pious before the gods,'-* whose
might you have been the first to besmirch with
foul imaginings. Here, if your fierceness allows,
and madness suffers, we ask you to answer us
this : Whether you think that anger finds a place
in the divine nature, or that the divine blessed-
ness is far removed from such passions? For if
they are subject to passions so furious, '5 and are
excited by feelings of rage as your imaginings
suggest, — for you say that they have often
shaken the earth with their roaring,'^ and bringing
woful misery on men, corrupted with pestilential


9 So Orelli, reading et quatido ; MS. and other edd. et si — " and
if ever."

'° Arnobius is generally thought to refer here to the persecution
under Diocletian mentioned by Eusebius, Hist. EccL, viii. 2.

" The service in which these prayers were offered was presided
over by the bishop, to whom the dead body was brought: hymns
were then sung of thanksgiving to God, the giver of victory, by
whose help and grace the departed brother had been victorious. The
priest ne.\t gave thanks to God, and some chapters of the Scriptures
were read: afterwards the catechumens were dismissed; the names of
those at rest were then read in a clear voice, to remind the survivors
of the success with which others had combated the temptations of
the world. The priest again prayed for the departed, at the close be-
seeching God to grant him pardon, and admission among the undy-
ing. Thereafter the body was kissed, anointed, and buried. — Dio-
Nvsius, .fee/. Hier., last chapter quoted by Heraldus. Cf. Const.
Apost., viii. 41. With the Church's advance in power there was an
accession of pomp to these riles. [Elucidation IV.]

'^ Cf the younger Pliny. Epist., .\. gy: " They affirmed that they
bound themselves by oath not for any wicked purpose, but to pledge
themselves not to commit theft, robbery, or adultery, nor break faith,
or prove false to a trust."

'3 Lit., " whom (7!<r society joins together," grtos solidet geriiiani-
tas. [Lardner justly argues that this passage proves our author's
familiarity with rites to which catechumens were not admitted.
Credibil., vol. iii. p. 458.]

'■* i.e., in their sight or estimation.

'S Lit., " conceive these torches."

'^ Lit., " have roared with tremblings of the earth."


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


489


contagion the character of the times,' both be-
cause their games had been celebrated with too
little care, and because their priests were not re-
ceived with favour, and because some small
spaces were desecrated, and because their rites
were not duly performed, — it must consequently
be understood that they feel no little wrath on
account of the opinions which have been men-
tioned. But if, as follows of necessity, it is ad-
mitted that all these miseries with which men
have long been overwhelmed flow from such fic-
tions, if the anger of the deities is excited by
these causes, you are the occasion of so terrible
misfortunes, because you never cease to jar upon
the feelings of the gods, and excite them to a
fierce desire for vengeance. But if, on the other
hand, the gods are not subject to such passions,

' The MS reads conru-isse auras tempor-um, all except the first
four edd. inserting / as above Meursius would also change iemp.
into ventonini — " the breezes of the wind^."


and do not know at all what it is to be enraged,
then indeed there is no ground for saying that
they who know not what anger is are angry with
us, * and they are free from its presence,- and
the disorder ^ // causes. For it cannot be, in the
nature of things, that what is one should become
two ; and that unity, which is naturally uncom-
pounded, should divide and go apart into sepa-
rate things.-*

- So the MS., reading comptu — tie, according to Hild., followed
by LB. and Orelh.

3 Lit., " mixture."

* The words following the asterisk (*) are marked in LB. as spu-
rious or corrupt, or at least as here out of place. Orelli transposes
them to ch. 13, as was noticed there, although he regards them as an
mterpolation. The clause is certainly a very strange one, and has a
kind of affected abslractness, which makes it seem out of place; but
it must be remembered that similarly confused and perplexing sen-
tences are by no means rare in Arnobius. If the clause is to be re-
tained, as good sense can be made from it here as anywhere else.
The general meaning would be: The gods, if angry, are angry with
the pagans; but if they are not subject to passion, it would be idle to
speak of them as angry with the Christians, seeing that they cannot
possibly at once be incapable of feeling anger, and yet at the same
time be angry with them. [See cap. 13, note 4, p. 480, supra.\


BOOK V.


I. Admitting that all these things which do the
immortal gods dishonour, have been put forth
by poets merely in sport, what of those found in
grave, serious, and careful histories, and handed
down by you in hidden mysteries? have they
been invented by the licentious fancy of the
poets ? Now if they seemed ' to you stories of
such absurdity, some of them you would neither
retain in their constant use, nor celebrate as
solemn festivals from year to year, nor would
you maintain them among your sacred rites as
shadows of real events. With strict modera-
tion, I shall adduce only one of these stories
which are so numerous ; that in which J^piter
himself is brought on the stage as stupid and
inconsiderate, being tricked by the ambiguity of
words. In the second book of Antias — lest any
one should think, perchance, that we are fabricat-
ing charges calumniously — the following story
is written : —

The famous king Numa, not knowing how to
avert evil portended by thunder, and being eager
to learn, by advice of Egeria concealed beside
a fountain twelve chaste youths provided with
chains ; so that when Faunus and Martins- Picus
came to this place ^ to drink, — for hither they
were wont to come-* to draw water, — they might

' So most edd., inserting er ; in MS. and Oehler, vid-entur.

2 So named either because he was said to have made use of the
bird of Mars, i.e., a woodpecker {picns), in augury, or because ac-
cording to the legend he was changed into one by Circe.

3 i.e., the Aventine. The story is told by Plutarch in his Life of
Numa, c. 15, and by Ovid, Fasti, iii. 291 sqq.

■* The MS. reads, sollemniter hiec, corrected, as above, soletiiie
iter hue by all edd. except Hild.


rush on them, seize and bind them. But, that
this might be done more speedily, the king filled
many 5 cups with wine and with mead,^and placed
them about the approaches to the fountain, where
they would be seen — a crafty snare for those
who should come. They, as was their usual cus-
tom, when overcome by thirst, came to their well-
known haunts. But when they had perceived
cups with sweetly smelling liquors, they preferred
the new to the old ; rushed eagerly upon them ;
charmed with the sweetness of the draught, drank
too much ; and becoming drunk, fell fast asleep.
Then the twelve youths threw themsehes upon
the sleepers, and cast chains round them, lying
soaked with wine ; and they.'' when roused, im-
mediately taught the king by what methods and
sacrifices Jupiter could be called down to earth.
With this knowledge the king performed the sa-
cred ceremony on the Aventine, drew down Jupi-
ter to the earth, and asked from him the due
form of expiation. Jupiter having long hesi-
tated, said, " Thou shalt avert what is portended
by thunder with a head." ** The king answered,
•' With an onion." ^ Jupiter again, " With a
man's." The king returned, "But with hair.""'

5 So the MS. and most edd., reading pociila non parvi mmicri,
for which Elmh. and Orelli have received from the margin of Ursi-
nus, poc non parva inero — " cups of great size, with pure
wine."

* i.e., miilstivt.

~ i.e., Faunus and Picus.

3 Capitr.

9 Ca-p/tio

'^ Jupiter is supposed to say Ininiano, meaning capite, to be un-
derstood, i.e., " with a man's head," while the king supplies capillo —
" with a man's hair."


490


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


The deity in turn, "With the Hfe.' With a
fish,"- rejoined Pompilius. Then Jupiter, being
ensnared by the ambiguous terms used, uttered
these words : " Thou hast overreached me,
Numa ; for I had determined that evils por-
tended by thunder should be averted with sacri-
fices of human heads, not ^ with hair and an
onion. Since, however, your craft has outwitted
me, have the mode which you wished ; and al-
ways undertake the expiation of thunder-portents
with those things which you have bargained
for."

2. What the mind should take up first, what
last, or what it should pass by silently, it is
not easy to say, nor is it made clear by any
amount of reflection ; for all have been so de-
vised and fitted to be laughed at, that you should
strive that they may be believed to be false —
even if they are true — rather than pass current
as true, and suggest as it were something extraor-
dinary, and bring contempt upon deity itself.
What, then, do you say, O you — ? Are we to
believe ^ that that Faunus and Martins Picus —
if they are of the number of the gods, and of
that everlasting and immortal substance — were
once parched with thirst, and sought the gush-
ing fountains, that they might be able to cool
with water their heated veins ? Are we to be-
lieve that, ensnared by wine, and beguiled by
the sweetness of mead, they dipped so long into
the treacherous cups, that they even got into
danger of becoming drunk? Are we to believe
that, being fast asleep, and plunged in the for-
getfulness of most profound slumbers, they gave
to creatures of earth an opportunity to bind
them? On what parts, then, were those bonds
and chains flung ? Did they have any solid sub-
stance, or had their hands been formed of hard
bones, so that if might be possible to bind them
with halters and hold them fast by tightly drawn
knots? For I do not ask, I do not inquire
whether they could have said anything when
swaying to and fro in their drunken maunder-
ings ; or whether, while Jupiter was unwilling, or
rather unwitting, any one could have made known
the way to bring him down to earth. This only
do I wish to hear, why, if Faunus and Picus
are of divine origin and power, they did not
rather themselves declare to Numa, as he ques-
tioned them, that which he desired to learn from
Jove himself at a greater risk ? Or s did Jupiter
alone have knowledge of this — for from him
the thunderbolts fall — how training in some


1 Anz'ma (ms. li'a).

2 Mcrna. There is here a lacuna in the text ; but there can be no
difficulty in filling it up as above, with Heraldus from Plutarch, or
with Gelenius from Ov\A, piscis — " tvith the life of a fish."

3 The MS. and both Roman edd. read Numa, corrected by Gele-
nius, as above, jto>t.

^ The MS. and edd. read cred-i-jniisne — "do we believe," for
which Meursius suggests -e- as above.

5 Lit, "or whether." Below the MS. reads corruptly «</ </>i;</« —
" to him."


kind of knowledge should avert impending dan-
gers? Or, while he himself hurls these fiery
bolts, is it the business of others to know in
what way it is fitting to allay his wrath and in-
dignation? For truly it would be most absurd
to suppose that he himself appoints^ the means
by which may be averted that which he has de-
termined should befall men through the hurling
of his thunderbolts. For this is to say. By such
ceremonies you will turn aside my wrath ; and
if I shall at any time have foreshown by flashes
of lightning that some evil is close at hand, do
this and that, so that ^ what I have determined
should be done may be done altogether in vain,
and may pass away idly through the force ^ of
these rites.

3. But let us admit that, as is said, Jupiter
has himself appointed against himself ways and
means by which his own declared purposes might
fittingly be opposed : are we also to believe that
a deity of so great majesty was dragged down
to earth, and, standing on a petty hillock with
a mannikin, entered into a wrangling dispute?
And what, I ask, was the charm which forced
Jupiter tq>.leave the all-important ^ direction of
the universe, and appear at the bidding of mor-
tals? the sacrificial meal, incense, blood, the
scent of burning laurel-boughs,'° and muttering
of spells? And were all these more powerful
than Jupiter, so that they compelled him to do
unwillingly what was enjoined, or to give him-
self up of his own accord to their crafty tricks?
What ! will what follows be believed, that the
son of Saturn had so little foresight, that he either
proposed terms by the ambiguity of which he
was himself ensnared, or did not know what was
going to happen, how the craft and cunning of a
mortal would overreach him ? You shall make
expiation, he says, with a head when thunderbolts
have fallen. The phrase is still incomplete, and
the meaning is not fully expressed and defined ;
for it was necessarily right to know whether Dies-
piter ordains that this expiation be effected with*
the head of a wether, a sow, an ox, or any other
animal. Now, as he had not yet fixed this
specifically, and his decision was still uncertain
and not yet determined, how could Numa know
that Jupiter would say the head of a man, so as
to'' anticipate (7//^/ prevent ////;/, and turn his un-
certain and ambiguous words" into "an onion's
head?"

4. But you will perhaps say that the king was
a diviner. Could he be more so than Jupiter


6 The MS. reads scire, but "knows" would hardly suit the con-
text. Instead of adopting any conjecture, however, it is sufficient to
observe, with Oehler, that scire is elsewhere used as a contraction for
sciscere.

7 The MS. omits tit.

8 So Cujacius, inserting vi, omitted by the MS.

9 Lit., " SD great."

'° Lit., " the fumigation oi verbefice ," i.e., of boughs of the laurel,
olive, or myrtle.

" Lit., " the uncertain things of that ambiguity."


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


491


himself? But for a mortal's anticipating ' what
Jupiter — whom ^ he overreached — was going to
say, could the god not know in what ways a man
was preparing to overreach him ? Is it not, then,
clear and manifest that these are puerile and
fanciful inventions, by which, while a lively wit
is assigned ^ to Numa, the greatest want of fore-
sight is imputed to Jupiter? For what shows so
little foresight as to confess that you have been
ensnared by the subtlety of a man's intellect,
and while you are vexed at being deceived, to
give way to the wishes of him who has overcome
you, and to lay aside the means which you had
proposed? For if there was reason and some
natural fitness that * expiatory sacrifice for that
which was struck with lightning should have been
made with a man's head, I do not see why the
proposal of an onion's was made by the king ;
but if it could be performed with an onion also,
there was a greedy lust for human blood. And
both parts are made to contradict themselves :
so that, on the one hand, Numa is shown not to
have wished to know what he did wish ; and, on
the other, Jupiter is shown to have been merci-
less, because he said that he wished expiation to
be made with the heads of men, which could
have been done by Numa with an onion's head.
5. In Timotheus, who was no mean mytholo-
gist, and also in others equally well informed, the
birth of the Great Mother of the gods, and the
origin of her rites, are thus detailed, being de-
rived — as he himself writes and suggests — from
learned books of antiquities, and from /it's ac-
quaintance with the most secret mysteries : —
Within the confines of Phrygia, he says, there is
a rock of unheard-of wildness in every respect,
the name of which is Agdus, so named by the
natives of that district. Stones taken from it, as
Themis by her oracle 5 had enjoined, Deucalion
and Pyrrha threw upon the earth, at that time
emptied of men ; from which this Great Mother,
too, as she is called, was fashioned along with
the others, and animated by the deity. Her,
given over to rest and sleep on the very summit
of the rock, Jupiter assailed with lewdest^ de-
sires. But when, after long strife, he could not
accomplish what he had proposed to himself, he,
baffled, spent his lust on the stone. This the
rock received, and with many groanings Acdestis ^
is born in the tenth month, being named from
his mother rock. In him there had been resist-


' Lit., "unless a mortal anticipated" — prcesunieret, the i\is.
reading.

^ So Oehler, supplying quern.

3 Lit., " liveliness of heart is procured."

•» Lit., "why."

5 So Ovid also {lilciam., i. 321), and others, speak of Themis as
the first to give oracular responses.

* So the MS. and edd., reading quant iiiccstis, except Orelli, who
adopts the conjecture of Barthius, ncquain — "lustful Jupiter with
lewd desires."

' So the MS. and edd., except Hildebrand and Oehler, who
throughout spell Agdesiis, following the Greek writers, and the deri-
vation cf the word from A^dus.


less might, and a fierceness of disposition beyond
control, a lust made furious, and derived from
both sexes.^ He violently plundered and laid
waste ; he scattered destruction wherever the
ferocity of his disposition had led him ; he re-
garded not gods nor men, nor did he think any-
thing more powerful than himself; he contemned
earth, heaven, and the stars.

6. Now, when it had been often considered
in the councils of the gods, by what means it
might be possible either to weaken or to curb
his audacity. Liber, the rest hanging back, takes
upon himself this task. With the strongest wine
he drugs a spring much resorted to by Acdestis ^
where he had been wont to assuage the heat and
burning thirst '° roused in him by sport and hunt-
ing. Hither runs Acdestis to drink when he felt
the need;" he gulps down the draught too
greedily into his gaping veins. Overcome by
what he is quite unaccustomed to, he is in con-
sequence sent fast asleep. Liber is near the
snare which he had set ; over his foot he throws
one end of a halter '^ formed of hairs, woven to-
gether very skilfully ; with the other end he lays
hold of his privy members. When the fumes of
the wine passed off, Acdestis starts up furiously,
and his foot dragging the noose, by his own
strength he robs himself of his '^ sex ; with the
tearing asunder of these parts there is an im-
mense flow of blood ; both ''^ are carried off and
swallowed up by the earth ; from them there
suddenly springs up, covered with fruit, a pome-
granate tree, seeing the beauty of which, with
admiration, Nana/5 daughter of the king or rjver
Sangarius, gathers and places in her bosom some
of the fruit. By this she becomes pregnant ;
her father shuts her up, supposing that she had
been '^ debauched, and seeks to have her starved
to death ; she is kept ahve by the mother of the
gods with apples, and other food, '7 and brings
forth a child, but Sangarius '^ orders it to be ex-
posed. One Phorbas having found the child,
takes it home,'^ brings it up on goats' milk ; and


^ So Ursinus suggested, followed by later edd., ej: utroque (ms.
iitra.) se-vu ; for which Meursiiis would read ejc utroque sejtriis —
" and a sex of both," i.e., that he was a hermaphrodite, which is re-
lated by other writers.
9 Lit., "him."

'° Lit., "of thirsting."

'' Lit., " in time of need."

'- So the reading of the MS. and edd., tiuum laqueum, maybe
rendered; for which Canterus conjectured imum — " the lowest part
of the noose."

'3 So the edd., reading eo quo (ms. quod) fuerat privat sexu ,'
for which Hild. and Oehler read _/u-itt-erai — " of the sex with which
he had been a fornicator."

'■* Lit., " these (i.e., the parts and the blood) are," etc.

'5 The MS. here reads Nata, but in c. 13 the spelling is Nana, as
in other writers.

•*> Lit., " as if."

'7 The MS. reads t-alulis, corrected as above /- by Jos. Scaliger, fol-
lowed by Hild. and Oehler. The other edd. read bacculis — " berries."

'^ So all the edd., except Hild. and Oehler, who retain the MS.
reading sauguinarius — " bloodthirsty."

'9 So Salmasius, Orelli, and Hild., reading repertutn ticscio quis
sunlit Fliorbas, lacte ; but no mention of any Phorbas is made
elsewhere in connection with this story, and Oehler has therefore pro-
posed _/i>r«rt ac lacte — " some one takes the cliild found, nourishes
it with sweet pottage of millet (JoriKa) and milk," etc.


492


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


as handsome fellows are so named in Lydia, or
because the Phrygians in their own way of speak-
ing call their goats atiagi, it happened in conse-
quence that the boy obtained the name x^ttis.'
Him the mother of the gods loved exceedingly,
because he was of most surpassing beauty ; and
Acdestis, who was his companion, as he grew
up fondling him, and bound to him by wicked
compliance with his lust in the only way now
possible, leading him through the wooded glades,
and presenting him with the spoils of many wild
beasts, which the boy Attis at first said boastfully
were won by his own toil and labour. After-
wards, under the influence of wine, he admits
that he is both loved by Acdestis, and honoured
by him with the gifts brought from the forest ;
whence it is unlawful for those polluted by drink-
ing wine to enter into ^is sanctuary, because it
discovered his secret.^

7. Then Midas, king of Pessinus, wishing to
withdraw the youth from so disgraceful an inti-
macy, resolves to give him his own daughter in
marriage, and caused the gates of the town to be
closed, that no one of evil omen might disturb
their marriage joys. But the mother of the gods,
knowing the fate of the youth, and that he would
live among men in safety ^;//i' so long as he was free
from the ties of marriage, that no disaster might
occur, enters the closed city, raising its walls with
her head, which began to be crowned with towers
in consequence. Acdestis, bursting with rage be-
cause of the boy's being torn from himself, and
brought to seek a wife, fills all the guests with
frenzied madness : ^ the Phrygians shriek aloud,
panic-stricken at the appearance of the gods ; +
a daughter of adulterous ^ Gallus cuts off her
breasts ; Attis snatches the pipe borne by him
who was goading them to frenzy ; and he, too,
now filled with furious passion, raving frantically
and tossed about, throws himself down at last,
and under a pine tree mutilates himself, say-
ing, " Take these,'' Acdestis, for which you have
stirred up so great and terribly perilous commo-
tions." 7 With the streaming blood his life flies ;
but the Great Mother of the gods gathers the
parts which had been cut off, and throws earth
on them, having first covered them, and wrapped ^


' [See vol. ii. p. 175-]

^ Lit., " his silence."

3 Lit., " fury and madness."

•• The MS., first five edd., and Oberthiir, read exterriti adoran-
do7-uJii Phrygcs ; for which Ursinus suggested ad ora deoritin —
"at the faces of god.s," adopted by Oehler; the other edd. reading
ad horain — " at the hour, i.e., thereupon."

5 It seems probable tfiat part of this chapter has been lost, as we
have no explanation of this epithet; and, moreover (as Oehler has
well remarked), in c. 13 this Gallus is spoken of as though it had
been previously mentioned that he too had mutilated himself, of
which we have not the slightest hint.

'' i.e., ge7iitaUa.

7 Lit., " so great motions of furious hazards."

* So most edd., reading veste prius tectis atqiie invohitis for
the MS. reading, retained by Hild. and Oehler, tecta atqiie involuta
— "his vest being first drawn over and wrapt about them;" the
former verb being found with this meaning in no other passage, and
the second very rarely.


them in the garment of the dead. From the
blood which had flowed springs a flower, the
violet, and with 9 this the tree '° is girt. Thence
the custom began and arose, whereby you even
now veil and wreath with flowers the sacred
pine. The virgin who had been the bride, whose
name, as Valerius " the pontifex relates, was la,
veils the breast of the lifeless youth with soft
wool, sheds tears with Acdestis, and slays her-
self. After her death her blood is changed into
purple violets. The mother of the gods sheds
tears also,'- from which springs an almond tree,
signifying the bitterness of death. '^ Then she
bears away to her cave the pine tree, beneath
which Attis had unmanned himself; and Acdestis
joining in her wailings, she beats and wounds her
breast, pacing round the trunk of the tree now
at rest."* Jupiter is begged by Acdestis that Attis
may be restored to life : he does not permit it.
What, however, fate allowed,' s he readily grants,
that his body should not decay, that his hairs
should always grow, that the least of his fingers
should live, and should be kept ever in motion ;
content with which favours, itis saidXhdX Acdestis
consecrated the body in Pessinus, and honoured
it with yearly rites and priestly services.'^

8. If some one, despising the deities, and fu-
rious with a savagely sacrilegious spirit, had set
himself to blaspheme your gods, would he dare
to say against them anything more severe than
this tale relates, which you have reduced to form,
as though it were some wonderful narrative, and
have honoured without ceasing,''' lest the power
of time and the remoteness '^ of antiquity should
cause it to be forgotten? For what is there
asserted in it, or what written about the gods,
which, if said with regard to a man brought up
with bad habits and a pretty rough training,
would not make you liable to be accused of
wronging and insulting him, and expose you to
hatred and dislike, accompanied by implacable
resentment? From the stones, you say, which
Deucalion and Pyrrha threw, was produced the


9 Lit., " from."

'° i.e., the pine.

" Nourry supposes that this may refer to M. Valerius Messala,
a fragment from whom on auspices has been preserved by Gellius
(xiii. 15) ; while Hild. thinks that Antias is meant, who is mentioned
in c. I.

'2 So Orelli punctuates and ex-plains; but it is doubtful whether,
even if this reading be retained, it should not be translated, " be-
dewed these (violets)." The MS. reads, siiffodit et as (probably
kas) — "digs under these," emended as above in L,h., suffudit et
has.

■3 Lit., "burial."

'■» So it has been attempted to render the MS., reading pausata
circum arboris rohiir, which has perplexed the different edd.
Heraldus proposed /a«ia;'<? — "at intervals round the trunk of the
tree;" LB. reads -ata — "round . . . tree having rested." Read-
ing as above, the reference might be either to the rest from motion
after being set up in the cave, or to the absence of wind there.

's Lit., " could be done through (i.e., as far as concerns) fate."

'* So Oehler, reading sacerdotnni atttistitiis for the MS. aitti-
stibtts, changed in both Roman edd. and Hild. to -stitibus — "with
priests (or overseers) of priests." Salmasius proposed iniestibus —
" with castrated priests."

'7 i.e., in the ever-recurring festival of Cybele.

13 Lit., " length."


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


493


mother of the gods. What do you say, O theo-
logians ? what, ye priests of the heavenly powers ?
Did the mother of the gods, then, not exist at
all for the sake of the deluge ? and would there
be no cause or beginning of her birth, had not
violent storms of rain swept away the whole race
of men? It is through man, then, that she feels
herself to exist, and she owes it to Pyrrha's kind-
ness that she sees herself addressed as a real
being ; ' but if that is indeed true, this too will
of necessity not be false, that she was human, not
divine. For if it is certain that men are sprung
originally from the casting of stones, it must be
believed that she too was one of us, since she
was produced by means of the same causes.
For it cannot be, for nature would not suffer it,-
that from one kind of stones, and from the same
mode of throwing tliem, some should be formed
to rank among the immortals, others with the
condition of men. Varro, that famous Roman,
distinguished by the diversity of his learning,
and unwearied in his researches into ancient
times, in the first of four books which he has
left in writing on the race of the Roman people,
shows by careful calculations, that from the time
of the deluge, which we mentioned before, down
to the consulship of Hirtius and Pansa,^ there
are not quite two thousand years ; and if he is
to be believed, the Great Mother, too, must be
said to have her whole life bounded by the limits
of this number. And thus the matter is brought
to this issue, that she who is said to be parent
of all the deities is not their mother, but their
daughter ; nay, rather a mere child, a little girl,
since we admit that in the never-ending series
of ages neither beginning nor end has been as-
cribed to the gods.

9. But why do we speak of your having
bemired the Great Mother of the gods with the
filth of earth, when you have not been able for
but a little time even to keep from speaking evil
of Jupiter himself? While the mother of the
gods was then sleeping on the highest peak
of Agdus, her son, you say, tried stealthily
to surprise her chastity while she slept. After
robbing of their chastity virgins and matrons
without number, did Jupiter hope to gratify his
detestable passion upon his mother? and could
he not be turned from his fierce desire by the
horror which nature itself has excited not only
in men, but in some other animals also, and by
common* feeling? Was he then regardless of
piety 5 and honour, who is chief in the temples ?


■ So the edd., reading orari i>i alicujtis suhstantice qualitatc
(or the MS. erari restored by Oehler, niim-crari — "numbered in
the quality of some substance," from the reading of an old copy
adopted by Livineius.

^ Lit., " through the resistance of nature."

3 B.C. 43-

^ Lit., " the feeling commonly implanted."

5 Lit., " was regard of piety wanting" — dc/uit,'M\ emendation
of Salmasius (according to Orelii) for the ,MS. dcpiiit.


and could he neither reconsider nor perceive
how wicked was his desire, his mind being madly
agitated? But, as it is, forgetting his majesty
and dignity, he crept forward to steal those vile
pleasures, trembling and cjuaking with fear, hold-
ing his breath, walking in terror on tiptoe, and,
between hope and fear, touched her secret parts,
trying how soundly his mother slept, and what
she would suffer.^ Oh, shameful representation !
oh, disgraceful plight of Jupiter, prepared to at-
tempt a filthy contest ! Did the ruler of the
world, then, turn to force, when, in his heedless-
ness and haste, he was prevented from stealing
on by surprise ; ^ and when he was unable to
snatch his pleasure by cunning craft, did he
assail his mother with violence, and begin with-
out any concealment to destroy the chastity
which he should have revered? Then, having
striven for a very long time when she is unwill-
ing, did he go off conquered, vanquished, and
overcome ? and did his spent lust part him whom
piety was unable to hold back from execrable
lust after his mother?

10. But you will perhaps say the human race
shuns and execrates such unions ; ^ among the
gods there is no incest. And why, then, did his
mother resist with the greatest vehemence her
son when he offered her violence? Why did
she flee from his embraces, as if she were avoid-
ing unlawful approaches ? For if there was noth-
ing wrong in so doing, she should have gratified
him without any reluctance, just as he eagerly
wished to satisfy the cravings of his lust. And
here, indeed, very thrifty men, and frugal even
about shameful works, that that sacred seed may
not seem to have been poured forth in vain —
the rock, one says, drank up Jupiter's foul in-
continence. What followed next, I ask? Tell.
In the very heart of the rock, and in that flinty
hardness, a child was formed and quickened to
be the offspring of great Jupiter. It is not easy
to object to conceptions so unnatural and so
wonderful. For as the human race is said by
you to have sprung and proceeded from stones, it
must be believed that the stones both had geni-
tal parts, and drank in the seed cast on them, and
when their time was full were pregnant,^ and at
last brought forth, travailing in distress as women
do. That impels our curiosity to inquire, since
you say that the birth occurred after ten months,
in what womb of the rock was he enclosed at
that time? with what food, with what juices,
was he supplied ? or what could he have drawn
to support him from the hard stone, as unborn


* Lit., " the depth and patience of his sleeping mother."

7 Lit., " from the theft of taking by surprise " — obrcptioiiis, for
which the ms., first four edd., Oberth., Hild., and Oehler read object.
— " of what he proposed."

^ So lleraldus, reading couvciitionis hujusiiiodi coetiim for the
iMS. ccEptuin.

9 Sustjilisse nl-vos graves.


494


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


infants usually receive from their mothers ! He
had not yet reached the light, my infcvviant
says ; and already bellowing and imitating his
father's thunderings, he reproduced their sound.''
And after it was given him to see the sky and
the light of day, attacking all things which lay in
his way, he made havoc of them, and assured
himself that he was able to thrust down from
heaven the gods themselves. O cautious and
foreseeing mother of the gods, who, that she
might not undergo the ill-will of so ^ arrogant a
son, or that his bellowing while still unborn
might not disturb her slumbers or break her re-
pose, withdrew herself, and sent far from her
that most hurtful seed, and gave it to the rough
rock.

11. There was doubt in the councils of the
gods how that unyielding and fierce violence
was to be subdued ; and when there was no
other way, they had recourse to one means, that
he should be soaked with much wine, and bereft
of his members, by their being cut off. As if,
indeed, those who have suffered the loss of these
parts become less arrogant, and as if we do not
daily see those who have cut them away from
themselves become more wanton, and, neglect-
ing all the restraints of chastity and modesty,
throw themselves headlong into filthy vileness,
making known abroad their shameful deeds.
I should like, however, to see — were it granted
me to be born at those times — father Liber,
who overcame the fierceness of Acdestis, having
glided down from the peaks of heaven after the
very venerable meetings of the gods, cropping
the tails of horses,^ plaiting pliant halters, drug-
ging the waters harmless while pure with much
strong wine, and after that drunkenness sprung
from drinking, to have carefully introduced his
hands, handled the members of the sleeper, and
directed his care skilfully* to the parts which
were to perish, so that the hold of the nooses
placed round them might surround them all.

12. Would any one say this about the gods
who had even a very low opinion of them ? or,
if they were taken up with such affairs, consid-
erations, cares, would any man of wisdom either
believe that they are gods, or reckon them
among men even? Was that Acdestis, pray,
the lopping off of whose lewd members was to
give a sense of security to the immortals, was
he one of the creatures of earth, or one of the
gods, and possessed of 5 immortality? For if he
was thought to be of our lot and in the condi-


' Most edd. read as an interrogation.

2 Perhaps, " that she might not be subject to ill-wili for having
borne so."

3 i.e., to form nooses with. The reading translated is an emen-
dation of Jos. ScaHger, adopted by OreWi, pem'ciilamenia decurtan-
tem catttkerzoriun, for the MS. peniculayitem decurtam tarn
cantherios, emended by each ed. as he has thought fit.

* Lit., " the cares of art."

5 Lit., " endowed with the honour of."


tion of men, why did he cause the deities so
much terror? But if he was a god, how could
he be deceived, or ho7v could anything be cut
off from a divine body ? ^ But we raise no issue
on this point : he may have been of divine
birth, or one of us, if you think it more correct
to say so. Did a pomegranate tree, also, spring
from the blood which flowed and from the parts
which were cut off? or at the time when ? that
member was concealed in the bosom of the
earth, did it lay hold of the ground with a root,
and spring up into a mighty tree, put forth
branches loaded with blossoms,^ and in a mo-
ment bare mellow fruit perfectly and completely
ripe ? And because these sprang from red blood,
is their colour therefore bright purple, with a dash
of yellow? Say further that they are juicy also,
that they have the taste of wine, because they
spring from the blood of one filled with it, and you
have finished your story consistently. O Abdera,
Abdera, what occasions for mocking yoii woidd
give'^ to men, if such a tale had been devised
by you ! All fathers relate it, and haughty states
peruse it ; and you are considered foolish, and
utterly dull and stupid. '°

13. Through her bosom, we are told," Nana
conceived a son by an apple. The opinion is \
self-consistent ; for where rocks and hard stones
bring forth, there apples must have their time
of generating.'- The Berecyntian goddess fed
the imprisoned maiden with nuts '^ and figs, fitly
and rightly ; for it was right that she should live
on apples who had been made a mother by an
apple. After her offspring was born, it was
ordered by Sangarius to be cast far away : that
which he believed to be divinely conceived long
before, he would not have '■* called the offspring
of his child. The infant was brought up on
he-goats' milk. O story ever opposed and most
inimical to the male sex, in which not only do
men lay aside their virile powers, but beasts even
which were males become mothers ! '5 He was
famous for his beauty, and distinguished by his
remarkable '^ comeliness. It is wonderful enough
that the noisome stench of goats did not cause
him to be avoided and fled from. The Great
Mother loved him — if as a grandmother her
grandson, there is nothing wrong ; but if as the


6 The MS. here inserts dc — "from the body from a divine
(being)."

7 So the edd. (except Oehler), reading i7i>n cum for the MS. turn
qtice giiod.

8 Balaiistits, the flowers of the wild pomegranate.

9 Dares suppUed by Salmasius.

10 [The Abderitans were proverbially such. " Hinc Abdera, non
tacente me." — Cicero, Ep. ad Attic., iv. i6.]

" Lit., " he says."

'- Lit., " must rut" — suriant, as deer. The MS., first four edd.,
and Elm. read .s?<>Xa«i — "rise," corrected as above in the margni
of Ursinus.

'3 Lit., " acorns" — glandibus.

'■» The MS. reads des-, emended as above ded-ignatus by Stewe-
chlus, followed by Heraldus and Orelli.

'5 i e., he-goats are made to yield milk.

'* Lit., " praiseworthy."


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


495


theatres tell, her love is infamous and disgrace-*
ful. Acdestis, too, loved him above all, enrich-
ing him with a hunter's gifts. There could be
no danger to his purity from one emasculated,
you say ; but it is not easy to guess what Midas
dreaded? The Mother entered bearing' the
very walls. Here we wondered, indeed, at the
might and strength of the deity ; but again ^ we
blame her carelessness, because when she re-
membered the decree of fate,^ she heedlessly
laid open the city to its enemies. Acdestis ex-
cites to fury and madness those celebrating the
nuptial vows. If King Midas had displeased hifti
who was binding the youth to a wife, of what
had Gallus been guilty, and his concubine's
daughter, that he should rob himself of his
manhood, she herself of her breasts? "Take
and keep these," says he,'^ " because of which
you have excited such commotions to the over-
whelming of onr minds with fear." We should
none of us yet know what the frenzied Acdestis
had desired in his paramour's body, had not the
boy thrown to him, to appease his wrath,5 the
parts cut off.

14. What say you, O races and nations, given
up to such beliefs? When these things are
brought forward, are you not ashamed and con-
founded to say things so indecent? We wish to
hear or learn from you something befitting the
gods ; but you, on the contrary, bring forward
to us the cutting off of breasts, the lopping off
of men's members, ragings, blood, frenzies, the
self-destruction of maidens, and flowers and
trees begotten from the blood of the dead. Say,
again, did the mother of the gods, then, with
careful diligence herself gather in her grief the
scattered genitals with the shed blood ?'^ With
her own sacred, her own divine 7 hands, did she
touch and lift up the instruments of a disgrace-
ful and indecent office ? Did she also commit
them to the earth to be hid from sight ; and lest
in this case they should, being uncovered, be
dispersed in the bosom of the earth, did she in-
deed wash and anoint them with fragrant gums
before wrapping and covering them with his
dress? For whence could the violet's sweet
scent have come had not the addition of those
ointments modified the putrefying smell of the
member? Pray, when you read such tales, do
you not seem to yourselves to hear either girls
at the loom wiling away their tedious working


' Lit., "with."

* So the MS., both Roman edd., LB., Hild., and Oehler, reading
rursns, for which the others receive tVie emendation of Gelenius,
regis — " the king's carelessness."

3 Lit., " the law and fate."

< i.e., Attis.

5 The MS. reads satietati-s objecisset offensi, corrected as above
by Hild. (omitting s) , followed by Oehler. The conjectures of pre-
vious edd. are very harsh and forced.

6 Lit., "flows."

' Lit., " herself with sacred, herself with divine."


hours, or old women seeking diversions for
credulous children,'^ and to be declaring mani-
fold fictions under the guise of truth ? Acdestis
appealed to 9 Jupiter to restore life to his para-
mour : Jupiter would not consent, because he
was hindered by the fates more powerful than
himself ; and that he might not be in every re-
spect very hard-hearted, he granted one favour —
that the body should not decay through any cor-
ruption ; that the hair should always grow ; that
the least of his fingers alone in his body should
live, alone keep always in motion. Would any
one grant this, or support it with an unhesitating
assent, that hair grows on a dead body, — that
part '° perished, and that the rest of his mortal
body, free from the law of corruption, remains
even still?

15. We might long ago have urged you to
ponder this, were it not foolish to ask proofs of
such things, as well as to say " them. But this
story is false, and is wholly untrue. It is no mat-
ter to us, indeed, because of whom you maintain
that the gods have been driven from the earth,
whetlier it is consistent and rests on a sure
foundation,'^ or is, on the contrary, framed and
devised in utter falsehood. For to us it is
enough — who have proposed this day to make
it plain — that those deities whom you bring for-
ward, if they are anywhere on earth, and glo\\'
with the fires of anger, are not more excited to
furious hatred by us than by you ; and that that
stoiy has been classed as an event and com-
mitted to writing by you, and is willingly read
over by you every day, and handed down in
order for the edifying of later times. Now, if
this story is indeed true, we see that there is no
reason in it why the cejestial gods should be as-
serted to be angry with us, since we have neither
declared things so much to their disgrace, nor
committed them to writing at all, nor brought
them publicly to light '^ by the celebration of
sacred rites ; but if, as you think, it is untrue,
and made up of delusive falsehoods, no man
can doubt that you are the cause of offence, who
have either allowed certain persons to write such
stories, or have suffered tliem, when written, to
abide in the memory of ages.

16. And yet how can you assert the falsehood
of this story, when the very rites which you cele-
brate throughout the year testify that you believe
these things to be true, and consider them per-
fectly trustworthy ? For what is the meaning of


8 [ypauJSei? |nv9ou9, I.Tim, iv. 7. Compare Ignatius, vol. i. p. 62,
note 3. But even the old wives' tales among Hebrews were clean in
contrast with the horrible amusements here imputed even to the girls
at the loom, and children, among the Gentiles.]

9 Lit., " spoke with."

1° i.e., the part cut off and buried separately.

" So the MS., according to Crusius, the edd. inserting s, di-s-cere
— " to learn."

'2 Lit., " on firmness of faith."
'3 Lit., "sent to public testifying."


496


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


that pine ' which on fixed days you ahvays bring
into the sanctuary of the mother of the gods?
Is it not in imitation of that tree, beneath which
the raging and ill-fated youth laid hands upon
himself, and which the parent of the gods con-
secrated to relieve her sorrow?- What mean
the fleeces of wool with which you bind and sur-
round the trunk of the tree? Is it not to recall
the wools with which la^ covered the dying
youth, and thought that she could procure some
warmth for his limbs fast stiffening with cold ?
\\'hat mean the branches of the tree girt round
and decked with wreaths of violets? Do they
not mark this, how the Mother adorned with
early flowers the pine which indicates and bears
witness to the sad mishap? What mean the
Galli'^ with dishevelled hair beating their breasts
with their palms ? Do they not recall to mem-
ory those lamentations with which the tower-
bearing Mother, along with the weeping Acdestis,
wailing aloud, 5 followed the boy? What means
the abstinence from eating bread which you
have named castas? Is it not in imitation of
the time when the goddess abstained from Ceres'
fruit in her vehement sorrow?

17. Or if the things which we say are not so,
declare, say yourselves — those effeminate and
delicate men whom we see among you in the
sacred rites of this deity — what business, what
care, what concern have they there ; and why
do they like mourners wound their arms and *"
breasts, and act as those dolefully circumstanced ?
\Vhat mean the wreaths, what the violets, what
the swathings, the coverings of soft wools ? Why,
finally, is the very pine, but a little before sway-
ing to and fro among the shrubs, an utterly inert
log, set up in the temple of the Mother of the
gods next, like some propitious and very vener-
able deity? For either this is the cause which
we have found in your writings and treatises,
and in that case it is clear that you do not cele-
brate divine rites, but give a representation of
sad events ; or if there is any other reason which
the darkness of the mystery has withheld from
us, even it also must be involved in the infamy
of some shameful deed. For who would believe
that there is any honour in that which the worth-


' The festival of Cybele began on the 22d of March, when a pine
tree was introduced into the mysteries, and continued until the 27th,
which was marked by a general purification {lavatio) , as Salmasius
observed from a calendar of Constantine the Great. [An equinoctial
feast, which the Church deposed by the Paschal observances. March
22 is \\\e prhiia scdcs Paschte.^

- Lit., " for solace of so great a wound."

3 So Stewechius, followed by Orelli and Oehler, reading qiiibus
la for the m.jaiit, which would refer the action to Cybele, whereas
Arnobius expressly says (c. 7) that it was the newly wedded wife who
covered the breast of Attis with wools, yam is, however, received
from the MS. by the other edd., except Hild., who asserts that the MS.
reads lam, and Klmenh., who reads Ion.

* i.e., priests of Cybele, their names being derived from the Phry-
gian river Gallus, whose waters were supposed to bring on frenzy end-
ing in self-mutilation.

- Lit., " with wailing."
<> Lit., " with."


less Ga//i begin, effeminate debauchees com-
plete ?

18. The greatness of the subject, and our duty
to those on their defence also,^ demand that we
should in like manner hunt up the other forms
of baseness, whether those which the histories of
antiquity record, or those contained in the sacred
mysteries named initia, ^ and not divulged 9
openly to all, but to the silence of a few , but
your innumerable sacred rites, and the loath-
someness of them all,'° will not allow us to go
through them all bodily : nay, more, to tell the
truth, we turn aside ourselves from some pur-
posely and intentionally, lest, in striving to unfold
all things, we should be defiled by contamination
in the very exposition. Let us pass by Fauna"
Fatua, therefore, who is called Bona Dea, whom
Sextus Clodius, in his sixth book in Greek on
the gods, declares to have been scourged to
death with rods of myrtle, because she drank a
whole jar of wine without her husband's knowl-
edge ; and this is a proof, that when women show
her divine honour a jar of wine is placed there,
but covered from sight, and that it is not lawful
to bring in twigs of myrtle, as Butas '^ mentions
in his Causalia. But let us pass by with similar
neglect '^ the dii conserentes, whom Flaccus and
others relate to have buried themselves, changed
in htimani penis similitudinem in the cinders
under a pot of exta.^'' And when Tanaquil,
skilled in the arts of Etruria,'^ disturbed these,
the gods erected themselves, and became rigid.
She then commanded a captive woman from
Corniculum to learn and understand what was
the meaning of this : Ocrisia, a woman of the
greatest wisdom divos insendsse genitali, expli-
cnisse motus certos. Then the holy and burning
deities poured forth the power of Lucilius,''' and
thus Servius king of Rome was born.

19. ^^X' shall pass by the wild Bacchanalia
also, which are named in Greek Omophagia, in
which with seeming frenzy and the loss of your
senses you twine snakes about you ; and, to show
yourselves full of the divinity and majest)' of the
god, tear in pieces with gory mouths the flesh of
loudly-bleating goats. Those hidden mysteries
of Cyprian Venus we pass by also, whose founder
is said to have been King Cinyras,'^ in which,
being initiated, they bring stated fees as to a
harlot, and carry away//^<^///, given as signs of


7 Lit., " and the duty of defence itself."
^ i.e., secret rites, to which only the initiated were admitted.
9 Lit., "which you deliver" — traditis; so Elmenh., LB., and
later edd., for the unintelligible MS. tradidisse, retained in both
Roman edd.

'° Lit., " deformit>' affixed to all."
" MS. fetamf. Cf. i. 36, n. 2, p. 422, siipra.
'2 So Heraldus, from Plutarch, Rom., 21, where Butas is said to]
have written on this subject (aircai) in elegiacs, for the MS. Putas.
" Lit., " in like manner and with dissimulation."
''' i.e., heart, lungs, and liver, probably of a sacrifice.
'5 i.e., " divination, augury," etc.

"> Vis Liicilii, i.e., semen. [He retails Pliny xxxvi. 27.]
•7 Cf. iv. 24.


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


497


the propitious deity. Let the rites of the Cory-
bantes also be consigned to obUvion, in which is
revealed that sacred mystery, a brother slain by
his brothers, parsley sprung from the blood of
the murdered one, that vegetable forbidden to
be placed on tables, lest the tnaties of the dead
should be unappeasably offended. But those
other Bacchanalia also we refuse to proclaim, in
which there is revealed and taught to the initi-
ated a secret not to be spoken ; how Liber, when
taken up with boyish sports, was torn asunder by
the Titans ; how he was cut up limb by limb by
them also, and thrown into pots that he might
be cooked ; how Jupiter, allured by the sweet
savour, rushed unbidden to the meal, and dis-
covering what had been done, overwhelmed the
revellers with his terrible thunder, and hurled
them to the lowest part of Tartarus. As evi-
dence and proof of which, the Thracian bard
handed down in his poems the dice, mirror, tops,
hoops, and smooth balls, and golden apples
taken from the virgin Hesperides.

20. It was our purpose to leave unnoticed
those mysteries also into which Phrygia is initi-
ated, and all that ' race, were it not that the
name of Jupiter, which has been introduced by
them, would not suffer us to pass cursorily by the
wrongs and insults offered to him ; not that we
feel any pleasure in discussing^ mysteries so
filthy, but that it may be made clear to you again
and again what wrong you heap upon those
whose guardians, champions, worshippers, you
profess to be. Once upon a time, they say,
Diespiter, burning after his mother Ceres with
evil passions and forbidden desires, for she is
said by the natives of that district to be Jupiter's
mother, and yet not daring to seek by open ^
force that for which he had conceived a shame-
less longing, hits upon a clever trick by which to
rob of her chastity his mother, who feared noth-
ing of the sort. Instead of a god, he becomes
a bull ; and concealing his purpose and daring
under the appearance of a beast lying in wait,+
he rushes madly with sudden violence upon her,
thoughtless and unwitting, obtains his incestuous
desires ; and the fraud being disclosed by his
lust, flies off known and discovered. His mother
burns, foams, gasps, boils with fury and indigna-
tion ; and being unable to repress the storm 5
and tempest of her wrath, received the name
Brimo ^ thereafter from her ever-raging passion :
nor has she any other wish than to punish as she
may her son's audacity.

21. Jupiter is troubled enough, being over-


' So the MS. and edd., reading gens ilia, for which Memmius
proposed Ilia—" and all the Trojan race."

2 lit., " riding upon" — incquitare.

3 Lit., " most open."
* Sjibsessoris.

5 Lit., "growling" — fremitittn.

*> The M.S. readf, priino, emended as above by the brother of Can-
terus, followed by later edd.


whelmed with fear, and cannot find means to
soothe the rage of his violated mother. He
pours forth prayers, and makes supplication ; her
ears are closed by grief. The whole order of the
gods is sent to seek his pardon; no one has
weight enough to win a hearing. At last, the
son seeking how to make satisfaction, devises
this means : Arietem nobilem benegrandibiis cum
testiculis deligit, exsecat hos ipse et lanato exuit
ex folliculi tegmine. Approaching his mother
sadly and with downcast looks, and as if by his
own decision he had condemned himself, he casts
and throws these 7 into her bosom. When she saw
what his pledge was,^ she is somewhat softened,
and allows herself to be recalled to the care of
the offspring which she had conceived.9 After the
tenth month she bears a daughter, of beautiful
form, whom later ages have called now Libera,
now Proserpine ; whom when Jupiter Verveceus '°
saw to be strong, plump, and blooming, forget-
ting what evils and what wickedness, and how
great recklessness, he had a little before fallen
into," he returns to his former practices; and
because it seemed too '^ wicked that a father
openly be joined as in marriage with his daugh-
ter, he passes into the terrible form of a dragon :
he winds his huge coils round the terrified maid-
en, and under a fierce appearance sports and
caresses her in softest embraces. She, too, is in
consequence filled with the seed of the most
powerful Jupiter, but not as her mother zvas, for
she '3 bore a daughter like herself; but from the
maiden was born something like a bull, to testify
to her seduction by Jupiter. If any one asks '+
who narrates this, then we shall quote the vvell-
known senarian verse of a Tarentine poet which
antiquity sings, '5 saying : " The bull begot a drag-
on, and the dragon a bull." Lastly, the sacred rites
themselves, and the ceremony of initiation even,
named Sebadia,'^ might attest the truth ; for in
them a golden snake is let down into the bosom
of the initiated, and taken away again from the
lower parts.

22. I do not think it necessary here also with
many words to go through each part, and show
how many base and unseemly things there are

'' i.e., iesticuli.
5 I'irilitate pignoris visa.

9 So Ursinus suggested, followed by .Stewechius and later edd.,
concepti fcetus re7>ocatur ad curam; the MS. reads coucepit — "is
softened and conceived, ' etc.

■° Jupiter may be here called Verveceus, either as an epithet of
Jupiter Ammon — " like a wether," or (and this seems most probable
from the context), "dealing with wethers," referring to the mode in
which he had extricated himself from his former difficulty, or " stu-
pid." The MS. reads 7iirTiriccus.

" Lit., " encountered " — aggressus.

'- Lit., " sufficiently."

'^ i.e., Ceres.

'* Lit., " will any one want."

'5 i.e., handed down by antiquity. [Vol. ii. p. 176, this series.]

"" These seem to have been celebrated in honour of Dionysius as
well as Zeus, thourh, in so far as they are described by Arnobius,
they refer to the intrigue of the latter only. Macrobius, however
{Saturn. ,'\. 18), mentions that in Thrace^ Liber and Sol were iden-
tified and worshipped as Sebaditis; and this suggests that we have to
take but one more step to explain the use of the title to Jupiter also.


498


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


in each particular. For what mortal is there,
with but little sense even of what becomes a man,
who does not himself see clearly the character
of all these things, how wicked they are, how
vile, and what disgrace is brought upon the
gods by the very ceremonies of their mysteries,
and by the unseemly origin of their rites ? Ju-
piter, it is said, lusted after Ceres. Why, I ask,
has Jupiter deserved so ill of you, that there is
no kind of disgrace, no infamous adultery, which
you do not heap upon his head, as if on some
vile and worthless person ? Leda was unfaithful
to her nuptial vow ; Jupiter is said to be the
cause of the fault. Danae could not keep her
virginity ; the theft is said to have been Jupiter's.
Europa hastened to the name of woman ; he is
again declared to have been the assailant of her
chastity. Alcmena, Electra, Latona, Laodamia,
a thousand other virgins, and a thousand matrons,
and with them the boy Catamitus, were robbed
of their honour and ' chastity. It is the same
story everywhere — Jupiter. Nor is there any
kind of baseness in which you do not join and
associate his name with passionate lusts ; so that
the wretched being seems to have been born
for no other reason at all except that he might
be a field fertile in ^ crimes, an occasion of evil-
speaking, a kind of open place into which should
gather all filthiness from the impurities of the
stage.^ And yet if you were to say that he had
intercourse with strange women, it would indeed
be impious, but the wrong done in slandering
him might be bearable. Did he lust^ after his
mother also, after his daughter too, with furious
desires ; and could no sacredness in his parent,
no reverence for her, no shrinking even from
the child which had sprung from himself,
withhold him from conceiving so detestable a
plan?

23. I should wish, therefore, to see Jupiter,
the father of the gods, who ever controls the
world and men, 5 adorned with the horns of an
ox, shaking his hairy ears, with his feet contracted
into hoofs, chewing green grass, and having be-
hind him ^ a tail, hams,^ and ankles smeared over
with soft excrement,* and bedaubed with the filth
cast forth. I should wish, I say, — for it must
be said over and over again, — to see him who
turns the stars in their courses, and who terrifies
and overthrows nations pale with fear, pursuing
the flocks of wethers, inspicienteni testicuios are-


1 Lit., " of."

2 Lit,, " that he might be a crop of" — seges, a correction in the
margin of Ursinus for the MS. sedes — " a seat."

3 So all edd., reading scenarum (ms. sc>--, but r marked as
spurious), e.xcept LB , followed by Orelli, who gives seiithiarum —
" of the dregs." Oehler supplies e, which the sense seems to
require. [Note our author's persistent scorn of Jove Opt. Maar.]

* Lit., " neigh with appetites of an enraged beast."
5 This clearly refers to the /Etieid, x. i8.

* Lit., " on the rear part."
' Suffragi7ies.

* So the margin of L^rsinus, Elmenh., L.B , Oberth., Orelli, and
Oehler, reading tnollijimo for the MS. molisiiino.


tinos, snatching these away with that severe ^ and
divine hand with which he was wont to launch
the gleaming lightnings and to hurl in his rage
the thunderbolt. '° Then, indeed, / sJiould like
to see him ransacking their inmost parts with
glowing knife ; " and all witnesses being removed,
tearing away the membranes circumjectas pro-
libus, and bringing them to his mother, still hot
with rage, as a kind of fillet '^ to draw forth her
pity, with downcast countenance, pale, wounded, '^
pretending to be in agony ; and to make this
believed, defiled with the blood of the ram, and
covering his pretended wound with bands of
wool and linen. Is it possible that this can be
heard and read in this world, '^ and that those
who discuss these things wish themselves to be
thought pious, holy, and defenders of religion?
Is there any greater sacrilege than this, or can
any mind '5 be found so imbued with impious
ideas as to believe suth stories, or receive them,
or hand them down in the most secret mysteries
of the sacred rites? If that Jupiter of whom
you speak, whoever he is, really '^ existed, or was
affected by any sense of wrong, would it not be
fitting that,'7 roused to anger, he should remove
the earth from under our feet, extinguish the
light of the sun and moon ; nay more, that he
should throw all things into one mass, as of old?'*
24. But, my opponent says, these are not the
rites of our state. Who, pray, says this, or who
repeats it? Is he Roman, Gaul, Spaniard, Afri-
can, German, or Sicilian ? And what does it
avail your cause if these stories are not yours,
while those who compose them are on your
side ? Or of what importance is it whether you
approve of them or not, since what you your-
selves say '9 are found to be either just as foul,
or of even greater baseness? For do you wish
that we should consider the mysteries and those
ceremonies which are named by the Greeks
Thesmophoria,-° in which those holy vigils and


9 Lit., " censorial."

1° Lit., " rage with thunders."

" So Gelenius, followed by Stewechius and Orelli, reading smilia
for the corrupt and unintelligible MS. nuUas.

12 Itifulce, besides being worn by the priest, adorned the victim,
and were borne by the suppliant. Perhaps a combination of the two
last ideas is meant to be suggested here.

'3 i e , seemingly so.

'■* Lit , " under this axis of the world."

'5 So the MS., followed by Hild. and Oehler; the other edd. read-
ing gens for tneiis.

"6 Lit., " felt himself to be."

'7 Lit., " would the thmg not be worthy that angry and roused."

■^ i.e., reduce to chaos, in which one thing would not be distin-
guished from another, but all be mixed up conlusedly.

'9 Lit., " what are your proper things."

2° Every one since Salmasius («</ soli?nim, p. 750) has supposed
Arnobius to have here fallen mto a gross error, by confounding the
Eleusinian mysteries with the Thesmophoria; an errror the less ac-
countable, because ihey are carefully distinguished by Clemens
Alexandrmus, whom Arnobius evidently h.id before him, as usual.
There seems to be no sufficient reason, however, for charging Arno-
bius with such a blunder, although in the end of ch. 26 he refers to
the story just related, as showing the base character of the Eleusinia
(Eleusiniorufii vestroruvi notas); as he here speaks of mysteria
(i.e., Eleusinia, cf Nepos,^/(r., 3, i5) ct ilia divina qiicr Tlicsmo-
phoria nomitiantur a Grcpcis. It should be remembered also that
there was much in common between these mysteries: the story of
Ceres' wanderings was the subject of both; in both there was a sea-


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


499


solemn watchings were consecrated to the goddess
by the Athenians ? Do you wish us, I say, to see
what beginnings they have, what causes, that we
may prove that Athens itself also, distinguished
in the arts and pursuits of civilization, says
things as insulting to the gods as others, and
that stories are there publicly related under the
mask of religion just as disgraceful as are thrown
in our way by the rest of you ? Once, they say,
when Proserpine, not yet a woman and still a
maiden, was gathering purple flowers in the
meadows of Sicily, and when her eagerness to
gather them was leading her hither and thither
in all directions, the king of the shades, spring-
ing forth through an opening of unknown depth,
seizes and bears away with him the maiden, and
conceals himself again in the bowels ' of the
earth. Now when Ceres did not know what had
happened, and had no idea where in the world
her daughter was, she set herself to seek the
lost one all over the ^ world. She snatches up
two torches lit at the fires of ^tna ; ^ and giv-
ing herself light by means of these, goes on her
quest in all parts of the earth.

25. In her wanderings on that quest, she
reaches the confines of Eleusis as well as other
countries ^ — that is the name of a canton in
Attica. At that time these parts were inhabited
by aborigines 5 named Baubo, Triptolemus, Eu-
buleus, Eumolpus,'' Dysaules : Triptolemus, who
yoked oxen ; Dysaules, a keeper of goats ; Eu-
buleus, of swine ; Eumolpus, of sheep, ? from
whom also flows the race of Eumolpidte, and
fivm ivhom is derived that name famous among
the Athenians,*^ and those who afterwards flour-
ished as cadueeatores,"^ hierophants, and criers.
So, then, that Baubo who, we have said, dwelt
in the canton of Eleusis, receives hospitably
Ceres, worn out with ills of many kinds, hangs
about her with pleasing attentions, beseeches
her not to neglect to refresh her body, brings to
quench her thirst wine thickened with spelt,'"
which the Greeks term cyceon. The goddess in
her sorrow turns away from the kindly offered

son of fasting to recall her sadness, both had indecent allusions to
the way in which that sadness was dispelled; and both celebrated
with some freedom the recovery of cheerfulness by the goddess, the
great distinguishing feature of the Thesmophoria being that only
women could take part in its rites. Now, as it is to the points in
which the two sets of mysteries were at one that allusion is made in
the passage which follows, it was only natural that Arnobius should
not be very careful to distinguish the one from the other, seeing that he
was concerned not with their differences, but with their coincidence.
It seems difficult, therefore, to maintain that Arnobius has here con-
victed himself of so utter ignorance and so gross carelessness as his
critics have imagined. [Vol. ii. p. 176.]
' Lit., " caverns "

2 Lit., " in the whole."

3 The MS. is utterly corrupt — flatnmis onere pressas etneis,
corrected as aSove by Gelenius from c. 35., f. comprehensas, — jEl.

■♦ Lit., "also."

S Lit., " (they were) earth-born who inhabited."

* The MS. wants this name: but it has evidently been omitted by
accident, as it occurs in the ne.xt line.

' Lit., " of woolly flock."

' Cecropifs et qui.

9 i.e., staff-bearers.

'° d'litnf^, the chief ingredients, according to Hesychiusfqunted by
Oehler) , being wine, honey, water, and spell or barley. [P. 503, inj.]


services," and rejects them; nor does her mis-
fortune suffer her to remember what the body
always requires. '^ Baubo, on the other hand,
begs and e.xhorts her — as is usual in such ca-
lamities — not to despise her humanity ; Ceres
remains utterly immoveable, and tenaciously
maintains an invincible austerity. But when
this was done several times, and her fixed pur-
pose could not be worn out by any attentions,
Baubo changes her plans, and determines to
make merry by strange jests her whom she could
not win by earnestness. That part of the body
by which women both bear children and obtain
the name of mothers, '^ this she frees from longer
neglect : she makes it assume a purer appear-
ance, and become smooth like a child, not yet
hard and rough with hair. In this wise she re-
turns ^* to the sorrowing goddess ; and while
trying the common expedients by which it is
usual to break the force of grief, and moderate
it, she uncovers herself, and baring her groins,
displays all the parts which decency hides ; '5 and
then the goddess fixes her eyes upon these, '^
and is pleased with the strange form of consola-
tion. Then becoming more cheerful after laugh-
ing, she takes and drinks off the draught spurned
before, and the indecency of a shameless action
forced that which Baubo's modest conduct was
long unable to win.

26. If any one perchance thinks that we are
speaking wicked calumnies, let him take the
books of the Thracian soothsayer,'^ which you
speak of as of divine antiquity ; and he will find
that we are neither cunningly inventing any-
thing, nor seeking means to bring the holiness
of the gods into ridicule, and doing so : for we
shall bring forward the very verses which the son
of Calliope uttered in Greek,'* and published
abroad in his songs to the human race through-
out all ages : —

" With these words she at the same time drew up her

garments from the lowest hein.
And cxj^osed to view formatas inguinibtis res.
Which Baubo grasping ''with hollow hand, for
Their appearance was infantile, strikes, touches gentlv.
Then the goddess, fi.xing her orbs of august light,
Being softened, lays aside for a little the sadness of her

mind;
Thereafter she takes the cup in her hand, and laughing,
Drinks off the whole draught of cyceon with gladness." '°


" Lit., " ofiRces of humanity."

'- Lit., "common health." Arnobius is here utterly forgetful of
Ceres' divinity, and subjects her to the invariable requirements of na-
ture, from which the divine might be supposed to be e.vempt.

'^ So the conjecture of Livineius, adopted by Oehler, ^^«<'-/-rz-
cutn for the ws. geiiericiim.

'♦ So Stewechius, followed by Oehler, reading redit iia for the MS.
redita; the other edd. merely drop a.

'5 Omnia ilia pudoris loca.

'6 Pnhi.

'^ Orpheus, under whose name there was current in the time of
Arnobius an immense mass of literature freely used, and it is proba-
ble sometimes supplementerl. by Christian writers. Cf. c. 19.

'^ Lit., " put forth with Greek mouth."

'9 I it., " tossing."

•° It may he well to observe that Arnobius differs from the Greek
versions ol these lines found in Clem. Alex. (vol. ii. p. 177) and


500


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


What say you, O wise sons of Erectheus ? ' what,
you citizens of Minerva?^ The mind is eager
to know with what words you will defend what
it is so dangerous to maintain, or what arts you
ha\-e by which to give safety to personages and
causes wounded so mortally. This ^ is no false
mistrust, nor are you assailed with lying accusa-
tions : -• the infamy of your Eleusinia is declared
both by their base beginnings and by the records
of ancient literature, by the very signs, in fine,
which you use when questioned in receiving the
sacred things, — "I have fasted, and drunk the
draught ; 5 I have taken out of the mystic cist,^
and put into the wicker-basket ; I have received
again, and transferred to the little chest." '

27. Are then your deities carried off by force,
and do they seize by violence, as their holy
and hidden mysteries relate ? do they enter into
marriages sought stealthily and by fraud ? ^ is
their honour snatched from virgins '' resisting and
unwilling? have they no knowledge of impending
injury, no acquaintance with what has happened
to those carried off by force ? Are they, when
lost, sought for as men are ? and do they traverse
the earth's vast extent with lamps and torches
when the sun is shining most brightly? Are they
afflicted? are they troubled? do they assume
the squalid garments of mourners, and the signs
of misery? and that they may be able to turn
their mind to victuals and the taking of food, is
use made not of reason, not of the right time,
not of some weighty words or pressing courtesy,
but is a display made of the shameful and in-
decent parts of the body ? and are those mem-
bers exposed which the shame felt by all, and
the natural law of modesty, bid us conceal,
which it is not permissible to name among pure
ears without permission, and saying, "by your
leave ? " '° What, I ask you, was there in such a
sight," what in the privy parts of Baubo, to move
to wonder and laughter a goddess of the same
sex, and formed with similar parts? what was
there such that, when presented to the divine


Eusebius {Prcepar. Evniig:, ii. 3), omitting all mentioia of lacchus,
who is made very prominent by them; and that he does not adhere
strictly to metrical rules, probably, as Heraldus pointed out, because,
like the poets of that age, he paid little heed to questions of quantity.
Whether Arnobius has merely paraphrased the original as found m
Clement and Eusebius, or had a different version of them before him,
IS a question which can only be discussed by means of a careful com-
parison between the Greek and Latin forms of the verses with the
context in both cases.

' So LB., Hild., and Oehler, reading Erechthida O (inserted by
Hild.) for the MS. erithiJeo.

- i.e., Athenians.

3 The MS., ist ed., Hild., and Oehler read ita — " It is thus not,"
etc.; the others as above, /.v/a.

•• Dt'latione calumniosa. [Conf. vol. ii. p. 175, col 2.]

5 Cyceon. [P. 499, supra, and 503, infra.^

6 The MS. reads exci-ta, corrected as above, ex cista, in the
margin of Ursinus.

7 [It is a pity that all this must be retailed anew after Clement,
vol. ii pp. 175, 177, notes.]

^ Lit., " by stealthy frauds."

9 Lit., " is the honour of virginity snatched from them? "
'° Sine vcnid ac sine honoribus prcejatis.

"So Stewechius, LB., and Orelli, reading spec-t-u in t-ali iot the
MS /;; specu aii.


eyes '^ and sight, it should at the same time en-
able her to forget her miseries, and bring her
with sudden cheerfulness to a happier state of
mind ? Oh, what have we had it in our power
to bring forward with scoffing and jeering, were
it not for respect for the reader, '^ and the dignity
of literature !

28. I confess that I have long been hesitating,
looking on every side, shuffling, doubling Tellene
perplexities ; "* while I am ashamed to mention
those Alimontian '5 mysteries in which Greece
erects phalli in honour of father Bacchus, and
the whole district is covered with images of men's
fascina. The meaning of this is obscure per-
haps, and it is asked why it is done. Whoever
is ignorant of this, let him learn, and, wondering
at what is so important, ever keep it with rever-
ent care in a pure heart. '^ While Liber, born at
Nysa,'7 and son of Semele, was still among men,
the story goes, he wished to become acquainted
with the shades below, and to inquire into what
went on in Tartarus ; but this wish was hindered
by some difficulties, because, from ignorance of
the route, he did not know by what way to go
and proceed. One Prosumnus starts up, a base
lover of the god, and a fellow too prone to
wicked lusts, who promises to point out the gate
of Dis, and the approaches to Acheron, if the
god will gratify him, and 'iv&t.x uxorias vohiptates
ex se carpi. The god, without reluctance, swears
to put himself '^ in his power and at his disposal,
but only immediately on his return from the
lower regions, having obtained his wish and de-
sire."? Prosumnus politely tells him the way, and
sets him on the very threshold of the lower re-
gions. In the meantime, while Liber is inspect-
ing ^° and examining carefully Styx, Cerberus, the
Furies, and all other things, the informer passed
from the number of the living, and was buried
according to the manner of men. Evius-' comes
up from the lower regions, and learns that
his guide is dead. But that he might fulfil his
promise, and free himself from the obligation of
his oath, he goes to the place of the funeral, and


'2 Lit., " light " [Note Clement, vol. ii. p. 175, col. 2, line 12.]

'3 .So the MS., Hild., and Oehler, reading iiosccntis.

U This allusion is somewhat obscure. Heraldus regards tricas
Tellenas as akin in sense to t. Atettanas, i.e., " comic trifles; " in
which case the sense would be, that Arnobius had been heaping up
any trifles which would keep him back from thedisagreeable subject.
Ausonius Popma (quoted by Orelli) explains the phrase with reference
to the capture of Tcllenae by Ancus Martins as meaning " something
hard to get through."

'5 The .MS. reads alimonicE, corrected from Clem. Alex, by Sal-
masius, Alunontia, i.e., celebrated at Halimus in Attica.

■*> Lit., " in pure senses." [Ironically said ]

'7 Cicero [de Nat. Dear., iii. 23) speaks of five Dionysi, the father
of the fifth being Nisus. Arnobius had this passage before him in
writing the fourth book (cf. c. 15, and n. 2), so that he may here mean
to speak of Liber similarly.

" Lit., " that he will be."

'9 So the MS., ace. to Hild., reading expe-titionis; ace. to Crusiiis,
the MS. gives -ditwnis — " (having accomplished) his expedition."

^° Lit., " is surveying with all careful examination."

21 MS. cuius. [Retailed from Clement, vol. ii p. 180. As to the
arguments the Fathers were compelled to use with heathen, see
note 5, same volume, p. 206.]


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


501


— " ficorum ex arbore ramum validissimum prse-
secans dolat, runcinat, levigat et humani speciem
fabricatur in penis, figit super aggerem tumuli, et
postica ex parte nudatus accedit, subsidit, insidit.
Lascivia deinde surientis assumpta, hue atque
illuc clunes torquet et meditatur ab ligno pati
quod jamdudum in veritate promiserat."

29. Now, to prevent any one from thinking
that we have devised what is so impious, we do
not call upon him to believe Heraclitus as a wit-
ness, nor to receive from his account what he
felt about such mysteries. Let him ' ask the
whole of Greece what is the meaning of these
phalli which ancient custom erects and worships
throughout the country, throughout the towns :
he will find that the causes are those which we
say ; or if they are ashamed to declare the truth
honestly, of what avail will it be to obscure, to
conceal the cause and origin of the rite, while ^
the accusation holds good against the very act
of worship ? What say you, O peoples ? what,
ye nations busied with the services of the tem-
ples, and given up to them ? Is it to these rites
you drive us by flames, banishment, slaughter,
and any other kind of punishments, and by fear
of cruel torture ? Are these the gods whom you
bring to us, whom you thrust and impose upon
us, like whom you would neither wish yourselves
to be, nor any one related to you by blood and
friendship? 3 Can you declare to your beardless
sons, still wearing the dress of boys, the agree-
ments which Liber formed with his lovers ? Can
you urge your daughters-in-law, nay, even your
own wives, to shoii) the modesty of Baubo, and
enjoy the chaste pleasures of Ceres? Do you
wish your young men to know, hear, and learn
what even Jupiter showed himself to more ma-
trons than one ? Would you wish your grown-
up maidens and still lusty fathers to learn how
the same deity sported with his daughter? Do
you wish full brothers, already hot with passion,
and sisters sprung from the same parents, to hear
that he again did not spurn the embraces, the
couch of his sister? Should we not then flee
far from such gods ; and should not our ears be
stopped altogether, that the filthiness of so im-
pure a religion may not creep into the mind?
For what man is there who has been reared with
morals so pure, that the example of the gods
does not excite him to similar madness ? or who
can keep back his desires from his kinsfolk, and
those of whom he should stand in awe, when he
sees that among the gods above nothing is held
sacred in the confusion caused by * their lusts ?
For when it is certain that the first and perfect
nature has not been able to restrain its passion
within right limits, why should not man give


' i.e.; the sceptic.

2 Cniii wanting in the MS.

3 Lit., " by right of friendship."
« Lit., " of."


himself up to his desires without distinction, be-
ing both borne on headlong by his innate frailtv,
and aided by the teaching of the holy deities ?5

30. I confess that, in reflecting on such mon-
strous stories in my own mind, I have long been
accustomed to wonder that you dare to speak
of those as atheists,*^ impious, sacrilegious, who
either deny that there are any gods at all, or
doubt their existence, or assert that they were
men, and have been numbered among the gods
for the sake of some power and good desert ;
since, if a true examination be made, it is fitting
that none should be called by such names, more
than yourselves, who, under the pretence of
showing them reverence, heap up in so doing ?
more abuse and accusation, than if you had
conceived the idea of doing this openly with
avowed abuse. He who doubts the existence
of the gods, or denies it altogether, although he
may seem to adopt monstrous opinions from the
audacity of his conjectures, yet refuses to credit
what is obscure without insulting any one ; and
he who asserts that they were mortals, although
he brings them down from the exalted place
of inhabitants of heaven, yet heaps upon them
other ^ honours, since he supposes that they
have been raised to the rank of the gods ^ for
their services, and from admiration of their
virtues.

31. But you who assert that you are the de-
fenders and propagators of their immortality,
have you passed by, have you left untouched,
any one of them, without assailing him '° with
your abuse? or is there any kind of insult so
damnable in the eyes of all, that you have been
afraid to use it upon them, even though hin-
dered" by the dignity of their name? Who
declared that the gods loved frail and mortal
bodies? was it not you? Who that they per-
petrated those most charming thefts on the
couches of others ? was it not you ? Who that
children had intercourse with their mothers ;
and on the other hand, fathers with their virgin
daughters? was it not you? Who that pretty
boys, and even grown-up men of very fine ap-
pearance, were wrongfully lusted after? was it
not you ? Who declared that they "^ were mu-
tilated, debauched, '3 skilled in dissimulation,
thieves, held in bonds and chains, finally assailed
with thunderbolts, and wounded, that they died,

5 Lit., " of holy divinity." Orelli thinks, and with reason, that
Arnobius refers to the words which Terence puts into the mouth of
Chaerea (£««., iii. 5, vv. 36-43), who encourages himself to give way
to lust by asking, "Shall I, a man, not do this?" when Jove had
done as much. [ j^lucidation IIL]

*> Lit., " to speak of any one as atheist . . . of those who," etc.

1 So the MS. and edd., reading in eo, (or which we should perhaps
read in eos — " heap upon them."

' Suhsiciz'is laudibus.

9 Lit., " to the reward {tnerituvt) of divinity."

'° Lit., " unwounded."

" So the edd , reading tardatiiax the MS. tradaiis,cxt:fpi Hild.,
who reads tardatis.

*2 i.e., the gods.

»3 Exoletos. Cf. iv. c. 35, note 13, p. 487, supra.


502


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


and even found graves on earth? was it not
you ? While, then, so many and grievous charges
have been raised by you to the injury of the
gods, do you dare to assert that the gods have
been displeased because of us, while it has long
been clear that you are the guilty causes of such
anger, and the occasion of the divine wrath ?

■^2. But you err, says my opponent, and are
mistaken, and show, even in criticising these
things, that you are rather ignorant, unlearned,
and boorish. For all those stories which seem
to you disgraceful, and tending to the discredit
of the gods, contain in them holy mysteries,
theories wonderful and profound, and not such
as any one can easily become acquainted with
by force of understanding. For that is not
meant and said which has been written and
placed on the surface of the story ; but all these
things are understood in allegorical senses, and
by means of secret explanations privately sup-
plied.' Therefore he who says' Jupiter lay with
his mother, does not mean the incestuous or
shameful embraces of Venus, but names Jupiter
instead of rain, and Ceres instead of the earth.
And he, again, who says that he ^ dealt lascivi-
ously with his daughter, speaks of no filthy pleas-
ures, but puts Jupiter for the name of a shower,
and by his daughter means + the crop sown. So,
too, he who says that Proserpina was carried off
by father Dis, does not say, as you suppose,'
that the maiden was carried off to gratify the
basest desires ; but because we cover the seed
with clods, he signifies that the goddess has sunk
under the earth, and unites with Orcus to bring
forth fruit. In like manner in the other stories
also one thing indeed is said, but something else
is understood ; and under a commonplace open-
ness of expression there lurks a secret doctrine,
and a dark profundity of mystery,

33. These are all quirks, as is evident, and
quibbles with which they are wont to bolster up
weak cases before a jury ; nay, rather, to speak
more truly, they are pretences, such as are used
in ^ sophistical reasonings, by which not the truth
is sought after, but always the image, and ap-
pearance, and shadow of the truth. For because
it is shameful and unbecoming to receive as true
the correct accounts, you have had recourse 7 to
this expedient, that one thing should be substi-
tuted for another, and that what was in itself
shameful should, in being explained, be forced
into the semblance of decency. But what is it to

' Sitbditivis secretis.

" Both Roman edd. and MS. read dicet — " shall say; " all others
as above — dicit.

3 i.e., Jupiter.

^ Lit., " in the signification of his daughter."

5 So the margin of Ursinus — ut reris for the MS. iit ce-reris.

'^ Lit., " colours of."

' The MS. and both Roman edd. read indecorum ^j^, which leaves
the sentence incomplete. LB., followed by later edd., proposed de-
cursum est, as above (Oehler, iiide d. — " from these recourse has
been had"), the other conjectures tending to the same meaning.


US whether other senses and other meanings un-
derlie these vain stories ? For we who assert that
the gods are treated by you wickedly and im-
piously, need only ^ receive what is written, what
is said,'' and need not care as to what is kept
secret, since the insult to the deities consists not
in the idea hidden in its meanings,'" but in what
is signified by the words as they stand out. And
yet, that we may not seem unwilling to examine
what you say, we ask this first of you, if only you
will bear with us, from whom have you learned,
or by whom has it been made known, either that
these things were written allegorically, or that
they should be understood in the same way?
Did the writers summon you to take counsel with
them ? or did you lie hid in their bosoms at the
time " when they put one thing for another, with-
out regard to truth ? Then, if they chose, from
religious awe '- and fear on any account, to wrap
those mysteries in dark obscurity, what audacity
it shows in you to wish to understand what they
did not wish, to know yourselves and make all
acquainted with that which they vainly attempted
to conceal by words which did not suggest the
truth !

34. But, agreeing with you that in all these
stories stags are spoken of instead of Iphige-
nias, yet, how are you sure, when you either
explain or unfold these allegories, that you give
the same explanations or have the same ideas
which were entertained by the writers them-
selves in the silence of their thoughts, but ex-
pressed by words not adapted '^ to what was
meant, but to something else ? You say that the
falling of rain into the bosom of the earth was
spoken of as the union of Jupiter and Ceres ;
another may both devise with greater subtlety,
and conjecture with some probability, something
else ; a third, a fourth may do the same ; and as
the characteristics of the minds of the thinkers
show themselves, so each thing may be explained
in an infinite number of ways. For since all
that allegory, as it is called, is taken from narra-
tives expressly made obscure, '•♦ and has no cer-
tain limit within which the meaning of the story,'5
as it is called, should be firmly fixed and un-
changeable, it is open to every one to put the
meaning into it which he pleases, and to assert
that that has been adopted '*" to which his thoughts
and surmises '7 led him. But this being the case,
how can you obtain certainty from what is doubt-


8 " We need only; " lit., " it is enough for us to."

9 Lit., "heard."

'° Lit., " in the obscure mind of senses."

" "Or at the time," aut turn, the correction of LB. for the MS.
sutum.

'^ Lit., " fear of any reason and of religion."

■3 Lit., " proper."

''' Lit., " from shut-up thmgs."

'5 Rei.

'6 Lit., " placed."

'^ Lit., " his suspicion and conjectural (perhaps " probable") in-
ference."


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


503


ful, and attach one sense only to an expression
which you see to be explained in innumerable
different ways ? '

35. Finally, if you think it right, returning to
our inquiry, we ask this of you, whether you think
that all stories about the gods,- that is, without
any exception,^ have been written throughout
with a double meaning and sense, and in a way*
admitting of several interpretations ; or that some
parts of them are not ambiguous at all, while, on
the contrary, others have many meanings, and
are enveloped in the veil of allegory which has
been thrown round them? For if the whole
structure and arrangement of the narrative have
been surrounded with a veil of allegory from
beginning to end, explain to us, tell us, what we
should put and substitute for each thing which
every story says, and to what other things and
meanings we should refer 5 each. For as, to
take an example, you wish Jupiter to be said in-
stead of the rain, Ceres for the earth, and for
Libera *' and father Dis the sinking and casting
of seed into the earth, so you ought to say what
we should understand for the bull, what for the
wrath and anger of Ceres ; what the word Brimo^
means ; what the anxious prayer of Jupiter ;
what the gods sent to make intercession for him,
but not listened to ; what the castrated ram ;
what the parts ^ of the castrated ram ; what the
satisfaction made with these ; what the further
dealings with his daughter, still more unseemly
in their lustfulness ; so, in the other story also,
what the grove and flowers of Henna are ; what
the fire taken from ^tna, and the torches lit
with it ; what the travelling through the world
with these ; what the Attic country, the canton
of Eleusin, the hut of Baubo, and her rustic hos-
pitality ; what the draught of cyceon 9 means, the
refusal of it, the shaving and disclosure of the
privy parts, the shameful charm of the sight, and
the forgetfulness of her bereavement produced
by such means. Now, if you point out what
should be put in the place of all these, changing
the one for the other,'" we shall admit your asser-
tion ; but if you can neither present another
supposition in each case, nor appeal to" the
context as a whole, why do you make that ob-

' Lit., " to be deduced with variety of expositions through num-
berless ways "

2 The MS., first four edd., and Hild. read de his — " about these,"
corrected in the others d'ls or diis, as above.

3 Lit., " each."
*■ PI.

5 Lit., "call."

6 i.e., Proserpine. The readiness with which Arnobius breaks the
form of the sentence should be noted. At first the gods represent
physical phenomena, but immediately after natural events are put for
the gods. In the ms. two copyists have been at work, the earlier giv-
ing Libero, which is rather out of place, and is accordingly corrected
by the later, Libera, followed by LB., Oberthur, Orelli, Hild., and
Oehler.

7 The MS. reads prima. Cf. c. 20.

8 Proles.

9 \KVK.ilov, a draught resembling caudle. See p. 499, note 10.]
'° Lit., " by change of things "

•' The MS. omits ad, supplied by Ursinus.


scure,'^ by means of fair-seeming allegories, which
has been spoken plainly, and disclosed to the
understanding of all?

36. But you will perhaps say that these alle-
gories are not found in the whole body of the
story, but that some parts are written so as to
be understood by all, while others have a double
meaning, and are veiled in ambiguity. . That is
refined subtlety, and can be seen through by the
dullest. For because it is very difficult for you
to transpose, reverse, and divert to other mean-
ings all that has been said, you choose out some
things which suit your purpose, and by means
of these you strive to maintain that false and
spurious versions were thrown about the truth
which is under them. '3 But yet, supposing that
we should grant to you that it is just as you say,
how do you know, or whence do you learn, which
part of the story is written without any double
meaning,"* which, on the other hand, has been
covered with jarring and alien senses? For it
may be that what you believe to be so '5 is other-
wise, that what you believe to be otherwise '^ has
been produced with different, and even opposite
modes of expression. For where, in a consist-
ent whole, one part is said to be written alle-
gorically, the other in plain and trustworthy
language, while there is no sign in the thing
itself to point out the difference between what
is said ambiguously and what is said simply,
that which is simple may as well be thought
to have a double meaning, as what has been
written ambiguously be believed to be wrapt in
obscurity.'^ But, indeed, we confess that we do
not understand at all by whom this '^ is either
done, or can be believed to be possible.

37. Let us examine, then, what is said in this
way. In the grove of Henna, my opponent
says, the maiden Proserpine was once gathering
flowers : this is as yet uncorrupted, and has been
told in a straightforward manner, for all know
without any doubt what a grove and flowers are,
what Proserpine is, and a maiden. Summanus
sprung forth from the earth, borne along in a
four-horse chariot : this, too, is just as simple,
for a team of four horses, a chariot, and Sum-
manus need no interpreter. Suddenly he carried
off Proserpine, and bore her with himself under
the earth : the burying of the seed, my opponent
says, is meant by th,e rape of Proserpine. What
has happened, pray, that the story should be sud-
denly turned to something else? that Proserpine
should be called the seed ? that she who was for


'2 So all edd., except Hild. and Oehler, reading obscur-atis for the
MS. -itaiibtis.

'3 Lit., " were placed above the interior truth."

'* Lit., " with simple senses."

'5 i.e., involved in obscurity.

'* i.e., free from ambiguity.

" Lit., " of shut-off obscurities."

'8 The refer nee is to the words in the middle of the chapter, " how
do you know which part is simple? " etc. ; Arnobius now saying that
he does not see how this can be known.


504


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


a long time held to be a maiden gathering flow-
ers, after that she was taken away and carried
off by violence, should begin to signify the seed
sown ? Jupiter, my opponent says, having turned
himself into a bull, longed to have intercourse
with his mother Ceres : as was explained before,
under these names the earth and falling rain are
spoken of. I see the law of allegory expressed
in the dark and ambiguous terms. Ceres was
enraged and angry, and received the parts ' of a
ram as the penalty demanded by ^ vengeance :
this again I see to be expressed in common lan-
guage, for both anger and (^testes and) satisfac-
tion are spoken of in their usual circumstances.^
What, then, happened here, — that from Jupiter,
who was named yi?r the rain, and Ceres, who was
named /^r the earth, the story passed to the true
Jove, and to a most straightforward account of
events ?

38. Either, then, they must all have been writ-
ten and put forward allegorically, and the whole
should be pointed out to us ; or nothing has been
so written, since what is supposed to be allegori-
cal does not seem as if it were part of the narra-
tive.* These are all written allegorically, you
say. This seems by no means certain. Do you
ask for what reason, for what cause ? Because,
/ answer, all that has taken place and has been
set down distinctly in any book cannot be turned
into an allegory, for neither can that be undone
which has been done, nor can the character of
an event change into one which is utterly differ-
ent. Can the Trojan war be turned into the
condemnation of Socrates? or the battle of
Cannse become the cruel proscription of Sulla?
A proscription may indeed, as TuUius says 5 in
jest, be spoken of as a battle, and be called that
of Cannce ; but what has already taken place,
cannot be at the same time a battle and a pro-
scription; for neither, as I' have said, can that
which has taken place be anything else than
what has taken place ; nor can that pass over
into a substance foreign to it which has been
fixed down firmly in its own nature and pecul-
iar condition.

39. Whence, then, do we prove that all these
narratives are records of events ? From the sol-
emn rites and mysteries of initiation, it is clear,
whether those which are celebrated at fixed
times and on set days, or those which are
taught secretly by the heathen without allowing
the observance of their usages to be interrupted.
For it is not to be believed that these have no
origin, are practised without reason or meaning,
and have no causes connected with their first


' Proles.

^ Lit., "for penalty and."
^ Lit., " in their customs and conditions."

* i.e., if historical, the whole must be so, as bits of allegory would
not fit in

5 Cicero, /^i? Rose. Am., c. 32.


beginnings. That pine which is regularly borne
into the sanctuary of the Great Mother,^ is it not
in imitation of that tree beneath which Attis
mutilated and unmanned himself, which also,
they relate, the goddess consecrated to relieve
her grief? That erecting of phalli and fascina,
which Greece worships and celebrates in rites
every year, does it not recall the deed by which
Liber 7 paid his debt? Of what do those Eleu-
sinian mysteries and secret rites contain a narra-
tive ? Is it not of that wandering in which Ceres,
worn out in seeking for her daughter, when she
came to the confines of Attica, brought wheat
with her, graced with a hind's skin the family of
the Nebridse,* and laughed at that most wonder-
ful sight in Baubo's groins? Or if there is an-
other cause, that is nothing to us, so long as they
are all produced by some cause. For it is not
credible that these things were set on foot with-
out being preceded by any causes, or the inhab-
itants of Attica must be considered mad to have
received ^ a religious ceremony got up without
any reason. But if this is clear and certain, that
is, if the causes and origins of the mysteries are
traceable to past events, by no change can they
be turned into the figures of allegory ; for that
which has been done, which has taken place,
cannot, in the nature of things, be undone. '°

40. And yet, even if we grant you that this is
the case, that is, even if the narratives give utter-
ance to one thing in words, /w/mean" something
else, after the manner of raving seers, do you not
observe in this case, do you not see how dis-
honouring, how insulting to the gods, this is
which is said to be done ? '^ or can any greater
wrong be devised than to term and call the earth
and rain, or anything else, — for it does not mat-
ter what change is made in the interpretation, —
the intercourse of Jupiter and Ceres? and to
signify the descent of rain from the sky, and the
moistening of the earth, by charges against the
gods? Can anything be either thought or be-
lieved more impious than that the rape of Pro-
serpine speaks of seeds buried in the earth, or
anything else, — for in like manner it is of no
importance, — and that it speaks of the pursuit
of agriculture to '^ the dishonour of father Dis ?


* The MS and edd. re.id inatris dcce — " of the mother goddess; "
for which Meursius proposed dcum — "mother of the gods," the
usual form of the title. Cf. cc. 7 and 16. [See Elucidation V.; also
note the reference to St. Augustme.]

^ The name is wanting in the MS Cf. c. 28.

' No Attic family of this name is mentioned anywhere; but in
Cos the Nebridae were famous as descendants of jt^sculapius through
Nebros. In Attica, on the other hand, the initiated were robed in
fawn-skins (I'e^piSe;), and were on this account spoken of as vt^p-
^oi'T€?. Saimasius has therefore suggested {ad Soluium, p. 864, E.)
that Amobius, or the author on whom he relied, transferred the family
to Attica on account of the similarity of sound.
9 Lit., " who have attached to themselves."

'° Amobius would seem to have been partial to this phrase, which
occurs in the middle of c. 38.
" Lit., "say."

'^ Lit., " with what shame and insult of the gods this is said to be
done."

'^ Lit., " with."


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


505


Is it not a thousand times more desirable to
become mute and speechless, and to lose that
flow of words and noisy and ' unseemly loquacity,
than to call the basest things by the names of the
gods ; nay, more, to signify commonplace things
by the base actions of the gods ?

41. It was once usual, in speaking allegori-
cally, to conceal under perfectly decent ideas,
and clothe^ with the respectability of decency,
what was base and horrible to speak of openly ;
but now venerable things are at your instance
vilely spoken of, and what is quite pure ^ is re-
lated+ in filthy language, so that that which vices
formerly concealed from shame, is now meanly
and basely spoken of, the mode of speech which
was fitting^ being changed. In speaking of Mars
and Venus as having been taken in adultery by
Vulcan's art, we speak of lust, says Jtiy opponent,
and anger, as restrained by the force and pur-
pose of reason. What, then, hindered, what
prevented you from expressing each thing by
the words and terms proper to it? nay, more,
what necessity was there, when you had resolved ^
to declare something or other, by means of trea-
tises and writings, to resolve that that should not
be the meaning to which you point, and in one
narrative to take up at the same time opposite
positions — the eagerness of one wishing to teach,
the niggardliness of one reluctant to make pub-
lic ? ^ Was there no risk in speaking of the gods
as unchaste ? The mention of lust and anger,
my opponent says, was likely to defile the tongue
and mouth with foul contagion.^ But, assuredly,
if this were done,'° and the veil of allegorical
obscurity were removed, the matter would be
easily understood, and by the same the dignity
of the gods would be maintained unimpaired.
But now, indeed, when the restraining of vices
is said to be signified by the binding of Mars
and Venus, two most inconsistent" things are
done at the very same time ; so that, on the one
hand, a description of something vile suggests
an honourable meaning, and on the other, the
baseness occupies the mind before any regard
for religion can do so.

42. But you will perhaps say, for this only is
left which you may think '^ can be brought for-


1 Lit., "din of."

2 Passivi.

3 Lit., " strong in chastity."

* The MS , first three edd., Elm., and Oehler read commora?ituy
— " lingers," i.e., " continues to be spoken of; " the other edd. re-
ceive comiiwmorantjir, as above, from the errata in the ist ed.

S The MS., first four edd., and Oehler read gravitas — serious-
ness; corrected /Sr. as above, in all edd. after Stewechius.

* So, perhaps, the unintelligible MS. dignorum should be emended
digna rcruni.

7 So all edd. since Stewechius, adding j to the MS. voluisse.

^ i e., the mere fact that the stories were published, showed a wish
to teach; but their being allegories, showed a reluctance to allow
them to be understood.

9 The edd. read this sentence interrogatively.

'° i.e., " if you said exactly what you mean." The reference is
not to the immediately preceding words, but to the question on which
the chapter is based — " what prevented you from cxpressuig," etc.

" Lit , " perverse."

'^ Passive.


ward by you, that the gods do not wish their
mysteries to be known by men, and that the
narratives were therefore written with allegorical
ambiguity. And whence have you learned '3 that
the gods above do not wish their mysteries to
be made public? whence have you become ac-
quainted with these ? or why are you anxious to
unravel them by explaining them as allegories?
Lastly, and finally, what do the gods mean, that
while they do not wish honourable, they allow
unseemly, even the basest things, to be said
about them ? When we name Attis, says my op-
po?ient, we mean' and speak of the sun ; but if
Attis is the sun, as you reckon hi?n and say, who
will that Attis be whom your books record and
declare to have been born in Phrygia, to have
suffered certain things, to have done certain
things also, whom all the theatres know in the
scenic shows, to whom every year we see divine
honours paid expressly by name amongst the
other religious ceremonies? Whether was this
name made to pass from the sun to a man, or
from a man to the sun? For if that name is
derived in the first instance from the sun, what,
pray, has the golden sun done to you, that you
should make that name to belong to him in com-
mon with an emasculated person ? But if it is
derived from a goat, and is Phrygian, of what
has the sire of Phaethon, the father of this light
and brightness, been guilty, that he should seem
worthy to be named from a mutilated man, and
should become more venerable when designated
by the name of an emasculated body ?

43. But what the meaning of this is, is already
clear to all. For because you are ashamed of
such writers and histories, and do not see that
these things can be got rid of which have once
been committed to writing in filthy language,
you strive to make base things honourable, and
by every kind of subtlety you pervert and cor-
rupt the real senses •'^ of words for the sake of
spurious interpretations ; '5 and, as ofttimes hap-
pens to the sick, whose senses and understand-
ing have been put to flight by the distempered
force of disease, you toss about confused and
uncertain conjectures, and rave in empty fic-
tions.

Let it be granted that the irrigation of the
earth was meant by the union of Jupiter and
Ceres, the burying of the seed '"^ by the ravishing
of Proserpine by father Dis, wines scattered over
the earth by the limbs of Liber torn asunder by
the Titans, that the restraining '? of lust and rash-
ness has been spoken of as the binding of the
adulterous Venus and Mars.


'2 Lit., " is it clear to you."
'"^ Lit,, " natures."
'5 Lit., " things."

"> So most edd., reading occiiltntio for the MS. ocC7i/>atw.
" So all edd., reading com-, except Hild and Oehler, who retain
the MS. reading, itii-pressio — " the assault of," i.e., " on."


5o6


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


44. But if you come to the conclusion that
these fables have been written allegorically, what
is to be done with the rest, which we see cannot
be forced into such changes of sense? For what
are we to substitute for the wrigglings ' into which
the lustful heat- of Semele's offspring forced him
upon the sepulchral mound? and what for those
Ganymedes who were carried off^ and set to
preside over lustful practices ? what for that con-
version of an ant into which Jupiter, the greatest
of the gods, contracted the outlines of his huge
body?-* what for swans and satyrs? what for
golden showers, which the same seductive god
put on with perfidious guile, amusing himself by
changes of form ? And, that we may not seern
to speak of Jupiter only, what allegories can
there be in the loves of the other deities ? what
in their circumstances as hired servants and
slaves? what in their bonds, bereavements, lam-
entations? what in their agonies, wounds, sepul-
chres? Now, while in this you might be held
guilty in one respect for writing in such wise
about the gods, you have added to your guilt
beyond measure s in calling base things by the
names of deities, and again in defaming the gods
by giving to them the names of infamous things.

' Lit., "waves" — fluctibus, the reading of the MS., LB., Hild.,
and Oehler; the other edd. xe.2iiSm^fustibus — " stakes."

2 So Meursius, changing the MS. 0- into n-rign.

3 The first four edd. retain the MS., reading partis — "brought
forth ; " the others adopt a suggestion ol Canterus, raptis, as above.

* Lit., " vastness."

S Addere garo gerrem, a proverb ridiculing a worthless addi-
tion, which nullifies something in itself precious, gariint being a
highly esteemed sauce (or perhaps soup), which would be thrown
away upon gerres, a worthless kind of salt fish. Arnobius merely
means, however, that while such stories are wrong, what follows is
unspeakably worse.


But if you believed without any doubt ^ that they
were here close at hand, or anywhere at all, fear
would check you in making mention of them,
and your beliefs and unchanged thoughts should
have been exactly ^ as if they were listening to
you and heard your words. For among men
devoted to the services of religion, not only the
gods themselves, but even the names of the gods,
should be reverenced, and there should be quite
as much grandeur in their names as there is in
those even who are thought of under these names.
45. Judge fairly, and you are deserving of
censure in this,** that in your common conversa-
tion you name Mars when you mean*? fighting,
Neptune when you mean the seas, Ceres when
you mean bread, Minerva when you mean weav-
ing,'" Venus when you mean filthy lusts. For
what reason is there, that, when things can be
classed under their own names, they should be
called by the names of the gods, and that such
an insult should be offered to the deities as not
even we men endure, if any one applies and
turns our names to trifling objects? But lan-
guage, you say, is contemptible, if defiled with
such words." O modesty,'^ worthy of praise !
you blush to name bread and wine, and are not
afraid to speak of Venus instead of carnal inter-
course !


*> Lit., " with undubitable knowledge."

7 Lit., " it ought to have been so believed, and to be held fixed
in thought just," etc.

8 Lit., " are in this part of censure."

9 Lit,, " for."

'° Lit., " the warp," stamine.

" i.e , if things are spoken of under their proper names.

'- The MS. reads ac unintelligibly.


BOOK VI.


I. Having shown briefly how impious and infa-
mous are the opinions which you have formed
about your gods, we have now to ' speak of their
temples, their images also, and sacrifices, and
of the other things which are ^ united and closely
related to them. For you are here in the habit
of fastening upon us a very serious charge of
impiety because we do not rear temples for the
ceremonies of worship, do not set up statues and
images ^ of any god, do not build altars,-* do not
offer the blood of creatures slain i7i sacrifices,
incense, 5 nor sacrificial meal, and finally, do not
bring wine flowing in libations from sacred bowls ;


' Lit., " it remains that we."

^ Lit., " series which is," etc.

3 Singular. [But costly churches were built about this time.]

* Non altaria, noii aras, i.e , neither to the superior nor infe-
rior deities. Cf. Virgil, Eel., v 66.

5 [It is not with any aversion to incense that 1 note its absence,
so frequently attested, from primitive rites of the Church.]


which, indeed, we neglect to build and do, not
as though we cherish impious and wicked dis-
positions, or have conceived any madly desper-
ate feeling of contempt for the gods, but because
we think and believe that they '' — if only they
are true gods, and are called by this exalted
name 7 — either scorn such honours, if they give
way to scorn, or endure tiiem with anger, if they
are roused by feelings of rage.

2. For — that you may learn what are our
sentiments and opinions about that race — we
think that they — if only they are true gods,
that the same things may be said again till you
are wearied hearing them ^ — should have all the
virtues in perfection, should be wise, upright,
venerable, — if only our heaping upon them


6 The earlier edd. prefix d to the MS. eos — " that the gods," etc.

7 Lit., " endowed with the eminence of this name."

8 Lit., " and to satiety."


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


507


human honours is not a crime, — strong in ex-
cellences within themselves, and should not give
themselves ' up to external props, because the
completeness of their unbroken bliss is made
perfect ; should be free from all agitating and
disturbing passions ; should not burn with anger,
should not be excited by any desires ; should
send misfortune to none, should not find a cruel
pleasure in the ills of men ; should not terrify
by portents, should not show prodigies to cause
fear ; should not hold men responsible and liable
to be punished for the vows which they owe,
nor demand expiatory sacrifices by threatening
omens ; should not bring on pestilences and
diseases by corrupting the air, should not bum
up the fruits with droughts ; should take no part
in the slaughter of war and devastation of cities ;
should not wish ill to one party, and be favour-
able to the success of another ; but, as becomes
great minds, should weigh all in a just balance,
and show kindness impartially to all. For it
belongs to a mortal race and human weakness
to act otherwise ; ^ and the maxims and declara-
tions of wise men state distinctly, that those who
are touched by passion live a life of suffering,^
and are weakened by grief,^ and that it cannot
be but that those who have been given over to
disquieting feelings, have been bound by the
laws of mortality. Now, since this is the case,
how can we be supposed to hold the gods in
contempt, who we say are not gods, and cannot
be connected with the powers of heaven, unless
they are just and worthy of the admiration which
great minds excite?

3. But, we are told, we rear no temples to
them, and do not worship their images ; we do
not slay victims in sacrifice, we do not offer in-
cense 5 and libations of wine. And what greater
honour or dignity can we ascribe to them, than
that we put them in the same position as the
Head and Lord of the universe, to whom the
gods owe it in common with us,^ that they are
conscious that they exist, and have a living be-
ing ?' For do we honour Him with shrines, and
by building temples ? ^ Do we even slay victims

' The MS. wants se, which was supplied by Stewechius.

* i.e., not act impartially and benevolently, which may possibly be
the meaning of contrariis agere, or, as Oehler suggests, " to assail
fiieH with contrary, i.e., injurious things." All edd. read egere, ex-
cept Oehler, who can see no meaning in it; but if translated, " to
wish for contrary things," it suits the next clause very well.

3 Lit., " whom passion touches, suffer."

* .So the MS., Stewechius, Hild.,and Oehler, while the first four
edd and Oberthiir merely add ni 10 dolore, and join with the pre-
ceding pati — " suffer pain, are weakened."

5 [See note 5, book. vi. p. 506.]

*> The MS. and most edd. read di-vina tiobiscmn — "the divine
things along with us; " Heraldus rejects div. as a gloss, while Meur-
sius, followed by Orelli, corrects dii una, and Oehler divi una, as
above.

' Lit , " are contained in vital substance."

^ Arnobius here expressly denies that the Christians had any tem-
ples. There has been some controversy on the subject (Mosheim,
book i. cent, i, ch. 4, sec. 5, Soames' ed.), surely as needless as con-
troversy could be; for as the Christians must at all times have had
stated places of meeting (although in time of persecution these might
be changed frequently), it is clear that, in speaking thus, the meaning
must be only, that their buildings had no architectural pretensions.


to Him ? Do we give Him the other things, to
take which and pour them forth in libation shows
not a careful regard to reason, but heed to a
practice maintained ^ merely by usage ? For it
is perfect folly to measure greater powers by your
necessities, and to give the things useful to your-
self to the gods who give all thin^^s, and to think
this an honour, not an insult. We ask, therefore,
to do what service to the gods, or to meet what
want, do you say that temples have been reared,'"
and think that they should be again built? Do
they feel the cold of" winter, or are they scorched
by summer suns? Do storms of rain flow over
them, or whirlwinds shake them? Are they in
danger of being exposed to the onset of enemies,
or the furious attacks of wild beasts, so that it is
right and becoming to shut them up in places
of security,'^ or guard them by throwing up a
rampart of stones? For what are these temples?
If you ask human weakness "^ — something vast
and spacious ; if you consider the power of the
gods — small caves, as it were,'-* and even, to
speak more truly, the narrowest kind of caverns
formed and contrived with sorry judgment.' s
Now, if you ask to be told who was their first
founder '^ and builder, either Phoroneus or the
Egyptian Merops '' will be mentioned to you, or,
as Varro relates in his treatise " de Admirandis,"
^acus the offspring of Jupiter. Though these,
then, should be built of heaps of marble, or shine
resplendent with ceilings fretted with gold, though
precious stones sparkle here, and gleam like stars
set at varying intervals, all these things are made
up of earth, and of the lowest dregs of even baser
matter. For not even, if you value these more
highly, is it to be believed that the gods take
pleasure in them, or that they do not refuse and
scorn to shut themselves up, and be confined
within these barriers. This, my opponent says,
is the temple of Mars, this that of Juno and of
Venus, this that of Hercules, of Apollo, of Dis.
What is this but to say this is the house of Mars,
this of Juno and Venus,'** Apollo dwells here, in
this abides Hercules, in that Summanus? Is it
not, then, the very '9 greatest affront to hold the


and their service no splendour of ritual. [Diocletian's mild begin-
ning suffered Christians to build costly temples in many places.
These he subsequently destroyed with great severity.]
9 Lit., " drawn out."

'° So the edd., reading constructa for the corrupt MS. cofiscripta
— " written."

" i.e., to suppose that temples are necessary to the gods, is to
make them subject to human weakness.

•- Lit., " with fortifications of roofs."

'3 i.e., if you have regard merely to the weakness of men, a tem-
ple may be something wonderful.

'* Lit., " .some."

'S Lit., " formed by contrivance of a poor heart."

'*' Insttintor, wanting in all edd., except Hild. and Oehler.

'^ Arnobius here agrees with Clemens Alexandrinus, but Jos.
Scaliger has pointed out that the name should be Cecrops. It is pos-
sible that Arnobius may have been misled by what was merely a slip
of Clement's pen. [See the passage here referred to, vol. ii. p. 184,
this series.]

'^ The preceding words, from " this of Hercules," are omitted by
the first four edd. and Elmenh., and were first restored from the MS.
by Stewechius.

'9 Lit., " first and."


5o8


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


gods kept fast ' in habitations, to give to them
httle huts, to build lockfast places and cells, and
to think that the things are ^ necessary to them
which are needed by men, cats, emmets, and
lizards, by quaking, timorous, and little mice ?

4. But, says jny opponent, it is not for this rea-
son that we assign temples to the gods as though
we wished to ward off from them drenching
storms of rain, winds, showers, or the rays of the
sun ; but in order that we may be able to see
them in person and close at hand, to come near
and address them, and impart to them, when in
a measure present, the expressions of our rev-
erent feelings. For if they are invoked under
the open heaven, and the canopy of ether, they
hear nothing, / suppose ; and unless prayers are
addressed to them near at hand, they will stand
deaf and immoveable as if nothing were said.
And yet we think that every god whatever — if
only he has the power of this name — should
hear what every one said from every part of the
world, just as if he were present ; nay, more,
should foresee, without waiting to be told,^ what
every one conceived in his secret and silent +
thoughts. And as the stars, the sun, the moon,
while they wander above the earth, are steadily
and everywhere in sight of all those who gaze at
them without any exception ; so, too, 5 it is fitting
that the ears of the gods should be closed against
no tongue, and should be ever within reach, al-
though voices should flow together to them from
widely separated regions. For this it is that be-
longs specially to the gods, — to fill all things
with their power, to be not partly at any place,
but all everywhere, not to go to dine with the
^4ithiopians, and return after twelve days to their
own dwellings.^

5. Now, if this be not the case, all hope of help
is taken away, and it will be doubtful whether
you are heard ' by the gods or not, if ever you
perform the sacred rites with due ceremonies.
For, to make it clear,^ let us suppose that there
is a temple of some deity in the Canary Islands,
another of the same deity in remotest Thyle, also
among the Seres, among the tawny Garamantes,
and any others ^ who are debarred from knowing
each other by seas, mountains, forests, and the
four cjuarters of the world. If they all at one
time beg of the deity with sacrifices what their


' So the edd., reading habere districtos for the MS. destrucios.

2 Lit., " that the things be thought to be."

3 Lit., " knowledge being anticipated."

* These words, et tacitis, omitted by Oberthur, are similarly,
omitted by Orelli without remark.

5 So the edd., inserting q7tfl- into the MS. reading ita-que — " it is
therefore fitting," which is absurd, as making the connection between
the members of the sentence one not of analogy, but of logical se-
quence.

6 Cf. the speech of Thetis, Iliad, i. 423-425.

' So the margin of Ursinus, Elm., LB., and Orelli, with Meur-

sius, reading audiamini for the MS. audi'amuf " we are heard,"

which does not harmonize with the next clause.

8 Lit., " for the purpose of coming to know the thing."
• 9 Lit., " if there are any others."


wants compel each one to think about,'° what
hope, pray, will there be to all of obtaining the
benefit, if the god does not hear the cry sent up
to him everywhere, and if there shall be any
distance to w'hich the words of the sui)pliant for
help cannot penetrate? For either he will be
nowhere present, if he may at times not be any-
where," or he will be at one place only, since he
cannot give his attention generally, and without
making any distinction. And thus it is brought
about, that either the god helps none at all, if
being busy with something he has been unable
to hasten to give ear to their cries, or one only
goes away with his prayers heard, while the rest
have effected nothing.

6. What cafi you say as to this, that it is at-
tested by the writings of authors, that many of
these temples which have been raised with golden
domes and lofty roofs cover bones and ashes,
and are sepulchres of the dead ? Is it not plain
and manifest, either that you worship dead men
for immortal gods, or that an inexpiable affront
is cast upon the deities, whose shrines and tem-
ples have been built over the tombs of the dead?
Antiochus,'^ in the ninth book of his Histories,
relates that Cecrops was buried in the temple of
Minerva,'^ at Athens ; again, in the temple of the
same goddess, which is in the citadel of Larissa,'-*
it is related and declared that Acrisius was laid,
and in the sanctuary of Polias,'^ Erichthonius ;
while the brothers Dairas and Immarnachus were
buried in the enclosure of Eleusin, which lies near
the city. What say you as to the virgin daugh-
ters of Celeus? are they not said to be buried '^
in the temple of Ceres at Eleusin? and in the
shrine of Diana, which was set up in the temple
of the Delian Apollo, are not Hyperoche and
Laodice buried, who are said to have been
brought thither from the country of the Hyper-
boreans? In the Milesian Didymaeon,'^ Lean-
drius says that Cleochus had the last honours of
burial paid to him. Zeno of Myndus openly
relates that the monument of Leucophryne is in
the sanctuary of Diana at Magnesia. Under the
altar of Apollo, which is seen in the city of Tel-


'° So the MS., reading c-ogiiare, corrected r " to beg," in the

margin of Ursinus and Elm. For the preceding words the MS reads,
poscantque de Humiiie. The edd. omit que as above, except Oehler,
who reads qtae — " what hope will there be, what, pray, to all," etc.

" So the MS., reading si iispiam poterit aliquando non esse,
which may be understood in two senses, either not liriiiied by space,
or not in space, i.e., not existing; but the reading and meaning must
be regarded as alike doubtful.

'2 A Syracusan historian. The rest of the chapter is almost liter-
ally translated from Clement, who is followed by Eusebius also (Fmp.
Evang., ii. 6). [See vol. ii. p. 184, this series.]

'3 i.e , the Acropolis.

'* In Thessaly, whither (ace. to Pau.sanias) he had fled in vain, to
avoid the fulfilment of the oracle that he should be killed by lua d ligh-
ter's son.

'5 i.e., Athena Polias, or guardian of cities. Immedi.itely below,
the MS. reads Iiiivtnrnaclius, corrected in LB. and Orelli Immarus
from Clem., who speaks of " Immarus, son of Euiiiolpiis and Ilaeira."

16 So the unintelligible reading of the .MS., liitDiation-ilnts cfficia,
was emended by Heraldus, followed by LB. and Orelli, is hnbiiisse.

'^ i.e., the temple near Diiiyma, sacred to Apollo, who was wor-
shipped then under the name Didymus.


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


509


messus, is it not invariably declared by writings
that the prophet Telmessus lies buried ? Ptole-
mceus, the son of Agesarchus, in the first book
of the History of Philopator^ which he published,
afifirms, on the authority of literature, that Ciny-
ras, king of Paphos, was interred in the temple
of Venus with all his family, nay, more, with all
his stock. It would be ^ an endless and bound-
less task to describe in what sanctuaries they all
are throughout the world ; nor is anxious care
required, although ^ the Egyptians fixed a penalty
for any one who should have revealed the places
in which Apis lay hid, as to those Polyandria ^
of Varro,5 by what temples they are covered, and
what heavy masses they have laid upon them.

7. But why do I speak of these trifles ? What
man is there who is ignorant that in the Capitol
of the imperial people is the sepulchre of Tolus ^
Vulcentanus ? Who is there, I say, who does not
know that from beneath ^ its foundations there
was rolled a man's head, buried for no very long
time before, either by itself without the other
parts of the body, — for some relate this, — or
with all its members ? Now, if you require this
to be made clear by the testimonies of authors,
Sammonicus, Granius, Valerianus,* and Fabius
will declare to you whose son Aulus^ was, of
what race and nation, how '° he was bereft of life
and light by the slave of his brother, of what
crime he was guilty against his fellow-citizens,
that he was denied burial in his father " land.
You will learn also — although they pretend tD
be unwilling to make this public — what was
done with his head when cut off, or in what place
it was shut up, and the whole affair carefully con-
cealed, in order that the omen which the gods
had attested might stand without interruption, '-
unalterable, and sure. Now, while it was proper
that this story should be suppressed, and con-
cealed, and forgotten in the lapse of time, the


' i.e., " lover of his father," the name given ironically to the fourth
Ptolemy, because he murdered his father.

2 Lit.. " is."

3 So the MS., both Rom. edd., Hild , and Oehler, reading quam-
vis paeiiam; Geleniiis, Canterus, Elm , and Oberthijr omit vis, and
the other edd. w, i e., "as to what punishment the Egyptian," etc. This
must refer to the cases in which the sacred bull, having outlived the
term of twenty-five years, was secretly killed by the priests, while the
people were taught that it had thrown itself into the water.

* i.e., "burial-places." By this Oehler has attempted to show is
meant the Hebdomades vel de Iinaginibus of Varro, a series of
biographical sketches illustrated with portraits, executed in some way
which cannot be clearly ascertained.

5 M,s. Barronis.

6 So the ,MS., first four edd., and Oberthiir, reading Toli, corrected
O/i in the others, from Servius (ad. ^n., viii. 345). Arnubius him-
self gives the form A ulus, i.e. Olus, immediately below, so that it is
probably correct.

' Lit., " the seats of."

^ Ursinus suggested Valerius Antias, mentioned in the first
chapter of the fifth book; a conjecture adopted by Hild.

9 The MS., LB., Hild., and Oehler read Aulus, and, ace. to Oehler,
all other edd. Tohis. Orelli, however, reads Olus, as above.

'° The .MS. and both Roman edd. XK.-AAgermani seri'uli inta with-
out meaning, corrected as above by Gclenius, Cameras, Elm., and
Oberthiir, id a g. servulo, and 7it a g. servulis — " by the slaves,"
in the others, except Oehler who reads as above, g. serTiilo ut.

" The MS and both Roman edd. read unintelligibly patientia,
correaed paiernt^ in Hild. and OMer, pairite in the rest.

'^ Lit., " the perpetuity of the omen sealed might stand."


composition of the name publi.shed it, and, by a
testimony which could not be got rid of, caused
it to remain m meji's minds, together with its
causes, so long as it endured itself; '^ and the
state which is greatest of all, and worships all
deities, did not blush in giving a name to the
temple, to name it from the head of Olus"'* Capi-
tolium rather than from the name of Jupiter.

8. We have therefore — as I suppose — shown
sufficiently, that to the immortal gods temples
have been either reared in vain, or built in con-
sequence of insulting opinions held to their dis-
honour and to the belittling '5 of the power
believed to be in their hands. We have next to
say something about statues and images, which
you form with much skill, and tend with religious
care, — wherein if there is any credibility, we
can by no amount of consideration settle in our
own minds whether you do this in earnest and
with a serious purpose, or amuse yourselves in
childish dreams by mocking at these very things.'^
For if you are assured that the gods exist whom
you suppose, and that they live in the highest
regions of heaven, what cause, what reason, is
there that those images should be fashioned by
you, when you have true beings to whom you
may pour forth prayers, a.ndfrom whom you may
ask help in trying circumstances ? But if, on the
contrary, you do not believe, or, to speak with
moderation, are in doubt, in this case, also, what
reason is there, pray, to fashion and set up im-
ages of doubtful beings, and to form '7 with vain
imitation what you do not believe to exist? Do
you perchance say, that under these images of
deities there is displayed to you their presence,
as it were, and that, because it has not been
given you to see the gods, they are worshipped
in this fashion,'^ and the duties owed to them
paid? He who says and asserts this, does not
believe that the gods exist ; and he is proved
not to put faith in his own religion, to whom it is
necessary to see what he may hold, lest that which
being obscure is not seen, may happen to be vain.

9. We worship the gods, you say, by means
of images.'^ What then? Without these, do
the gods not know that they are worshipped, and
will they not think that any honour is shown to
them by you? Through by-paths, as it were,
then, and by assignments to a third party,^° as
they are called, they receive and accept your


'3 Lit., " through the times given to itself"

■'» The .MS. reads j-c//, — changed into Toli by the first four edd.,
Elm., and Oberthiir. The others omit .r.

'5 [" Belittle." This word here is noteworthy. President Jeffer-
son is said to have coined it, and I have never before seen it in a
transatlantic book.]

'<> i.e., " which you pretend to worship."

'7 So the edd., reading /o/-//.rtr-f, except Hild. and Oehler, who
retain the MS. reading / — " that images be formed."

■^ The MS. and both Roman edd. read corruptly insolidi, corrected
ita or sic coli, as above, in all except the last two edd.

'9 [It is manifest that nothing of the kind was said by Christians.
See p 506, note 3, supra.\

-° i.e., you do not seek access to the gods directly, and seek to do
them honour by giving that honour to the idols instead.


5IO


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


services ; and before those to whom that service
is owed experience it, you first sacrifice to im-
ages, and transmit, as it were, some remnants
to them at the pleasure of others.' And what
greater wrong, disgrace, hardship, can be in-
flicted than to acknowledge one god, and yet
make supplication to something else — to hope
for help from a deity, and pray to an image with-
out feeling? Is not thus, I pray you, that which
is said in the common proverbs : " to cut down
the smith when you strike at the fuller ; " ^ " and
when you seek a man's advice, to require of asses
and pigs their opinions as to what should be
done? "

I o. And whence, finally, do you know whether
all these images which you form and put in the
place of 3 the immortal gods reproduce and bear
a resemblance to the gods? For it may happen
that in heaven one has a beard who by you is
represented ■* with smooth cheeks ; that another
is rather advanced in years to whom you give
the appearance of a youth ; 5 that here he is fair,
rvith blue eyes^ who really has grey ones ; that
he has distended nostrils whom you make and
form with a high nose. For it is not riglit to
call or name that an image which does not derive
from the face of the original features like it;
which 7 can be recognised to be clear and cer-
tain from things which are manifest. For while
all we men see that the sun is perfectly round by
our eyesight, which cannot be doubted, you have
given ^ to him the features of a man, and of
mortal bodies. The moon is always in motion,
and in its restoration every month puts on thirty
faces : ^ with you, as leaders and designers, that
is represented as a woman, and has one counte-
nance, which passes through a thousand different
states, changing each day.'° We understand that
all the winds are only a flow of air driven and
impelled in mundane ways : in your hands they
take ' ' the forms of men filling with breath twisted


' i.e., the transmission of the sacrifice to the gods is made depend-
ent on idols,

2 This corresponds exactly to the English, " to shoot at the pigeon
and hit the crow."

3 Lit., " with vicarious substitution for." [A very pertinent ques-
tion as to the images worshipped in Rome to this day. There is one
Mndonua of African hue and features. See also Murray's Hand-
book, Italy, p. 72.]

* The MS. reads effi-gitur, corrected as above, effin., in all edd.
except Hild., who reads cfficitur — " is made," and Stewechius, effigi-
atitr — " is formed "

5 Lit., " boy's age."

6 FlavHs, so invariably associated with blue eyes, that though
these are the feature brought into contrast, they are only suggested
in this way, and not directly mentioned — a mode of speech very
characteristic of Arnobius.

7 i.e., a fact which can be seen to be true by appealing to analog^'.

8 So the MS., LB., Hild., and Oehler, reading donastis, the
others donatis — " you give."

9 As the appearance of the moon is the same in some of its phases
as in oth' rs. it is cle.ir that Arnobius cannot mean that it has thirty
distinct forms. We must therefore suppose that he is either speaking
very loosely of change upon change day after day, or that he is re-
ferring to some of the limar theories of the ancients, such as that a
new moon is created each day, and that its form is thus ever new
(Lucr., v. 729-748).

'° Lit., "is changed through a thousand states with daily in-
stability."

1' Lit., "are."


trumpets by blasts from out their breasts. "^ Among
the representations of y owe gods we see that there
is the very stern face of a lion '^ smeared with
pure vermilion, and that it is named Frugifer. If
all these images are likenesses of the gods above,
there must then be said to dwell in heaven also
a god such as the image which has been made
to represent his form and appearance ; '•♦ and, of
course, as here K\i2X figure of yours, so there the
deity himself '5 is a mere mask and face, without
the rest of the body, growling with fiercely gaping
jaws, terrible, red as blood,'^ holding an apple
fast with his teeth, and at times, as dogs do when
wearied, putting his tongue out of his gaping
mouth. "7 But if,'^ indeed, this is not the case, as
we all think that it is not, what, pray, is the
meaning of so great audacity to fashion to your-
self whatever form you please, and to say ''* that
it is an image of a god whom you cannot prove
to exist at all?

II. You laugh because in ancient times the
Persians worshipped rivers, as is told in the writ-
ings which hand down these things to memory ;
the Arabians an unshapen stone ; ^° the Scythian
nations a sabre ; the Thespians a branch instead
of Cinxiaj^r the Icarians^^ an unhewn log in-
stead of Diana ; the people of Pessinus a flint
instead of the mother of the gods ; the Romans
a spear instead of Mars, as the muses of Varro
point out ; and, before they were acquainted
with the statuary's art, the Samians a plank ^^ in-


'- Lit., " intestine and domestic."

■3 The MS. reads leoti-e-s torvissimatn facietn, emended, as above,
leonis t. /., in LB., Orelli, Hild., and Oehler, and /. torinssima
facie — " lions of very stern face," in the others. Noiirry supposes
that the reference is to the use of lions, or lion-headed figures, as
architectural ornaments on temples (cf. the two lions rampant sur-
mounting the gale of Mycena;), but partially comcides in the
view of Elm., that mixed figures are meant, such as are described by
Tertullian and Minucius Felix (ch. 28: " Vou deify gods made up of
a goat and a lion, and with the faces of lions and of dogs " ). The
e.\t\\\\c\.frijgi/er, however, which was applied to the Egyptian Osiris,
the Persian Mithras, and Bacchus, who were also represented as
lions, makes it probable that the reference is to symbolic statues of
the sun.

'■» Lit., " such a god to whose form and appearance the likeness of
this image has been directed."

'S Lit., " that."

'6 The MS. and both Roman edd. read unintelligibly sanguitieo
decotoro, for which s. de colore, as above, has been suggested by
Canterus, with the approval of Heraldus.

'7 The .MS. here inserts puetuitate, for which no satisfactory
emendation has been proposed. The early edd. read pituitate, a
word for which there is no authority, while LB. gives potiis aziditate
— " drunk with avidity " — both being equally hopeless.

■s MS. sic, corrected by Geleniusi/'.

19 So Meursius, ac dicere, for MS. -cidere.

™ It is worthy of notice that although in this passage, as often else-
where, Arnobius adheres pretty closely to the argument proposed by
Clemens Alexandrinus, he even in such passages sometimes differs
from it, and not at random. Thus Clement^ speaks merely of a
"stone," and .•Xrnobius of an " unshaped stone." The former expres-
sion harmonizes with the words of Maximus Tyrius {Serin., xxxviii.
p. 225, Steph.), " The Arabians worship I know not whom, but the
image whicli I saw was a square stone; " while Suidas (Kiister's ed.,
s. v. Seus 'Apr;?; agrees with Arnobius in calling it a " stone, black,
square, unfashioned" (arvTrwros). This is the more noteworthy, as
at times Arnobius would almost seem to be following Clement blindly.
[See Clement, cap. iv. vol. ii. p. 184, this series.]

"' So Arnobius renders Clement's Cithceronian Hera.

" So corrected in the notes of Canterus from Clem for the MS.
reading Carios, retained by the first four edd. and Elmenh. In Icaria
there was a temple of Diana called TaupoTroAtov.

^-i The MS. and first four edd. read p-uteutn — " a well," corrected
/>lut., as above, by Gifanius, and in the notes of Canterus.


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


511


stead of Juno, as Aethlius ' relates : and you do
not laugh when, instead of the immortal gods,
you make supplication to little images of men
and human forms — nay, you even suppose that
these very little images are gods, and besides
these you do not believe that anything has divine

power. What say you, O ye ! Do the gods

of heaven have ears, then, and temples, an occi-
put, spine, loins, sides, hams, buttocks, houghs, ^
ankles, and the rest of the other members with
which we have been formed, which were also
mentioned in the first part of this book ^ a little
more fully, and cited with greater copiousness
of language ? Would that it were possible ■♦ to
look into the sentiments and very recesses of
your mind, in which you revolve various and enter
into the most obscure considerations : we should
find that you yourselves even feel as we do, and
have no other opinions as to the form of the
deities. But what can we do with obstinate
prejudices? what with those who are menacing
us with swords, and devising new punishments
against us? In your rage 5 you maintain a bad
cause, and that although you ai'e perfectly aware
of it; and that which you have once done with-
out reason, you defend lest you should seem to
have ever been in ignorance ; and you think it
better not to be conquered, than to yield and
bow to acknowledged truth.

12. From such causes as these this also has
followed, with your connivance, that the wanton
fancy of artists has found full scope in represent-
ing the bodies of the gods, and giving forms to
them, at which even the sternest might laugh.
And so Hammon is even now formed and rep-
resented with a ram's horns ; Saturn with his
crooked sickle, like some guardian of the fields,
and pruner of too luxuriant branches ; the son
of Maia with a broad-brimmed travelling cap, as
if he were preparing to take the road, and avoid-
ing the sun's rays and the dust ; Liber with
tender limbs, and with a woman's perfectly free
and easily flowing lines of body ; ^ Venus, naked
and unclothed, just as if you said that she ex-
posed publicly, and sold to all comers,^ the
beauty of her prostituted body ; Vulcan with his
cap and hammer, but with his right hand free,
and with his dress girt up as a workman pre-
pares ^ for his work ; the Delian god with a
plectrum and l3Te, gesticulating like a player on
the cithern and an actor about to sing ; the king
of the sea with his trident, just as if he had to
fight in the gladiatorial contest : nor can any


1 The MS. reads ethedius, corrected in the notes of Canterus.

2 So all edd., except both Roman edd., which retain the MS. read-
ing in the singular, suffrnginem,

3 i.e., iii. 13, p. 467.

* Lit , " it was allowed."

5 So Meiirsius suggested ameutes for the MS. reading animantis,
for which Heraldus proposed argiitiientis — " by arguments."

^ Lit., " and most dissolved with the laxity of feminine liquidity."
1 Divetidere.

* Lit., " with a workman's preparing."


figure of any deity be found 9 which does not
have certain characteristics '° bestowed on it by
the generosity of its makers, Lo, if some witty
and cunning king were to remove the Sun from
his place before the gate " and transfer him to
that of Mercury, and again were to carry off
Mercury and make him migrate to the shrine of
the Sun, — for both are made beardless by you,
and with smooth faces, — and to give to this onei
rays of light, to place a little cap '^ on the Sun's
head, how will you be able to distinguish be-
tween them, whether this is the Sun, or that
Mercury, since dress, not the peculiar appear-
ance of the face, usually points out the gods to
you ? Again, if, having transported them in like
manner, he were to take away his horns from the
unclad Jupiter, and fix them upon the temples
of Mars, and to strip Mars of his arms, and, on
the other hand, invest Hammon with them, what
distinction can there be between them, since he
who had been Jupiter can be also supposed to
be Mars, and he who had been Mavors can as-
sume the appearance of Jupiter Hammon? To
such an extent is there wantonness in fashioning
those images and consecrating names, as if they
were peculiar to them ; since, if you take away
their dress, the means of recognising each is put
an end to, god may be believed to be god, one
may seem to be the other, nay, more, both may
be considered both !

13. But why do I laugh at the sickles and
tridents which have been given to the gods? why
at the horns, hammers, and caps, when I know
that certain images have '^ the forms of certain
men, and the features of notorious courtesans?
For who is there that does not know that the
Athenians formed the HermcB in the likeness of
Alcibiades ? Who does not know — if he read
Posidippus over again — that Praxiteles, putting
forth his utmost skill,'+ fashioned the face of the
Cnidian Venus on the model of the courtesan
Gratina, whom the unhappy man loved desper-
ately? But is this the only Venus to whom there
has been given beauty taken from a harlot's face ?
Phryne,'5 the well-known native of Thespia — as
those who have written on Thespian affairs relate
— when she was at the height of her beauty,
comeliness, and youthfiil vigour, is said to have
been the model of all the Venuses which are
held in esteem, whether throughout the cities of
Greece or here,'^ whither has flowed the longing
and eager desire for such figures. All the artists,


9 Lit., "is there any figure to find."

'o Habitus.

" Ex/oribus. Cf. TertulL, de Idol., ch. 15: "In Greek writers
we also read that Apollo %v(talo<i and the damones Antelii ^iXtHa
over doors."

■- So the edd, rca.&ng petas-un-cultnn for the MS. -io-.

'3 Lit., " are."

'•* Lit., " with strife of skills."

'5 MS. Phyrna, but below Phryna, which is read in both instances
by Hild. and Oehler.

■<> So Meursius, followed by Orelli, readmg istic for the MS. iste.


512


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


therefore, who lived at that time, and to whom
truth gave the greatest abihty to portray Hke-
nesses, vied in transferring with all painstaking
and zeal the outline of a prostitute to the images
of the Cytherean. The beautiful thoughts ' of
the artists were full of fire ; and they strove each
to excel the other with emulous rivalry, not that
Venus might become more august, but that
Phryne = might stand for Venus. And so it was
brought to this, that sacred honours were offered
to courtesans instead of the immortal gods, and
an unhappy system of worship was led astray by
the making of statues. ^ That well-known and-^
most distinguished statuary, Phidias, when he
had raised the form of 01ym))ian Jupiter with
immense labour and exertion, 5 inscribed on the
finger of the god Pantarces ^ is beautiful, —
this, moreover, was the name of a boy loved by
him, and that with lewd desire, — and was not
moved by any fear or religious dread to call the
god by the name of a prostitute ; nay, rather, to
consecrate the divinity and image of Jupiter to
a debauchee. To such an extent is there wan-
tonness and childish feeling in forming those
little images, adoring them as gods, heaping upon
them the divine virtues, when we see that the
artists themselves find amusement in fashioning
them, and set them up as monuments of their
own lusts ! For what reason is there, if you
should incjuire, why Phidias should hesitate to
amuse himself, and be wanton when he knew
that, but a little before, the very Jupiter which
he had made was gold, stones, and ivory,^ form-
less, separated, confused, and that it was he him-
self who brought all these together and bound
them fast, that their appearance ^ had been given
to them by himself in the imitation ^ of limbs
which he had carved ; and, which is more than "^
all, that it was his own free gift, Xhsii Jupiter had
been produced and was adored among men? "

14. We would here, as if all nations on the
earth were present, make one speech, and pour
into the ears of them all, words which should
be heard in common : '^ Why, pray, is this, O
men ! that of your own accord you cheat and
deceive yourselves by voluntary blindness ? Dis-

* i.e., either the conceptions in their minds, or realized in their
works. Orelli, followed by the German translator Besnard, adopting
the former view, tran-^lates " the ideas of the artists (die Ideale der
Kiinstler) were full of fire and lile."

* [See note 15, p. 511.]

3 [True, alas! to this day; notorious courtesans furnishing the
models for the pictures and statues worshipped as saints, angels, etc.]

* So Gelenius and Canterus, reading et for Ms. est.
^ Lit., " with exertion of immense strength."

6 MS. Pantarches. 7"his was a very common mode of expressing
love among the ancients, the name of the loved one being carved on
the bark of trees (as if the Loves or the mountain nymphs had done
it), on walls, doors, or, as in this case, on statues, with the addition
"beautiful" (.Suidis, s. v. KaAoi and 'Vnixvovaia Me/uco-n, with
Kiister's notes). [Vol. ii. p. 187, note i, this series.]

"> Lit., " bones. '

* Lit., " conditions," habitus.
9 Lit., " similitude."

'° Lit., " first among."

" Lit., " human things."

*^ [Isa. xX 18-20, xliv. 9-20, xlvi. 5-8.]


pel the darkness now, and, returning to the light
of the mind, look more closely and see what
that is which is going on, if only you retain your
right, '3 and are not beyond the reach '•♦ of the
reason and prudence given to you. '5 Those
images which fill you with terror, and which you
adore prostrate upon the ground '^ in all the tem-
ples, are bones, stones, brass, silver, gold, clay,
wood taken from a tree, or glue mixed with
gypsum. Having been heaped together, it may
be, from a harlot's gauds or from a woman's '^
ornaments, from camels' bones or from the tooth
of the Indian beast,''^ from cooking-pots and
little jars, from candlesticks and lamps, or from
other less cleanly vessels, d';/^/ having been melted
down, they were cast into these shapes and
came out into the forms which you see, baked
in potters' furnaces, produced by anvils and
hammers, scraped with the silversmith's, and
filed down with ordinary files, cleft ajid hewn
with saws, with augers, '9 with axes, dug and hol-
lowed out by the turning of borers, t?;;^'/ smoothed
with planes. Is not this, then, an error? Is it
not, to speak accurately, folly to believe that a
god which you yourself made with care, to kneel
down trembling in supplication to that which has
been formed by you, and while you know, and
are assured that it is the product ^° of the labour
of your hands,^' — to cast yourself down upon
your face, beg aid suppliantly, and, in adversity
and time of distress, ask it to succour^- you with
gracious and divine favour?

15. Lo, if some one were to place before you
copper in the lump, and not formed ^^ into any
works of art, masses of unwrought silver, and
gold not fashioned into shape, wood, stones,
and bones, with all the other materials of which
statues and images of deities usually consist, —
nay, more, if some one were to place before you
the faces of battered gods, images melted down ^+
and broken, and were also to bid you slay vic-
tims to the bits and fragments, and give sacred
and divine honours to masses without form, —
we ask you to say to us, whether you would do
this, or refuse to obey. Perhaps you will say,
why? Because there is no man so stupidly
blind that he will class among the gods silver,


'3 i.e., the faculty of discernment, which is properly man's.

'■t Lit., " are in the limits of."

'5 The MS. reads his — " these," emended, as above, vobis in the
margin of Ursinus, Elm., and LB.

"' Lit., " and humble."

'7 i.e., a respectable woman.

" i.e., the elephant's tusk.

19 So Salmasius, followed by Orelli, Hild., and Oehler, reading
f2trfuracuUs,2iXiA\-.'2>.,xe.zA\'a%perforaculis for the us,. /ur/ure
aculeis.

'° So the margin of Ursinus, Meursius (according to Orelli),

Hild., and Oehler, reading part-tt-m for the MS. -e "is a part of

your labour," etc.

-' Lit., " of thy work and fingers."

22 So the MS., both Roman edd., Elm., and Orelli, reading nu-
minis favor e, for which LB. xza^s /avorcm — "the favour of the
propitious deity to succour." [Isaiah's argument reproduced.]

^3 Lit.., " thrown together."

^ Rigaltius suggested confracta — " shattered," for MS. -Jlata.


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


513


copper, gold, gypsum, ivory, potter's clay, and
say that these very things have, and possess in
themselves, divine power. What reason is there,
then, that all these bodies should want the power
of deity and the rank of celestials if they remain
untouched and unwrought, but should forthwith
become gods, and be classed and numbered
among the inhabitants of heaven if they receive
the forms of men, ears, noses, cheeks, hps, eyes,
and eyebrows? Does the fashioning add any
newness to these bodies, so that from this addi-
tion you are compelled ' to believe that some-
thing divine and majestic has been united to
them? Does it change copper into gold, or
compel worthless earthenware to become silver?
Does it cause things which but a little before
were without feeling, to live and breathe?^ If
they had any natural properties previously,^ all
these they retain ■♦ when built up in the bodily
forms of statues. What stupidity it is — for I
refuse to call it blindness — to suppose that the
natures of things are changed by the kind of
form into which they are forced, and that that
receives divinity from the appearance given to
it, which in its original body has been inert, and
unreasoning, and unmoved by feeling ! s

16. And so unmindful and forgetful of what
the substance and origin of the images are, you,
men, rational beings'^ and endowed with the
gift of wisdom and discretion, sink down before
pieces of baked earthenware, adore plates of
copper, beg from the teeth of elephants good
health, magistracies, sovereignties, power, vic-
tories, acquisitions, gains, very good harvests,
and very rich vintages ; and while it is plain and
clear that you are speaking to senseless things,
you think that you are heard, and bring your-
selves into disgrace of your own accord, by
vainly and credulously deceiving yourselves. 7
Oh, would that you might enter into some
statue ! rather, would that you might separate ^
and break up into parts ^ those Olympian and
Capitoline Jupiters, and behold all those parts
alone and by themselves which make up the
whole of their bodies ! You would at once see
that these gods of yours, to whom the smooth-
ness ^ //i(?/y exterior gives a majestic appearance
by its alluring '° brightness, are only a framework


' So the edd., reading cog- for the MS. cogit-aminz.

2 Lit., " be moved with agitation of breathing."

3 Lit., " outside," i.e., before being in bodily forms.

•♦ So Ursinus and LB., reading rethi-e-nt for the MS. -ea-, which
can hardly be correct. There may possibly be an elhpsis of si be-
fore this clause, so that the sentence would run: ''If they had
any natural properties, (if) they retain all these, what stupidity,"
etc.

S Lit., " deprived of moveableness of feeling."

* Lit., " a rational animal."

"> Lit., " with deceit of vain credulity." The edd. read this as an
interrogation: " Do you, therefore, sink down, adore, and bring your-
selves into disgrace ? "

* So Orelli, Hild., and Oehler, adopting a conjecture of Graevius,
di-, for the MS. de-ducere — " to lead down."

9 Lit., " resolved into members."
'° Lit., " by the charm of."


of ilexible " plates, particles without shape joined
together ; that they are kept from falling into
ruin and fear of destruction, by dove-tails and
clamps and brace-irons ; and that lead is run
into the midst of all the hollows and where the
joints meet, and causes delay '- useful in preserv-
ing them. You would see, I say, at once that
they have faces only without the rest of the
head,'3 imperfect hands without arms, beUies and
sides in halves, incomplete feet,'* and, which is
most ridiculous, that they have been put together
without uniformity in the construction of their
bodies, being in one part made of wood, but in
the other of stone. Now, indeed, if these things
could not be seen through the skill with which
they were kept out of sight, '5 even those at least
which lie open to all should have taught and in-
structed you that you are effecting nothing, and
giving your services in vain to dead things. For,
in this case,'^ do you not see that these images,
which seem to breathe, '^ whose feet and knees
you touch and handle when praying, at times
fall into ruins from the constant dropping of
rain, at other times lose the firm union of their
parts from their decaying and becoming rotten,'^
— how they grow black, being fumigated and
discoloured by the steam of sacrifices, and by
smoke, — how with continued neglect they lose
their position '9 and appearance, and are eaten
away with rust ? In this case, I say, do you not
see that newts, shrews, mice, and cockroaches,
which shun the light, build their nests and live
under the hollow parts of these statues? that
they gather carefully into these all kinds of filth,
and other things suited to their wants, hard and
half-gnawed bread, bones dragged thither in view
of probable scarcity,^" rags, down, and pieces of
paper to make their nests soft, and keep their
young warm ? Do you not see sometimes over
the face of an image cobwebs and treacherous
nets spun by spiders, that they may be able to
entangle in them buzzing and imprudent flies
while on the wing? Do you not see, finally,
that swallows full of filth, flying within the very
domes of the temples, toss themselves about, and
bedaub now the very faces, now the mouths of


" The MS. reads fle7'-tltiim, for which Hild. suggests flex-, as

above, previous edd. readingyfai? " of cast plates; " which cannot,

however, be correct, as Arnobius has just said that the images were
in part made of ivory.

'- Lit., " delays salutary for lastingnesses." The sense is, that the
lead prevents the joints from giving way, and so gives permanence to
the statue.

'3 Occipitiis.

^■^ Plantaru7n vestigia.

^3 Lit., " from the art of obscurity."

'6 i.e., if the nature of the images is really concealed by the skill
displayed in their construction.

" Lit.," breathing." [Ps. cxv. 4-8.]

'3 Lit., " are relaxed from decay of rottenness."

'9 i.e., fall from their pedestals. For the MS. reading situs (re-
tained in LB., as above), the margin of Ursinus, followed by the other
edd. except the first four, and Oberthiir, read situ " lose their ap-
pearance from mould."

"° So LB. and Oehler, xe.z.iim%faniis in spem for the ms. />a?inis,
omitted in other edd. All prefix /, as above, to the next word,
attnos.


514


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


the deities, the beard, eyes, noses, and all the
other parts on which their excrements ' fall ?
Blush, then, even though it is late, and accept
true methods and views from dumb creatures,
and let these teach you that there is nothing di-
vine in images, into which they do not fear or
scruple to cast unclean things in obedience to
the laws of their being, and led by their unerring
instincts.-

17. But you err, says my oppo7ient, and are
mistaken, for we do not consider either copper,
or gold and silver, or those other materials of
which statues are made, to be in themselves gods
and sacred deities ; but in them we worship and
venerate those whom their ^ dedication as sacred
introduces and causes to dwell in statues made
by workmen. The reasoning is not vicious nor
despicable by which any one — the dull, and also
the most intelligent — can believe that the gods,
forsaking their proper seats — that is, heaven —
do not shrink back and avoid entering earthly
habitations ; nay, more, that impelled by the
rite of dedication, they are joined to images !
Do your gods, then, dwell in gypsum and in
figures of earthenware? Nay, rather, are the
gods the minds, spirits, and souls of figures of
earthenware and of gypsum ? and, that the mean-
est things may be able to become of greater im-
portance, do they suffer themselves to be shut
up and concealed and confined in ^ an obscure
abode? Here, then, in the first place, we wish
and ask to be told this by you : do they do this
against their will — that is, do they enter the
images as dwellings, dragged to tliem by the rite
of dedication — or are they ready and willing?
and do you not summon them by any considera-
tions of necessity ? Do they do this unwillingly ? 5
and how can it be possible that they should be
compelled to submit to any necessity without
their dignity being impaired? With ready as-
sent ? ^ And what do the gods seek for in figures
of earthenware that they should prefer these
prisons ? to their starry seats, — that, having been
all but fastened to them, they should ennoble ^
earthenware and the other substances of which
images are made ?

18. What then? Do the gods remain always


' Deonernti proluvies podicis. [So Clement, vol. ii. p. i86, at
BOle 1, this series.]

2 LiL, " incited by the truth of nature." The MS. and both
Roman edd. read d-, all others iuhtincta, as above.

■5 LiL, " the sacred dedication "

■< Lit., " concealed in the restraint of."

5 The MS. reads iiirogati (the next letter being erased, having
probably been i redundant) jz' /wz*///, corrected in the margin of Ursi-
nus and Oehler, as above, -tis in.

^ Lit., "with the assent of voluntary compliance." "Do you
say," or some such e.xpression, must be understood, as Arnoblus is
asking his opponent to choose on which horn of the dilemma he wishes
to be impaled.

7 Lit., " bindings."

8 So Gelenius, Canterus, Elm., Oberth., and Orelli, reading nobili-
icnt. No satisfactory emendation has been proposed, and contradic-
tory accounts are given as to the reading of the MS Immediately
after this sentence, LI?., followed by Orelli, inserts a clause from the
□ext chapter. Cf. the foUouing note.


in such substances, and do they not go away to
any place, even though summoned by the most
momentous affairs ? or do they have free passage,
when they please to go any whither, and to leavd
their own seats and images? If they are under
the necessity of remaining, what can be more
wretched than they, what more unfortunate than
if hooks and leaden bonds hold them fast in
this wise on their pedestals? but if we allow
that they prefer tJiese images to heaven and the
starry seats, they have lost their divine power.'
But if, on the contrary, when they choose, they
fly forth, and are perfectly free to leave the stat-
ues empty, the images will then at some time
cease to be gods, and it will be doubtful when
sacrifices should be offered, — when it is right
and fitting to withhold them. Oftentimes we see
that by artists these images are at one time made
small, and reduced to the size of the hand, at an-
other raised to an immense height, and built up
to a wonderful size. In this way, then, it follows
that we should understand that the gods contract
themselves in '° little statuettes, and are com-
pressed till they become like " a strange body;
or, again, tliat they stretch themselves out to a
great length, and extend to immensity in images
of vast bulk. So, then, if this is the case, in
sitting statues also the gods should be said to be
seated, and in standing ones to stand, to be run-
ning in those stretching forward to run, to be
hurling javelins in those represented as casting
the/?2, to fit and fashion themselves to their
countenances, and to make themselves like " the
other characteristics ot the body formed by the
artist.

19. The gods dwell in images — each wholly
in one, or divided into parts, and into members?
For neither is it possible that there can be at
one time one god in several images, nor, again,
divided into parts by his being cut up.'^ For
let us suppose that there are ten thousand images
of Vulcan in the whole world : is it possible at
all, as I said, that at one time one deity can be
in all the ten thousand ? I do not think so. Do
you ask wherefore? Because things which are
naturally single and unique, cannot become
many while the integrity of their simplicity "• is
maintained. And this they are further unable


9 It will be seen that these words fit into the indirect arg'ument of
Arnobius very well, although transposed in LB. to the end of last
chapter, and considered a gloss by Otelli and Hildebrand. " See the
consequences," Arnobius says, " of supposing that the gods do not
quit these images: not merely are they in a wretched case, but they
must further lose their power as divinities." Me\irsius, with more
reason, transposes the clause to the end of the next sentence, which
would be justifiable if necessary.

■° Perhaps " into," as Arnobius sometime? uses the abl. after in
instead of the ace.

t Lit., " compressed lo the similitude of."

t- Lit., " to adapt their similitude to."

'3 Lit., " a cutting taking place."

''* i.e., of their character as independent and not compounded.
This is precisely such an expression as that which closes the fouith
book, and its occurrence is therefore an additional ground for re-
garding the earlier passage as genuine.


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


515


to become if the gods have the forms of men, as
your behef declares ; for either a hand sepa-
rated from the head, or a foot divided from the
body, cannot manifest the perfection of the
whole, or it must be said that parts can be
the same as the whole, while the whole cannot
exist unless it has been made by gathering
together its parts. Moreover, if the same deity
shall be said to be in all the statues, all reason-
ableness and soundness is lost to the truth, if
this is assumed that at one time one can remain
in them all ; or each of the gods must be said
to divide himself from himself, so that he is
both himself and another, not separated by any
distinction, but himself the same as another.
But as nature rejects and spurns and scorns
this, it must either be said and confessed that
there are Vulcans without number, if we decide
that he exists and is in all the images ; or he will
be in none, because he is prevented by nature
from being divided among several.

20. And yet, O you — if it is plain and clear
to you that the gods live, and that the inhabitants
of heaven dwell in the inner parts of the images,
\vhy do you guard, protect, and keep them shut
up under the strongest keys, and under fasten-
ings of immense size, under iron bars, bolts,'
and other such things, and defend them with a
thousand men and a thousand women to keep
guard, lest by chance some thief or nocturnal rob-
ber should creep in ? Why do you feed dogs in
the Capitols?^ Why do you give food and nour-
ishment to geese? Rather, if you are assured
that the gods are there, and that they do not de-
part to any place from their figures and images,
leave to them the care of themselves, let their
shrines be always unlocked and open ; and if
anything is secretly carried off by any one with
reckless fraud, let them show the might of divinity,
and subject the sacrilegious robbers to fitting
punishments at the moment ^ of their theft and
wicked deed. For it is unseemly, and sub-
versive of their power and majesty, to entrust
the guardianship of the highest deities to the
care of dogs, and when you are seeking for
some means of frightening thieves so as to keep
them away, not to beg it from the gods them-
selves, but to set and place it in the cackling of
geese.

2 1 . They say that Antiochus of Cyzicum took
from its shrine a statue of Jupiter made of gold
ten 4 cubits high, and set up in its place one
made of copper covered with thin plates of


gold. If the gods are present, and dwell in
their own images, with what business, with what
cares, had Jupiter been entangled that he could
not punish the wrong done to himself, and avenge
his being substituted in baser metal ? When the
famous Dionysius — but it was the younger s —
despoiled Jupiter of his golden vestment, and
put instead of it one of wool, and, when mocking
him with pleasantries also, he said that that 7uhich
he was taking away was cold in the frosts of
winter, this warm, that that one was cumbrous
in summer, that this, again, was airy in hot
weather, — where was the king of the world that
he did not show his presence by some terrible
deed, and recall the jocose buffoon to soberness
by bitter torments? For why should I mention
that the dignity of ^sculapius was mocked by
him ? For when Dionysius was spoiling him of his
very ample beard, which was of great weight and
philosophic thickness,^ he said that it was not
right that a son sprung from Apollo, a father
smooth and beardless, and very like a mere boy,^
should be formed with such a beard that it was
left uncertain which of them was father, which
son, or rather whether they were of the same ^
race and family. Now, when all these things
were being done, and the robber was speaking
with impious mockery, if the deity was con-
cealed in the statue consecrated to his name and
majesty, why did he not punish with just and
merited vengeance the affront of stripping his
face of its beard and disfiguring his countenance,
and show by this, both that he was himself pres-
ent, and that he kept w^atch over his temples and
images without ceasing?

22. But you will perhaps say that the gods do
not trouble themselves about these losses, and
do not think that there is sufficient cause for
them to come forth and inflict punishment
upon the offenders for their impious sacrilege.''
Neither, then, if this is the case, do they wish
to have these images, which they allow to be
plucked up and torn away with impunity ; nay,
on the contrary, they tell us plainly that they
despise these statues, in which they do not care
to show that they were contemned, by taking
any revenge. Philostephanus relates in his Cy-
priaca, that Pygmalion, king '° of Cyprus, loved
as a woman an image of Venus, which was held


' Claitstris repagitlis pessulis.

2 Cl'. p. 481, n. 5. Geese as well as dogs guarded the Capitol,
having been once, as the well-known legend tells, its only guards
against the Gauls.

•5 The MS. first four edd., and Elm. read jioinine — " under the
name of," corrected moviine by Meursius and the rest.

* So the MS., reading decern; but as Clement says TrevTeicaiSeKa
Tnjxwi', we must either suppose that Arnobius mistook the Greek, or
transcribed it carelessly, or, with the margin of Ursinus, read qum-
decim — " fifteen."


5 Stewechius and Heraldus regard these words as spurious, and

as having originated in a gloss on the margin, scz. junio> "to

wit, the younger." Heraldus, however, changed his opinion, because
Clement, too, says, " Dionysius the younger." The words mean
more than this, however, referring probably to the fact that Cicero
{de Nat. Dear., iii. 33, 34, 35) tells these and other stories of the
elder Dionysius. To this Arnobius calls attention as an error, by
addin.g to Clement's phrase " but."

<> Only rustics, old-fashioned people, and philosophers wore the
beard imtrimmed; the last class wearing it as a kind of distinctive
mark, just as Juvenal (iii. 15) speaks of a thick woollen cloak as
marking a philosopher. [Compare vol. i. p. 160; also ii. p. 321, n. 9.]

' Impiiberi.

^ Lit., " one."

9 Lit., " punishment of violated religion."

'° Clemens says merely " the Cyprian Pygmalion."


5i6


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


by the Cyprians lioly and venerable from ancient
times/ his mind, spirit, the hght of his reason,
and his judgment being darkened ; and that he
was wont in his madness, just as if he were deal-
ing with his wife, having raised the deity to his
couch, to be joined with it in embraces and
face to face, and to do other vain things, carried
azvay by a foolishly lustful imagination/ Simi-
larly, Posidippus,^ in the book which he mentions
to have been written about Gnidus and about its
affairs,'* relates that a young man, of noble birth, —
but he conceals his name, — carried away with
love of the Venus because of which Gnidus is fa-
mous, joined himself also in amorous lewdness to
the image of the same deity, stretched on the
genial couch, and enjoying 5 the pleasures which
ensue. To ask, again, in like manner : If the
powers of the gods above lurk in copper and the
other substances of which images have been
formed, where in the world was the one Venus
and the other to drive far away from them the
lewd wantonness of the youths, and punish their
impious touch with terrible suffering?^ Or, as
the goddesses are gentle and of calmer disposi-
tions, what would it have been for them to as-
suage the furious joys of'' the wretched men, and
to bring back their insane minds again to their
senses ?

23. But perhaps, as you say, the goddesses
took the greatest pleasure in these lewd and
lustful insults, and did not think that an action
requiring vengeance to be taken, which soothed
their minds, and which they knew was suggested
to human desires by themselves. But if the
goddesses, the Venuses, being endowed with
rather calm dispositions, considered that favour
should be shown to the misfortunes of the blinded
youths ; when the greedy flames so often con-
sumed the Capitol, and had destroyed the Cap-
itoiine Jupiter himself with his wife and his
daughter,^ where was the Thunderer at that time
to avert that calamitous fire, and preserve from
destruction his property, and himself, and all his
family? Where was the queenly Juno when a
violent fire destroyed her famous shrine, and
her priestess 9 Chrysis in Argos? Where the
Egyptian Serapis, when by a similar disaster his
temple fell, burned to ashes, with all the mys-
teries, and Isis ? Where Liber Eleutherius, when
his temple fell at Athens ? Where Diana, when
hers fell at Ephesus ? Where Jupiter of Dodona,


^ Lit., "of ancient sanctity and religion."

2 Lit., " imagination of empty lust."

3 Cf. ch. 13.

■* So Gelenius, reading rebus for the MS. and first ed. re a (ms.
ab) se.

S Lit., " in the limits of"

^ Lit., " agonizing restraint."

7 Lit , " to."

* Cf. p. 315, n. 2, supra.

9 So Clemens narrates; but Thucydides (iv. 133) says that
"straightway Chrysis flees by night for refuge to Phlious, fearing
theArgives;" while Pausanius (ii. 59) says that she fled to Tegea,
taking refuge there at the altar of Minerva Alea.


when his fell at Dodona? Where, finally, the
prophetic Apollo, when by pirates and sea rob-
bers he was both plundered and set on fire,'° so
that out of so many pounds of gold, which ages
without number had heaped up, he did not have
one scruple even to show to the swallows which
built under his eaves," as Varro says in his Sa-
turcB Aleuippece ? '^ It would be an endless task
to write down what shrines have been destroyed
throughout the whole world by earth quakesand
tempests — what have been set on fire by ene-
mies, and by kings and tyrants — what have been
stript bare by the overseers and priests them-
selves, even though they have turned suspicion
away from them '^ — finally, what have been robbed
by thieves and Canacheni,''* opening them up,
though barred by unknown means ; 'S which, in-
deed, would remain safe and exposed to no
mischances, if the gods were present to defend
them, or had any care for their temples, as is
said. But now because they are empty, and
protected by no indwellers. Fortune has power
over them, and they are exposed to all accidents
just as much as are all other things which have
not Ufe."^

24. Here also the advocates of images are
wont to say this also, that the ancients knew
well that images have no divine nature, and
that there is no sense in them, but that they
formed them profitably and wisely, for the sake
of the unmanageable and ignorant mob, which
is the majority in nations and in states, in order
that a kind of appearance, as it were, of deities
being presented to them, from fear they might
shake off their rude natures, and, supposing that
they were acting in the presence of the gods,
put '7 away their impious deeds, and, changing
their manners, learn to act as men ; '^ and that
august forms of gold and silver were sought for
them, for no other reason than that some power
was believed to reside in their splendour, such
as not only to dazzle the eyes, but even to strike
terror into the mind itself at the majestic beam-
ing lustre. Now this might perhaps seem to be


1° From Varro's being mentioned, Oehler thinks that Arnobius
must refer to various marauding expeditions against the temples of
Apollo on the coasts and islands of the yEgean, made at the time of
the piratical war. Clemens, however, speaks distinctly of the destruc-
tion of the temple at Delphi, and it is therefore probable that this is
referred to, if not solely, at least along with those which Varro men-
tions. Clement, vol. ii. p. 187.

'' Lit., " his visitors," hospitis.

12 Varro Memppeiis, an emendation of Carrio, adopted in LB.
and Orelli for the ms. se tliev.ipeus.

i^ Lit., " suspicion being averted."

■■* It has been generally supposed that reference is thus made to
some kind of thieves, which is probable enough, as Arnobius (end of
next chapter) classes all these plunderers as " tyrants, kings, robbers,
and nocturnal thieves;" but it is impossible to s.ay precisely what is
meant. Heraldus would read ^^rrtrcw/ — "Saracens."

'5 Lit., "with obscurity of means." The phrase may refer either
to the defence or to the assault of temples by means of magic arts.

■'' Lit., " interior motion."

'7 Lit., " lop away," depntarent, the reading of the Ms., Hild.,
and Oehler; the rest reading depoiierent — " lay aside." [The same
plausible defences are used to this day by professed Christians. See
Jesuits at Romf, by Hobart Seymour, p. 38, ed. New York, 1849.]

'^ Lit., " pass to human offices."


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


517


said with some reason, if, after the temples of the
gods were founded, and their images set up, there
were no wicked man in the world, no villany at
all, if justice, peace, good faith, possessed the
hearts of men, and no one on earth were called
guilty and guiltless, all being ignorant of wicked
deeds. But now when, on the contrary, all
things are full of wicked men, the name of inno-
cence has almost perished, and every moment,
every second, evil deeds, till now unheard of,
spring to light in myriads from the wickedness
of wrongdoers, how is it right to say that images
have been set up for the purpose of striking ter-
ror into the mob, while, besides innumerable
forms of crime and wickedness,', we see that
even the temples themselves are attacked by
tyrants, by kings, by robbers, and by nocturnal
thieves, and that these very gods whom antiquity
fashioned and consecrated to cause terror, are
carried away ^ into the caves of robbers, in spite
even of the terrible splendour of the gold ? 3

25. For what grandeur — if you look at the
truth without any prejudice "* — is there in these
images 5 of which they speak, that the men of
old should have had reason to hope and think
that, by beholding them, the vices of men could
be subdued, and their morals and wicked ways
brought under restraint ? ^ The reaping-hook, for
example, which was assigned to Saturn, 7 was it to
inspire mortals with fear, that they should be willing
to live peacefully, and to abandon their malicious
inclinations? Janus, with double face, or that
spiked key by which he has been distinguished ;
Jupiter, cloaked and bearded, and holding in his
right hand a piece of wood shaped like a thun-
derbolt ; the cestus of Juno,** or the maiden lurk-
ing under a soldier's helmet ; the mother of the
gods, with her timbrel ; the Muses, with their
pipes and psalteries ; Mercury, the winged slayer
of Argus ; ^sculapius, with his staff; Ceres, with
huge breasts, or the drinking cup swinging in
Liber's right hand ; Mulciber, with his work-
man's dress ; or Fortune, with her horn full of
apples, figs, or autumnal fruits ; Diana, with half-
covered thighs, or Venus naked, exciting to
lustful desire ; Anubis, with his dog's face ; or
Priapus, of less importance 9 than his own


' Lit., " crimes and wickednesses."

- Lit,, " go," vadere.

3 Lit., " with their golden and to-be-feared splendours them-
selves."

^ Lit., " and without any favour," gratificatiojie.

5 Lit., "what great tliing\\-xve. these images in them."

^ So the MS., first four edd.. Elm., Hild., and Ochler, reading
mores et Jiiali'Jicza, corrected in the others a tnalc/iczo — " laoraXs
withheld from wickedness."

^ Cf. ch. 12, p. 511.

8 The reference is probably to some statue or picture of Juno
represented as girt with the girdle of Venus (//., xiv. 214).

9 Lit., " inferior."


genitals : were tJiese expected to make men
afraid?

26. O dreadful forms of terror and '° frightful
bugbears " on account of which the human race
was to be benumbed for ever, to attempt noth-
ing in its utter amazement, and to restrain itself
from every wicked and shameful act — little sic-
kles, keys, caps, pieces of wood, winged sandals,
staves, little timbrels, pipes, psalteries, breasts
protruding and of great size, little drinking cups,
pincers, and horns filled with fruit, the naked
bodies of women, and huge veretra openly ex-
posed ! Would it not have been better to dance
and to sing, than calling it gravity and pretend-
ing to be serious, to relate what is so insipid and
so silly, that images '^ were formed by the ancients
to check wrongdoing, and to arouse the fears of
the wicked and impious ? Were the men of that
age and time, in understanding, so void of reason
and good sense, that they were kept back from
wicked actions, just as if they were little boys,
by the preternatural '^ savageness of masks, by
grimaces also, and bugbears ?'"♦ And how has
this been so entirely changed, that though there
are so many temples in your states filled with
images of all the gods, the multitude of criminals
cannot be resisted even with so many laws and
so terrible punishments, and their audacity can-
not be overcome '5 by any means, and wicked
deeds, repeated again and again, multiply the
more it is striven by laws and severe judgments
to lessen the number of cruel deeds, and to quell
them by the check given by meaiis of punish-
ments? But if images caused any fear to men,
the passing of laws would cease, nor would so
many kinds of tortures be established against the
daring of the guilty : now, however, because it
has been proved and established that the sup-
posed ^^ terror which is said to flow out from the
images is in reality vain, recourse has been had
to the ordinances of laws, by which there might
be a dread of punishment which should be most
certain fixed in men's minds also, and a con-
demnation settled ; to which these very images
also owe it that they yet stand safe, and secured
by some respect being yielded to them.


'° Formidimtm.

" Terrores.

'- Or, perhaps, " relate that im.iges so frigid and so awkward."

'3 The MS. and both Roman edd. read moiistruosissima-s tot~^n-
tate-s annis; corrected by Gelenius and later edd. ino7istruosissiinA
torvitate animos, and by Salmasius, Orelli, Hild., and Oehler, as
above, m. t. sannis.

■■* The MS., first four edd.. Elm., and Oberthlirread tnamis, which,
with animos read in most (cf preceding note), would run, "that
they were even kept back, as to (i.e., in) minds and hands, from
wicked actions by the preternatural savageness of masks." The other
edd. read with .Salmasius, as above, mantis.

'5 I^it., "cut away."

''' Lit., " opinion of."


5i8


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


BOOK VII.


1. Since it has been sufificiently shown, as far
as there has been opportunity, how vain it is to
form images, the course of our argument requires
that we should next speak as briefly as possible,
and without any periphrasis, about sacrifices,
about the slaughter and immolation of victims,
about pure wine, about incense, and about all
the other things which are provided on such
occasions.' For with respect to this you have
been in the habit of exciting against us the most
violent ill-will, of calling us atheists, and inflict-
ing upon us the punishment of death, even by
savagely tearing us to pieces with wild beasts, on
the ground that we pay very little respect ^ to the
gods ; which, indeed, we admit that we do, not
from contempt or scorn of the divine,^ but be-
cause we think that such powers require nothing
of the kind, and are not possessed by desires for
such things.'*

What, then, 5 some one will say, do you think
that no sacrifices at all should be offered ? To
answer you not with our own, but with your
Varro's opinion — none. Why so? Because,
he says, the true gods neither wish nor demand
these ; while those ^ which are made of copper,
earthenware, gypsum, or marble, care mj-ich less
for these things, for they have no feeling ; and
you are not blamed 7 if you do not offer them,
nor do you viin favour if you do. No sounder
opinion can be found, none truer, and one which
any one may adopt, although he may be stupid
and very hard /o convince. For who is so ob-
tuse as either to slay victims in sacrifice to those
who have no sense, or to think that they should
be given to those who are removed far from them
in their nature and blessed state ?

2. Who are the true gods? you say. To
answer you in common and simple language, we
do not know ; ^ for how can we know who those

* Lit , " in that part of years."

2 Lit., " attribute least."

3 Lit , " divine spurning."

^ [When good old Dutch Boyens came to the pontificate as
Hadrian VI., he was accounted a "barbarian" because he so little
appreciated the art-treasures in the Vatican, on which Leo X. had
lavisheJ so much money and so much devotion. His pious spirit
seemed oppressed to see so many heathen images in the Vatican:
sunt idola cthni:orum was all iie could say of them, — a most cred-
itable anecdote of such a man in such times. See p. 504, n. b^siipra.^

5 [In the Edin. edition this is the opening sentence, but the editor
remirk^]: " By some accident the introduction to the seventh book
has been tacked on .as a last chapter to the sixth, where it is just as
out of place as here it is in keeping. [I have restored it to its place
accordingly.]

^ Lit., "those, moreover."

' Lit., " nor is any blame contracted."

^ On this Heraldus [most ignorantly] remarks, that it .shows con-
clusively how slight was the acquaintance with Christianity possessed
by .^rnobius, when he could not say who were the true gods. [The
Edin. editor clears up the cases as follows:] This, however, is to
forget that Arnobius is not declaring his own opinions here, but meet-
ing his adversaries on their own ground. He knows who the true
God is — the source and fountain of all being, and framer of the uni-


are whom we have never seen? We have been
accustomed to hear from you that an infinite
number 9 are gods, and are reckoned among'"
the deities; but if these exist" anywhere, and
are true gods, as Terentius '^ believes, it follows
as a consequence, that they correspond to their
name ; that is, that they are such as we all see
that they should be, and that they are worthy to
be called by this name ; nay, more, — to make
an end without many words, — that they are such
as is the Lord of the universe, and the King
omnipotent Himself, whom we have knowledge
and understanding enough to speak of as the true
God when we are led to mention His name.
For one god differs from another in nothing as
respects his divinity ; '^ nor can that which is one
in kind be less or more in its parts while its own
qualities remain unchanged. '^ Now, as this is
certain, it follows that they should never have
been begotten, but should be immortal, seeking
nothing from without, and not drawing any
earthly pleasures from the resources of matter.

3. So, then, if these things are so, we desire
to learn this, first, from you — what is the cause,
what the reason, that you offer them sacrifices ;
and then, what gain comes to the gods them-
selves from this, and remains to their advantage.
For whatever is done should have a cause, and
should not be disjoined from reason, so as to be
lost '5 among useless works, and tossed about
among vain and idle uncertainties.'^ Do the
gods of heaven '^ live on these sacrifices, and
must materials be supjolied to maintain the union
of their parts? And what man is there so igno-
rant of what a god is, certainly, as to think that
they are maintained by any kind of nourishment,
and that it is the food given to them '^ which
causes them to live and endure throughout their
endless immortality? For whatever is upheld
by causes and things external to itself, must be
mortal and on the way to destruction, when any-
thing on which it lives begins to be wanting.
Again, it is impossible to suppose that any one
believes this, because we see that of these things


verse (ii. 2) , and if there are any lesser powers called gods, what their
relation to Him must be (iii. 2, 3); but he does not know any such
gods himself, and is continually reminding the heathen that they know
these gods just as little. (Cf. the very next sentence.)
9 Lit., " as many as possible."

•° Lit., " in the series of."

" Lit., " are."

'- i e., M. Terentius Varro, mentioned in the last chapter.

'3 Tit., " in that in which he is a god."

'■♦ Lit., " uniformity of quality being preserved."

'5 The MS. and edd. read ui in cperibiis fcratur cassis — " so as

to be borne among," emended by Hild. and Oehler teratut " worn

away among."

'0 Lit., " in vain errors of inanity."

'7 The MS. and edd. have here forte — " perchance."

'3 Lit., " gift of food."


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


519


which are brought to their altars, nothing is
added to and reaches the substance of the
deities ; for either incense is given, and is lost
melting on the coals,' or the life only of the
victim is offered to the gods,^ and its blood is
licked up by dogs ; or if any flesh is placed upon
the altars, it is set on fire in like manner, and is
destroyed, and falls into ashes, — unless per-
chance the god seizes upon the souls of the vic-
tims, or snuffs up eagerly the fumes and smoke
isuhich rise from the blazing altars, and feeds upon
the odours which the burning flesh gives forth,
still wet with blood, and damp with its former
juices.3 But if a god, as is said, has no body,
and cannot be touched at all, how is it possible
that that which has no body should be nourished
by things pertaining to the body, — that what is
mortal should support what is immortal, and
assist and give vitality to that which it cannot
touch ? This reason for sacrifices is not valid,
therefore, as it seems ; nor can it be said by any
one that sacrifices are kept up for this reason,
that the deities are nourished by them, and sup-
ported by feeding on them.

4. If perchance it is not this,"* are victims not
slain in sacrifice to the gods, and cast upon their
flaming altars to give them 5 some pleasure and
delight? And can any man persuade himself
that the gods become mild as they are exhila-
rated by pleasures, that they long ,for sensual
enjoyment, and, like some base creatures, are
affected by agreeable sensations, and charmed
and tickled for the moment by ^ a pleasantness
which soon passes away ? For that which is
overcome by pleasure must be harassed by its
opposite, sorrow ; nor can that be free from the
anxiety of grief, which trembles with joy, and is
elated capriciously with gladness. ? But the gods
should be free from both passions, if we would
have them to be -everlasting, and freed from the
weakness of mortals. Moreover, every pleasure
is, as it were, a kind of flattery of the body, and
is addressed to the five well-known senses ; but
if the gods above feel it,^ they must partake also


' [It must have taken much time to overcome this distaste for the
use of incense in Christian minds. Let us wait for the testimony
of Lactantius.J

2 Or perhaps, simply, " the sacrifice is a living one," animalis
est liostia. Alacrobius, however {Srti., iii. 5), quotes Trebatius as
saying that there were two kinds of sacrifices, in one of which the
entrails were examined that they might disclose the divine will, while
in the other the life only was consecrated to the deity. This is more
precisely stated by Servius {ALn., iii. 231), who says that the hcistia
aiiiinatis was only slain, that in other cases the blood was poured on
the altars, that in others part of the victim, and in others the whole
animal, was burned. It is probable, thtrefore, that Arnobius uses the
words here in their technical meaning, as the next clause shows that
none of the flesli was offered, while the blood was allowed to fall to
the ground. [I am convinced that classical antiquities must be
more largely studied in the Fathers of the first five centuries.]

3 i e., the juices which formerly flowed through the living body.

■♦ The heathen opponent is supposed to give up his first reason,
that the sacrifices provided food for the gods, and to advance this new
suggestion, that they were intended for their gratification merely.

5 Lit., " for the sake of."

^ Lit., " with the fleeting tickling of"

' Lit., " with the levities of gladnesses."

^ i.e., pleasure.


of those bodies through which there is a way to
the senses, and a door by which to receive pleas-
ures. Lastly, what pleasure is it to take delight
in the slaughter of harmless creatures, to have
the ears ringing often with their piteous bellow-
ings, to see rivers of blood, the life fleeing away
with the blood, and the secret parts having been
laid open, not only the intestines to protrude with
the excrements, but also the heart still bounding
with the life left in it, and the trembling, palpi-
tating veins in the viscera? We half-savage men,
nay rather, — to say with more candour what it
is truer and more candid to say, — we savages,
whom unhappy necessity and bad habit have
trained to take these as food, are sometimes
moved with pity for them ; we ourselves accuse
and condemn ourselves when the thing is seen
and looked into thoroughly, because, neglecting
the law which is binding on men, we have broken
through the bonds which naturally united us at
the beginning.9 Will '° any one believe that the
gods, who are kind, beneficent, gentle, are de-
lighted and filled with joy by the slaughter of
cattle, if ever they fall and expire pitiably before
their altars?" And there is no cause, then, for
pleasure in sacrifices, as we see, nor is there a
reason why they should be offered, since there
is no pleasure a forded by them ; and if perchance
there is sonie,'^ it has been shown that it cannot
in any way belong to the gods.

5. We have next to examine the argument
which we hear continually coming from the lips
of the common people, and find embedded in
popular conviction, that sacrifices are offered to
the gods of heaven for this purpose, that they
may lay aside their anger and passions, and may
be restored to a calm and placid tranquillity, the
indignation of their fiery spirits being assuaged.
And if we remember the definition which we
should always bear steadily in mind, that all agi-
tating feelings are unknown to the gods, the
consequence is, a belief '^ that the gods are
never angry ; nay, rather, that no passion is
further from them than that which, approaching
most nearly to the spirit of wild beasts and sav-
age creatures, agitates those who suffer it with
tempestuous feelings, and brings them into dan-
ger of destruction. For whatever is harassed
by any kind of disturbance,'-* is, it is clear, capa-
ble of suffering, and frail ; that which has been
subjected to suffering and frailty must be mortal ;
but anger harasses and destroys '5 those who are


9 Naturalis initit consortia.

'0 So the MS. and first ed., according to Oehler, reading cred-e-t,
the others -/- — " does."

" Lit., " these."

'- Arnobius says that the sacrifices give no pleasure to any being,
or at least, if that is not strictly true, that they give none to the gods.
[See Elucidation VI., i7ifral\

'3 So the MS., LB., Oberthiir, Orelli, Hild., and Oehler, reading
consec-, for which the rest read coiiseti-taneiim est credere — " it is
fitting to believe."

'•* Lit., " motion of anything."

'S Cf. i. i8.


520


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


subject to it : therefore that should be called
mortal which has been made subject to the
emotions of anger. But yet we know that the
gods should be never-dying, and should possess
an immortal nature ; and if this is clear and cer-
tain, anger has been separated far from them
and from their state. On no ground, then, is it
fitting to wish to appease that in the gods above
which you see cannot suit their blessed state.

6. But let us allow, as you wish, that the gods
are accustomed to such disturbance, and that
sacrifices are offered and sacred solemnities per-
formed to calm it, when, then, is it fitting that
these offices should be made use of, or at what
time should they be given? — before they are
angry and roused, or when they have been
moved and displeased even ? ' If we must meet
them witli sacrifices before their anger is roused,
lest they become enraged, you are bringing for-
ward wild beasts to us, not gods, to which it is
customary to toss food, upon which they may
rage madly, and turn their desire to do harm,
lest, having been roused, they should rage and
burst the barriers of their dens. But if these
sacrifices are offered to satisfy - the gods when
already fired and burning with rage, I do not in-
quire, I do not consider, whether that happy 3
and sublime greatness of spirit -^j-hich belongs to
the deities is disturbed by the offences of little
men, and wounded if a creature, blind and ever
treading among clouds of ignorance, has com-
mitted any blunder, — said anything by which
their dignity is impaired.

7. But neither do I demand that this should
be said, or that I should be told what causes the
gods have for their anger against men, that hav-
ing taken offence they must be soothed. / do
ask, hoivever, Did they ever ordain any laws
for mortals? and was it ever settled by them
what it was fitting for them to do, or what it was
not ? what they should pursue, what avoid ; or
even by what means they wished themselves to
be worshipped, so that they might pursue with
the vengeance of their wrath what was done
otherwise than they had commanded, and might
be disposed, if treated contemptuously, to avenge
themselves on the presumptuous and transgress-
ors ? As I think, nothing was ever either settled
or ordained by them, since neither have they
been seen, nor has it been possible for it to be
discerned very clearly whether there are any.4
What justice is there, then, in the gods of heaven
being angry for any reason with those to whom


^ lit., " set in Indignations."

- I,it., " if this satisfaction of sacrifices is offered to."

3 So the MS. and most edd., reading lacta, for which Ursinus
suggested lauta — "splendid," and Heraldus data — "exalted."

^ It is perhaps possible so to translate the MS. neque si sunt ulli
aj>srttssi7na potitit cogiiiticne dzgnosci, retained by Orelli, Hild.,
and Oehler, in which case si stint nili must be taken as the subject
of the clause. The other add., from regard to the construction, read
visi — " nor, if they have been seen, has it been possible."


they have neither deigned at any time to show
that they existed, nor given nor imposed any
laws which they wished to be honoured by them
and perfectly observed ? s

8. But this, as I said, I do not mention, but
allow it to pass away in silence. This one thing
I ask, above all, What reason is there if I kill a
pig, that a god changes his state of mind, and
lays aside his angry feelings and frenzy ; that if
I consume a pullet, a calf under his eyes and on
his altars, he forgets the wrong which I did to
him, and abandons completely all sense of dis-
pleasure ? What passes from this act ^ to modify
his resentment? Or of what service ^ is a goose,
a goat, or a peacock, that from its blood relief
is brought to the angry god? Do the gods, then,
make insulting them a matter of payment ? and
as little boys, to induce them to give up their fits
of passion*^ and desist from their wailings, get
little sparrows, dolls, ponies, puppets,*^ with
which they may be able to divert themselves, do
the immortal gods in such wise receive these
gifts from you, that for them they may lay aside
their resentment, and be reconciled to those
who offended them? And yet I thought that
the gods — if only it is right to believe that they
are really moved by anger — lay aside their
anger and resentment, and forgive the sins of
the guilty, without any price or reward. For
this belongs specially to deities, to be generous
in forgiving, and to seek no return for their gifts.^
But if this cannot be, it would be much wiser
that they should continue obstinately offended,
than that they should be softened by being cor-
rupted with bribes. For the multitude increases
of those who sin, when there is hope given of
paying for their sin ; and there is little hesi-
tation to do wrong, when the favour of those
who pardon offences may be bought.

9. So, if some ox, or any animal you please,
which is slain to mitigate and appease the fury
of the deities, were to take a man's voice and
speak these '° words : " Is this, then, O Jupiter,
or whatever god thou art, humane or right, or
should it be considered at all just, that when
another has sinned I should be killed, and that
you should allow satisfaction to be made to you
with my blood, although I never did you wrong,
never wittingly or unwittingly did violence to
your divinity and majesty, being, as thou know-
est, a dumb creature, not departing from " the
simplicity of my nature, nor inclined to be fickle
in my '^ manners ? Did I ever celebrate your


5 lit., " kept with inviolable observance."

6 Lit., "work."

7 Lit., " remedy."

8 So Panes seems to be generally understood, i.e., images of Pan
used as playthings by boys, and very much the same thing as the
puppets — pup7tli — already mentioned.

9 Lit., " to have liberal pardons and free concessions."
'° Lit., " in these."

" Lit., " following."

'2 Lit., " to varieties of manifold,"


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


521


games with too little reverence and care ? did I
drag forward a dancer so that thy deity was
offended? did I swear falsely by thee? did I
sacrilegiously steal your property and plunder
your temples? did I uproot the most sacred
groves, or pollute and profane some hallowed
places by founding private houses ? What, then,
is the reason that the crime of another is atoned
for with my blood, and that my life and innocence
are made to pay for wickedness with which I
have nothing to do ? Is it because I am a base
creature, and am not possessed of reason and
wisdom, as these declare who call themselves
men, and by their ferocity make themselves
beasts ? ' Did not the same nature both beget
and form me from the same beginnings? Is it
not one breath of hfe which sways both them
and me ? Do I not respire and see, and am I
not affected by the other senses just as they are ?
They have livers, lungs, hearts, intestines, bellies ;
and do not I have as many members? They
love their young, and come together to beget
children ; and do not I both take care to pro-
cure offspring, and delight in it when it has been
begotten? But they have reason, and utter
articulate sounds ; and how do they know
whether I do what I do for my own reasons,
and whether that sound which I give forth is my
kind of words, and is understood by us alone?
Ask piety whether it is more just that I should
be slain, that I should be killed, or that man
should be pardoned ajid be safe from punish-
ment for what he has done ? Who formed iron
into a sword? was it not man? Who brought
disaster upon races ; who imposed slavery upon
nations? was it not man? Who mixed deadly
draughts, and gave them to his parents, broth-
ers, wives, friends ? was it not man ? Who found
out or devised so many forms of wickedness,
that they can hardly be related in ten thousaitil
chronicles of years, or even of days? was it not
man? Is not this, then, cruel, monstrous, and
savage? Does it not seem to you, O Jupiter,
unjust and barbarous that I should be killed, that
I should be slain, that you may be soothed, and
the guilty find impunity?"

It has been established tliat sacrifices are of-
fered in vain for this purpose then, viz., that the
angry deities may be soothed ; since reason has
taught us that the gods are not angry at any
time, and that they do not wish one thing to be
destroyed, to be slain for another, or offences
against themselves to be annulled by the blood
of an innocent creature.^

10. But perhaps some one will say. We give
to the gods sacrifices and other gifts, that, being
made willing in a measure to grant our prayers,

' Lit., " leap into."

2 [I'his very striking passage should lead us to compare the widely
different purpose of Judaic sacrifices. See Elucidation VI., infra.^


they may give us prosperity and avert from us
evil, cause us to live always happily, drive away
grief truly, and any evils which threaten us from
accidental circumstances. This point demands
great care ; nor is it usual either to hear or to
believe what is so easily said. For the whole
company of the learned will straightway swoop
upon us, who, asserting and proving that what-
ever happens, happens according to tlie decrees
of fate, snatch out of our ^ hands that opinion,
and assert that we are putting our trust in vain
beliefs. Whatever, they will say, has been done
in the world, is being done, and shall be done,
has been settled and fixed in time past, and has
causes which cannot be moved, by means of
which events have been finked together, and
form an unassailable chain of unalterable neces-
sity between the past and the future. If it has
been determined and fixed what evil or good
should befall each person, it is already certain ;
but if this is certain and fixed, there is no room
for all the help given by the gods, their hatred,
and favours. For they are just as unable to do
for you that which cannot be done, as to prevent
that from being done which must happen, ex-
cept that they will be able, if they choose, to
depreciate somewhat powerfully that belief
which you entertain, so that they 4 say that even
the gods themselves are worshipped by you in
vain, and that the supplications with which you
address them are superfluous. For as they are
unable to turn aside the course of events, and
change what has been appointed by fate, what
reason, what cause, is there to wish to weary and
deafen the ears of those in whose help you can-
not trust at your utmost need ?

1 1 . Lastly, if the gods drive away sorrow and
grief, if they bestow joy and pleasure, how 5 are
there in the world so many^ and so wretched men,
whence cotne so many unhappy ones, who lead a
life of tears in the meanest condition ? Why are
not those free from calamity who every moment,
every instant, load and heap up the altars with sac-
rifices? Do we not see that some of them, say
the learned, are the seats of diseases, the light of
their eyes quenched, and their ears stopped,
that they cannot move with their feet, that they
live mere trunks without tlie use of their hands,
that they are swallowed up, overwhelmed, arid
destroyed by conflagrations, shipwrecks, and dis-
asters ; ^ that, having been stripped of immense
fortunes, they support themselves by labouring
for hire, and beg for alms at last ; that they are
exiled, proscribed, always in the midst of sorrow,
overcome by the loss of children, and harassed


3 Lit., " from the hands to us," nobis, the reading of the MS., both
Roman edd., Gelenius, LB., and Oehler; for which the rest give
vobis — " out of your hands."

* i.e., the learned men referred to above.

5 Lit., " whence."

^ Lit., " so innumerable."

' Lit., " ruins."


522


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


by other misfortunes, the kmds and forms of
which no enumeration can comprehend ? But
assuredly this would not occur if the gods, who
had been laid under obligation, were able to
ward off, to turn aside, those evils from those
who merited tliis favour. But now, because in
these mishaps there is no room for the interfei'-
ence of the gods, but all things are brought
about ' by inevitable necessity, the appointed
course of events goes on and accomplishes that
which has been once determined.

12. Or the gods of heaven should be said to
be ungrateful if, while they have power to pre-
vent it, they suffer an unhappy race to be in-
volved in so many hardships and disasters. But
perhaps they may say something of importance
/;/ anstoer to this, and not such as should be
received by deceitful, fickle, and scornful ears.
This point, however, because it would require
too tedious and prolix discussion,- we hurry past
unexplained and untouched, content to have
stated this alone, that you give to your gods dis-
honourable reputations if you assert that on no
other condition do they bestow blessings and
turn away what is injurious, except they have
been first bought over with the blood of she-
goats and sheep, and with the other things which
are put upon their altars. For it is not fitting,
in the first place, that the power of the deities
and the surpassing eminence of the celestials
should be believed to keep their favours on sale,
first to receive a price, and then to bestow
them ; and then, which is much more unseemly,
that they aid no one unless they receive their
demands, and that they suffer tlie most wretched
to undergo whatever perils may befall them,^
while they could ward these off, and come to
their aid. If of two who are sacrificing, one is
a scoundrel,^ and rich, the other of small for-
tune, but worthy of praise for his integrity and
goodness, — if the former should slay a hundred
oxen, and as many ewes with their lambkins, the
poor man burn a little incense, and a small piece
of some odorous substance, — will it not follow
that it should be believed that, if only the deities
bestow nothing except when rewards are first
offered, they will give their favour 5 to the rich
man, turn their eyes away from the poor, whose
gifts were restricted not by his spirit, but by the
scantiness of his means ? ^ For where the giver
is venal and mercenary, there it must needs be


1 So Canterus suggests conf-iiuit for the MS. confic "bring

about."

2 Lit., " it is a thing of long and much speech."

3 Lit., " the fortunes of perils."

* The MS. reading is hoc est it?ijcs, corrected honestus — "hon-
ourable" (which makes the comparison pointless, because there is no
reason why a rich man, if good, .should not be .succoured as well as a
poor), in all edd., except Oehler, who reads seclestus, which departs
too far from the MS. Perhaps we should read, as above, inhonesties.

5 So the MS., LB., Hild., and Oehler, and the other edd., addmg
et lUtxUiuni — " and help."

^ Lit., "whom not his mind, but the necessity of his property,
made restricted."


that favour is granted according to the greatness
of the gift by which it is purchased, and that a
favourable decision is given to him from whom ^
far the greater reward and bribe, though this be
shameful, flows to him who gives it.^ What if
two nations, on the other hand, arrayed against
each other in war, enriched the altars of the
gods with equal sacrifices, and were to demand
that their power and help should be given to
them, the one against the other : must it not,
again, be beheved that, if they are persuaded to
be of service by rewards, they are at a loss be-
tween both sides, are struck motionless, and do
not perceive what to do, since they understand
that their favour has been pledged by the ac-
ceptance of the sacrifices? For either they will
give assistance to this side and to that, which is
impossible, for in that case they will fight them-
selves against themselves, strive against their own
favour and wishes ; or they will do nothing to
aid either nation 9 after the price of their aid
has been paid and received, which is very
wicked. All this infamy, therefore, should be
removed far from the gods ; nor should it be
said at all that they are won over by rewards
and payments to confer blessings, and remove
what is disagreeable, if only they are true gods,
and worthy to be ranked under this name. For
either whatever happens, happens inevitably, and
there is no place in the gods for ambition and
favour ; or if fate is excluded and got rid of, it does
not belong to the celestial dignity to sell the boon
of its services, '° and the conferring of its bounties.
13. We have shown sufficiently, as I suppose,
that victims, and the things which go along with
them, are offered in vain to the immortal gods,
because they are neither nourished by them, nor
feel any pleasure, nor lay aside their anger and
resentment, so as either to give good fortune, or
to drive away and avert the opposite. We have
now to examine that point also which has been
usually asserted by some, and applied to forms
of ceremony. For they say that these sacred
rites were instituted to do honour to the gods
of heaven, and that these things which they do,
they do to show thc7n honour, and to magnify
the powers of the deities by them. What if
they were to say, in like manner, that they keep
awake and sleep, walk about, stand still, write
something, and read, to give honour to the gods,
and make them more glorious in majesty? For
what substance is there added to them from the
blood of cattle, and from the other things which
are prepared in sacrificing? what power is given
and added to them ? For all honour, which is


7 Lit., " inclines thither whence."

8 i.e., the decision.

9 Lit., "both nations."

'" Lit., " the favours of good work," boni oferis favor-es et, the
reading of Hild. and Oehler (other edd. -em — "the favour of its
service" ) for j.\s./abore sed.


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


523


said to be offered by any one, and to be yielded
to reverence for a greater being, is of a kind hav-
ing reference to the other ; and consists of two
parts, of the concession of the giver, and the
increase of honour of the receiver. As, if any
one, on seeing a man famed for his very great
power ' and authority, were to make way for him,
to stand up, to uncover his head, and leap down
from his carriage, then, bending forward to salute
him with slavish servility and^ trembling agita-
tion, I see what is aimed at in showing such re-
spect : by the bowing down of the one, very great
honour is given to the other, and he is made to
appear great whom the respect of an inferior
exalts and places above his own rank.^

14. But all this conceding and ascribing of
honour about which we are speaking are met with
among men alone, whom their natural weakness
and love of standing above their fellows + teach
to delight in arrogance, and in being preferred
above others. But, I ask, where is there room
for honour among the gods, or what greater ex-
altation is found to be given s to them by piling
up*^ sacrifices? Do they become more vener-
able, more powerful, when catde are sacrificed to
them ? is there anything added to them from
this? or do they begin to be more truly gods,
their divinity being increased ? And yet I con-
sider it almost an insult, nay, an insult altogether,
when it is said that a god is honoured by a man,
and exalted by the offering of some gift. For
if honour increases and augments the grandeur
of him to whom it is given, it follows that a deity
becomes greater by means of the man from whom
he has received the gift, and the honour con-
ferred on him ; and thus the matter is brought
to this issue, that the god who is exalted by hu-
man honours is the inferior, while, on the other
hand, the man who increases the power of a
deity is his superior.^

15. What then ! some one will say, do you
think that no honour should be given to the
gods at all? If you propose to us gods such as
they should be if they do exist, and such as ^ we
feel that we all mean when we mention ^ that
name, how can we but give them even the great-
est honour, since we have been taught by the
commands which have especial power over us,'°


' Wt., "of most powerful name."

- Lit. , " imitating a slave'.s servility " — ancillatnm, the emenda-
tion 'of Hemsterhuis, adopted by Orelli, Hild., and Oehler for the
uninteUigible .\i.s. aiicillariim.

3 Lit., " things."

•♦ 1 it., " in higher />/rtrc.j."

5 Lit,, " what eminences is it found to be added," addier. So
Hild. and Oehler for the reading of MS., first four add., and Ober-
thiir addere — "to add," emended in rest from margin of Ursinus
accedere, much as above.

*> So the MS., reading cotij'ec^ionih 11 s. which is retained in no edd.,
although its primary meaning is exactly what the sense here requires.

7_'ihe last clause was omitted in first four edd. and Elmh., and
was inserted from the MS. by Meursius.

* Lit., " whom."

9 Lit., " say in the proclamation of."

'" Lit , " more powerful commands," i.e., by Christ's injunctions.
It seems hardly possible that any one should suppose that there is


to pay honour to all men even, of whatever rank,
of whatever condition they may be? What,
pray, ji'<?z^ ask,\s this very great honour? One
much more in accordance with duty than is paid
by you, and directed to " a more powerful race,
we reply. Tell, us, you say, in the first place,
what is an opinion worthy of the gods, right and
honourable, and not blameworthy from its being
made unseemly by something infamous? We
reply, one such that you believe that they neither
have any hkeness to man, nor look for any-
thing which is outside of them and comes from
without ; then — and this has been said pretty
frequently — that they do not burn with the fires
of anger, that they do not give themselves up
passionately to sensual pleasure, that they are
not bribed to be of service, that they are not
tempted to injure our enemies, that they do not
sell their kindness and favour, that they do
not rejoice in having honour heaped on them,
that they are not indignant and vexed if it is
not given ; but — and this belongs to the divine
— that by their own power they know them-
selves, and that they do not rate themselves by
the obsequiousness of others. And yet, that we
may see the nature of what is said, what kind
of honour is this, to bind a wether, a ram, a bull
before the face of a god, and slay them in his
sight ? What kind of honour is it to invite a god
to a banquet of blaod, which you see him take
and share in with dogs? What kind of honour
is it, having set on fire piles of wood, to hide
the heavens with smoke, and darken with gloomy
blackness the images of the gods? But if it
seems good to you that these actions should be
considered in themselves,'- not judged of accord-
ing to your prejudices, j'<??/ will find that those
altars of which you speak, and even those beau-
tiful ones which you dedicate to the superior
gods, '3 are places for burning the unhappy race
of animals, funeral pyres, and mounds built for
a most unseemly office, and formed to be filled
with corruption.


16. What say you, O you


! is that foul


smell, then, which is given forth and emitted by
burning hides, by bones, by bristles, by the
fleeces of lambs, and the feathers of fowls, —
is that a favour and an honour to the deity ? and
are the deities honoured by this, to whose tem-
ples, when you arrange to go, you come '-^
cleansed from all pollution, washed, and per-
fectly '5 pure ? And what can be more polluted


here any reference to Christ's command to His disciples not to e.xercise
lordship over each other, yet Orelli thinks that there is perhaps a
reference to Mark x. 42, 43. If a particular reference were intended,
we might with more reason find it in i Pet. ii. 17, " Honour all men."

'' Lit , " established in."

'- Lit, " weighed by their own force," vi.

'' i e., nltariaque liiec finlchra.

'^ Lit., " you show yourselves," /r<p.f^rt^/.f.

'5 Lit , " most." So TibuUus {Eleg., ii. 1,13) : " Pure things please
the gods. Come (i.e., to the sacrifice) with clean garments, and with
clean hands take water from the fountain," — perfect cleanliness being
scrupulously insisted on.


524


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


than these, more unhappy," more debased, than
if their senses are naturally such that they are
fond of what is so cruel, and take delight in
foul smells which, when inhaled with the breath,
even those who sacrifice cannot bear, and cer-
tainly not a delicate^ nose? But if you think
that the gods of heaven are honoured by the
blood of living creatures being offered to them,
why do you not ^ sacrifice to them both mules,
and elephants, and asses? why not dogs also,
bears, and foxes, camels, and hysenas, and lions ?
And as birds also are counted victims by you,
why do you not sacrifice vultures, eagles, storks,
falcons, hawks, ravens, sparrow-hawks, owls, and,
along with them, salamanders, water-snakes, vi-
pers, tarantulse ? For indeed there is both blood
in these, and they are in like manner moved by
the breath of life. What is there more artistic
in the former kind of sacrifices, or less ingenious
in the latter, that these do not add to and in-
crease the grandeur of the gods ? Because, says
my opponent, it is right to honour the gods of
heaven with those things by which we are our-
selves nourished and sustained, and live ; which
also they have, in their divine benevolence,
deigned to give to us for food. But the same
gods have given to you both cumin, cress, turnips,
onions, parsley, esculent thistles, radishes, gourds,
rue, mint, basil, flea-bane, and chives, and com-
manded them to be used by you as part of your
food ; why, then, do you not put these too upon
the altars, and scatter wild-marjoram, with which
oxen are fed, over them all, and mix amongst
them onions with their pungent flavour?

1 7. Lo, if dogs — for a case must be imagined,
in order that things may be seen more clearly —
if dogs, I say, and asses, and along with them
water-wagtails, if the twittering swallows, and
pigs also, having acquired some of the feelings
of men, were to think and suppose that you
were gods, and to propose to offer sacrifices in
your honour, not of other things and substances,
but of tJiose with which they are wont to be
nourished and supported, according to their
natural inclination, — we ask you to say whether
you would consider this an honour, or rather a
most outrageous affront, when the swallows slew
and consecrated flies to you, the water-wagtails
ants ; when the asses put hay upon your altars,
and poured out libations of chaff; when the
dogs placed bones, and burned human excre-
ments '' at your shrines ; when, lastly, the pigs
poured out before you a horrid mess, taken from


• This Heraldus explains as " of worse omen," and Oehler as
" more unclean."

- Ingi'ttitie, i.e., such as any respectable person has.

3 To this the commentators have replied, that mules, asses, and
dogs were sacrificed to certain deities. We must either admit that
Arnobius has here fallen into error, or suppose that he refers merely
to the animals which were usually slain, or find a reason for his neg-
lecting it in the circumstances of each sacrifice.

^ [The wit of Arnobius must be acknowledged in this scorching
satire. Compare the divine ordinances, E.x'od. x.\ix. 13, 14.]


their frightful hog-pools and filthy maws ? Would
you not in this case, then, be inflamed with rage
that your greatness was treated with contumely,
and account it an atrocious wrong that you were
greeted with filth ? But, you reply, you honour
the gods with the carcasses of bulls, and by slay-
ing 5 other living creatures. And in what respect
does this differ from that, since these sacrifices,
also, if they are not yet, will nevertheless soon
be, dung, and will become rotten after a very
short time has passed? Finally, cease to place
fire upon ^ your altars, then indeed you will 7 see
that consecrated flesh of bulls, with which you
magnify the honour of the gods, swelling and
heaving with worms, tainting and corrupting the
atmosphere, and infecting the neighbouring dis-
tricts with unwholesome smells. Now, if the gods
were to enjoin you to turn these things ^ to your
own account, to make your meals from them 9 in
the usual way, you would flee to a distance, and,
execrating the smell, would beg pardon from the
gods, and bind yourselves by oath never again
to offer such sacrifices to them. Is not this con-
duct of yours mockery, then? is it not to confess,
to make known that you do not know what a
deity is, nor to what power the meaning and title
of this name should be given and applied ? Do
you give new dignity to the gods by new kinds
of food? do you honour them with savours and
juices, and because those things which nourish
you are pleasing and grateful to you? do you
believe that the gods also flock up to enjoy their
pleasant taste, and, just as barking dogs, lay
aside their fierceness for mouthfuls, and pretty
often fawn upon those who hold these out?

1 8. And as we are now speaking of the ani-
mals sacrificed, what cause, what reason is there,
that while the immortal gods — for, so far as we
are concerned, they may all be gods who are be-
lieved to be so — are of one mind, or should be
of one nature, kind, and character, all are not
appeased with all the victims, but certain deities
with certain animals, according to the sacrificial
laws? For what cause is there, to repeat the
same question, that that deity should be hon-
oured with bulls, another with kids or sheep, this
one with sucking pigs, the other with unshorn
lambs, this one with virgin heifers, that one with
homed goats, this with barren cows, but that with
teeming ■° swine, this with white, that with dusky "


5 Lit., "by slaughters of," ccedibus.

6 Lit., " under," i.e., under the sacrifices on your altars.

7 So all edd., reading ccrne-, except both Roman edd., Hild., and
Oehler, who retain the MS. cerni-tis — " you see."

s In translating thus, it has been attempted to adhere as closely
as possible to the ms. reading (according to Crusius) q7ia si — cor-
rected, as above, grtrs in LB.; but it is by no means certain that
further changes should not be made.

9 Lit., "prepare luncheons and dinners thence," i.e., from the
putrefying carcasses.

'° The MS. and first four edd. read ingeutibics scrofis — "\iM.
huge breeding swine," changed by rest, as above, indent-, from the
margin of Ursinus. .

'' Or " gloomy," tetris, the reading of MS. and all edd. since LB.,
for which earlier edd. give atris — " black."


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


525


victims, one with female, the other, on the con-
y trary, with male animals?/ For if victims are
slain in sacrifice to the gods, to do them honour
and show reverence for them, what does it mat-
ter, or what difference is there with the life of
what animal this debt is paid, their anger and
resentment put away ? Or is the blood of one
victim less grateful and pleasing to one god,
while the other's fills him with pleasure and joy?
or, as is usually done, does that deity abstain
from the flesh of goats because of some reveren-
tial and religious scruple, another turn with dis-
>gust from pork, while to this mutton stinks?, and
does this one avoid tough ox-beef that he may
not overtax his weak stomach, and choose ten-
der • sucklings that he may digest them more
speedily?^

19. But you err, says my opponent, and fall
into mistakes ; for in sacrificing female victims
to the female deities, males to the male deities,
there is a hidden and very^ secret reason, and
one beyond the reach of the mass. I do not
inquire, I do not demand, what the sacrificial
laws teach or contain ; but if reason has demon-
strated,^ and truth declared, that among the gods
there is no difference of species, and that they
are not distinguished by any sexes, must not all
these reasonings be set at nought, and be proved,
be found to have been believed under the most
foolish hallucinations? I will not bring forward
the opinions of wise men, who cannot restrain
their laughter when they hear distinctions of sex
attributed to the immortal gods : I ask of each
man whether he himself believes in his own mind,
and persuades himself that the race of the gods
is so distinguished that they are male and female,
and have been formed with members arranged
suitably for the begetting of young ?
> But if the, laws of the sacrifices enjoin that like
sexes should be sacrificed to like, that is, female
victims to the female gods, male victims, on the
contrary, to the male gods, what relation is there
in the colours, so that it is right and fitting that
to these white, to those dark, even the blackest
victims are slain? Because, says my oppoiient,
to the gods above, and those who have power to
give favourable omens,5 the cheerful colour is
acceptable and propitious from the pleasant ap-
pearance of pure white ; while, on the contrary,
to the sinister deities, and those who inhabit the
infernal seats, a dusky colour is more pleasing,
^ and one tinged with gloomy hues.^ But if, again,
the reasoning holds good, that the infernal re-


' Lit., " the tenderness of."

* [The law of clean and unclean reflects the instincts of man, as
here appealed to; but compare and /«//'<■«//>' i^;(rt'j/ these texts: Lev.
X. 10 and Ezek. xxii. 26; Lev. xi. and Acts x. 15; Rom. xiv. 14 and
Luke xi. 41.]

^ Lit., " more."

■* So the M.S., Elm., LB., Orelli, Hild., and Oehler, reading t'?Vfr;V,
for which ihe others re^Ajusserit — " has bidden."

5 Ijit., " prevailing with favourableness of omens," oiiiuium, for
which the MS. and first four edd. read h " of men."


gions are an utterly vain and empty name,'' and
that underneath the earth there are no Plutonian
realms and abodes, this, too, must nullify your
ideas about black cattle and gods under the
ground. Because, if there are no infernal re-
gions, of necessity there are no dii Majiiiim also.
For how is it possible that, while there are no
regions, there should be said to be any who
inhabit them?

20. But let us agree, as you wish, that there
are both infernal regions and Manes, and that
some gods or other dwell in these by no means
favourable to men, and presiding over misfor-
tunes ; and what cause, what reason is there,
that black victims, even^ of the darkest hue,
should be brought to their altars ? Because dark
things suit dark, and gloomy things are pleasing
to similar beings. What then? Do you not see
— that we, too, may joke with you stupidly, and
just as you do yourselves^ — that the flesh of
the victims is not black,^ nor their bones, teeth,
fat, the bowels, with '° the brains, and the soft
marrow in the bones ? But the fleeces are jet-
black, and the bristles of the creatures are jet-
black. Do you, then, sacrifice to the gods only
wool and little bristles torn from the victims?
Do you leave the wretched creatures, despoiled
it may be, and shorn, to draw the breath of
heaven, and rest in perfect innocence upon their
feeding-grounds? But if you think that those
things are pleasing to the infernal gods w' hich are
black and of a gloomy colour, why do you not
take care that all the other things which it is cus-
tomary to place upon their sacrifices should be
black, and smoked, and horrible in colour ? Dye
the incense if it is offered, the salted grits, and
all the libations without exception. Into the
milk, oil, blood, pour soot and ashes, that this
may lose its purple hue, that the others may be-
come ghastly. But if you have no scrupl^ in
introducing some things which are white and
retain their brightness, you yourselves do away
with your own religious scruples and reasonings,
while you do not maintain any single and uni-
versal rule in performing the sacred rites.

21. But this, too, it is fitting that we should
here learn from you : If a goat be slain to Jupi-
ter, which is usually sacrificed to father Liber and
Mercury," or if the barren heifer be sacrificed to
Unxia, which you give to Proserpine, by Avhat
usage and rule is it determined what crime there
is in this, what wickedness or guilt has been con-


6 That Arnobius had good reason to appeal to this scepticism as
a fact, is evident from the lines of Juvenal (ii. 149-152): " Not even
children believe that there are any planes and subterranean realms."

7 Lit., " and." Immediately after, the MS. is corrected in later
writing color-cs (for -is) — " and the darkest colours."

^ Shniliter. This is certainly a suspicious reading, but Arnobius
indulges occa.sionally in similar vague expressions.
9 Lit., " is white."

'° Or, very probably, " the membranes with (i.e., enclosing) the
brains," omctita cum cerebris.

" Goats were sacrificed to Bacchus, but not, so far as is known,
to Mercury. Cf. c. 16, p. 524, n. 3.


526


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


tracted, since it makes no difference to the wor-
ship offered to the deity what animal it is with
whose head the honour is paid which you owe ?
It is not lawful, says j?iy oppo7ient, that these
things should be confounded, and it is no small
crime to throw the ceremonies of the rites and
the mode of expiation into confusion. Explain
the reason, I beg. Because it is right to conse-
crate victims of a certain kind to certain deities,
and that certain forms of supplication should be
also adopted. And what, again, is the reason
that it is right to consecrate victims of a certain
kind to certain deities, and that certain forms of
supplication should be also adopted, for this very
rightfulness should have its own cause, and spring,
be derived from certain reasons ? Are you going
to speak about antiquity and custom ? If so,
you relate to me merely the opinions of men,
and the inventions of a blind creature : but I,
when I request a reason to be brought forward
to me, wish to hear either that something has
fallen from heaven, or, which the subject rather
requires, what reladon Jupiter has to a bull's
blood that it should be offered in sacrifice to
him, not to Mercury or Liber. Or what are the
natural properties of a goat, that they again should
be suited to these gods, should not be adapted
to the sacrifices of Jupiter? Has a partition of
the animals been made amongst the gods ? Has
some contract been made and agreed to, so that '
it is fitting that this one should hold himself back
from the victim which belongs to that, that the
other should cease ^ to claim as his own the blood
which belongs to another? Or, as envious boys,
are they unwilling to allow others to have a share
in enjoying the cattle presented to them? or, as
is reported to be done by races which differ
greatly in manners, are the same things which
by one party are considered fit for eating, rejected
as food by others?

22. If, then, these things are vain, and are
not supported by any reason, the very offering ^
of sacrifices also is idle. For how can that
which follows have a suitable cause, when that
very first statement from which the second flows
is found to be utterly idle and vain, and estab-
lished on no solid basis? To mother Earth,
they say, is sacrificed a teeming + and pregnant
sow ; but to the virgin Minerva is slain a virgin
calf, never forced s by the goad to attempt any
labour. But yet we think that neither should a
virgin have been sacrificed to a virgin, that the
virginity might not be violated in the brute, for


' Lit., " by the paction of some transaction is it," etc.

2 So all except both Roman edd., which retain the MR. reading
desi-d-eret (corrected -«- liy Gelenius) — " wish."

3 So the MS., Hild., and Oehler, reading d-atio, approved of by
Stewechius also. The others read r " reasoning on behalf."

•• In:i-ens, so corrected in the margin of Ursinus for MS. ittg-
— " huge." Cf. ch. i8, p. 524, n. 10.

5 The MS. reads excitata conatus (according to Hild.) ; cor-
rected, as above, by th.c insertion of ad.


which the goddess is especially esteemed ; nor
should gravid and pregnant victims have been
sacrificed to the Earth from respect for its fruit-
fulness, which ^ we all desire and wish to go on
always in irrepressible fertility.? For if because
the Tritonian goddess is a virgin it is therefore
fitting that virgin victims be sacrificed to her,
and // because the Earth is a mother she is in
like manner to be entertained with gravid swine,
then also Apollo should be honoured hy the sac-
rifice of musicians because he is a musician ;
^sculapius, because he is a physician, by the
sacrificg of physicians ; and because he is an
artificer, Vulcan by the sacrifice of artificers ; and
because Mercury is eloquent, sacrifice should be
made to him with the eloquent and most fluent.
But if it is madness to say this, or, to speak with
moderation, nonsense, that shows much greater
madness to slaughter pregnant swine to the
Earth because she is even more prolific ; puie
and virgin heifers to Minerva because she is
pure, of unviolated virginity.

23. For as to that which we hear said by you,
that some of the gods are good, that others,
on the contrary, are bad, and rather inclined to
indulge in wanton mischief,^ and that the usual
rites are paid to the one party that they may
show favour, but to the others that they may not
do you harm, —with what reason this is said,
we confess that we cannot understand. For to
say that the gods are most benevolent, and have
gentle dispositions, is not only pious and reli-
gious, but also true ; but that they are evil and
sinister, should by no means be listened to, in-
asmuch as that divine power has been far re-
moved and separated from the disposition which
does harm.9 But whatever can occasion calam-
ity, it must first be seen what it is, and then it
should be removed very far from the name of
deity.

Then, supposing that wc should agree with you
that the gods promote good fortune and calam-
ity, not even in this case is there any reason why
you should allure some of them to grant you
prosperity, and, on the other hand, coax others
with sacrifices and rewards not to do you harm.
First, because the good gods cannot act badly,
even if they have been worshipped with no hon-
our,— for whatever is mild and placid by nature,
is separated widely from the practice and devising
of mischief; while the bad knows not to restrain
his ferocity, although he should be enticed to do
so with a thousand flocks and a thousand altars.
For neither can bitterness change itself into
sweetness, dryness into moisture, the heat of


* Quatii, i.e., the earth.

7 Singularly enough, {axfecunditate Oberthiir reads firginitnte
— "inextinguishable virginity," which is by no me.ins universally
desired in the earth Orelli, as usual, copies without remark the mis-
take of his predecessor.

8 Lit., '' more prompt to lust of hurting."

9 Lit., " nature of hurling."


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


527


fire into cold, or what is contrary to anything
take and change into its own nature that which
is its opposite. So that, if you should stroke a
viper with your hand, or caress a poisonous scor-
pion, the former will attack you with its fangs,
the latter, drawing itself together, will fix its sting
in you ; and your caressing will be of no avail,
since both creatures are excited to do mischief,
not by the stings of rage, but by a certain pecul-
iarity of their nature. It is thus of no avail to wish
to deserve well of the sinister deities by means
of sacrifices, since, whether you do this, or on
the contrary do not, they follow their own nature,
and by inborn laws and a kind of necessity are
led to those things, to do which ' they were made.
Moreover, in this way ^ both kinds of gods cease
to possess their own powers, and to retain their
own characters. For if the good arc worshipped
that they may be favourable, and supplication is
made in the same way to the others, on the con-
trary, that they may not be injurious, it follows
that it should be understood that the propitious
deities will show no favour if they receive no
gifts, and become bad instead of good ; ^ while,
on the contrary, the bad, if they receive oferings,
will lay aside their mischievous disposition, and
become thereafter good : and thus it is brought
to this issue, that neither are these propitious,
nor are those sinister ; or, which is impossible,
both are propitious, and both again sinister.

24. Be it so ; let it be conceded that these
most unfortunate cattle are not sacrificed in the
temples of the gods without some religious obli-
gation, and that what has been done in accord-
ance with usage and custom possesses some
rational ground : but if it seems a great and
grand thing to slay bulls to the gods, and to burn
in sacrifice the flesh of animals whole and entire,
what is the meaning of these relics connected
with the arts of the Afagi which the pontifical
mysteries have restored to a place among the
secret laws of the sacred rites, and have mixed
up with religious affairs? What, I say, is the
meaning of these things, apexaones, hircicB, sili-
cernia, longavi, which are names and kinds of
sausages,'* some stuffed with goats' blood, 5 others
with minced liver? What is the meaning of t(Z-
dce, ucEnice, offce, not those used by the common
people, but those named and called offce penitce?


' The MS. reids ad en qiicB fircti siiiit, understood seemingly as
above by the eJd., by supplying ad before qua:. Oehler, however,
proposes quia — "because they were madeyi)/- them." The read-
ing must be regarded as doubtful.

- i.e., if sacrifices avail to counteract the malevolent dispositions
of the gods.

3 tit , " these." This clause, omitted by Oberthiir, is also omit-
ted without remark by Ore'.li.

** So the edd., reading yarf/w/«K»« for the MS. facinorum, cor-
rected by W\\\. fartorum — " of stuffings." Throughout this pas-
sage hardly one of the names of these .sacrificial dainties is generally
agreed upon; as many are met with nowhere else, the MS. has been
adhered to strictly

s i.e., probably the hirciee: of the others, silicernia seem to have
been put on the table at funerals.


— of which the first ^ is fat cut into very small
pieces, as dainties ^ are ; that which has been
placed second is the extension of the gut by which
the excrements are given off after being drained
of all their nourishing juices ; while the offa
penita is a beast's tail cut off with a morsel of
flesh. What is the meaning of polimina, ofnenta,
palasea, or, as some call it, plasea ? — of which
that named omentum is a certain part enclosed
by the reservoirs of the belly are kept within
bounds ; the plasea is an ox's tail ^ besmeared
with flour and blood ; the polimina, again, are
those parts which we with more decency call
pjvles, — by the vulgar, however, they are usu-
ally termed testes. What is the meaning of fitilla,
fnunen, africia,gratilla, catumeitm, cumspoliuni,
cubula ? — of which the first two are names of
species of pottage, but differing in kind and qual-
ity ; while the series of tiames which follows de-
notes consecrated cakes, for they are not shaped
in one and the same way. For we do not choose
to mention the caro strcbula which is taken from
the haunches of bulls, the roasted pieces of meat
which are spitted, the intestines first heated, and
baked on glowing coals, nor, finally, the pickles,'
which are made by mixing four kinds of fruit.
In like manner, we do not choose to mention the
feitdicce, which also are the hi7'ce,^° which the lan-
guage of the mob, when it speaks, usually terms
ilia; " nor, in the same way, the CBrumncE,^^ which
are the first part of the gullet, '3 where ruminating
animals are accustomed to send down their food
and bring it back again ; nor the magmenta,^^
augmina, and thousand other kinds of sausages
or pottages which you have given unintelligible
names to, and have caused to be more revered
by common people.

25. For if whatever is done by men, and es-
pecially in religion, should have its causes, —
and nothing should be done without a reason in
all that men do and perform, — tell us and say
what is the cause, what the reason, that these
things also are given to the gods and burned
upon their sacred altars? For here we delay,
constrained most urgently to wait for this cause,
we pause, we stand fast, desiring to learn what
a god has to do with pottage, with cakes, with
different kinds of stuffing prepared in manifold
ways, and with different ingredients? Are the


* i.e., trrda.

7 So Salmasius and Meursius corrected the MS. catillaminu-a-m
by omitting a.

^ i.e., tail-piece.

9 Sntsamina, by which is perhaps meant the grits and salt cast
on the victim; but if so, Arnobius is at variance with Servius (Virgil,
Eel , viii 81), who expressly states that these were of spelt mixed
only with salt: while there is no trace elsewhere of a different usage.
'° The first four edd. retain the unintelligible MS dim.
" i.e., the entrails. The MS., first four edd., and Elm. read ilia.
•- So the MS., LB., Oberthiir, Orelh, Hild., and Oehler; but
cErumnce is found in no other passage with this meaning.
'3 J-it., " first heads in gullets."

''' By this, and the word which follows, we know from the etymol-
ogy that " oflerings" to the gods must be meant, but we know nothing


528


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


deities affected by splendid dinners or luncheons,
so that it is fitting to devise for them feasts with-
out number? Are they troubled by the loath-
ings of their stomachs, and is variety of flavours
sought for to get rid of their aversion, so that
there is set before them meat at one time roasted,
at another raw, and at another half cooked and
half raw? But if the gods like to receive all
these parts which you term prcesicicE,'^ and if
these gratify them with any sense of pleasure or
delight, what prevents, what hinders you from
laying all these upon iheir a/tars at once with
the whole animals? What cause, what reason
is there that the haunch-piece^ by itself, the
gullet, the tail, and the tail-piece 3 separately,
the entrails only, and the membrane + alone,
should be brought to do them honour ? Are the
gods of heaven moved by various condiments ?
After stuffing themselves with sumptuous and
ample dinners, do they, as is usually done, take
these little bits as sweet dainties, not to appease
their hunger, but to rouse their wearied palates,^
and excite in themselves a perfectly voracious
appetite? O wonderful greatness of the gods,
comprehended by no men, understood by no
creatures ! if indeed their favours are bought
with the testicles and gullets of beasts, and if
they do not lay aside their anger and resentment,
unless they see the entrails ^ prepared and offce
bought and burned upon their altars.

26. We have now to say a few words about
incense and wine, for these, too, are connected
and mixed up with your ceremonies,^ and are
used largely in your religious acts. And, first,
with respect to that very incense which you use,
we ask this of you particularly, whence or at
what time you have been able to become ac-
quainted with it, and to know it, so that you
have just reason to think that it is either worthy
to be given to the gods, or most agreeable to
their desires. For it is almost a novelty ; and
there is no endless succession of years since it
began to be known in these parts, and won its
way into the shrines of the gods. For neither
in the heroic ages, as it is believed and declared,
was it known what incense was, as is proved by
the ancient writers, in whose books is found no
mention ^ of it ; nor was Etruria, the parent and
mother of superstition, acquainted with its fame
and renown, as the rites of the chapels prove ;


' i.e., cut off for sacrifice.

^ Caro strebula.

3 Plasea.

* The MS. reads unintelligibly nomen qua, corrected by Gelenius
omentum, as above.

5 Lit., " admonish the ease of the palate; " a correction of Salma-
sius, by omitting a from the MS. palati-a admoneant.

^ Naniie.

"> Lit., " these kinds of ceremonies, too, were coupled and mixed,"
etc.

^ On this Oehler remarks, that the books of Moses show that it
was certainly used in the East in the most ancient times. But Arno-
bius has expressly restricted his statement to the use of incense " in
these parts."


nor was it used by any one in offering sacrifice
during the four hundred years in which Alba
flourished ; nor did even Romulus or Numa, who
was skilful in devising new ceremonies, know
either of its existence or growth, as the sacred
grits 9 show with which it was customary that the
usual sacrifices should be performed. Whence,
therefore, did its use begin to be adopted?
or what desire of novelty assailed the old and
ancient custom, so that that which was not
needed for so many ages took the first place in
the ceremonies? For if without incense ' the
performance of a religious service is imperfect,
and if a quantity of it is necessary to make the
celestials gentle and propitious to men, the an-
cients fell into sin, nay rather, their whole life
was full of guilt, for they carelessly neglected to
offer that which was most fitted to give pleasure
to the gods. But if in ancient times neither men
nor gods sought for this incense, it is proved
that to-day also that is offered uselessly and in
vain which antiquity did not believe necessary,
but modern times desired without any reason. '°

27. Finally, that we may always abide by the
rule and definition by which it has been shown
and determined that whatever is done by man
must have its causes, we will hold it fast here
also, so as to demand of you what is the cause,
what the reason, that incense is put on the altars
before the very images of the deities, and that,
from its being burned, they are supposed to be-
come friendly and gentle. What do they acquire
from this being done, or what reaches their
minds, so that we should be right in judging that
these things are well expended, and are not con-
sumed uselessly and in vain ? For as you should
show why you give incense to the gods, so, too,
it follows that you should manifest that the gods
have some reason for not rejecting it with dis-
dain, nay more, for desiring it so fondly. We
honour the gods with this, some one will perhaps
say. But we are not inquiring what your feeling
is, but the gods' ; nor do we ask what is done by
you, but how much they value what is done to
purchase their favour. But yet, O piety, what or
how great is this honour which is caused by the
odour of a fire, and produced from the gum of
a tree? For, lest you should happen not to
know what this incense is, or what is its origin,
it is a gum flowing from the bark of trees, ///j-/
as from the almond- tree, the cherry-tree, solidi-
fying as it exudes in drops. Does this, then,
honour and magnify the celestial dignities? or,
if their displeasure has been at any time excited,
is it melted away before the smoke of incense,
and lulled to sleep, their anger being moderated ?
Why, then, do you not burn indiscriminately the
juice of any tree whatever, without making any


9 Piumfar.

'° [See p. 519, note i, supra.\


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


529


distinction ? For if the deities are honoured by
this, and are not displeased that Panchaean gums
are burned to them, what does it matter from
what the smoke proceeds on your sacred altars,
or from what kind of gum the clouds of fumiga-
tion arise ?

28. Will any one say that incense is given to
the celestials, for this reason, that it has a sweet
smell, and imparts a pleasant sensation to the
nose, while the rest are disagreeable, and have
been set aside because of their offensiveness ?
Do the gods, then, have nostrils with which to
breathe ? do they inhale and respire currents of
air so that the qualities of different smells can
penetrate them? But if we allow that this is
the case, we make them subject to the condi-
tions of humanity, and shut them' out from the
limits of deity ; for whatever breathes and draws
m draughts of air, to be sent back in the same
way, must be mortal, because it is sustained by
feeding on the atmosphere. But whatever is
sustained by feeding on the atmosphere, if you
take away the means by which communication
is kept up,' its life must be crushed out, and its
vital principle must be destroyed and lost. So
then, if the gods also breathe and inhale odours
enwrapt in the air that accompanies them, it is
not untrue to say that they live upon what is re-
ceived from others,^ and that they might perish
if their air-holes were blocked up. And whence,
lastly, do you know whether, if they are charmed
by the sweetness of smells, the same things are
pleasant to them which are pleasant to you, and
charm and affect your different natures with a
similar feeling? May it not be possible that the
things which give pleasure to you, seem, on the
contrary, harsh and disagreeable to them? For
since the opinions of the gods are not the same,
and their substance not one, by what methods
can it be brought about that that which is unlike
in quality should have the same feeling and per-
ception as to that which touches it.^ Do we not
every day see that, even among the creatures
sprung from the earth, the same things are either
bitter or sweet to different species, that to some
things are fatal which are not pernicious to
others, so that the same things which charm
some with their delightful odours, give forth
exhalations deadly to the bodies of others ? But
the cause of this is not in the things which can-
not be at one and the same time deadly and
wholesome, sweet and bitter ; but just as each
one has been formed to receive impressions from
what is external,-* so he is affected : 5 his condi-


' Lit., " the returns by which the vital alternation is restored and
withdrawn."

2 So the MS., Hild., and Oehler, \^2idivci% sjtffec-tionibus alienis,
for which the rest read su^ " the fumigations of others."

3 Lit., " feel and receive one contact."

* Lit., " as each has been made for the touching of a thing coming
from without."

5 So Gelenius and later edd., reading afficitur for the unintelligi-
ble reading of .Ms. and Roman edd., efficit — " effects."


tion is not caused by the influences of the things,
but springs from the nature of his own senses,
and connection with the external. But all this
is set far from the gods, and is separated from
them by no small interval. For if it is true, as
is believed by the wise, that they are incorpo-
real, and not supported by any excellence of
bodily strength, an odour is of no effect upon
them, nor can reeking fumes move them by
their senses, not even if you were to set on fire
a thousand pounds of the finest incense, and the
whole sky were clouded with the darkness of
the abundant vapours. For that which does not
have bodily strength and corporeal substance,
cannot be touched by corporeal substance ; but
an odour is corporeal, as is shown by the nose
when touched by one : therefore it cannot, ac-
cording to reason, be felt by a deity, who has no
body, and is without any feeling and thought.'^

29. Wine is used along with incense ; and of
this, in like manner, we ask an explanation why
it is poured upon it when burning. For if a
reason is not'' shown for doing this, and its
cause is not ^ set forth, this action of yours must
not now be attributed to a ridiculous error, but,
to speak more plainly, to madness, foolishness,
blindness. For, as has been already said pretty
frequently, everything which is done should have
its cause manifest, and not involved in any dark
obscurity. If, therefore, you have confidence in
what is done, disclose, point out why that liquor
is offered ; that is, why wine is poured on the
altars. For do the bodies of the deities feel
parching thirst, and is it necessary that their dry-
ness be tempered by some moisture? Are they
accustomed, as men are, to combine eating and
drinking ? In like manner, also, after the solid '^
food of cakes and pottages, and victims slain in
honour of them, do they drench themselves, and
make themselves merry with very frequent cups
of wine, that their food may be more easily
softened, and thoroughly digested ? Give, I beg,
to the immortal gods to drink ; bring forth gob-
lets, bowls, '° ladles, and cups ; and as they stuff
themselves with bulls, and luxurious feasts, and
rich food, — lest some piece of flesh hastily ■ ■
gulped down should stick in passing through the
stomach, run up, hasten, give pure wine to Jupi-
ter, the most excellent, the supreme, lest he be
choked. He desires to break wind, and is un-


6 So all edd., without remark, reading cog-it-atione, although
" meditation " has nothing to do with the sense of smell, and has not
been previously mentioned. We should probably read cog-n-atione —
" relation," i.e., to such objects.

7 So LB. and Oehler, reading «z-«'. (MS. si), and other edd. insert-
ing non, the negative being absolutely necessary to the sense, and
supplied in the next clause.

8 Lit., " nor will it have its cause."

9 Although this is clearly the meaning, Stewechius explained soli-
dos by referring to the ancient belief that such offerings should be
wholly consumed, and no fragment left.

'° Bri<^, drinking-cups, but of their peculiar shape or purpose we
know nothing.
" Lit., " badly."


530


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


able ; and unless that hindrance passes away
and is dissolved, there is very great danger that
his breathing will be stopped and ' interrupted,
and heaven be left desolate without its rulers.

30. But, says i?iy opponent, you are insulting
us without reason, for we do not pour forth wine
to the gods of heaven for these reasons, as if we
supposed that they either thirsted, or drank, or
were made glad by tasting its sweetness. It is
given to them to do them honour ; that their
eminence may become more exalted, more illus-
trious, we pour libations on their altars, and
with the //^^-extinguished embers we raise sweet
smells,^ which show our reverence. And what
greater insult can be inflicted upon the gods
than if you believe that they become propitious
on receiving wine, or, if you suppose that great
honour is done to them, if you only throw and
drop on the live coals a few drops of wine?
We are not speaking to men void of reason, or
not possessed of common understanding : in you,
too, there is wisdom, there is perception, and in
your hearts you know, by your own ^ judgment,
that we are speaking truly. But what can we do
with those who are utterly unwilling to consider
things as they are, to converse themselves with
themselves? For you do what you see to be
done, not that which you are assured should be
done, inasmuch ■* as with you a custom without
reason prevails, more than a perception of the
nature of circumstances .based on a careful ex-
amination of the truth. For what has a god to
do with wine ? or what or how great is the power
in it, that, on its being poured out, his eminence
becomes greater, and his dignity is supposed to
be honoured? What, I say, has a god to do
with wine, which is most closely connected with
the pursuits of Venus, which weakens the strength
of all virtues, and is hostile to the decency of
modesty and chastity, — which has often excited
men's minds, and urged them to madness and
frenzy, and compelled the gods to destroy their
own authority by raving and foul language ? Is
not this, then, impious, and perfectly sacrilegious,
to give that as an honour which, if you take too
eagerly, you know not what you are doing, you
are ignorant of what you are saying, and at last
are reviled, and become infamous as a drunkard,
a luxurious and abandoned fellow?

31. It is worth while to bring forward the
words themselves also, which, when wine is of-
fered, it is customary to use and make supplica-
tion with : " Let the deity be worshipped with


' Lit., " being strangled, may be."

^ So LB., Orelli, and Oehler, reading with Salm.^sius in-n-scos
(ms. -?'-). Gelenius proposed ciiissas, which would refer to the steam
of the sacrifices.

3 Lit., " interior."

•• So most edd., reading niim'rttin quia plus valet, for which the
MS., followed by both Roman edd., Hild., and Oehler, reaAj>ri)inc»i
q. v., which Hild. would explain, "because it prevails above all
rather than; " but this is at least very doubtful.


this wine which we bring." 5 The words " which
we bring," says Trebatius, are added for this pur-
pose, and put forth for this reason, that all the
wine whatever which has been laid up in closets
and storerooms, from which was taken that which
is poured out, may not begin to be sacred, and
be reft from the use of men. This word, then,
being added, that alone will be sacred which is
brought to the plaee, and the rest will not be con-
secrated.*" What kind of honour, then, is this, in
which there is imposed on the deity a condition,^
as it were, not to ask more than has been given?
or what is the greed of the god, who, if he were
not verbally interdicted, would extend his desires
too far, and rob his suppliant of his stores?
" Let the deity be worshipped with this wine
which we bring": " this is a wrong, not an honour.
For what if the deity shall wish for more, and
shall not be content with what is brought !
Must he not be said to be signally wronged who
is compelled to receive honour conditionally?
For if all wine in cellars whatever must become
consecrated were a limitation not added, it is
manifest both that the god is insulted to whom
a limit is prescribed against his wishes, and that
in sacrificing you yourselves violate the obliga-
tions of the sacred rites, who do not give as
much wine as you see the god wishes to be given
to himself. " Let the deity be worshipped with
this wine which we bring : " what is this but say-
ing, " Be worshipped as much as I choose ; re-
ceive as much dignity as I prescribe, as much
honour as I decide and determine by a strict
engagement^ that you should have?" O sub-
limity of the gods, excelling in power, which
thou shouldst venerate and worship with all cere-
monial observances, but on which the worshipper
imposes conditions, which he adores with stipu-
lations and contracts, which, through fear of one
word, is kept from excessive desire of wine !

32. But let there be, as you wish, honour in
wine and in incense, let the anger and displeas-
ure of the deities be appeased by the immola-
tion and slaughter of victims : are the gods
moved by garlands also, wreaths and flowers, by
the jingling of brass also, and the shaking of
cymbals, by timbrels also, and also by s}-mpho-
nious pipes? ^ What effect has the clattering of
castanets, that when the deities have heard them,
they think that honour has been shown to them,
and lay aside their fiery spirit of resentment in
forgetfulness ? Or, as little boys are frightened
into giving over their silly wailings by hearing


s Vino inferio.

* Lit., " bound by religion."

7 This is admirably illustrated in an inscription quoted by Heral-
dus : "Jupiter most excellent, supreme, when this day I give and
dedicate to thee this altar, I give and dedicate it with these conditions
and limits which I say openly to-day."

^ Circumseriptione verboruiu.

9 Symphonic. Evidently musical instruments; but while Isidore
speaks of them as a kind of drum, other writers call them trumpets
and pipes.


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


531


the sound of rattles, are the almighty deities also
soothed in the same way by the whistling of
pipes? and do they become mild, is their indig-
nation softened, at the musical sound of cym-
bals ? What is the meaning of those calls ' which
you sing in the morning, joining your voices to
the music of the pipe ? Do the gods of heaven
fall asleep, so that they should return to their
posts ? What is the meaning of those slumbers '
to which you commend them with auspicious sal-
utations that they may be in good health ? Are
they awakened from sleep ; and that they may
be able to be overcome by it, must soothing lul-
labies be heard ? The purification, says my op-
ponent, of the mother of the gods is to-day.^ Do
the gods, then, become dirty ; and to get rid of
the filth, do those who wash them need water,
and even some cinders to rub them with?^ The
feast of Jupiter is to-morrow. Jupiter, I sup-
pose, dines, and must be satiated with great
banquets, and long filled with eager cravings for
food by fasting, and hungry after the usual ^ in-
terval. The vintage festival of ^sculapius is
being celebrated. The gods, then, cultivate vine-
yards, and, having collected gatherers, press the
wine for their own uses.5 The lectisternium of
Ceres *" will be on the next Ides, for the gods
have couches ; and that they may be able to lie
on softer cushions, the pillows are shaken up
when they have been pressed down.'' It is the
birthday of Tellus ; ^ for the gods are born, and
have festal days on which it has been settled
that they began to breathe.

2,7,. But the games which you celebrate, called
Floralia and Afegaknsia,'^ and all the rest which
)'ou wish to be sacred, and to be considered re-
ligious duties, what reason have they, what cause,
that it was necessary that they should be insti-
tuted and founded and designated by the names '°
of deities? The gods are honoured by these,
says my opponent ; and if they have any recol-
lection of offences committed " by men, they lay


' At daybreak on opening, and at night on closing the temple, the
priests of Isis sang hymns in praise of the goddess (cf. Jos. Scaliger,
Castigatioiies ad Cat., etc., -p. 132); and to these Amobius refers
sarcastically, as though they had been calls to awake, and lullabies to
sing her asleep.

^ i.e., March 27lh, marked Lavatio in a calendar prepared during
the reign of Constantius.

3 Lit., "and some rubbing of cinders sAAeA," altgica frictione
cineris ; an emendation of Ursinus for the possibly correct MS. a7iti-
gtia f. c. — " the ancient rubbing," i.e., that practised in early times.

"* Lit., "anniversary."

5 So the later edd., adopting the emendation of ad suas uszones
for the corrupt MS. ad (or ab) suasioiiibiis.

'' i.e., feast at which the image of Ceres was placed on a couch,
probably the Cerealia, celebrated in April. This passage flatly con-
tradicts Prof. Ramsay's assertion (^Ani., p. 345) that lectisternium is
not applied to a banquet offered to a goddess; while it corroborates
his statement that such feasts were ordinary events, not extraordinary
solenmities, as Mr. Yates says (Smith's Ant., s. v.). See p. 519, n. 2.

'' Lit., " the impression of the cushions is lifted up and raised,"
i.e., smoothed.

^ Thus the 25th of January is marked as the birthday of the
Graces, the ist of February as that of Hercules, the ist of March as
that of Mars, in the calendar already mentioned.

9 The former dedicated to Flora (cf. iii. 25), the latter to Cybele.

'° Singular.

" So the margin of Ursinus, Elm., LB., Orelli, Hild., and
Oehler; the MS. reading not being known.


it aside, get rid of it, and show themselves gra-
cious to us again, their friendship being renewed.
And what is the cause, again, that they are made
quite calm and gentle, if absurd things are done,
and idle fellows sport before the eyes of the
multitude? Does Jupiter lay aside his resent-
ment if the Amphitryon of Plautus is acted and
declaimed? or if Europa, Leda, Ganymede, or
Danae is represented by dancing, does he restrain
his passionate impulses? Is the Great Mother
rendered more calm, more gentle, if she beholds
the old story of Attis furbished up by the play-
ers? Will Venus forget her displeasure if she
sees mimics act the part of Adonis also in a bal-
let ? " Does the anger of Alcides die away if the
tragedy of Sophocles named Trachinice, or the
Hercules of Euripides, is acted? or does Flora
think '3 that honour is shown to her if at her
games she sees that shameful actions are done,
and the stews abandoned for the theatres ? Is
not this, then, to lessen the dignity of the gods,
to dedicate and consecrate to them the basest
things which a rigidly virtuous mind will turn
from with disgust, the performers of which your
law has decided to be dishonoured and to be
considered infamous? The gods, forsooth, de-
light in mimics ; and that surpassing excellence
which has not been comprehended by any human
faculty, opens '^ its ears most willingly to hear
these plays, with most of which they know they
are mixed up to be turned to derision ; they are
delighted, as it is, with the shaved heads of the
fools, by the sound of flaps, and by the noise of
applause, by shameful actions and words, by huge
red fascina. But further, if they see men weak-
ening themselves to the effeminacy of women,
some vociferating uselessly, others running about
without cause, '5 others, while their friendship is
unbroken, bruising and maiming each with the
bloody cestus, these contending in speaking loith-
out draiving breath,'^ swelling out their cheeks
with wind, and shouting out noisily empty vows,
do they lift up their hands to heaven in their
admiration, start up moved by such wonders,
burst into exclamations, again become gracious
to men ? If these things cause the gods to for-
get their resentment, if they derive the highest
pleasure from comedies, Atellane farces, and
pantomimes, why do you delay, why do you
hesitate, to say that the gods themselves also
play, act lasciviously, dance, compose obscene
songs, and undulate with trembling haunches?


i^ Lit., " in dancing motions."

13 So Meursius, Orelli, and Oehler, reading cxistitiiat-ve, all the

others retaining the MS. -ur "Is Flora thought to be treated,"

etc.

'■* Lit., " adapts."

'5 Here also there is doubt as to what the reading of the MS. is.
The ist ed. reads sine culpa — " without blame," which is hardly in
keeping with the context, emended causa, as above, by Gelenius.

'^ So Orelli explains certare hos spiritic as referring to a contest
in which each strove to speak or sing with one breath longer than the
rest.


532


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HF:ATHEN.


For what difference is there, or what does it mat-
ter, whether they do these things themselves, or are
pleased and delighted to see them done by others ?

34. Whence, therefore, have these vicious
opinions flowed, or from what causes have they
sprung? From this it is clear, in great measure,
that men are unable to know what Ood is,
what is His essence, nature, substance, quality ;
whether He has a form, or is limited by no bodily
outline, does anything or not, is ever watchful,
or is at times sunk in slumbers, runs, sits, walks,
or is free from such motions and inactivity. Be-
ing, as I have said, unable to know all these
things, or to discern them by any power of rea-
son, they fell into these fanciful beliefs, so that
they fashioned gods after themselves, and gave
to these such a nature as they have themselves,
in actions, circumstances, and desires. But if
they were to perceive that they are worthless
creatures,' and that there is no great difference
between themselves and a little ant, they would
cease, indeed, to think that they have anything
in common with the gods of heaven, and would
confine their unassuming insignificance ^ within
its proper limits. But now, because they see
that they themselves have faces, eyes, heads,
cheeks, ears, noses, and all the other j^arts of our
limbs and muscles, they think that the gods also
have been formed in the same way, that the
divine nature is embodied in a human frame ; ^
and because they perceive that they themselves
rejoice ajid are glad, and again are made sad by
what is too disagreeable, they think that the
deities also on joyous occasions are glad, and on
less pleasant ones become dejected. They see
that they are affected by the games, and think
that the minds of the celestials are soothed by
enjoying games ; and because they have pleasure
in refreshing themselves with warm baths, they
think that the cleanness produced by ^ bathing is
pleasing to the gods above. We men gather our
vintages, and they think and believe that the
gods gather and bring in their grapes ; we have
birthdays, and they affirm that the powers of
heaven have birthdays.s But if they could
ascribe to the gods ill-health, sickness, and bodily
disease, they would not hesitate to say that they
were splenetic, blear-eyed, and ruptured, because
they are themselves both splenetic, and often
blear-eyed, and weighed down by huge hernice.

35. Come now: as the discussion has been
prolonged and led to these points, let us, bring-
ing forward what each has to say,^ decide by a
brief comparison whether your ideas of the gods


' Lit., " an animal of no value."

- Lit., " the modesty of their humility."

3 Lit., " they contain their nature in a corporeal form."

■• Lit., "of."

s Cf. p. 53i,n. 8. _ _

^ Lit., " by opposition of the parts of each." Considerable diffi-
culty has been felt as to the abrupt way in whichi the book ends as it
is arranged in the MS. Orelli has therefore adopted the suggestion of


above are the better, or our thoughts preferable,
and much more honouraljle and just, and such as
to give and assign its own dignity to the divine
nature. And, first, you declare that the gods,
whom you either think or believe to exist, of
whom you have set up images and statues in all
the temples, were born and produced from the
germs of males and females, under the necessary
condition of sexual embraces. But we, on the
contrary, if they are indeed true gods, and have
the authority, power, dignity of this name, con-
sider that they must either be unbegotten, for it
is pious to believe this, or, if they have a be-
ginning in 7 birth, it belongs to the supreme God
to know by what methods He made them, or
how many ages there are since He granted to
them to enter upon the eternal being of His own
divine nature. You consider that the deities have
sexes, and that some of them are male, others
female ; we utterly deny that the powers of
heaven have been distinguished by sexes, since
this distinction has been given to the creatures
of earth which the Author of the universe willed
should embrace and generate, to provide, by
their carnal desires, one generation of offspring
after another. You think that they are like men,
and have been fashioned with the countenances
of mortals ; we think that the images of them
are wide of the mark,^ as form belongs to a
mortal body ; and if they have any, we swear
with the utmost earnestness and confidence that
no man can comprehend it. By you they are
said to have each his trade, like artisans ; we
laugh when we hear you say such things, as we
hold and think that professions are not necessary
to gods, and it is certain and evident that these
have been provided to assist poverty.

36.'' You say that some of them cause dissen-
sions, that there are others who inflict pesti-
lences, others who excite love and madness,
others, even, who preside over wars, and are
delighted by the shedding of blood ; but we,
indeed, on the contrary, judge that these things
are remote '° from the dispositions of the deities ;


an anonymous critic, and transposed cc. 35, 36, 37 to the end. This
does not, however, meet the difficulty; for the same objection still
holds good, that there is a want of connection and harmony in these
concluding chapters, and that, even when thus arranged, they do not
form a fitting conclusion to the whole work.

^ Lit., "oi."

5 Lit., " that effigies have been far removed from them " This
may be understood, either as meaning that the gods had not visible
form at all, or, as above, that their likenesses made by men showed
no resemblance.

9 50 in Orelli.

'° It is important to notice the evidence in this one sentence of
haste and want of revision. In the first line we find a genitive {dis-
cordiariiin — " dissensions"), but not the noun on which it depends;
and in the apodosis a verb {disjzinctas esse — " have been removed,"
i.e., "are remote") has no subject, although its gender imperatively
requires that has res, or some such words, be supplied. One omis-
sion might have been easily ascribed to a slip on the part of the copy-
ist; but two omissions such as these occurring so closely, must, it
would seem, be assigned to the impetuous disregard of >ni»utice with
which Arnobius blocked out a conclusion which was never carefully
revised. (Cf Appendix, note i, and p. 539, n. 8.) The importance
of such indications is manifest in forming an opinion on the contro-
versy as to this part of the work.


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


533


or if there are any who inflict and bring these
ills on miserable mortals, we maintain that they
are far from the nature of the gods, and should
not be spoken of under this name. You judge
that the deities are angry and perturbed, and
given over and subject to the other mental affec-
tions ; we think that such emotions are alien
from them, for these suit savage beings, and those
who die as mortals.' You think that they re-
joice, are made glad, and are reconciled to men,
their offended feelings being soothed by the
blood of beasts and the slaughter of victims ;
we hold that there is in the celestials no love
of blood, and that they are not so stern as to
lay aside their resentment only when glutted
with the slaughter of animals. You think that,
by wine and incense, honour is given to the
gods, and their dignity increased ; we judge it
marvellous and monstrous that any man thinks
that the deity either becomes more venerable by
reason of smoke,^ or thinks himself supplicated
by men with sufficient awe and respect when
they offer ^ a few drops of wine. You are per-
suaded that, by the crash of cymbals and the
sound of pipes, by horse-races and theatrical
plays, the gods are both delighted and affected,
and that their resentful feelings conceived before ■^
are mollified by the satisfaction which these
things give ; we hold it to be out of place, nay
more, we judge it incredible, that those who have
surpassed by a thousand degrees every kind of
excellence in the height of their perfection,
should be pleased and delighted with those
things which a wise man laughs at, and which
do not seem to have any charm except to little
children, coarsely and vulgarly educated.

37. Since these things are so, and since there
is so great difference between ^ our opinions and
yours, where are we, on the one hand, impious,
or you pious, since the decision as to ^ piety and
impiety must be founded on the opinions of the
tivo parties? For he who makes himself an
image which he may worship for a god, or
slaughters an innocent beast, and burns it on
consecrated altars, must not be held to be de-
voted to religion. 5 Opinion constitutes religion,
and a right way of thinking about the gods, so
that you do not think that they desire anything
contrary to what becomes their exalted position,
which is manifest.*^ For since we see all the
things which are offered to them consumed here
under our eyes, what else can be said to reach


' Lit , " are of . . . those meeting the functions of mortality,"
obetiiiti-unt, corrected by Gelenius (according to Orelli) for the MS.
-bus, retained, though unintelligible, by Canterus, Oberth., and
Hild.

- [See p. 519, note i, and p. 528, cap. 26, S7ipra.\

3 Lit., " of." [Cap. 29, p. 529, supra.'\

•• Lit., " some time."

5 Lit., " divine things."

* So the MS., both Roman edd . Hild., and Oehler, reading
promptie ; corrected pmsninptce - "taken for granted," in the
rest.


them from us than opinions worthy of the gods,
and most appropriate to their name? These
are the surest gifts, these true sacrifices ; for
gruel, incense, and flesh feed the devouring
flames, and agree very well with the parentalia ^
of the dead.

38.^ If the immortal gods cannot be angry,
says }?iy opponent, and their nature is not agi-
tated or troubled by any passions, what do the
histories, the annals mean, in which we find it
written 9 that the gods, moved by some annoy-
ances, occasioned pestilences, sterility,'" failure
of crops, and other dangers, to states and na-
tions ; and that they again, being appeased and
satisfied by means of" sacrifices, laid aside their
burning anger, and changed the state of the
atmosphere and times into a happier one?
What is the meaning of the earth's roarings, the
earthquakes, which we have been told occurred
because the games had been celebrated careless-
ly, and their nature and circumstances had not
been attended to, and yet, on their being cele-
brated afresh, and repeated with assiduous care,
the terrors of the gods were stilled, and they were
recalled to care and friendship for men? How
often, after that — in obedience to the commands
of the seers and the responses of the diviners
— sacrifice has been offered, and certain gods
have been summoned from nations dwelling be-
yond the sea, and shrines erected to them, and
certain images and statues set on loftier pillars,
have fears of impending dangers been diverted,
and the most troublesome enemies beaten, and
the republic extended both by repeated joyous
victories, and by gaining possession of several
provinces ! Now, certainly this would not hap-
pen if the gods despised sacrifices, games, and
other acts of worship, and did not consider them-
selves honoured by expiatory offerings. If, then,
all the rage and indignation of the deities are
cooled when these things are offered, and if
those things become favourable which seemed
fraught with terrors, it is clear that all these
things are not done without the gods wishing
them, and that it is vain, and shows utter igno-
rance, to blame us for giving them.

39.'^ We have come, then, in speaking, to
the very point of the case, to that on which the
question hinges, to the real and most intimate
part of the discussion, which it is fitting that,
laying aside superstitious dread, and putting away
partiality, we should examine whether these are
gods whom you assert to be furious when of-
fended, and to be rendered mild by sacrifices ;


7 i.e., offerings to parents, as the name implies, and other rela-
tives who were dead.

^ 35 in Orelli.

9 T.it., " in the writings of which we read."
'o PI.

" Lit., " by satisfaction of."
•2 36 in Orelli. [See note i, Appcndi.v, p. 539, iH/ra.\


534


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


or whether they are something far different, and
should be separated from the notion of this
name and power. For we do not deny that all
these things are to be found in the writings of
the annalists which have been brought forward
by you in opposition ; for we ourselves also, ac-
cording to the measure and capacity of our
abilities, have read, and know, that it has been
recorded that once at the liidi circenses, cele-
brated in honour of Jupiter the supreme, a mas-
ter dragged across the middle of the arena, and
afterwards, according to custom, punished with
the cross, a very worthless slave whom he had
beaten with rods. Then, when the games were
ended, and the races not long finished, a pesti-
lence began to distress the state ; and when each
day brought fresh ill worse than what was be-
fore,' and the people were perishing in crowds,
in a dream Jupiter said to a certain rustic, ob-
scure from the lowliness of his lot, that he should
go - to the consuls, point out that the dancer ^
had displeased him, that it might \>q better for
the state if the respect due to the games were
paid to them, and they were again celebrated
afresh with assiduous care. And when he had
utterly neglected to do this, either because he
supposed it was an empty dream, and would find
no credence with those to w^hom he should tell
it, or because, remembering his natural insignifi-
cance, he avoided and dreaded approaching
those who were so powerful,* Jupiter was ren-
dered hostile to the lingerer, and imposed as
punishment oti him the death of his sons. After-
wards, when he s threatened the man himself
with death unless he went to announce his dis-
approval of the dancer, — overcome by fear of
dying, since he was already himself also burning
with the fever of the plague, having been in-
fected, he was carried to the senate-house, as
his neighbours wished, and, when his vision had
been declared, the contagious fever passed away.
The repetition of the games being then decreed,
great care was, on the one hand, given to the
shows, and its former good health was restored
to the people.

40.^^ But neither shall we deny that we know
this as well, that once on a time, when the state
and republic were in difficulties, caused either
by 7 a terrible plague continually infecting the
people and carrying them off, or by enemies
powerful, and at that time almost threatening to
rob it of its liberty ^ because of their success in
battle, — by order and advice of the seers, cer-


' Lit., " added evil heavier than evil."

- So later edd., reading vaderet from the margin of Ursinus,
while the first three retain the MS. reading suaderet — " persuade."
3 i.e., the slave writhing under the scourge.
■* Lit., " of so great power."
S i.e., Jupiter.
* 37 in Orelli.

7 Lit., " which either a . . . made," etc.
5 Lit., " very near to danger of carrying off liberty."


tain gods "^ were summoned from among nations
dwelling beyond the sea, and honoured with mag-
nificent temples ; and that the violence of the
plague abated, and very frequent triumphs were
gained, the power of the enemy being broken,
and the territory of the empire was increased,
and provinces without number fell under your
sway. But neither does this escape our knowl-
edge, that we have seen it asserted that, when
the Capitol was struck by a thunderbolt, and
many other things in it, the image of Jupiter
also, which stood on a lofty pillar, was hurled
from its place. Thereafter a response was given
by the soothsayers, that cruel and very sad mis-
chances were portended from fire and slaughter,
from the destruction of the laws, and the over-
throw of justice, especially, however, from ene-
mies themselves belonging to the nation, and
from an impious band of conspirators ; but that
these things could not be averted, nay, that the
accursed designs could not be revealed, unless
Jupiter were again set up firmly on a higher pil-
lar, turned towards the east, and facing the ra)s
of the rising sun. Their words were trustworthy,
for, when the pillar was raised, and the statue
turned towards the sun, the secrets were revealed,
and the offences made known were punished.

41.'° All these things which have been men-
tioned, have indeed a miraculous appearance, —
rather, they are believed to have it, — if they
come to men's ears just as they have been brought
forward ; and we do not deny that there is in
them something which, being placed in the fore
front, as the saying is, may stun the ears, and
deceive by its resemblance to truth. But if you
will look closely at what was done, the person-
ages and their pleasures," you will find that there
is nothing worthy of the gods, and, as has already
been said often, nothing worthy to be referred
to the splendour and majesty of this race. For,
first, who is there who will believe that he was
a god who was pleased with horses running to
no purpose,'^ and considered it most delightful
that he should be summoned '^ by such sports ?
Rather, who is there who will agree that that was
Jupiter — whom you call the supreme god, and
the creator of all things which are — who set out
from heaven to behold geldings vieing with each
other in speed, and running '■♦ the seven rounds
of the course ; and that, although he had him-
self determined that they should not be equally
nimble, he nevertheless rejoiced to see them pass


9 Cf. ii. 73.

10 38 in Orelli.

" So the MS., LB., Hild., and Oehler, reading volu-p-tates, i.e.,
the games and feasts spoken of previously; the other edd. read -n-
— "wishes."

'2 Oehler c\'^sm% frustra by otiose — "who was leisurely de-
lighted; " but there is no reason why it should not have its usual
meaning, as above. [See note i, Appendi.\, p. 539.]

'3 i.e., from heaven. Instead of e-vocari, however, Heraldus has
proposed a "be diverted."

'•» Lit.," unfolding."


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


535


each other, and be passed, some in their haste
falhng forward upon their heads, and overturned
upon their backs along with their chariots, others
dragged along and lamed, their legs being broken ;
and that he considered as the highest pleasures
fooleries mixed with trifles and cruelties, which
any man, even though fond of pleasure, and not
trained to strive after seriousness and dignity,
would consider childish, and spurn as ridiculous ?
^^'ho is there, I say, who will believe — to repeat
this word assiduously — that he was divine who,
being irritated because a shive was led across the
circus, about to suffer and be punished as he de-
served, was inflamed with anger, and prepared
himself to take vengeance ? For if the slave was
guilty, and deserved to be punished with that
chastisement, why should Jupiter have been
moved with any indignation when nothing was
being done unjustly, nay, when a guilty fellow
was being punished, as was right? But if he
was free from guilt, and not worthy of punish-
ment at all, yiipiter himself was the cause of
the dancer's vitiating the games,' for when he
might have helped him, he did him no service —
nay, sought both to allow what he disapproved,
and to exact from others the penalty for what he
had permitted. And why, then, did he complain
and declare that he was wronged in the case of
that dancer because he was led through the midst
of the circus to suffer the cross, with his back
torn by rods and scourges ?

42.^ And what pollution or abomination could
have flowed from this, either to make the circus
less pure, or to defile Jupiter, seeing that in a
few moments, in a feiv seconds, he beheld so
many thousands throughout the world* perish by
different kinds of death, and with various forms
of torture ? He was led across, says my opponent,
before the games began to be celebrated. If
from a sacrilegious spirit and contempt ^ for re-
ligion, we have reason to excuse Jupiter for being
indignant that he was contemned, and that more
anxious care was not given to his games. But
if from mistake or accident that secret fault was
not observed and known, would it not have been
right and befitting Jupiter to pardon human fail-
ings, and grant forgiveness to the blindness of
ignorance ? But it was necessary that it should
be punished. And after this, will any one
believe that he was a god who avenged and
punished neglect of a childish show by the de-
struction of a state ? that he had any seriousness
and dignity, or any steady constancy, who, that
he might speedily enjoy pleasure afresh, turned
the air men breathed ■* into a baneful poison, and
ordered the destruction of mortals by plague


' Lit., " was in the cause of the vicious dancer."
^ 39 in Orelli.

3 So all edd., rejecting .r from MS. coiitemptit-s.
■* Lit., " draughts of air."


and pestilence ? If the magistrate who presided
over the games was too careless in learning who
on that day had been led across the circus, and
blame was therefore contracted, what had the
unhappy people done that they should in their
own persons suffer the penalty of another's of-
fences, and should be forced to hurry out of life
by contagious pestilences ? Nay, what had the
women, whose weakness did not allow them to
take part in public business, the grown-up 5
maidens, the little boys, finally the young chil-
dren, yet dependent for food on their nurses, —
what had these done that they should be assailed
with equal, with the same severity, and that
before they tasted the joy of fife ^ they should
feel the bitterness of death ? »

43.7 If Jupiter sought to have his games cele-
brated, and that afresh,^ with greater care ; if
he honestly sought to restore 9 the people to
health, and that the evil which he had caused
should go no further and not be increased, would
it not have been better that he should come to
the consul himself, to some one of the public
priests, the pontifex niaximus, or to his own
fiamen Dialis, and in a vision reveal to him the
defect in the games occasioned by the dancer,
and the cause of the sadness of the times?
What reason had there been that he should
choose, to announce his wishes and procure the
satisfaction desired, a man accustomed to live
in the country, unknown from the obscurity of
his name, not acquainted with city matters, and
perhaps not knowing what a dancer is? And
if he indeed knew, as he must have known if
he was a diviner, '° that this fellow would refuse
to obey, would it not have been more natural
and befitting a god, to change the man's mind,
and constrain him to be willing to obey, than
to try more cruel methods, and vent his rage
indiscriminately, without any reason, as robbers
do? For if the old rustic, not being quick in
entering upon anything, delayed in doing what
was commanded, being kept back by stronger
motives, of what had his unhappy children been
guilty, \.\\2it Jupiter^ s anger and indignation should
be turned upon them, and that they should pay
for another's offences by being robbed of their
lives? And can any man believe that he is a
god who is so unjust, so impious, and who does
not observe even the laws of men, among whom
it would be held a great crime to punish one
for another, and to avenge one man's offences
upon others?" But, I am told, he caused the


5 So, by omitting two letters, all edd. except ist and Ursinus,
which retain MS. aduU-er-ie — "adulterous."

6 Lit., " light."

7 40 in Orelli. The MS., ist edd., and Ursinus want si.

8 Lit., "and restored." [Conf. Pont. Max. here named, with
vol. iv. p. 74.]

9 The MS. and Ursinus read reddere-t — " if he was to restore; "
corrected, as above, by omission of/.

'° i.e., if he is a god. Cf iii. 20 ; [specially, note 3, p. 469J.
" Lit., " the necks of."


536


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


man himself to be seized by the cruel pestilence.
Would it not then have been better, nay rather,
juster, if it seemed that this should be done, that
dread of punishment should be first excited by
the father, who ' had been the cause of such
passion by- his disobedient delay, than to do
violence to the children, and to consume and
destroy innocent persons to make him sorrow-
ful ? 3 What, pray, was the meaning of this fierce-
ness, this cruelty, which liias so great that, his
offspring being dead, it afterwards terrified the
father by his own danger ! But if he had chosen
to do this long before, that is, in the first place,
not only would not the innocent brothers have
been cut off, but the indignant purpose of the
deity also would have been known. But cer-
tainly, it will be said, when he had done his
duty by announcing the vision, the disease im-
mediately left him, and the man was forthwith
restored to health. And what is there to admire
in this if he removed** the evil which he had
himself breathed into the man, and vaunted
himself with false pretence? But if you weigh
the circumstances thoroughly, there was greater
cruelty than kindness in his deliverance, iox Jupi-
ter did not preserve him to the joys of life tuho
was miserable and wishing to perish after his
children, but to learn his solitariness and the
agonies of bereavement.

44.5 In like manner we might go through the
other narratives, and show that in these also, and
in expositions of these, something far different
from what the gods should be is said and de-
clared about them, as in this very story which I
shall next relate, one or two only being added
to it, that disgust may not be produced by
excess.^ After certain gods were brought from
among nations dwelling beyond the sea, you say,
and after temples were built to them, after their
altars were heaped with sacrifices, the plague-
stricken people grew strong and recovered, and
the pestilence fled before the soundness of health
which arose. What gods, say, I beseech?
^sculapius, you say, the god of health, from
Epidaurus, and now setded in the island in
the middle of the Tiber. If we were disposed
to be very scrupulous in dealing with your asser-
tions, we might prove by your own authority that
he was by no means divine who had been con-
ceived and bom from a woman's womb, who
had by yearly stages reached that term of life at


' Lit., " the terror of coercion should begin from the father with
whom."

2 Lit., " even," et.

3 Lit., " to his grief."

* The MS. reads rett-tilit, emended ret " gave back," i.e., got

rid of, by ist ed. and Ursinus; and rep-, as above, by Gelenius and
others.

5 41 in Orelli. [See Appendix, note i, p. 539.]

* In the MS. and both Roman edd. the section translated on p.
539 is inserted here. Ursinus, however (pp. 210-21 1), followed by
Heraldus (312-313), enclosed it in brackets, and marked it with aster-
isks. In all other edd. it is either given as an appendix, or wholly
rejected.


which, as is related in your books, a thunderbolt
drove him at once from life and light. But we
leave this question : let the son of Coronis be,
as you wish, one of the immortals, and possessed
of the everlasting blessedness 7 of heaven. From
Epidaurus, however, what was brought except
an enormous serpent? If we trust the annals,
and ascribe to them well -ascertained truth, noth-
ing else, as it has been recorded. What shall
we say then? That ^sculapius, whom you
extol, an excellent, a venerable god, the giver of
health, the averter, preventer, destroyer of sick-
ness, is contained within the form and outline
of a serpent, crawling along the earth as worms
are wont to do, which spring from mud ; he
rubs the ground with his chin and breast, drag-
ging himself in sinuous coils ; and that he may
be able to go forward, he draws on the last part
of his body by the efforts of the first.

45.^ And as we read that he used food also,
by which bodily existence is kept up, he has a
large gullet, that he may gulp down the food
sought for with gaping mouth ; he has a belly to
receive it, and^ a place where he may digest
the flesh which he has eaten and devoured, that
blood may be given to his body, and his strength
recruited ; '" he has also a draught, by which the
filth is got rid of, freeing his body from a dis-
agreeable burden. Whenever he changes his
place, and prepares to pass from one region to
another, he does not as a god fly secretly through
the stars of heaven, and stand in a moment where
something requires his presence, but, just as a
dull animal of earth, he seeks a conveyance
on which he may be borne ; he avoids the waves
of the sea ; and that he may be safe and sound,
he goes on board ship along with men ; and
that god of the common safety trusts himself
to weak planks and to sheets of wood joined to-
gether. We do not think that you can prove
and show that that serpent was ^Esculapius,
unless you choose to bring forward this pretext,
that you should say that the god changed him-
self into a snake, in order that he might be able "
to deceive men as to himself, who he was, or to
see what men were. But if you say this, the
inconsistency of your own statements will show
how weak and feeble such a defence is.'^ For if
the god shunned being seen by men, he should
not have chosen to be seen in the form of a
serpent, since in any form whatever he was not
to be other than himself, but alzvays himself. But
if, on the other hand, he had been intent on al-
lowing himself to be seen — he should not have


7 Lit., "sublimity."

^ 42 in Orelli.

9 So the edd., reading et for MS. ut (according to Crusius).
'° Lit., " restoration be supplied to his strength."
" So Gelenius, merely adding / to the Ms. posse. The passage is,
however, very doubtful.

'- Lit., " how weakly and feeble it is said."


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


537


refused to allow men's eyes to look on him ' —
why did he not show himself such as he knew
that he was in his own divine power ? ^ For this
was preferable, and much better, and more be-
fitting his august majesty, than to become a
beast, and be changed into the likeness of a ter-
rible animal, and afford room for objections,
which cannot be decided,^ as to whether he was
a true god, or something different and far re-
moved from the exalted nature of deity.

46."* But, says my opponent, if he was not a
god, why, after he left the ship, and crawled to
the island in the Tiber, did he immediately be-
come invisible, and cease to be seen as before ?
Can we indeed know whether there was anything
in the way under cover of which he hid himself,
or any opening in the earth ? Do you declare,
say yourselves, what that was, or to what race
of beings it should be referred, if your service of
certain personages is in itself certain. s Since
the case is thus, and the discussion deals with
your deity, and your religion also, it is your part
to teach, and yours to show what that was, rather
than to wish to hear our opinions and to await
our decisions. For we, indeed, what else can
we say than that which took place and was seen,
which has been handed down in all the narra-
tives, and has been observed by means of the
eyes ? This, however, undoubtedly we say was
a colubra ^ of very powerful frame and immense
length, or, if the name is despicable, tve say it
ivas a snake,7 we call it a serpent,^ or any other
name which usage has afforded to us, or the
development of language devised. For if it
crawled as a serpent, not supporting itself and
walking on feet,"* but resting upon its belly and
breast ; if, being made of fleshly substance, it
lay stretched out in '° slippery length ; if it had a
head and tail, a back covered with scales, di-
versified by spots of various colours ; if it had
a mouth bristling with fangs, and ready to bite,
what else can we say than that it was of earthly
origin, although of immense and excessive size,
although it exceeded in length of body and
greatness of might that which was slain by Reg-
nlus by the assault of his army? But if we
think otherwise, we subvert" and overthrow the
truth. It is yours, then, to Explain what that


' These words, non debuit ocjtlorjtm negare conspecijii, should,
Orelli thinks, be omitted; and certainly their connection with the
rest of the sentence is not very apparent.

2 Lit., "he was, and such as he had learned that he was, con-
tained in the power of his divinity."

3 Lit., " to ambiguous contradictions."
■* 43 in Orelli.

5 Lit., " if your services of certain persons are certain," i.e., if
these facts on which your worship is built are well ascertained.

*> What species of snake this was, is not known ; the Latin is
therefore retained, as the sentence insists on the distinction.

7 Anguon,

* Serpentetn.

9 Lit., " bearing himself on feet, nor unfolding below his own
goings."

'° Lit., " to a."

" So Hild. and Oehler, reading labe/aL-t-nitnis for the Ms. -/-.


was, or what was its origin, its name, and nature.
For how could it have been a god, seeing
that it had those things which we have men-
tioned, which gods should not have if they intend
to be gods, and to possess this exalted title?
After it crawled to the island in the Tiber, forth-
with it was nowhere to be seen, by which it is
shown that it was a deity. Can we, then, know
whether there was there anything in the way under
cover of which it hid itself,'- or some opening in
the earth, or some caverns and vaults, caused by
huge masses being heaped up irregularly, into
which it hurried, evading the gaze of the be-
holders? For what if it leaped across the river?
what if it swam across it ? what if it hid itself in
the dense forests ? It is weak reasoning from
this,'3 to suppose that that serpent was a god
because with all speed it withdrew itself from
the eyes of the beholders, since, by the same rea-
soning, it can be proved, on the other hand, that
it was not a god.

4 7. '4 But if that snake was not a present deity,
says my opponent, why, after its arrival, was the
violence of the plague overcome, and health re-
stored to the Roman people? We, too, on the
other hand, bring forward the question. If, ac-
cording to the books of the fates and the re-
sponses of the seers, the god ^sculapius was
ordered to be invited to the city, that he might
cause it to be safe and sound from the contagion
of the plague and of pestilential diseases, and
came without spurning the proposal contemptu-
ously, as you say, changed into the form of ser-
pents, — why has the Roman state been so often
afflicted with such disasters, so often at one time
and another torn, harassed, and diminished by
thousands, through the destruction of its citizens
times without number? For since the god is
said to have been summoned for this purpose,
that he might drive away utterly all the causes
by which pestilence was excited, it followed that
the state should be safe, and should be always
maintained free from pestilential blasts, and un-
harmed. But yet we see, as was said before,
that it has over and over again had seasons made
mournful by these diseases, and that the manly
vigour of its people has been shattered and
weakened by no slight losses. Where, then, was
^sculapius? where that deliverer promised by
venerable oracles? Why, after temples were
built, and shrines reared to him, did he allow
a state deserving his favour to be any longer
plague-stricken, when he had been summoned
for this purpose, that he should cure the diseases
which were raging, and not allow anything of the


'- This sentence alone is sufficient to prove that these chapters
were never carefully revised by their author, as otherwise so glaring
repetitions would certainly have been avoided.

'3 Here the MS. and both Roman edd. insert the last clause, " what
. . . forests."

'* 44 in Orelli.


538


ARNOBIUS AGAINST THE HEATHEN.


sort which might be dreaded to steal on tJicin
afteiivards?

48.' But some one will perhaps say that the
care of such a god has been denied ^ to later and
following ages, because the ways in which men
now live are impious and objectionable ; that it
brought help to our ancestors, on the contrary,
because they were blameless and guiltless. Now
this might perhaps have been listened to, and
said with some reasonableness, either if in an-
cient times all were good without exception, or
if later times produced ^ only wicked people, and
no others.-* But since this is the case that in
great peoples, in nations, nay, in all cities even,
men have been of mixed 5 natures, wishes, man-
ners, and the good and bad have been able to
exist at the same time in former ages, as well as
in modern times, it is rather stupid to say that
mortals of a later day have not obtained the aid
of the deities on account of their wickedness.
For if on account of the wicked of later gen-
erations the good men of modern times have
not been protected, on account of the ancient
evil-doers also the good of former times should
in like manner not have gained the favour of the
deities. But if on account of the good of an-
cient times the wicked of ancient times were
preserved also, the following age, too, should
have been protected, although it was faulty, on
account of the good of later times. So, then,
either that snake gained the reputation of being
a deliverer while he had been of no service at
all, through his being brought to the city when
the violence of the disease ^ was already weakened
and impaired, or the hymns of the fates must be
said to have been far from giving 7 true indica-
tions, since the remedy given by them is found
to have been useful, not to all in succession, but
to one age only.

49.' But the Great Mother, also, says /ny op-
p07ient, being summoned from Phrygian Pessinus
in precisely the same way by command of the
seers, was a cause of safety and great joy to the
people. For, on the one hand, a long-powerful
enemy was thrust out from the position he had
gained in 9 Italy ; and, on the other, its ancient
glory was restored to the city by glorious and
illustrious victories, and the boundaries of the
empire were extended far and wide, and their
rights as freemen were torn from races, states,
peoples without number, and the yoke of slavery

' 45 in Orelli.

- Lit., " wanting."

3 The MS., ist ed., Hild., and Oehler read gencr-ent, corrected in
the rest, as above, -arent.

■* Lit., " all wicked and distinguished by no diversity."

5 Lit., " the human race has been mixed in," etc.

^ So all edd., reading vi morbi, except Hild., who retains the MS.
vi urbi, in which case the italics should denote "of the disease,"
instead of " to the city." The construction, however, seems to make
it impossible to adhere to the MS.

^ Lit., " to have erred much from."

5 46 in Orelli.

9 Lit., " from the po.ssession of Italy."


imposed on them, and many other things ac-
complished at home and abroad established the
renown and dignity of the race with irresistible
power. If the histories tell the truth, and do
not insert what is false in their accounts of events,
nothing else truly ■" is said to have been brought
from Phrygia, sent by King Attalus, than a stone,
not large, which could be carried in a man's
hand without any pressure — of a dusky and
black colour — not smooth, but having little cor-
ners standing out, and which to-day we all see
put in that image instead of a face, rough and
unhewn, giving to the figure a countenance by
no means lifelike."

50.'^ What shall we say then? ^^'as Hannibal,
that famous Carthaginian, an enemy strong and
powerful, before whom the fortunes of Rome
trembled in doubt and uncertainty, and its great-
ness shook — was he driven from Italy by a
stone? '3 was he subdued by a stone? was he
made fearful, and timid, and unlike himself by a
stone ? And with regard to Rome's again spring-
ing to the height of power and royal supremac)',
was nothing done by wisdom, nothing by the
strength of men ; and, in returning to its former
eminence, was no assistance given by so many
and so great leaders by their military skill, or by
their acquaintance with affairs? Did the stone
give strength to some, feebleness to others ? Did
it hurl these down from success, raise the for-
tunes of others which seemed hopelessly over-
thrown ? And what man will believe that a stone
taken from the earth, having'^ no feeling, of sooty
colour and dark '5 body, was the mother of the
gods ? or who, again, would listen to this, — for
this is the only alternative, — that the power "^'
of any deity dwelt in pieces of flint, within '^
its mass,'^ and hidden in its veins? And how
was the victory procured if there was no deity
in the Pessinuntine stone ? We may say, by the
zeal and valour of the soldiers, by practice,
time, wisdom, reason ; we may say, by fate also,
and the alternating fickleness of fortune. But
if the state of affairs was improved, and success
and victory were regained, by the stone's assist-
ance, where was the Phrygian mother at the time
when the commonwealth was bowed down by
the slaughter of §0 many and so great armies,
and was in danger of utter ruin ? Why did she
not thrust herself before the threatening, the
strong enejny ? Why did she not crush and re-


'° So all edd. to Orelli, adding -em to the MS. qiiid. [See, con-
cerning Pessinus, p. 492, supra.\

" Lit., " a face too little expressed with imitation."

'- 47 in Orelli.

'3 Lit., " did a stone drive," etc.

'■* Lit., " moved by."

'5 So the MS. and edd. ; but, on account of the unnecessary repeti-
tion, Ursinus proposed to delete atri. Unger {Anal. Propert., p.
87) has suggested very happily arti — " of confined, i.e., small body."

'6 Vim, suggested by Orelli, and adopted by Hild. and Oehler.

■7 Lit., " subjected to."

13 So Hild. and Oehler, reading molt for the unintelligible MS.
more.


APPENDIX.


539


pel assaults ' so terrible before these awful blows
fell, by which all the blood was shed, and the
life even failed, the vitals being almost exhausted ?
She had not been brought yet, says my opponent,
nor asked to show favour. Be it so ; - but a kind
helper never requires to be asked, always offering
assistance of his own accord. She was not able,
yo7\ say, to expel the enemy and put him to flight,
while still separated from Italy ^ by much sea
and land. But to a deity, if really one,-* noth-
ing whatever is remote, to whom the earth is a
point, and by whose nod all things have been es-
tablished.

51.5 But suppose that the deity was present
in that very stone, as you demand should be
believed : and what mortal is there, although he
may be credulous and very ready to listen to
any fictions you please, who would consider that
she either was a goddess at that time, or should
be now so spoken of and named, who at one
time desires these things, at another requires
those, abandons and despises her worshippers,
leaves the humbler provinces, and allies herself
with more powerful and richer peoples, truly ^


' Lit., " so great assaults of war."

2 So Oehler, adding -0 to the MS. est. The word immediately
preceding is in the MS.paTorein — " panic," which is of course utterly
out of place, and is therefore corrected, as above, _/■ in all edd., except
ist, Ursinus, and Hild.

3 So — ab Italia — Oehler has admirably emended the MS. habi-
tabilia.

* Lit., " if he is."

5 48 in Orelli.

6 AH edd., except Hild. and Oehler, begin a new sentence here,
and change the construction, seemingly following the mistake of the
ist ed.


loves warfare, and wishes to be in the midst of
battles, slaughter, death, and blood? If it is
characteristic of the gods — if only they are true
gods, and those who it is fitting should be named
according to the meaning of this word and the
power of divinity — to do ^ nothing wickedly,
nothing unjustly, to show 7 themselves equally
gracious to all men without any partiality, luoul'd
any man believe that she was of divine origin, or
showed *^ kindness worthy of the gods, who, mix-
ing herself up with the dissensions of men, de-
stroyed the power of some, gave and showed
favour to others, bereft some of their liberty,
raised others to the height of power, — who, that
one state might be pre-eminent, having been
born to be the bane of the human race, subju-
gated the guiltless world?


' " To do ... to show, " so the edd., dropping -nt from the MS.
facere-iit . . . pmbere-nt.

^ Lit., " showed." Ursinus and Heraldus supposed that some
paragraphs are now wanting which were originally found here. It
should be noticed that in the MS. the usual subscription is found de-
noting the end of a book. " The seventh book of Arnovius {,sic) ends,
the eighth (i.e., Octaznits of Minucius Felix) begins," so that the
present arrangement is not due to the binder, nor clearly to the copy-
ist who wrote these words. Nothing can be more certain than that
we do not have these chapters as Arnobius intended to leave them;
but there is not the slighest reason to suppose that he actually left
them otherwise than they have come down to us. Remembering this,
we may well suppose that we have only the first draught of them.
If so, the difficulties vanish, for nothing would be more natural than
that, when Arnobius was drawing near the close of his work, the ideas
of the conclusion in which the discussion was to be fairly summed up
should force themselves upon his attention, and that he should there-
fore turn aside at once to give them expression roughly, without seek-
ing completeness and elaboration, and should then hastily resume his
argument, of course with the intention of afterwards revising and re-
arranging the whole. We may infer that the re-arrangement was
never effected, as there are sufficient proofs that the revision was
never accomplished, whatever may have been the reason.


APPENDIX.'


We do not deny that all these things which
have been brought forward by you in opposition
are contained in the writings of the annalists.
For we have ourselves also, according to the
measure and capacity of our powers, read these
same things, and know that they have been
alleged ; but the whole discussion hinges upon
this : whether these are gods who you assert are
furious when displeased, and are soothed by
games and sacrifices, or are something far differ-


' This section, which is found in the MS. after the first sentence
of ch. 44, was retained in the text of both Roman editions, marked
off, however, by asterisks in that of Ursinus, but was rejected by Ge-
lenius and later editors as the useless addition of some copyist. Oehler
alone has seen that it is not " a collection of words gathered care-
lessly and thoughtlessly" (Hildebrand), and maintained that we have
in it the corrections of Arnobius himself. If the three paragraphs are
read carefully, it will be observed that the first is a transposition and
reconstruction of the first two sentences of ch. 39; the second a re-
vision of the interrogations in ch. 41, but with the sentence which
there precedes placed after them here, whilst the third is made up of
the same sentences in a revised and enlarged form. Now this must
be regarded as conclusive evidence against the hypothesis that these
sentences were originally scribbled carelessly on the margin, and
afterwards accidentally incorporated in the text. Cf p. 532, n. 10.


ent, and should be separated from the notion
even of this, and from its power.

For who, in the first place, thinks or believes
that those are gods who are lost in joyful pleasure
at theatrical shows ^ and ballets, at horses running
to no purpose ; who set out from heaven to be-
hold silly and insipid acting, and grieve that they
are injured, and that the honours due to them
are withheld if the pantomimist halts for a httle,
or the player, being wearied, rests a little ; who
declare that the dancer has displeased them if
some g\i}\\.y felloiv passes through the middle of
the circus to suffer the penalty and punishment
of his deeds ? All which things, if they be sifted
thoroughly and without any partiality, will be
found to be alien not only to the gods, but to
any man of refinement, even if he has not been
trained to the utmost gravity and self-control.^


2 Lit., " motions."

3 Lit., "to the heights {apices) of gravity and weight," i.e., of that
constancy of mind which is nc/t moved by trifles.


540


ELUCIDATIONS.


For, in the first place, who is there who would
suppose that those had been, or believe that they
are, gods, who have a nature which tends to '
mischief and fury, and lay these ^ aside again,
being moved by a cup of blood and fumigation
with incense ; who spend days of festivity, and
find the liveliest pleasure in theatrical shows ^
and ballets ; who set out from heaven to see
geldings running in vain, and without any rea-
son, and rejoice that some of them pass the
rest, that others are passed,'*rush on, leaning for-
ward, and, with their heads towards the ground,
are overturned on their backs with the chariots
to which they are yoked, are dragged along crip-


^ Lit., " of hurting and raging."

^ i.e., evil dispositions.

3 Lit., " motions."

•^ So the MS., according to Crusius, inserting transiri, which is
omitted by Hild., either because it is not in the MS., or because he
neglected to notice that Orelli's text was deficient. If omitted, we
should translate, " that some pass, leaning forward, and rush with
their heads towards the ground."


pled, and limp with broken legs ; who declare
that the dancer has displeased them if some
wicked fellow passes through the middle of the
circus to suffer the punishment and penalty of
his deeds ; who grieve that they are injured, and
that the honours due to them are withheld if the
pantomimist halts for a little, the player, being
wearied, rests a little, \\\?A.puer matrimus happens
to fall, stumbling through some s unsteadiness ?
Now, if all these things are considered thor-
oughly and without any partiality, they are found
to be perfectly ^ alien not only to the character
of the gods, but to that of any man of common
sense, even although he has not been trained to
zealous pursuit of truth by becoming acquainted
with what is rational.^

5 Lit., " of something."

* Lit., " far and far."

' \Voxpuer matrhnus (one whose mother is yet living), see p. 486,
note II, supra. And for the argument, here recast, turn to cap. 41,
P- 534-]


ELUCIDATIONS.


(Note 9, p. 459.)

Thls is a most extraordinary note. The author uses "so to say" (= "as it were") merely
to qualify the figure, which a pagan might think extravagant. " This is, as it were, the door of
life : " the expression qualifies the rhetoric, not the Scripture, as such. On the contrary, I should
adduce this very passage as an instance of our author's familiarity alike with the spirit and the
letter of two most important texts of the Gospel, which he expounds and enforces with an earnest
intelligence, and with a spirit truly evangelical.


II.

(Covered with garments, note 7, p. 469.)

A heathen might have retorted, had he known the Scriptures, by asking about the " white
robes" of angels, and the raiment of the risen Redeemer; e.g.. Rev. i. 13. "Curious and
unlearned questions " concerning these matters have been stirred by a certain class of Christians.
(See Stier' and Olshausen.^) But let us not reason from things terrestrial as regards things
celestial: our coarse material fabrics are "shadows of the true." The robes of light are realities,
and are conformed to spiritual bodies, as even here a mist may envelop a tree. Because of
men's stupid and carnally gross ideas, let it be said of " harps " and " phials," and all like phrase-
ology as to things heavenly, once for all, " it doth not yet appear " what it means ; but they inti-
mate realities unknown to sense, and " full of glory."


■ Words of Jesus, vol. viii. p. 63, trans., ed. Edinburgh, 1858.
2 Neiv-Testament Coiinueutary, Kendrick's trans., vol. iii. p. is


ed. 1858.


ELUCIDATIONS. 541


III.

(The eyes of Jupiter, p. 483.)

Amobius with remorseless vigour smites Jove himself, -— the Optimus Maximus of polytheism,
— and, as I have said, with the assurance of one who feels that the Church's triumph over " lords
many and gods many" is not far distant. The scholar will recall the language of Terence/ where
the youth, gazing on the obscene picture of Jupiter and Danae, exclaims, —

" What 1 he who shakes high heaven with his thunder
Act thus, and I, a mannikin, not do the same ?
Yes, do I, and right merrily, forsooth ! "

On which the great African Father - remarks pithily, " Omnes enim cultores talium deorum, mox
ut eos libido perpulerit, magis intuentur <////>/ '[fiipiter fecerit, quam quid docuerit Plato, \'el
censuerit Cato." And here is not only the secret of the impotence of heathen ethics, but the
vindication of the Divine Wisdom in sending the God- Man. Men will resemble that which they
worship: law itself is incapable of supplying a sufficient motive. Hence,^ "what the law could
not do, in that it was weak, . . . God sending His own Son,'' qIc. Thus " the foolishness of God
is wiser than men," and " the love of Christ constraineth us."

"Talk they of morals? O Thou bleeding Lamb!
The grand morality is love of Thee."

The world may sneer at faith, but only they who believe can love ; and who ever loved Christ
without copying into his life the Sermon on the Mount, and, in some blest degree, the holy
example of his Master?

IV.

(For those freed from the bondage of the flesh, p. 488 and note 11.)

The early Christians prayed for the departed, that they might have their consummation in
body and spirit at the last day. Thus, these prayers for the faithful dead supply the strongest
argument against the purgatorial system, which supposes the dead in Christ (i) not to be in re-
pose at first, but (2) capable of being delivered out of "purgatory" into heaven, sooner or later,
by masses, etc. Thus, their situation in the intermediate state is not that of Scripture (Rev. xiv.
13), nor do they wait for glory, according to Scripture, until that day (2 Tim. iv. 8). Archbishop
Usher, therefore, bases a powerful argument against the Romish dogma, on these primitive prayers
for the departed. Compare vol. iii. p. 706, and vol. v. p. 222, this series.

He divides it into five heads, as follows : ^ —

" (i) Of the persons for whom, after death, prayers were offered ;

" (2) Of the primary intention of these prayers ;

" (3) Of the place and condition of souls departed ;

" (4) Of the opinion of Aerius, the heretic, touching these prayers ; and

" (5) Of the profit, to the persons prayed for, of these prayers."

And his conclusion is, after a rich collation of testimonies, that " the commemoration and
prayers for the dead used by the ancient Church had not any relation with pi/?'gatory, and there-
fore, whatsoever they were. Popish prayers we are sure they were not."


' Eunuch., iii. 5.

2 August., De Civitate, book ii. cap. 7.

3 Rom. viii. 3-39.

* Quoted in Tracts for the Tunes (p. 30), vol. iii., ed. New York, 1840.


542 ELUCIDATIONS.


(The pine . . . sanctuary of the Great Mother, p. 504.)

I RECALL with interest the pine-cone of Dante's comparison {Inferno, canto xxxi. 59) as
I saw it in the gardens of the Vatican. Vahiable notes may be found in Longfellow's translation,
vol. i. p. 328. It is eleven feet high, and once adorned the summit of Hadrian's mausoleum, so
they say ; but that was open, and had no apex on which it could be placed. It is made of bronze,
and, I think, belonged to the mysteries satirized by our author. It is less pardonable to find the
vilest relics of mythology on the very doors of St. Peter's, where J have seen them with astonish-
ment. They were put there, according to M. Valery,' under Paul V. ; " and among the small
mythological groups," he adds, "may be distinguished Jupiter and Leda, the Rape of Ganytnede,
some nymphs and satyrs, with other very singular devices for the entrance of the most imposing
of Christian temples." It is painful to think of it ; but the heathenism to which the age of Leo
X. had reduced the court of Rome must be contrasted with the ideas of a Clement, an Athenag-
oras, and even of an Arnobius, in order to give us a due sense of the crisis which, after so many
appeals for a reformation "in the head and the members" of the Latin communion, brought on
the irrepressible revolt of Northern Europe against the papacy. *


VI.

(Sacrifices, p. 519.)

It must be felt that Arnobius here lays himself open to a severe retort. The God of Chris-
tians is the author of sacrifice, and accepts the unspeakable sufferings of the innocent Lamb for
the sins of the whole world.

The answer, indeed, suggests itself, that the sacrifices of the heathen had no apparent relation
whatever to faith in this Atoning Lamb ; none in the mysterious will of God that this faith
should be nurtured before the Advent by an institution /;/ which He had no pleasure, but which
sYdiS profoundly harmonious with human thought SiwA the self-consciousness of human guilt.

Arnobius would have written better had he been a better-instructed Christian. He demol-
ishes pagan rites, but he should have called up the Gentile mind to the truths covered under its
corruptions and superstitions. On this subject the reader will do well to consult the work of a
modern Arnobius, the eccentric Soame Jenyns, who called out such a controversy in the last cen-
tury about the truths and errors of his Vieza of the Internal Evidence of the Christian Religion,^
to which he had become a convert from previous scepticism. This essay attracted the attention
of the Count (Joseph) de Maistre, who read it in the French translations of MM. le Tour-
neur and de Feller both, reflected it in his Considerations sur la France,^ and reproduced some
of its admirable thoughts in the Soirees de St. Petersbourg.^ From these two striking writers, the
one an Anglican and the other a rabid Ultramontane, I must permit myself -to condense an out-
line of their views of sacrifice.

So long as we know nothing of the origin of evil, we are not competent judges of what is or
is not a suitable remedy. Nobody can assure us that the sufferings of one may not be in some
way necessary to the good of the many. A tax may thus be laid upon innocence in behalf of the
guilty, and a voluntary sacrifice may be accepted from the Innocent (the Holy One) for the
payment of the debts of others. In spite of something illogical which seems to cling to this
idea, the fact of its universal adoption in all ages among men must be accounted for, — the fact

' He was royal librarian at Versailles under Charles X. See his Travels in Italy (Clifton's trans.), P- 501, ed. Paris, 1842.

2 It appeared in Paris 1764. A more literal translation (by the Abbe de Feller) was published, Liege, 1779.

3 Published in 1794.

4 Works, vol. vi. p. 140, ed. Paris, 1850.


ELUCIDATIONS. 543


that all nations have always accepted this principle of expiatory sacrifice, innocent men and inno-
cent beasts suffering for the unjust. Never could this principle have been thus universalized by
human wisdom, for it seems to contradict reason ; nor by human stupidity, for ignorance never
could have proposed such a paradox ; nor could priestcraft and kingcraft have obtained for it,
among divers races and forms of society, with barbarians and philosophers, freemen and slaves,
alike, a common acceptance. It must therefore proceed (i) from a natural instinct of humanity,
or (2) from a divine revelation : both alike must be recognised as the work of our Creator. Now,
Christianity unveils the secret, presenting the Son of God, made man, a voluntary sacrifice for
the sins of the whole world. If it be a mystery, still we do not wonder at the idea when we see
one man paying the debts of another, and so ransoming the debtor.' Christianity states this as
God's plan for the ransom of sinners. Such is the fact : as to the why, it says nothing.^ As to
the philosophy of these mysteries, we reason in vain ; and, happily, the Gospel does not require
us to reason. The Nicene Creed formulates the truth : " For us men and for our salvation He came
down," etc. But we are called to profess no more than " I believe ; help Thou mine unbelief."

De Maistre responds as follows : This dogma is universal, and as old as creation ; viz., the re-
versibility of the sufferings of innocence for the benefit of the guilty. As to the fall of man, " earth
felt the wound ; "^ " the whole creation groaneth and travaileth ^ in pain together." In this con-
dition of things the human heart and mind have universally acquiesced in the idea of expiation. s
. . . And as well the Gentile sacrifices (corrupted from Noah's pure original) as those which were
perpetuated in their purity by the Hebrews on one spot, and looking to their only explanation in
the coming of one Redeemer, bear witness to the Wisdom which framed the human mind and
adapted its ordinances thereto with profound and divine comprehension of all human wants and all
human capabilities. When the infinite Victim exclaimed upon the cross, " It is finished," the
veil was rent, the grand secret was unfolded. For this event, God had prepared all mankind by
the system of sacrifice which, even in its corruption, had made preparation for the true elucidation.

In a word, then, Arnobius should have said this, as the Church was always saying it in the per-
petual commemoration of Calvary, in her Holy Eucharist, and in her annual Paschal celebration.
It was all summed up by the prophet a thousand years before " the Lamb of God " was slain. By
the prophet, the Lamb Himself expounds it all : "^ —

" Sacrifice and meat-offering Thou ivouldest not, but mine ears hast Thou opened : burnt-offer-
ings and sacrifice for sin hast Thou not required. Then said I, Lo, I come : in the volume of
the Book // is written of Me, that I should fulfil Thy will, O my God. I ayn content to do it ;
yea. Thy law is within my heart."

The expiatory sacrifice, the voluntary Victim, the profound design of God the Father, are all
here. But the infinite value of the sacrifice was unfolded when the Son of man was identified by
the poor Gentile centurion : " Truly this was the Son of God."

' De Maistre quotes, " Potest unus ita pro alio poenam compensare vel debitum solvere ut ille satisfacere merito dici possit." Bellar-
min, Opp., torn. iii. col. 1493, ed. Ingolstadt, 1601.

~ See Jenyns, p. 67 (ed. eighth), Philadelphia, 1780.
3 Milton, Paradise Lost, ix. 785.
* Rom. viii. 19.

5 Plato, Repub., Opp., torn. vi. pp. 225-226, ed. Bipont.

6 De Maistre cites the example of Decius from Livy, vol. i. p. 477, Piactehtm deoruin ircE, etc.; and I commend the inquiring
reader to his very curious and entertaining Edaircissement sitr les Sacrifices, pp. 321-425, Jibi supra, appended to the same work. Let
me also add a reference to the other Decius, vol. i. p. 607. See lib. viii. cap. 9, and lib. x. cap. 28. My edition is the valuable (Parisian)
Frousheim & Crevier, a.d. 1735.


INDEXES.


GREGORY THAUMATURGUS, DIONYSIUS OF
ALEXANDRIA, AND JULIUS AFRICANUS.


INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


Africanus, Julius, life and works

(J. A.), 123-124, 140 (note).
Alexandria, church of, suffering and

martyrdoms in (D. A), 10S-109.
All Saints, homily on (G. T.), 72;

feast of, 73 (note).
Anathemas on twelve heretical tenets

(G. T.), 50.
Angel, Guardian, office and benefits

of (G. T.), 24.
Annunciation, the, homilies on

(G.T.), 58-67.
Antony and Cleopatra, history of

(J- A.), 135-

Apocalypse, the, how understood
(D. A.), 83; authorship of, 84,
no (note).

Arian heresy condemned (G. T.), 40.

Aristotelian philosophy in the early
Church, Dupin's note on (G. T.),
57 (note).

Atomic theory of Epicurus, stated
(D. A.), 84 ; refuted by analogies,
85, by the constitution of the
universe, 86, by the human con-
stitution, 88.

Baptism, of Christ, homily on (G. T.),
6S-71; of heretics, disallowed
by African councils (D. A.), 102.

Basilides, bishop, epistle to (D. A.),

94-
Berytus, school of Roman law

(G. T.), 4, 26.
Birth of Christ, apocryphal fables

concerning (J. A.), 127.

Captives, Christian, cruel treatment

of (G. T.), 19.
Chronology of Old-Testament his-

tor}', Egyptian, Chaldean, and

Greek (J. A.), 130-134.
Councils, CEcumenical (G. T.), 53

(note).
Covetousness, sin and punishment

of (G. T.), 18.

Daniel, seventy weeks of (J. A), 134.

Dionysius, bishop of Alexandria,
life and character of (D. A.),
77 ; works of, 78-79 ; sufferings
in Decian persecution, 96-103,
and under Gallus and Valerian,
105.


Dionysius, bishop of Rome, epistle
to (D. A.), 92.

Ecclesiastes, book of, metaphrase of

(G. T.), 9; comment on (D. A),

III.
Epicurean theories of nature refuted

(D. A.), 84; other fallacies of

this philosophy, 88-91.

Fabius, bishop of Antioch, epistle

to (D. A.), 97.
Faith, the decline of (G. T.), 7.
Fast, ante-paschal, how kept (D. A.),

94-95-
Fatherhood of God, eternal, therefore
Christ eternal (D. A.), 92.

Gallandi, Biblioth. Patrum (D. A.),
120 (note).

Gallus, emperor, persecutor of Chris-
tians (D. A.), 106.

Genealogies of Christ (J. A.), 125-
126, 139 (note).

Gratitude, offering of, how acceptable
(G. T.), 23.

Gregory Thaumaturgus, bishop of
Neo-Cassarea, a pupil of Origen
(G. T.), 3; student of law, 4;
surname, life, and character, 5, 6 ;
his own account of his conver-
sion, 25; how led to Berytus, 26;
meeting with Origen, 27.

Heresies, twelve, anathematized,

(G. T.), 50-53.
Holy Spirit, personality and divinity

of (G. T.), 41.

Incarnation, the, how understood
(G.T.), 41,44, 50; mystery of, 67.

Lapsed, the, reconciliation of (D. A.),

120.
Law, Roman, in the Pandects of

Justinian, Christian origin of

(G. T.), 4.

Macrianus, instigator of the persecu-
tion under Valerian (D. A.), 106.

Magnificat, the, comment on (G. T.),
64.

Martyrs of Alexandria (D. A.), 97-

lOI.


Matter not ungenerated (D. A.), 91.
Millennium, the, errors concerning
(D. A.), 81.

Names, Christian, in the early Church

(D. A.), 83 and note.
Novatus, Epistle to (D. A.), 97.

Origen, teacher of Gregory (G. T.),
27 ; their friendship, 28 ; his
teaching of logic, 29, of natu-
ral science, 30, of morals, ^i ;
his exposition of Holy Scripture,
36 ; considerations on his faults,
39 (note).

Passion of Christ, voluntary (D.A.),
115, 118; chronology of (J. A.),
136.

Penitents, place and privileges of
(G. T.), 20.

Peter, St., his office and work at Rome
_ (G. T.), 47 (note).

Philosophy, study of, leads to piety
(G. T.), 27; schools of Greek,
their contentions and errors, 35.

Sabellian heresy on the origin of mat-
ter (D. A.); 91.

Serapion, absolution of (D. A.), loi.

Soul, the, how apprehended (G. T.),
54; existence and nature of, 55;
immortal, 55 ; rational, 56.

Symphorosa, St., and her seven sons,
passion of (J. A.), 138-139.

Synod, a primitive, under Dionysius
(D. A.), 82 and note.

Theophany, the, at the Baptism of
of Christ (G. T.), 6S-71.

Trinity, the, doctrine of (G. T.), 42 ;
proofs from Holy Scripture, 43,
46 ; mystery of, 48 ; Ante-Nicene
Fathers on, 49 (note).

Valerian, emperor, persecutor of
Christians (D. A.), 106, 107.

Will, divine and human in Christ
(D. A.), 114, 117.

Word, the, how divine (G. T.), 41 ;
consubstantial with the Father,
45, (D. A.) 120; eternal genera-
tion of (D. A.), 92, 120.

547


GREGORY THAUMATURGUS, DIONYSIUS OF
ALEXANDRIA, AND JULIUS AFRICANUS.


INDEX OF TEXTS.


PAGE

PAGE

PAGE

PAGE

Gen. i. 2 43

Ps. civ. 2 , . . .

68

Matt. iii. 13 ... . 68

Luke xxii. 42 . . . 117

i.31 .

85

civ. 2 . . . .

69

iii. 13 .

70

xxii. 46

119

iii. 17 .

119

civ. 23 . . .

87

iii. 14 .

68

xxiii. 56

95

iii. 19 .

119

cxix. 6 . . .

113

iii. 17 .

48

xxiv. I, 2

• 95

xvii. II

64

cxix. 73 . . .

88

iii. 17 .

50

John i. . .

51

xviii. .

67

cxxxii. 8 . . .

60

iii. 17 .

71

i.

62

xviii. 23, 2

5

18

c.xxxvi. 6 . .

69

iv. . .

51

i. I .

42

xlviii. 15

24

cxxxvii. . . .

37

iv. I .

116

i. I .

44

Ex. vi. 23

125

cxxxix. 12-16 .

88

iv. I .

119

i. I .

69

vi. 25

125

cxxxix. 16 . .

86

V. 10, 12

99

i. I .

93

xii. 2 .

63

Prov. viii. 30 . .

92

ix. 20 .

9^

i. 9 .

. 69

xii. 19

127

viii. 30 . .

93

XV. II.

18

i. 14

84

xii. 30

108

ix. 5 . , .

114

XV. 27 .

65

i. 18

48

XV. 23

63

X. 7 ...

113

xvi. 13

71

i. 23

69

xxiii. 4

19

XX. 9 . . .

14

xvi. 16

71

1.27

69

Deut. .xix. 14

103

xxii. I . . .

13

xvi. 17

83

i. 29

69

xxii. 1-3

19

Eccles. iii. 11 . .

88

xvi. 21

• 51

ii. 20, 2

I

51

xxii. 26, 2

7

18

iv. 12 . .

12

xvi. 27

• 51

iii. .

51

Josh. vii. . .

19

vii. 2 . .

114

xvii. 5 .

• 71

iii. 19

113

I Sam. xviii. i

28

Isa. v. 7 ... .

93

xxvi. 38

• 52

iv. 24

43

2 Sam. vi. 14

114

vii. 14 . . .

66

xxvi. 64

• 51

iv. 24

44

I Kings iv. 32

III

ix

51

xxviii. I

• 94

iv. 24

92

viii. 46

14

xiv. 14 . . .

64

xxviii. i-(

S

95

V.39

62

2 Kings xxiv.

37

xiv. 15 . . .

64

xxviii. 9

61

vi. 55

52

XXV.

37

xxii. 22 . . .

36

xxviii. 19

44

vi. 56

52

2 Chron. vi. 36

14

xxix. II . . .

66

Mark i. 3 . .

69

viii. 12

120

Job i. 21 . .

13

xxxvii. 22, 23 .

86

i. II .

71

viii. 40

51

X. 10-12

88

xlii. 9 . . .

107

xiv. 36

"5

viii. 51

51

xiv. I

86

xlix. 8 . . .

96

xiv. 62

51

viii. 58

51

XX. 20 .

12

Iii. 5 • • • •

53

xvi. I, 2

95

ix. . .

51

Ps. xvi. 10 .

51

liii. 4 ...

52

Luke i. 26, 27

63

X. 10

51

xvii. . .

37

liii. 5 ...

52

i. 26, 27

65

X. 17

52

xviii. 9 .

65

liii. 8. . . .

53

i. 28 .

5^

X. 18

115

xix. I.

91

lvi.3. . . .

3

i. 29 .

58

X. 30

71

xxiii. 5 .

91

Ixyi. 3, 4 . .

107

i-34 .

51

xi. 25

51

xxiv. I

91

Jer. xii. i . . . .

II

1-35 •

51

xi.33

52

xxxi. 5 .

112

XV. 19 . . .

103

1.36 .

66

Xll. .

51

xxxiii. 6 .

43

xxxi

62

i. 41 .

64

xii. 27

52

xxxiv. 19

119

xlviii. 10 . .

90

i. 42, 43

64

xiii.

51

xxxvi. 6 .

"3

Ezek. i. 22, 26, 27 .

62

i. 46 .

64

xiii. 21

52

xlv. I . .

93

xiii. 3 . . .

107

i. 51 .

64

xiv. 6

51

xlv. 2 . .

59

xxxiii. II

100

i- 54 •

65

xiv. 6

113

xlv. 10, II

60

Dan. viii. i . . .

137

n. 4-7 .

60

xiv. 9

71

xlvi. 4 .

59

viii. 13, 14 .

137

ii. 7 .

65

xiv. 28

71

Ixxii. 6 .

67

Amos iii. 3 . . .

88

ii. 10 .

61

xvi. .

5'

Ixxx. I .

60

viii. 10 . .

62

ii. 14 .

52

xvi. 20

114

Ixxx. I .

65

Mal. iii. 6 . . .

51

iii. 4 .

69

xvi. 22

58

Ixxxvii. 3

66

Matt. i. I . . . .

III

iii. 16 .

69

xvi. 22

61

xc. 10

116

i. 1-17 . .

123

iii. 23, 24

126

xvi. 33

52

xc. 10

119

i. 16 . . .

125

vi. 25 .

114

XVI. 33

119

xcvi. 11-13

58

i. 20, 21 . .

51

viii. 43

96

xvii. 2

62

cii. 24

114

iii. 3 . . .

69

ix- 35 •

71

xvii. 6

48

civ. 2 . .

60

iii. 8 . . .

58

xxi. 2 .

23

xviii. II

"5

54

8

GREGORY

THAUMATURGUS, ETC.: INDEX

OF TEXTS.

549

PAGE

PAGE

PAGE

PAGE

John XX. I ... . 94

Rom. XV. 20 ... . 43

2 Cor. i. 21, 22 . . . 45

Tit. iii. ID .... 114

XX. I .

95

XV. 30 . .

43

i. 24 . . .

9^

Heb. i. 3 . .

^i

Acts i. 7 . .

52

I Cor. ii. 4, 5

43

iii. 15-18

46

ii- 3. 4 •

46

ii. 31 .

51

ii. 9-11 .

43

V. 4, 5 . .

46

iii. 7-1 1

46

V. 29

105

ii. 14 .

43

VI. 4 . .

46

vii. 14 . .

125

xiii. 2, 3

43

iii. 6 .

42

vi. 6, 7 .

46

X. 30 .

98

xiii. 5 .

83

iii. 16, 17

46

viii. 9

60

Jas. 1. 13 . .

116

xiii. 13 .

83

iii. 19.

III

X. 13-16.

43

i. 13 . .

"i

xiv. 27 .

105

iv. 13.

109

X. 16 . .

47

1. 27 . . .

98

XV. 39, 40

47

v-3 •

105

xi. 27

95

iv. 12 . .

93

Rom. ii. 13 .

93

vi. II

46

xiii. 13 .

45

I Pet. V. 5 .

82

iv. II .

64

vi. 13.

18

Gal. i. 8, 9 . .

46

I John i. I .

P

V. 12 .

52

vi. 19.

46

ii. 8, 9 . .

43

i. I, 2

84

V. 14 .

63

vii. 5 .

96

Eph. ii. 14 . .

67

V?'3

84

viii. 3 .

52

vii. 40

46

iii. 8, 9 . .

3^

i. 8 .

14

viii. 9 .

43

viii. 6

42

V. 5-13 •

18

V. 19 .

116

viii. II

43

X. 4 .

46

v. 23 . .

"3

V. 19 .

^i'^

viii. 14, i_

43

xii. 3-13

46

Col. ii. 8 . . .

34

Rev. i. I, 2 .

^3

ix. I .

43

XV. 12

125

I Thess. V. 16-18

61

i. 9 . .

83

xiii. 4, 6

108

XV. 41

86

V. 21 .

• 103

iii. 7 .

36

xiv. 23.

96

XV. 45

SO

I Tim. iv. 8 . .

95

iii. 8 .

'°i

XV. 13 .

43

XV. 47

50

vi. 7 . .

13

xiii. 5 .

. 106

XV. 15-19

43

XV. 55

• 72

2 Tim. iv. 21

• 47

xxii. 7, 8

• 83

ANATOLIUS AND MINOR WRITERS. ARCHELAUS, ALEXANDER

OF LYCOPOLIS, PETER OF ALEXANDRIA,

ALEXANDER OF ALEXANDRIA.


INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


Acts of the Apostles, Pamphilus'
summary of contents, 166-168.

Alexander, bishop of Alexandria,
notices of, 290.

Alexander of Cappadocia, notices of,
153; friend of Origen, 154.

Alexander, Bishop of Lycopolis, life
and writings, 240 ; theories con-
cerning his history, 253; a wit-
ness to the Christian Faith, 253.

Alexandria, church of, the ecclesias-
tical metropolis of Christendom
in the East, 257 ; presbyters of,
298; its ecclesiastical independ-
ence, 304.

Alexandrian school, its origin from
Apollos, 236; its influence on
Catholic theology, 289, 303.

Anatoli us of Alexandria, life and
works of, 145.

Apollos, founder of Alexandrian the-
ology, 236.

Archelaus, Bishop, 176; date and
character of his writings, 177.

Arius, heresiarch, ordained and de-
posed by Peter of Alexandria,
262, 265 ; restored, 26S ; his final
excommunication, 290 ; his here-
sies refuted, 291-297.

Basilides, teacher of dualism, 233.
Bishop, not to ordain out of his own
diocese, 164.

Christ, Incarnation of, 221, 297, 300;
His Passion, events of, 301.

Church Catholic, Ante-Nicene the-
ory of, 304.

Devil, the, origin and agency of, 205.
Dualism, Manichaean, refuted, 196;

origin from Scythianus, 229;

taught by Basilides, 233.

Easter, time of, how computed, 145-
151-


Egyptian proselytes, makers of the

golden calf, 204.
Emperor, how to be served in his

household, 159.

Free-will belongs to man, 204.

Heresies, how originated, 241.
Incarnation of Christ, why essential,

221, 300 ; faith of the Church in,

295, 297.

Judas Iscariot, crime of, 207.

Lapsed, Canons of Peter of Alexan-
dria on, 269; case of slaves,
271, of freemen, 272; confess-
ors in prison, 272; rashly in-
curring danger, 273 ; clergy, 274 ;
purchase of safety, 276; flight
from persecution, 277 ; Dupin's
judgment of these Canons, 284.

Law of Moses, in what sense a min-
istration of death, 203 ; not to
be contemned by Christians, 2 1 5.

Laymen to speak publicly only by
the bishop's leave, 154.

Library, imperial, care of, 160.

Light, creation and nature of, 193.

Lucian, Epistle of Theonas to, on
duties of the imperial house-
hold, 158.

Malchion, presbyter of Antioch, no-
tice of, 169.

Man, his creation in soul and bodv,
298.

Manes, heresies of, 182, 213, 241 ;
claims to be the Paraclete, 1S7,
209; his dualism refuted, 196;
its origin, 229; his history, 230;
his cosmogony, 242 ; borrows
from heathen mythology, 242,
245 ; his theory of matter self-
contradictory, 244.

Marcellus, story of, 179.


Mareotis, presbyters of, 299.

Martyrdom, Christian, described by
Phileas, 162.

Mathematics, fragments of Anato-
lius' treatise on, 151.

Matter, Manichaean theories of, con-
tradictory, 244.

Meletius of Lycopolis, schism of,
239. 283.

Monasticism, Eastern, origin and re-
sults of, 279.

Moses a type of Christ, 220.

Pamphilus, priest and martyr, notice
of, 165. _

Paraclete, the, imparted specially to
St. Paul, 208; falsely claimed by
Manes, 209.

Passover, when kept by the Jews,
2S0 ; by our Lord, 2S2.

Paul of Samosata, his character and
heresies, 169; deposed, 170.

Peter, bishop of Alexandria, life and
works, 258 ; ordains and excom-
municates Arius, 262, 265 ; his
persecution and imprisonment,
262 ; his passion and martyrdom,
_ 264-267.

Phileas, bishop of Thmuis, biographi-
cal notice of, 161 ; epistle to
his people, 162.

Pierius of Alexandria, notices of, 156,
157-

Quartodeciman controversy, 148, 149.

Scripture, study of, counselled, i6r.
Scythianus, first teacher of dualism,

' 229.
Stationary days, observance of, 278.

Theognostus of Alexandria, cate-
chist, notice of, 155.

Theonas of Alexandria, bishop, no-
tice of, 158.


550


ANATOLIUS AND MINOR WRITERS, ARCHELAUS, ALEXANDER

OF LYCOPOLIS, PETER OF ALEXANDRIA,

ALEXANDER OF ALEXANDRIA.


INDEX OF TEXTS.


PAGE

PAGE

PAGE

PAGE

Gen. i. 4 196

Ps. V. 9 234

Matt. iv. 10 . . . . 269

Matt. xvi. 16 . . . 223

i. ir, 12

281

xi. 7 . .

294

v-3

214

xvi. 21

224

i. 26 .

283

xxxvi. 9 .

294

V. 3

217

xvi. 22

224

i. 26 .

300

xlv. I . .

297

V. 8

217

xvi. 23

224

iii. 5 .

206

xlv. 7 . .

292

V. 16

158

xvi. 26

277

vi. 2

252

xcv. 10, II

281

V. 16

159

xvii. 2 .

220

vi. 2

294

cv. 15 .

203

V. 16

195

xviii. 21

204

XV. 5 .

293

ex. 3 . .

294

V. 17

214

xix. II

197

xix. 17 .

277

ex. 3 . .

297

V. 29

262

xix. 12

157

xxii. I .

~^l

CXXXl. I .

235

V. 32

216

xix. 21

. 279

xxxii. 26

266

cxxxi. I .

293

VI. 6

194

xxi. 19

. 270

xxxviii. 26

219

Prov. vi. . .

170

vi. 9

194

xxii. 29

201

xlix. 10-12

219

viii. 30

293

vi. 13

273

xxii. 42

223

Ex. ii

220

xiii. 8 .

277

VI. 34

279

xxiii. 6

• 194

viii. . .

220

xviii. 3

298

vi. 24

277

xxiii. 25

• 194

ix. 32 .

281

xxii. 2

314

vii. 6

234

xxiii. 27

217

xii. . ,

220

xxii. 2

217

vii. 12

217

xxiii. 35

• 203

xii. 2 . .

281

xxiv. 16

272

vii. 15

217

xxiii. 35

• 277

xii. 15 .

148

Eccles. i. 15 .

270

vii. 15-

20

189

xxiv. 4, 5

209

xii. 18, 19

148

Isa. i. 2 . .

292

vii. 16

190

xxiv. 23-26

209

xii. 35 .

214

i. 2 . .

294

vii. 18

182

xxiv. 24 .

210

XIV. . .

220

viii. 3, 4

277

vii. 18

187

xxiv. 45, 47

• 159

xvi. . .

220

ix. 6 . .

271

vii. 24

222

XXV. 29 .

234

xvii. . .

220

xxvi. i8-.

207

viii. 10

217

XXV. 41

234

XX. 3 . .

163

xlii. 14 .

301

viii. 26

220

XXV. 44

212

xxi. 24 .

214

xlv. 7

234

ix. 16 .

192

XXV. 46

212

xxii. 20 .

163

liii. 8. .

293

ix. 17

192

xxvi. 17

. 148

xxiv. 18 .

220

liii. 8. .

29s

X. 10

216

xxvi. 38

149

xxxii.

220

Ivii. 20, 21

270

X. 17

273

xxvi, 41

273

xxxiv. .

220

Ixi. I, 2 .

270

X. 18

273

xxvi. 55

273

xxxiv, 33

219

Ixvi. 21 .

263

X. 23

273

xxvii. 2

273

xxxiv. 35

220

Ixvi. 24 .

270

X. 28

222

xl. 27 .

293

Lev. xxiii. 5-7

149

Jer. iii. 23 .

270

X. 28

265

Mark ii. 1 1 .

. 214

xxiii. 6 .

148

Lam. 111. 33 .

217

X. 34

220

ii. 19 .

. 217

Num. xii. 24

281

Ezek. xxvii. 15

186

x-34

234

iii. 23 .

. 190

XV. 32 .

204

Dan. iv. 35 .

235

^■37

224

111. 27 .

190

XV. 32

214

Jonah ii. 4 .

301

X. 40

223

iv- 33 •

236

Deut. iv. 24 .

234

Mai. iii. 6 .

298

xi. II

226

viii. 15

220

xviii. 15

219

Matt. i. 25 .

235

xi. 27

211

xi. 25 .

i6i

xviii. 18

216

ii. 11-13

277

xi. 27

295

xii. 38 .

194

xxviii. 66

219

ii. 13 .

220

xii. 8

217

xii. 41 .

217

xxix. 29

235

ii. 13-16

277

xii. 31

156

xiv. 12

148

xxxii. 22

234

ii. 16 .

220

xii. 32

204

XXV. 25

282

Josh. ix. . .

268

ii. 16 .

277

xii. 47

223

Luke i. 28 .

283

I Sam. ii. 6 .

234

iii. 7,8

205

xiii. 13

234

i-35 .

280

xxi. 13

271

iii. 17 .

226

xiii. 25

187

J 35 •

283

2 Sam. xiv. 33

268

iii. 17 .

228

xiii. 34

236

i- 76, 77

271

.,. ''''!• 3

268

iii. 17 .

294

xni. 35

201

i. 80 . .

279

I Kmgs XIX. 9

279

iv. 2 .

220

XIV.

220

iv. 18, 19.

270

Job ii. 10 . .

217

iv. 3 .

228

xiv. 25

220

iv. 34 . .

225

iv. 18 .

235

IV. 10 .

205

XV. 24

223

vi. I . .

214

551


552 ANATOLIUS AND MINOR WRITERS: INDEX OF TEXTS.


PAGE

PAGE

PAGE

PAGE

Luke vi. 29 . . . . 214

John xiv. 17. . . . 200

I Cor. ix. 25 . . .

159

Eph. vi. 12 . . , , 187

ix. 10

• 279

xiv. 18.

200

xi. 19. . ,

213

Phil, i, 23, 24

274

ix. 59,

60

. 224

xiv. 28 .

29s

xii. 18 , ,

193

ii. 6-8 .

162

X. 18

194

xiv. 28 .

296

xiii. 4 . .

274

ii. 7. .

227

X. 18

205

XV. 21 .

281

xiii. S-io .

211

ii. 7. ,

228

X. 19

205

xvi. 8 .

200

xiii. 9 . .

187

ii, 7. .

280

X. 22

211

xvi. 12, 13

156

xiii. 9, 10 .

211

ii. 9, .

224

xi. 2

194

xvi. 14.

208

xiii. 11 . .

224

ii. 13 .

212

xi. 39

194

xvi. 18 .

187

xiv, . . ,

154

III. 13 .

224

xi. 42

194

xvi. 28

200

xiv, 31 . .

263

iii. 14 .

272

xii. 49

234

xvi. 33.

296

XV. 3-9 . .

208

iii. 14 .

275

xiii. 27

212

xviii. 28

282

XV. 9, 10. .

208

iii. 19 .

212

xiv. 33

214

xix. 13, 14

282

XV, II . ,

208

iv. 7 .

161

xiv. 33

217

xix. 31 .

282

XV. 12-20 .

226

Col. i. 16, 17

293

XV. 6 .

149

xix. 37 .

228

XV. 21 . .

218

i. 23 . ,

209

xvi. 16

188

Acts ii. 6 . .

210

XV. 32 , .

225

i. 24 . .

209

xvi. 16

215

V. 10 .

234

XV. 46-50 .

214

ii. 6-9 .

209

xvi. 19

216

vii. 59 .

273

XV. 54 . .

202

iii. II ,

272

xvii. 21

271

ix. 15 .

208

XV. 54, 55 •

203

iv. 6 . .

161

XX. 46 .

194

ix. 40 .

234

XV. 56 . .

201

I Thess. V. I, 2

212

x.xi. 8 .

298

xii. 4 .

277

2 Cor. iii. 6 . . .

201

I Tim, i. 9 .

204

xxii. 7 .

148

xii. 18, 19

277

iii. 6-1 1 . .

214

i. 20 .

187

xxii. 48

280

xiii. 15 .

154

iii. 7 . . .

201

iii. I .

229

xxiii. 34

220

xiv. 22 .

273

iii. 7 . . .

218

iv. I ,

264

John i. I . .

297

xiv, 23 .

229

iii. 13 . .

219

iv. I ,

298

'• 1-3

292

xvii. 9, 10

277

iii. 14-17 .

219

iv. 1-4

. 209

i-3 •

297

xviii. 24

236

iv. 4 , , .

187

V. 2 ,

161

i- 5 •

1S7

xviii. 26 .

236

iv. 4 . . .

• 234

vi. 3. 4

. 296

i-S .

197

xix. 26-30

277

V. 21 . . ,

228

vi. 5 .

169

i. 12

201

XX. 28 .

264

vi. 14. . .

, 297

vi. II, I

2

, 278

i. 14

280

XX. 32 ,

264

vi. 14, 15 .

294

2 Tim. ii. 17 ,

, 298

i. 14

283

XX. 38 ,

265

vi. 16 . .

193

ii. 23.

• ^^1

i. 16

221

Rom. ii. 1 1 ,

272

vii. 10 . .

207

lii. 4 ,

, 296

i. 17

280

ii. 14 .

201

viii. 9 . .

280

iii. 6 .

212

i. 18

182

ii. 15 .

201

ix. 14, 15 .

208

iii. 8, 9

210

i. 18

205

ii. 28 .

214

xi. 3-5 . .

208

iii. 8, 9

, 221

i. 18

223

ii. 29 .

2X8

xi. 19. . .

161

iv. 7, 8

209

i. 18 .

292

iii. 20 .

214

xi. 23 . . .

209

Tit. ii. 7 , .

274

i. 18

297

iv. I .

214

xi. 32, 33 •

273

iii. 9 , .

235

iii. 13

223

iv. 2 .

214

xii. 8, 9 . .

208

Heb. i. 3 . ,

, 207

V. I .

295

V. 12-14

203

xiii. 3 . .

199

i. 3 . ,

295

V. 17

203

V. 14 .

202

xiii. 3 , .

. 208

1:.3 • •

297

V. 45-4"

221

viii. 21, 2:

211

xiii. 3 . .

, 218

111. 5, 6

216

V. 46

216

viii. 32

294

Gal. i. 6-8 .. ,

209

iv. 15 ,

217

vi. 38

223

ix. I .

208

i. 8 ,

213

vi. 4

156

viii. 44

187

X. 8-10

271

i, 8, 9

296

vi. 8 .

182

viii. 44

201

xi. 7 .

281

i. 17 .

279

vi. 8 .

217

viii. 44

202

xii. 3 .

217

ii. 18

188

viii. 13

188

viii. 44

204

xii. 16.

275

ii. 18

. 214

xi. 10 .

298

viii. 44,

205

XV. 15, 16

208

iii. I

226

xi. 32 .

273

viii. 44

206

XV. 18 .

208

iii. 13

201

xiii. 8 .

298

viii. 44

207

xvi. 20

161

iii. 13

203

Jas. i. 4 , .

156

X. II

265

I Cor. ii. 9 .

293

iv. 3

188

iii. 2 . .

268

X. 15

298

iii. 7 . .

188

iv. 4 ,

226

I Pet. iv. II ,

159

X. 27 .

197

iii. 10.

229

vi. 17

269

2 Pet. iii. 9 .

200

X. 30

294

iii. 17 .

193

Eph. ii. 2 ,

220

I John i. 8 .

268

X. 30

298

V. 7 .

226

ii. 8, 9

280

ii. I .

276

xiii. 27

207

V. 7 .

282

iii. 8

207

iv, 18

162

xiv. 8, 9 .

294

vi. 14.

226

iii. 8

209

V, 19.

188

xiv. 9 . .

297

vii. 7 .

157

V. 4, 5

159

2 John X. . ,

298

xiv. 10

298

vii. 18, ic

)

218

V. 14

218

xiv. 12

".

200

yii- 35

182

vi. 8

271

xiv, 15,

16

208

ix. 9 .

194

vi. 9

272

METHODIUS.


INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


Adam, type of Christ, 31S ; of the
Father, 402.

Agnos-tree, emblem of the resurrec-
tion, 369,375-

Angels, creation and fall of, 370.

Anna, type of the Gentiles, 391.

Baptism, a birth into Christ, typified
in the Apocalypse, 337 ; sin af-
ter, why possible, 365.

Birth of Christ, nature, prophecies,
and types of, 386, 3S9.

Body, essential to the perfect man,
370 ; not destroyed by death, 373,
but real as well as spiritual in the
resurrection, 375; essentially im-
mortal, 377.

Canticles, the, interpreted of virgin-
ity, 3-1-324-

Chastity, the government of the soul,
347 ; spiritual keeping of, 351.

Christ, His union with the Church,
319; why subject to the law of
Moses, 385.

Church, the bride of Christ, 319;
typified by the woman of the
Apocalypse, 336, 355 (note) ;
meaning of the word, 381 ; apos-
trophe to, 392.

Coats of skins, to Adam, signify
mortality, 370.

Continence, how taught by St. Paul,
321 ; pleasing to God, 342.

Cross of Christ, blessing and glory
of, 399, 400; figure of, in the
vexilla, 399, 402 (note).

Days of the creation, errors in inter-
preting, 381.

Dragon of the Apocalypse inter-
preted, 338.

Evil, origin of, not from God, 358,
but in free-will, 362 ; a power
over man, 371 ; consists in igno-
rance of God, 382.

Fate, not the cause of all things, nor

controlling man, 342.
Free-will, God's gift to man, 342, 362 ;

necessary to obedience, 362.

Generation of man, in what sense
God's work, 312; proof of the
resurrection of the body, 36S.


God, His government in nature, 357 ;
not the author of evil, 358.

Heresies foretold in the Apocalypse,

338.
Hymn of the virgms, 351-352.

Images of kings, why honoured, 369 ;
of angels, in honour of God,
369; otherwise explained, 378,
382 (note).

Job, Book of, by Moses, 381 ; faith

of, 401.
Jonah, history of, interpreted, 378.
Justin Martyr, on the resurrection

of the body, 374.

Man, consists of both soul and body,
370; made in God's image, 370.

Marriage, how honourable, 314, 316;
type of Christ and the Church,
317 ; second, how far allowed
by St. Paul, 321.

Martyrdom honoured by Christ, 382.

Mathematicians, astronomical theo-
ries of, considered, 340.

Matter not uncreated, 35S-361, 380.

Methodius, bishop of Tyre, biographi-
cal notice of, 307.

Numbers of the Apocalypse, sjtti-
bolism of, 339.

Palm Sunday, events and lessons of,
395-398.

Paradise distinct from heaven, 370.

Passion of Christ, nature and pur-
pose of, 399, 400.

Patriarchs, the, types of the Holy
Trinity, 403 and note.

Pearls before swine interpreted, 379.

Repentance, timely, effaces sin, 382.

Resurrection, typified by the Feast
of Tabernacles, 345 ; of the flesh
as well as of the soul, 364 ; a
restoration of the perfect man,
365, and of creation, 366; not a
transformation into the nature of
angels, 367 ; Christ's answer to
the Sadducees concerning, 367 ;
its mystery paralleled by the
generation of man, 368 ; not a
destruction of the body, 373, but
its renewal as a spiritual body,
375; shown by Moses and Elias


at the Transfiguration, 375, by
Enoch, 376, by the parable of
Dives and Lazarus, 377, and by
the history of Jonah, 378.

Sadducees, Christ's answer to, 367.
Sikera, a spurious wine, 327.
Simeon, his song interpreted, 387,

388; a type of ancient Israel,

391 ; apostrophe to, 393.
Sin, why possible after baptism, 365;

law of, in man, 372.
Soul of man, the image of Christ,

329 ; not properly incorporeal,

377-

Tabernacle, the, type of the Church
and of heaven, 328.

Tabernacles, Feast of, spiritually in-
terpreted, 344; type of the res-
urrection, 368.

Trees, the, parable of, interpreted,
348.

Virgin, the Blessed, panegyric of, 390,

393-

Virginity, why difficult and excellent,
310; by what steps attained,
311; an imitation of Christ, 312 ;
does not dishonour marriage,
314-316; an espousal of Christ,
320; St. Paul's teaching thereon,
322 ; a gift of God, 322 ; how
perfected, 326; taught in the
Canticles, 331-334; its rewards
in heaven, 335, 353 (note) ; imi-
tation of the Church in the wil-
derness, 339 ; other types in the
Apocalypse, 340; of the mother
of Christ, 385.

Virgins, the ten, parable of, inter-
preted, 329.

Watches of the night, spiritually in-
terpreted, 326.

Willow, the, why a type of chastity,
324, 346-

Wine in Holy Scripture, true and
spurious, 327, 349.

Wisdom, the artificer of all things,
369, 381 ; why not found by the
Greeks, 401.

Woman of the Apocalypse, a type of
the Church, 336 ; her child typifies
not Christ, but Christians, 337.

Zechariah, vision of, interpreted, 350.
553


METHODIUS.


INDEX OF TEXTS


PAGE

PAGE

PAGE

Gen. i. I 381

Lev. ii. 13 . . .

3"

Ps. xliv. 10 ... . 316

Isa. vi. 3

i. 14

341

xi. 29 . . .

328

Xlv. 2 . .

326

vi. 3 . .

i. 18

319

xviii. 19 . . .

3"

Xlv. 2 . .

334

vi. 3. 4

i. 28 .

313

XX. 17 . . . .

3"

xlv. 2 . .

387

vi. 4 .

ii. I .

344

xxiii. 39-42 .

344

xlv. 10 .

316

vi. 6 .

ii. 7 .

316

xxiii. 40 . .

345

xlv. 10 .

352

vi. 9 .

ii. 9.

319

xxiii. 40 . .

346

xlv. 14 .

332

VI. 10

ii. 9.

346

xxiv. 2, 3 . .

330

xlv. 15, 16

334

vii. II

ii. 17

371

xxiv. 3 . . .

330

xlvi. 4, 5 .

389

viii. I

ii. 18

320

Num. vi. I, 2 . .

325

xlvi. 8 .

39'

ix. 2 .

ii. 23

3^3

vi. 1-4 . .

327

xlvii. I .

394

ix. 6 .

ii. 23, 24

316

vi. 2 . . .

326

xlviii. 2 .

392

xi. 2 .

ii. 23, 24

317

xvii. 8 . . .

389

1. . . .

383

xi. 5 .

ii. 23, 24

364

xxxiii. 5 . .

347

1. 3 .

383

xii. 6 .

ii. 24

320

Deut. vi. 5 . . .

340

lxii.8. .

394

XXV. I

iii. 3

333

xviii. 15-19 •

391

Ixviii. 4 .

395

xxviii. 16

ill. 7

348

XXX. 15 . .

371

Ixviii. 34 .

395

xxix. 22, 24

iii. 19

317

xxxii. 32, 33

327

Ixxii. 18, 19

386

xxxviii. 21

iii. 19

3^9

xxxii. 33 . .

350

Ixxxiv. 8

394

xl. I . .

iii. 19

350

xxxii. 39 . .

364

Ixxxv. 9 .

394

xlii. 7

iii. 19

368

Judg. vi. 37 . . .

390

Ixxxvii. 3

392

xlii. 7

iii. 19

374

ix.8-15 . .

348

xc. 2, 4 .

381

xlii. 8

iii. 19

378

I Sam. xxvui. 12 .

377

XCV. I . .

394

xlii. 18-2

0

iii. 21

364

2 Sam. vi. 7 . . .

383

xcvi. 9 .

3S6

xliii. ID

iii. 22

3^7

vi. 10 . .

383

xcvii. II .

386

xliv. 4

iv. 5

356

vi. 14 . .

384

xcviii. 2 .

388

xliv. 4

IV. 10

352

vi. 14 . .

394

civ. I . .

387

xlv. 8

V. 29

349

xxiii. 17

390

civ. 2 . .

390

xlv, 18

ix. 22

348

I Kings xix. 4 . .

349

civ. 15 .

349

xlix. 9

XV. 9

325

2 Kings ii. II . .

390

civ. 30 . .

366

Ii. 6 .

xxvii. 29

394

ii. 20 . .

390

civ. 31 .

344

Hi. 2 .

xxvii. 41

356

iv. 41 . .

390

CV. 1 1 . .

330

Iii. 6 .

xxxvii. 4

356

V. . . .

390

cv. 15

337

liv. I .

xxxix. 12

352

XX. 7 . .

350

cxviii. 22

387

Ivi. 22

xlix. 10

395

Jobx. 8 . . . .

314

cxviii. 26

394

Ix. I .

Ex. i. 16 . .

323

xxi. 22 . . .

401

cxxxii. 16

392

Ix. I .

iii. 2 .

388

xxii. 2 . . ,

401

cxxxvi. .

323

Ix. 1-4

iii. 2 .

389

xxxviii. II . .

357

cxxxvii. .

323

Ixii. 9

iii. 14.

335

xxxviii. 14 . .

314

cxxxvii. .

324

Ixiii. 9

iii. 23.

387

xl. 3 . . . .

401

cxxxvii. I, 2

324

Ixvi. 7

vii. II

349

Ps. 1. 3 ....

346

cxxxvii. 5, 6

324

Ixvi. 7, 8

xi. . .

330

11. 7 ....

■ 338

cxxxix. 4

326

Jer. i. 5 .

xi. 7 .

398

vi. 6 . . . .

• 388

cxli. 3 .

326

ii. 32 .

xii.

330

viii. 2 . . . .

394

cxlviii. 9.

395

iii. 3 .

XV. 2 .

384

viii. 2 . . . .

396

cxlviii. II, I

2

394

V.8 .

XV. 2 .

3^7

viii. 5 . . . .

367

clxvii. 5 .

398

viii. 4

xvii. 6

389

xviii. 8 . . .

• 392

Prov. i. 5, 6 .

345

viii. 13

xix. 16

388

xix. 12 ...

• 372

iii. 18 .

346

xii. I .

XX. 12

390

xix. 12, 13 . .

371

v. 18 .

312

xiii. 23

XXV. 8

3^2

xxii. 15 . , .

375

viii. 9 .

384

xviii. 3, 4

XXV. 22

. 386

XXXV. 10 . . .

• 397

viii. 22

381

xviii. 3-6

XXV. 40

. 328

xxxvi. 9 . , .

• 389

Isa. i. . . .

392

xxi. 8 .

XXX. 1-9

. 328

xxxvii. 6 . . .

• 3"

i. 26 . .

392

xxiii. 24.

xxxi. 19

• 385

xxxviii. 5 . .

• 311

vi. . .

386

xxiv. 3 .

XXXV. 17

• 390

xlii. 4 . . . .

• 347

vi. 1-9 .

384

Lam. iii. 27

554


METHODIUS: INDEX OF TEXTS.


555


PAGE

PAGE

PAGE

PAGE

Ezek. iii. 22 ... . 395

Luke ii. 29 . . . . 396

Rom. vii. 25 . . . 373

Gal. V. 17 343

xvii. 3.

• 339

ii. 29-32

388

viii. 2, II, 3, 4

373

V. 22, 23

350

xxxvii. 4

• 368

ii. 32 .

392

viii. 19-21 .

366

Eph. i. 5 . .

384

xliv. 2

• 390

ii. 38 .

391

ix. S .

383

i. 21

318

Dan. iii. 21 .

• 3S8

viii. 29

395

XI- 33 •

3S5

iii. ID .

318

iii. 56 .

• 395

X. 24 .

395

xiv. 9 .

377

iii. 14-17

337

ix. 23 .

375

X. 34 •

397

I Cor. i. 21 .

397

V. 25, 26

320

xii. 2 .

367

xi. 24 .

385

iii. 7 .

369

V. 26, 27

319

Joel ii. 13 .

397

xii. 32 .

392

iv. 15

320

V. 28-32

316

ii. 21-23

350

xii. 35-38

326

V. 42 .

368

V. 28-32

317

ii. 22

348

xii. 49 .

392

vii. I .

321

V. 31 .

319

Amos iv. 5 .

324

XV. 8 .

346

vii. 2 .

321

V. 32 .

317

ix. II .

367

XV. 23 ,

333

vii. 2-6

321

vi. 12 .

329

Micah iv. 4 .

350

xvi. 9 .

374

vii. 5 .

321

vi. 12 .

372

Hab. ii. 20 .

3^^

xvi. 28

377

vii. 8, 9

321

vi. 13 .

372

iii. 2 .

386

xix. 27

394

vii. 25-2J

322

vi. 14-17

372

iii. 3 .

384

xix. :i7, 38

395

vii. 28

322

vi. 16 .

390

^ , '."-^ •

393

xix. 38

394

vii. 29

322

vi. 17 .

339

Zecb. IV. 1-3

350

xxi. 34.

327

vii. 29

347

Phil. ii. 5 . .

382

ix. 9 .

396

John i. . .

383

vii. 31

366

ii. 7 . .

339

Mai. iv. 6

394

i. I . .

318

vii. 32-34

322

ii. ID .

398

Matt. i. 18 .

353

i. I, 2 .

3S1

VII. 34

311

iii. II .

325

V. 3-16

332

1.5 . .

395

vii. 34

326

iii. 21 .

375

V.8. .

354

1. 9 . . .

402

vii- 35

322

Col. i. 15 . .

317

V. 13 . .

3"

i. II

383

vii. 36

322

ii 4 . .

389

V. 16 . ,

330

i. 18 .

356

vii. 37

322

I Thess. iv. 16

330

^:.35 • •

392

i. 18 .

377

vu. 38

316

iv. 16,

17

330

vu. 6 .

324

ii. 7 . .

395

xi. I .

372

iv. 17

330

vii. 6 .

379

iv. 9

389

xi. 7 .

375

V. 23

325

ix. 12 .

310

V. 5- •

395

xiii. 2, 3

346

I Tim. i. 17 .

387

xi. 28 .

383

V. 17 .

313

xiii. 10

345

i. 17 .

391

xii. 27 .

396

V. 17 .

369

xiii. 12

328

ii. 4 .

3,6

xii. 29 .

397

V. 39 •

336

xiii. 12

345

vi. 16

329

xii. 40 .

378

V.39 •

396

XV. 22

319

vi. 16

386

xiii. 16, 17

333

vi. II .

395

XV. 22

368

Tit. iii. 5 . .

320

xiv. 26.

395

vi. 27 .

394

XV. 41, 4:

332

„ , ''}■ 5 • •

389

xvii. 7 .

392

ix. . .

395

XV. 42

374

Heb. i. I . .

323

xix. 4, 5

364

X. 33 •

397

_xv. 49

368

i: 3; •

390

xix. II .

351

XI. 44 .

395

XV. 49

374

11. 16 .

392

xix. 12.

316

xii. 13 .

394

XV. 50

368

iv. 14 .

347

xxi. 5 .

395

xiv. 16 .

345

XV. 50

374

ix. 4 .

389

xxi. 9 .

394

xiv. 28 .

331

XV- 53

36S

ix. 4 .

390

xxi. 10.

395

XV. I

350

XV. 53

374

X. I . .

328

xxi. 14-16

397

XV. I, 5

327

XV. 54

368

X. 32 .

320

xxi. 15.

395

XV. 23 .

398

2 Cor. iii. 6 .

389

XI. 10 .

328

xxi. 19.

350

xvi. 28 .

398

iii. 18

383

xi. 23 .

333

xxii. 23

367

Acts xviii. 28

387

iv. 6 .

348

xii. 15 .

365

xxii. 30

316

xxviii. 26

391

V. I .

373

Jas. i. 18 . .

397

xxii. 30

366

Rom. i. 21 .

340

V. 2, 3

374

I Pet. ii. 6 .

387

xxiii. 38

392

V. 14 .

323

V. 4 .

374

ii. 9 .

393

xxiv. 22

^'A

vi. 4 .

36S

V. 7 .

374

ii. ID .

324

xxiv. 35

366

vii. 7 .

371

v. 17 .

383

V. 4 .

397

XXV.

329

vii. 8 .

371

V. 19 .

384

I John V. 19 .

374

XXV. 6 .

330

vii. 9 .

370

vii. 4 .

387

Jude viii. . .

352

XXV. II

352

vii. 9, 10

371

X. 5 .

371

Rev. i. 5 . .

375

Mark i. 22 .

3^7

vii. 12 .

371

X. 5 .

372

ii. 7 . .

317

ii. 10 .

389

vii. 13 .

371

XI. 2 .

310

vii. 4 .

331

ix. 40 .

3"

vii. 14

371

xi. 2 .

325

vii. 9

313

xi. 9 .

394

vii. 15

370

xi. 12 .

320

xii. 1-6 .

335

Luke i. 17

394

vii. 15 .

371

xi. 14.

349

xii. 1-6 .

336

i. 17 .

396

vii. 15-18

372

xii. 2, 3

370

xiv. 1-4

313

i. 79 .

3^2

vii. 19 .

• 371

Gal. ii. 9 . .

395

xiv. 4 .

331

i. 79 .

388

vii. 19 .

372

iv. 4, 5 .

386

xiv. 4, 5

313

ii. 14 ,

386

vii. 22-24

372

iv. 19 .

320

XX. 6

346

ii. 22 .

385

vii. 23

372

iv. 19 .

337

XX. 13 .

375

ARNOBIUS.


ANALYSIS OF CONTENTS.


BOOK I.


PP- 413-432


Argument. — The enemies of Christianity were
wont to say that, since its appearance on earth, the
gods had shown their hatred of it by sending upon
men all manner of calamities, and that, owing to the
neglect of sacred rites, the divine care no longer
guarded the world. Arnobius begins by showing
how baseless this opinion is (i), for the laws and
course of nature remain unchanged (2) ; and though
the heathen said that since Christianity came into
the world there had been wars, famines, pestilences,
and many other similar calamities, these were not
new evils, for history tells of terrible misery and
destruction resulting from such causes in past
3-ges (3-5) ; while it should also be noticed, that
through the gentle and peaceful spirit of Christi-
anity, the world is already relieved in part, and that
war would be unknown, and men live peacefully to-
gether, if it prevailed universally (6). If asked,
What are, then, the causes of human misery ? Ar-
nobius answers that this is no part of his subject
(7), but suggests that all evil results necessarily
from the very nature of things, — is, indeed, per-
haps not evil at all, but, however opposed to the
pleasures or even interests of individuals, tends to
general good (S-ii) ; and that it is therefore some-
what presumptuous in man, a creature so ignorant
of himself, to seek to impose conditions on the su-
perior powers (12). He further shows the futility
of blaming the Christians for all these ills, by re-
minding his opponents that there had been no un-
varying series of calamities since Christianity came
to earth, but that success had counterbalanced de-
feat, and abundance scarcity ; so that arguments
such as these would prove that the gods were angry
at times, at times forgot their anger (13-16). But,
Arnobius asks, if the gods can be enraged, does not
this argue mortality and imperfection in them (17,
18), and even injustice (19), or weakness, if they
need the aid of men in punishing iheir enemies (20) ?
As, however, all alike suffer, it is absurd to say that
Christians are specially aimed at; and, indeed, this
is a cry raised by those interested in upholding the
superstitious rites of antiquity (21-24). But assum-
ing that the gods could be enraged, why should they
be angry at Christians more than others .'' Because,
the heathen said, Christianity introduced new and
impious forms of religion. In reply to this, Arno-
bius points out that Christians are nothing but
worshippers of the Supreme God, under Christ's
teaching and guidance (25-27) ; and shows how ab-
surd it is to accuse those of impiety who worship
the Creator and Supreme Ruler, while those who
serve the lesser gods — even foul and loathsome


deities — are called religious (28-30) ; and then turns
to God Himself, beseeching pardon for these igno-
rant worshippers of His creatures, who had neg-
lected Himself (31). He merely notices but refuses
to discuss the position of those who deny that God
e.xists, holding it impious even to reason about this,
as though it were questionable, while there is an
instinctive belief and reverence implanted in our
breasts (31-33)- But, his opponents said, we wor-
ship Jupiter as the supreme God. Jupiter, how-
ever, Arnobius points out, cannot claim this rank,
for he is admittedly not self-existent (34) ; or if, as
some said, Jupiter is only another name for the Su-
preme Being, then, as all alike worship Him, all
must be regarded by Him alike (35). But, his op-
ponents urged, you are guilty not in worshipping
God, but in worshipping a mere man who died on
the cross ; to which Arnobius replies, in the first
place, by retorting the charge as bearing much more
forcibly on the heathen themselves (36, 37) ; and
then argues that Christ has sufficiently vindicated
His claims to divinity by leading the blind and err-
ing and lost into the ways of truth and salvation,
and by His revelation of things previously unknown
(38, 39) ; while, again. His death on the cross does
not affect His teaching and miracles, any more than
the loss of life deprived of fame Pythagoras, Socrates,
Aquilius, Trebonius, or Regulus (40), and contrasts
favourably with the stories told about Bacchus, .^s-
culapius, Hercules, Attis, and Romulus (41) ; and,
finally, asserts Christ's divinity as proved by His
miracles (42), which are compared with those of the
Magi both as to their end and the manner in which
they were wrought (43, 44) ; and the chief features
of the miracles of His life on earth and His resur-
rection, of the power of His name, and the spread
of His Church are summarily noticed (45-47). Ar-
nobius next remarks that the heathen did not even
pretend that their gods had healed the sick without
using medicines, merely by a word or touch, as
Christ did (48); and, recalling the thousands who
had in vain sought divine aid at temple or shrine,
says that Christ sent none away unhelped (49), and
that He gave this same power to His followers also
(50), which neither priest nor magician is found to
possess (51, 52). His divinity was shown also by the
wonders which attended His death (53). Eye-wit-'
nesses — and these most trustworthy — testified to
Christ's miracles (54); and the acceptance by the
whole world, in so short a time, of His religion, at-
tests its truth (55). It might be said, however, that
the Christian writers were not trustworthy, and ex-
aggerated the number and importance of Christ's
miracles (56) : in reply to which, Arnobius shows
that their writings rest on as good authority as those


556


ARNOBIUS: ANALYSIS OF CONTENTS.


557


of the heathen (57), and that their greater novelty
and literary rudeness are in their favour rather than
otherwise, and are certainly of no weight against
them (57-59)- But, said the heathen, if Christ was
God, why did He live and die as a man ? Because,
it is replied, God's own nature could not be made
manifest to men (60), and His reasons for choosing
so to manifest Himself, and not otherwise, though
they may be within our reach, are certainly con-
cealed in much obscurity (61); while as to Christ's
death, that was but the dissolution of His human
frame (62). Hurrying, it would seem, to conclude
this part of the discussion, Arnobius hastily points
out the great powers which Christ might have
wielded in His own defence, if He had refused to
submit to the violence offered Him, which however
were unused, because He rather chose to do for His
disciples all that He had led them to look for (63).
If, then, kings and tyrants and others who lived
most wickedly, are honoured and deified, why should
Christ, even if He asserted falsely that He was a
heaven-sent Saviour, be so hated and assailed (64) ?
If one came from distant and unknown regions,
promising to deliver all from bodily sickness, how
gladly would men flock to do him honour, and
strive for his favour! How extraordinary, then, is
the conduct of those who revile and abuse, and
would destroy, if they could. Him who has come
to deliver us from spiritual evils, and work out our
salvation (65) !


BOOK II.


pp. 433-463


Argument. — The question is again asked, Why
is Christ so bitterly hated, while it cannot be said
that He ever injured any one (i) .' Because, an op-
ponent is supposed to reply. He drove religion from
the earth by withholding men from worshipping the
gods. In this, however, it is shown that He did not
assail, but built up religion, as He taught men to
worship the creator and source of all things, God
Supreme, the worship of whom is surely the truest
religion (2, 3). It is declared to be mere folly in
the heathen to disbelieve Christ's message, for the
future alone can prove or disprove the truth of what
is foretold ; but when there are the two prospects,
that if Christ's words are false. His followers lose
nothing more than others, but that, on the other
hand, if He spoke truly, those who refuse to believe
in Him suffer an infinite loss, it is more rational to
choose the course which tends to no evil and may
lead to blessing, rather than that which it is cer-
tain leads to no good, and may bring us to terrible
woe (4, 5). Is the truth of Christianity not mani-
fested, he goes on to ask, in the readiness with
which it has been received by men of everv class in
all parts of the world, and by the noble constancy
with which so many have endured suffering even to
death, rather than abandon or dishonour it (5) ?
And if, as was often the case, any one should say
that there were indeed many who received Christ's
Gospel, but that these were silly and stupid people,
Arnobius reminds him that learning and grammati-
cal knowledge alone do not fit a man to decide be-
tween truth and falsehood, to say what may and
what cannot take place (6) ; and this is shown by
the uncertainty and confusion which surround even
those matters which force themselves on our notice
every day, such as the nature and origin of man,
the end of his being, the mode in which he was
quickened into life, and many other similar ques-
tions {7). Moreover, the heathen laughed at the
faith of the Christians ; but in doing so, Arnobius
asks, did they not expose themselves to ridicule ?
For does not the whole conduct of life depend on


the belief that the end will correspond to our aims
and actions (8) ? Again, most men put faith in one
or other of the leading philosophers (9) ; and these,
in turn, trust their own fancies, and put faith in their
own theories, so that faith is common to all men
alike (10). And if the heathen put faith in the
philosophers, the Christians have no less reason to
put faith in Christ ; while, if a comparison be en-
tered into, no other can point to such wonderful
powers and such marvellous deeds as are recorded
of Him (11). Not by such subtle quibbling as men
brought against it did the new religion make its
way, but by the marvellous and unheard-of mira-
cles which attested its truth, so that it won followers
among all tribes on the face of the earth ; and if
any man was ignorant of these facts, it was because
he had not chosen to know them, and had suffered
the truth to be obscured by those interested in up-
holding error (12). Arnobius goes on to show that
many Christian doctrines which were ridiculed as
such by the heathen, were held by the philosophers
also; referring more particularly to the worship of
one God, the resurrection of the dead (13), and the
quenchless fires of punishment, from which he takes
occasion to point out that man's true death comes
not at, but after the soul's separation from the body,
and to discuss the nature of the soul (14). The
soul is not, he maintains, immortal in itself, or of
divine origin — if it were born of God, men would
be pure and holy, and of one opinion (15) — but
has been made vicious and sinful by causes to be
found in the world; while, if it had been made
by the Supreme God, how could His work have
been marred by that w-hich was less powerful (16) .i'
Arnobius next endeavours to show that we are in
nothing distinguished from the brutes : so far as
body, the maintenance of life, and the reproduction
of the race are concerned, we are found to be alike,
while the heathen are reminded of the doctrine of
the transmigration of souls (16); and if stress is
laid on man's reason and intelligence as a distinc-
tive characteristic, it is first suggested that all men
do not act rationally, and the question is then
asked. What is the reason which man possesses,
and not the beasts (17).'' Man's practical skill
is no proof of superior reason, for its exercise is
necessitated by his excessive poverty; and it is,
moreover, not a faculty native in the soul, but one
acquired only after long years under the pressure of
necessity (iS). The arts, grammar, music, oratory,
and geometry are similarly noticed, and the doctrine
of reminiscence rejected (19). Arnobius next sup-
poses a boy to be brought up wholly a]jart from
human society, and seeks to establish his position
by the supposed results of imaginary questions put
to this hypothetical being (20-23) ; and then goes
on to attack the contrary opinions which Plato had
sought to establish in a somewhat similar way, by
challenging him to question the boy just imagined,
who is, of course, found to be exactly what was in-
tended (24) ; and thus gives his creator a triumph,
by showing conclusively that man untaught is igno-
rant as a stock or stone, while on being taught
other creatures can learn also — the ox and ass to
grind and plough, the horse to run in harness, and
the like (25). Pursuing the same subject, it is
argued that if the soul loses its former knowledge
on uniting with the bodv, it cannot be incorporeal,
and cannot therefore be immortal (26, 27) ; and
further, that if the soul's former knowledge were
lost through the influence of the bod)-, the knowl-
edge acquired in this life should in like manner
be lost (28). Those who assert the soul's immor-
tality are accused of teaching that which will add
to the wickedness of men : for how shall any one
be restrained even by the fear of a higher power,


558


ARNOBIUS: ANALYSIS OF CONTENTS.


who is persuaded that his life cannot be cut short
by any power (29) ? while if he is threatened with
the punishments of the infernal regions, he will
laugh them to scorn, knowing that what is incor-
ruptible cannot be affected by mere bodily ills. If
the soul is hnmortal, Arnobius affirms there is no
need or ground for philosophy, that is, ethics, whose
purpose is to raise man above the brutish pleasures
of sense to a virtuous life : for why should not a
soul which cannot perish give itself up to any pleas-
ures? while if the soul is mortal, philosophy is in
precisely the same position, aiming to do for man
what will not profit him if done (30). The soul, he
concludes, is neither mortal nor immortal (31) ; and
there is therefore good reason that those who have
no confidence in their power to help themselves,
should welcome a saviour in one more powerful
(32, 33). Christians and heathen alike, then, look
for the deliverance of their souls from death ; and
neither party, therefore, has any reason to mock the
other in this (23, 34). Such, too, is the condition
of all spirits which are supposed to exist (35) ; and
it is only through God's goodness that any spirit be-
comes immortal (36). It is next argued at great
length, and with some prolixity, that the soul is not
sprung from God, on the ground of its vicious and
imperfect nature (37-46) ; and it is then shown that,
in denying the soul's divine origin on this ground,
we are acting most reasonablv, although we cannot
say what its real origin is (47, 48) ; while if any one
attempts to show that the soul is not imperfect and
polluted by sin by pointing to good and upright
men, he is reminded that the whole race cannot take
its character from a few individual members, and
that these men were not so naturally (49, 50).
There is nothing ridiculous, Arnobius goes on to
say, in confessing ignorance of such matters ; and
the preceding statements are to a certain extent
supported by Plato's authority, in so far as he sepa-
rates the formation of man's soul from the divine
acts {51, 52). But if this belief be mistaken, what
harm does it do to others (53) ? From this there
naturally follows a discussion of the origin of evil,
the existence of which cannot be denied, though its
cause is beyond our knowledge; it is enough to
know that ail God does is good (54, 55). How idle
a task it would be to attempt the solution of such
problems, is seen when we consider how diverse are
the results already arrived at, and that each is sup-
ported on plausible grounds (56, 57); which clearly
shows that man's curiosity cannot be certainly satis-
fied, and that one man cannot hope to win general
assent to his opinions (57). Arnobius now proposes
to his opponents a series of questions as to men
and things, after answering which they may with
more reason taunt him with his ignorance of the
soul's origin (58, 59) ; and says that, because of the
vanity of all these inquiries, Christ had commanded
them to be laid aside, and men to strive after the
knowledge of God (6c), and the deliverance of their
souls from the evils which otherwise await them
(61), — a task to be accomplished only through the
aid of Him who is all-powerful (62). The condi-
tion of those who lived before Christ came to earth
is to be learned from His teaching (63) ; and His
bounty extends to all, though all do not accept it
(64) ; for to compel those to turn to Him who wi//
not come, would be to use violence, not to show
mercy (65). No purity therefore, or holiness, can
save the man who refuses to accept Christ as his
Saviour (66). Arnobius next deals with the objec-
tion that Christianity is a thing of yesterday, for
which it would be absurd to give up the more an-
cient religions, by asking if it is thus that we look
upon the various improvements which have been
suggested from time to time by the increase of


knowledge and wisdom (66-68). All things, more-
over, have had a beginning — philosophy, medicine,
music, and the rest (69), even the gods themselves
(70) ; but all this is wholly beside the mark, for the
truth of a religion depends not on its age, but on
its divine origin. And if, a few hundred years be-
fore, there was no Christianity, the gods were in
like manner unknown at a still earlier period (71).
But Christianity worships that which was before all,
the eternal God, although late in its worship, because
there was not the needed revelation sooner (72),
Arnobius again asserts that Christianity does not
stand alone, for it was at a comparatively late time
that the worship of Serapis and Isis, and of others,
was introduced ; and so Christianity too had sprung
up but lately, because it was only then that its
teacher had appeared (73) : and having considered
why Christ was so late in appearing among men
(74, 75), and why Christians are allowed to un-
dergo such suffering and trial on earth (76, 77),
he earnestly exhorts all to see to the safety of their
souls, and flee for salvation to God, seeing that such
terrible dangers threaten us, lest the last day come
upon us, and we be found in the jaws of death (78).


BOOK III.


pp. 464-475


Argument. — In the two preceding books, Ar-
nobius endeavoured to repel the objections raised
against Christianity; but already, he says, it had
found able defenders, though strong enough in its
own might to need none (i) ; and therefore, having
replied to the charge of neglecting the worship of
the gods, by asserting that in worshipping the Su-
preme God, the Creator of the universe, any other
gods, if there are such, receive honour, inasmuch as
they are sprung from Him (2, 3), he goes on to attack
heathenism itself, pointing out that the other gods
cannot be proved to exist, their names and number
being alike unknown (4, 5). These gods, moreover,
are spoken of as male and female, but the divine
cannot be liable to such distinctions, as Cicero
showed (6) ; whom it would be well, therefore, for
the heathen to refute, instead of merely raising an
unreasoning clamour against his writings (7). The
use by Christians of a masculine term to denote
the Deity, is merely a necessity of speech ; but
the heathen expressly attributed sex to their deities
(8), who would therefore, being immortal, be innu-
merable; or if the gods did not beget children, why
had they sex (9) ? Arnobius then inveighs against
this opinion as degrading and dishonouring the
gods (10), and says that it is far more likely that
they would afiHict men to punish such insults, than
to take vengeance on Christians, who did them no
dishonour (11). He then goes on to speak of bod-
ily form, denying that it is attributed to the Deity
by Christians (12), while the heathen boldly asserted
that their gods had human bodies, which, Arnobius
shows, makes it necessary to ascribe to some gods
the basest offices (13-15). It might, however, be
said that the gods were not really supposed to have
such bodies, but were so spoken of out of respect.
This, Arnobius shows, is not honouring, but insult-
ing, them as much as possible (16). If the Deity
has any mortal shape, we do not know it (17) ; He
may hear, see, and speak in His own, but not in our
way (18) ; and it is unbecoming to ascribe even our
virtues to God, — we can only say that His nature
cannot be declared by man (19).

The offices ascribed to the gods are next derisive-
ly commented on (20, 21) ; and as to the suggestion
that the gods impart a knowledge of the arts over
which they preside, without being practically ac-
quainted with them, it is asked why the gods should


ARNOBIUS: ANALYSIS OF CONTENTS.


559


seek this knowledge, when they had no opportunity
of turning it to account (22). It might, however,
be said that it belonged to the gods to secure a pros-
perous issue to human undertakings. Why, then,
failure, ruin, and destruction (23) ? Because, it
would be answered, of neglected rites, and sacri-
fices withheld. Is, then, Arnobius asks, the favour
of the gods to be purchased ? is it not theirs to give
to those utterly destitute (24) ? Unxia, Cinxia, Vita,
and Potua are held up as foul parodies on Deity
(25). Mars and Venus being taken as fair exam-
ples (26, 27), the conclusion is reached, that such
gods, presiding over lust, discord, and war, cannot
be believed in (28). The inconsistent and mutu-
ally destructive opinions entertained with regard to
Janus, Saturn (29), Jupiter, Juno (30), and other
gods, render belief in them impossible (31-34) I
while if, as some believe, the world is a living being,
the deities cannot exist which are said to be parts
of it, as the sun, moon, etc., for the whole will have
life, not its members (35). Thus the heathen plain-
ly subvert all faith in their religion, however zeal-
ous against Christian innovations (36). They do
so still further, by the ridiculous inconsistency of
their opinions as to the origin and numbers of
their gods, in particular of the Muses (37, 38) ; the
Novensiles (38, 39); the Penates (40); and the
Lares (41).

Arnobius, having thus shown that the heathen are
in doubt and ignorance as to all their gods, a cir-
cumstance giving rise to confusion in seeking to
celebrate their rites (42, 43), calls upon them to de-
cide on their creed, and abide by it (44).


BOOK IV pp. 476-488

Argument. — Arnobius now attacks the heathen
mythology, pointing out that such deities as Piety,
Concord, Safety, and the like, could only be mere
abstractions (i, 2) ; while, as to many others, it
would be difficult to suppose — especially when
facts are compared with theories — that they were
seriously spoken of as deities, e.g., Luperca, Praes-
tana, Pantica (3), and Pellonia (4) ; the sinister
deities (5) ; Lateranus, a god degraded to the
kitchen (6) ; and others to whom were assigned ob-
scene and trifling offices (7) ; and asking whether
the existence of these deities depended on the
things for which they cared, or the performance of
the offices over which they were set, and how, if
they were first in the order of existence, they could
be named from things which did not then exist, and
how their names were known (8). Common-sense
will not allow us to believe in gods of Gain, Lust,
Money, and the rest (9) ; and besides, we could not
stop here, for if there were gods to preside over
bones, honev, thresholds, we should find it impossi-
ble to deny that everywhere and for everything there
are special gods (10). What proof, it is asked, do
the gods give of their existence .'' do they appear
when invoked.'' do they give true oracles (11) ? how
were they made known to men, and how could it be
certain that some one did not take the place of all
those supposed to be present at different rites (12) ?
Arnobius next goes on to point out that several
deities were spoken of under one name, while, on
the contrary, several names were sometimes applied
to one deity (13); e.g., there were three Jupiters,
five Suns and Mercuries, five Minervas (14), four
Vulcans, three Dianas and /Esculapii, six called
Hercules, and four called Venus, and others, in like
manner, from which would arise much confusion
(15); for if Minerva were invoked, the five might
be supposed to appear, each claiming the honour
of deity as her own, in which case the position of


the worshipper would be one of danger and per-
plexity ( 16). The others might be similarly referred
to, and this alone would make it impossible to be-
lieve in these deities (17). And if it should be said
that these writings are false, it might be answered
that It is only of such published statements that
notice could be taken ; and that, if they were dis-
credited, this fact should be made evident ; and,
finally, that from them all the religious ideas of the
heathen were drawn( iS). In saying that a god was
sprung from such a father and mother, the thought
might have suggested itself, that in this there was
something human, something not befitting deity
(19) ; but, so far from this, they had added every-
thing degrading and horrible (20). Jupiter had
such an origin, they said, and the Thunderer was
once a helpless infant tended by his nurse (21) ;
and — which was even more degrading and unseem-
ly— in turn he, too, was subject to lust and passion,
even descending to intercourse with mortals (22, 23).
Here, Arnobius says, would be found the cause of
all the miseries of which they complained, and these,
therefore, were to be laid to the account, not of the
Christians, but of the heathen, for it was they who
devised such hideous, absurd, and blasphemous tales
about the deities, which are either utterly false, or
conclusively disprove the existence of such gods
(24-28). Here it might have been shown that all
the gods were originally men, by referring to vari-
ous historians (29) ; but this is not done, because
the purpose of Arnobius was merely to show that it
was the heathen, not the Christians, who did the
gods dishonour. True worship is not ritual ob-
servance, but right thoughts ; and therefore the re-
sentment of the gods would be excited rather by
the infamous tales of the heathen, than by the neg-
lect of the Christians (30, 31); and whoever might
have invented them, the great body of the people
were to blame, in that they allowed it to be done,
and even took pleasure in reading or hearing such
stories, although they had secured not merely the
great, but even private persons from libels and cal-
umnies by the strictest laws (32-34). But not
merely did they suffer things to be written with im-
punity which dishonoured the gods, similar plays
were also acted on the stage (35) ; and in these the
gods were even made a laughing-stock, to the great
delight of crowded audiences (35, 36). And yet,
though they were so open and unblushing in the
insults which they offered the gods, they did not
hesitate to accuse the Christians of impiety, who
were not guilty in this respect at all (37). If,
therefore, the gods are angry, it is not because
of the Christians, but because of their own worship-
pers (38).


BOOK V.


pp. 489-505


Argument. — It might be said that these charges
were founded by Arnobius on the writings of poets
and actions of stage-players, and that the heathen
generally could not therefore be held guilty. Such
a defence, however, would not avail those who in
their histories and religious rites were not less
impious and insulting to the deities. Arnobius
proceeds, therefore, to narrate the story, told by
Antias, of Jupiter's being tricked by Numa (i),
and criticises it minutely, showing the manifest
absurdity and impiety of representing man as over-
coming and deluding the gods (2-4). He next re-
lates from Timotheus the origin of Acdestis (5) ;
the base and degrading expedients which the gods
were compelled to adopt in order that they might rid
themselves of his audacity; and the extraordinary
birth (6) and death of Attis, and institution of the


56o


ARNOBIUS: ANALYSIS OF CONTENTS.


rites of the Great Mother in memory of him (7).
This story also is criticised at great length, its ab-
surdity, indecency, and silliness being brought prom-
inently forward (8-14) ; while it is pointed out that
the truth or falsehood of the story is of no conse-
quence to the argument, as all that Arnobius wishes
to prove is, that any deities which exist are more
grossly insulted by their own worshippers than by
Christians (15). But, he says, how can you main-
tain that this story is false, when the ceremonies
you are ever observing always refer to the events
of which it speaks (16, 17)?

Neglecting many similar stories as too numerous
to be related, he merely mentions Fenta Fauna, the
birth of Servius Tullius (iS), the Omophagia, rites
of Venus, Corybantia, and the Bacchanalia which re-
late the dismembering of Bacchus (19). The story
is next related of Jupiter's amours with Ceres as a
bull, and with Proserpine as a serpent (20, 21), in
which, Arnobius says, it might be thought that it was
wished to make Jupiter an embodiment of all the
vices (22) ; and then notes, with bitter irony, how the
Supreme Ruler is belittled by their trivial and de-
grading tales {23). Passing now to the other deities,
Arnobius narrates the wanderings of Ceres, and the
origin, in consequence, of the Thesmophoria and
Eleusinia (24-27). So, too, the obscene Alimontia
are shown to have an origin as shameful (28) ; and
Arnobius indignantly asks, whether such a tale does
not strike at the foundation of all morality ? and
whether Christians are to be forced, by fear of tor-
ment and death, to worship such deities (29), for
disbelief in whom he cannot but wonder that men are
called atheists (30) } Since, then, it is the heathen
who so insult their own deities, the wrath of the
gods must be against their worshippers, not against
Christians {31).

The suggestion that these stories are allegories
(32) he scouts as utterly absurd, pointing out the
impossibilty of finding any meaning in some parts
of the fables, insisting that as every detail is not
allegorical, no part can be, and supposing that he
thus shows that these must be accounts of actual
events (33-39). If, however, these tales are alle-
gories, do they not, Arnobius asks, do the gods
wrong by imputing to them as crimes what are
merely natural phenomena (40) ? that is, do they
not turn into obscenity that which is pure and hon-
ourable in itself, while allegory is rather used to hide
under a cloak of decency what is indecent (41).''
There is but one other pretext, that the gods them-
selves would have their mysteries made allegories,
not choosing that they should be generally under-
stood. But how was this ascertained ? and why
would they not allow the truth to be told, against
which no objection could be taken, preferring inde-
cent and shameful allegory (42) .' These explana-
tions, then, are merely attempts to get rid of
difficulties (43) ; attempts, too, which could not be
very successful, for many shameful tales do not
admit of explanation as allegories (44). What re-
markable modesty is this, to blush at the mention
of bread and wine, and fearlessly to say " Venus "
for a shameful act ! (45.)


BOOK VI.


pp. 506-517


Argument. — Having shown how impious were
the opinions entertained by the heathen about their
own gods, Arnobius next meets the charge of im-
piety made against Christinns because they neither
built temples, nor set up statues, nor offered sacri-
fices. This, however, he asserts was not the fruit
of impiety, but of nobler beliefs (i). For, admitting
that they are gods, they must be free from all im-


perfection, and therefore self-sufficient, not depend-
ent on aid from without, nor afflicted with the desires
and passions of mortals. To think thus, he adds,
is not to hold the gods in contempt (2). But if they
are such, of what use would temples be to them i*
Is it not sheer madness to think that you honour
your superiors when you judge of them by your own
necessities.' Do the gods need shelter from cold
and heat, from rain or storm .-' And although to
men temples may seem magnificent, to the gods of
heaven they can be only mean cells (3). But, it
might be said, temples are built not to shelter the
gods, but that we may address them face to face, as
it were. Then, if prayers were offered to the gods
under the open heaven, they would not be heard.
But the true God must hear prayers wherever of-
fered, nay, must be present even in the silent recesses
of the heart, to know what is thought, what is de-
sired, even though it be not expressed, for it is His
to fill all things with His power, and not to be pres-
ent in one place only (4). Otherwise there could be
no hope of help; for if prayers were made to one
deity from different parts of the earth, while he
could be present only in one, then either all would
be alike neglected, or one only would be heard and
answered (5).

These temples, however, which were said to have
been built in honour of the gods, were in reality
places of sepulture. Thus Cecrops was buried in
the temple of Minerva at Athens, and others, both
men and women, in various well-known shrines (6),
even the Capitol being only the sepulchre of Olus;
and thus the heathens are shown to have been
guilty either of worshipping the dead as gods, or of
dishonouring the gods by making tombs their tem-
ples (7).

As to images, if there are really gods in heaven
to whom supplication can be made, why, Arnobius
asks, should figures of them be made on earth i* and
if they are not believed to be in heaven, it is still
more difficult to say of what use these images are
(8). We worship the gods, the heathen said, by
means of their images. Can the gods, therefore,
Arnobius asks, receive homage only when offered
to statues? What can be more insulting than to
believe in a god, and pray to a statue, to hope for
aid from a deity, but to ask it from his image (9) ?
Moreover, how could it be known that those figures
were indeed images of the gods .' The moon is ever
in motion; how could the figure of a woman which
never stirred be her likeness .-' But if the gods were
not such as their statues — which no one supposed
— what audacity was shown in giving to them what-
ever figures men pleased (10) ! Little occasion had
they to laugh at the su])erstitious worship of rivers,
stones, sabres, and pieces of wood by ancient and
barbarous peoples, while they themselves prayed to
little figures of men. Did they, then, believe that
the gods were like men ? No, Arnobius says ; only
they found themselves committed to a false position,
and would rather maintain it with violence and cru-
elty than admit that they were in error (11). Hence
it was that such extraordinary forms and equipments
were given to the gods. But if the images were
secretly removed from their proper places, and the
insignia of one given to another, it would be impos-
sible to say which was Jupiter, which Mars. How
absurd to form images of the gods, which depend
for their individuality on the dresses put upon them
(12) ! It was a small thing, however, to distinguish
the gods by means of reaping-hooks, tridents, horns,
or hammers ; but it was no light matter that the gods
should be fashioned like lewd men and women, and
that thus divine honours should be paid to harlots
(13). Arnobius next insists that images are but dead
matter, moulded, cut, filed, and hewn into form by


ARNOBIUS : ANALYSIS OF CONTENTS.


561


men ; and that it is therefore absurd for a man to
worship what he has himself made (14). No one
would worship, he says, a mass of metal or a heap
of stones, or even fragments of images ; but why,
while the parts are thus regarded as merely dead
matter, should they, when formed into an image,
become divine (15). Still men asked blessings from
earthenware, copper, and ivory, and supposed that
their prayers were heard by senseless figures, for-
getting how and from what they were formed; that
it was man's skill which gave them all their gran-
deur, for within them there was only hideous empti-
ness ; and that they were destroyed by time, used
as coverts by mean and loathsome creatures, and
bemired by birds, the dumb animals thus teaching
their master, man, that the images which he wor-
shipped were beneath his notice ( 16). But, was tlie
reply of the heathen, we worship not the images, but
the deities, which are brought into them by their
consecration. Do the gods, then, quit heaven to
give dignity to what is base .'' And if so, do they
enter these images willingly or unwillingly.'' If un-
willingly, is their majesty not lessened .-' If willingly,
what can they find there to entice them from their
starry seats (17) .' It is further asked, Do the gods
always remain in th^se images, or come and go at
will .' If the former, how wretched is their case !
If the latter, how is it to be known when the god is
in the image so that he should be worshipped, and ,
when he has quitted it so that it may be safely
neglected ? Moreover, in small figures, do the gods
become small ? in those represented as sitting, do
they sit.' and do they thus conform in all respects
to their images (18) .'' But there are either as many
gods as statues, or no statue can be tenanted by a
god, because one god cannot occupy different images
(19). But if the gods dwell in their own images, why
do they not themselves defend these, instead of leav-
ing it to dogs and geese and watchers to protect
their effigies from fire or thieves (20) .'' Nay, more,
why do they allow themselves to be robbed and in-
sulted by the stripping from their images of what
is valuable (21)? It might be said that the gods
despised such trifles ; but if so, that showed that
they despised the images as well. Arnobius then
relates the stories of men falling in love with statues
of Venus, and asks, where was the goddess, that she
did not repel and punish such insulting wantonness,
or at least recall the frenzied youths to their senses
(22) ? If anv explanation could be found for this,
there was none, however, for the fact that so many
temples had been destroved by fire and spoiled by
robbers, without the interference of their presiding
deities (23). Finallv, if it were said that images had
been devised in ancient times to terrify men from
their wickedness by the belief that gods were at
hand to see and punish their crimes, Arnobius ad-
mits that there would be some reason in this, if
temples and images caused peace, justice, and purity
to prevail on the earth ; but points out that this had
not been the result, for crime and wickedness abound
everywhere ; and tem])les, and even the images which
were to force men to be just, are plundered without
fear (24). He then asks what power Saturn's sickle,
the winged shoes of Mercury, or any of the other
insignia of the gods possess, to move men's minds
to fear (25) ; and whether it had ever been thought
that men could be frightened by a hideous face, as
children by some bugbear. The enactment of laws,
however, shows clearly that images or temples have
no such power (26).


BOOK VII.


PP- 518-540


Argument. — He proceeds to meet the charge,
that Christians are atheists because they offer none


of the usual divine honours to God. The fact he
admits, but asserts that in so doing Christians really
comply with God's will. To vindicate the Christians
from any charge of impiety because they offered no
sacrifices, Arnobius quotes Varro's opinion, that the
true gods could not wish for these, whilst the images
could care for nothing (i). The true gods, though
unknown because unseen, must be, so far as their
divinity is concerned, exactly alike, so as never to
have been begotten, or be dependent on anything
external to themselves (2). But if this is the case,
on what ground ought sacrifices to be offered — as
food for the gods } but whatever needs help from
without, must be liable to perish if this is withheld.
Moreover, unless the gods feed on the steam and
vapour of the sacrifices, it is plain that they receive
nothing, as the fire on the altar destroys what is
placed on it; whilst, finally, if the gods are incorpo-
real, it is difficult to see how they can be supported
by corporeal substances (3). It might indeed be
supposed that the gods took some pleasure in hav-
ing victims slain to them ; but this is exposed to two
objections, — that to feel pleasure necessitates the
capacity of feeling pain, whilst these two states are
becoming only in the weakness of mortals, and re-
quire the possession of the senses, which can only
accompany a bodily form, from which the gods are
supposed to be free ; and that, secondly, to feel
pleasure in the sufferings of animals, is hardly con-
sistent with the divine character (4). It was com-
monly held that sacrifices propitiated the deities,
and appeased their wrath. Against this Arnobius
protests as utterly inconsistent with the view of the
divine nature, which he conceives it necessary to
maintain so persistently (5). But conceding this
point, for the sake of argument, two alternatives
are proposed : such sacrifices should be offered
either before or after the divine wrath is excited.
If the former is chosen, this is to represent the gods
as wild beasts to be won from their savageness by
throwing to them sops, or that on which to vent
their rage ; if the latter, without waiting to discuss
whether the divine greatness would be offended by
a creature so ignorant and unimportant as man (6),
or what laws the gods have established on earth by
the violation of which they might be enraged (7), it
is asked why the death of a pig, a chicken, or an ox
should change the disposition of a god, and whether
the gods can be bribed into a gracious mood. More-
over, if the divine pardon is not given freely, it
would be better to withhold it, as men sin more
readily when they believe that they can purchase
pardon for themselves (8). A protest is put into
the mouth of an ox against the injustice of compel-
ling cattle to pay the j^enalty of men's offences (9).
Arnobius then points out that the doctrine of fate,
that all things proceed from causes, and that there-
fore the course of events cannot be changed, does
away with all need to appeal to the gods to reader
services which are not in their power (10). Finally,
the miseries of men are a conclusive proof that the
gods cannot avert evil (11), otherwise they are un-
grateful in allowing misfortunes to overwhelm their
worshippers. A brief resume is given of the pre-
ceding arguments, illustrated by the cases of two
men, of whom one has but little to give, whilst the
other loads the altars with his offerings; and of two
nations at war with each other whose gifts are equal,
— which show how untenable the hypothesis is, that
sacrifices purchase the favour of the gods (12).

Another pretext urged was, that the gods were
honoured by the offering of sacrifices. How Could
this be ? Honour consists in something yielded and
something received {13). But what could the gods
receive from men ? how could their greatness be
increased by men's actions (14) ^ The true deities


562


ARNOBIUS: ANALYSIS OF CONTENTS.


should indeed be honoured by entertaining thoughts
worthy of them ; but what kind of honour is it to
slay animals before them, to offer them blood, and
send up wreaths of smoke into the air (15) ? Still,
if such horrid sights and smells were thought pleas-
ing to the gods, why were certain animals and cer-
tain things chosen to be sacrificed, and not others
(16) ? The absurdity of offering to the gods the
food used by us, is shcjwn by supposing that pigs,
dogs, asses, swallows, and other birds and beasts,
were to sacrifice to men, in like manner, ants, hav,
bones, and the filth even which some of them eat
(17). It is then asked why to one god bulls were
sacrificed, to another kids, to a third sheep ; to
some white, to others black, to some male, to others
female annuals (iS). The usual answer was, that
to the gods male victims, to the goddesses females,
were sacrificed, which brings up again the question
as to sex amongst the deities But passing this by,
what is there in difference of colour to make the
gods pleased or displeased as the victim might be
white or black? The gods of heaven, it might be
said, delight in cheerful colours, those of Hades in
gloomy ones. In the time of Arnobius, however,
few believed that there was any such place as
Hades ; and if this were so, there could be no gods
there (19). But conceding this point also, and ad-
mitting that to their savage dispositions gloomy
colours might be pleasing, Arnobius suggests that
only the skins of animals are black, and that there-
fore the flesh, bones, etc., should not be offered, nor
the wine, milk, oil, and other things used in sacri-
fices which are not black (20). It is next asked why
certain animals were sacrificed to certain gods, and
not to others; to which the only answer is, that it
had been so determined by the men of former times
(21). Or if it be suggested that a reason is seen
in the sacrificing of fruitful and barren victims to
mother earth and the virgin Minerva, such reason-
ing requires that musicians should be sacrificed to
Apollo, physicians to yEsculapius, and orators to
Mercury (22). Returning to the argument, that
sacrifices should be offered to the gods to win
favours from the good, to avert the malice of the
bad, Arnobius points out, first, that it is impossible
that there should be evil deities ; and, secondly, that
to suppose that the sacrifices were effectual, is to
suppose that by them an evil deity could be changed
into a good, and that, through their being withheld,
a beneficent deity might become malevolent; which
is as absurd as if one were to expect, on caressing
a viper or scorpion, that he would escape being
stung (23). He proceeds to call attention to various
kinds of puddings, cakes, pottages, and other deli-
cacies used in ceremonies, asking with scorn for
what end they were employed (24, 25). It is next
pointed out, that no reason can be offered for the
use of incense, which was certainly unknown in the
heroic ages, and unused even in Etruria, the mother
of superstition, and could not have been burned on
the altar until after the time of Numa. If, there-
fore, the ancients were not guilty in neglecting to
burn incense, it could not be necessary to do so (26).
Moreover, of what service wasi^ncense to the gods ?
If they were honoured by its being burned, why
should not any gum be so used (27) .' If incense is
preferred because of its sweet smell, the gods must
have noses, and share man's nature. Further, they
may not be affected as we are bv odours, and what
is pleasant to us may be disagreeable to them ; and
vice versa. But such considerations are inadmissi-
ble with regard to the gods, for reason demands


that they should be immaterial, and that therefore
they should not be affected by odours (28). Arno-
bius next shows that the use of wine in ceremonies
was as little based on reason as that of incense, for
deities cannot l)e affected by thirst (29); and how
could they be honoured with that which excites to
vice and impairs man's reason (30) .'' The formula
with which libations were made is ridiculed as nig-
gardly and stingy (31); and the wreaths and gar-
lands worn by the celebrants, and the noise and
clangour of their musical instruments, are also
turned into mockery (32) ; whilst it is shown that,
to speak of the gods being honoured by the games
dedicated to them, is to say that they were honoured
by being publicly insulted in the ribald plays which
were acted at these times, and by licentious and
lustful conduct (33). All these detestable opinions
originated in man's inability to understand what the
deity really is, and in his therefore attributing to
the divinenature what belongs to himself alone (34).
In the three chapters which follow, he contrasts the
opinions of heathen and Christians as to the divine
nature, showing that to the former nothing seemed
too bad to be attributed to their gods; while the
latter, not professing to worship the gods, insulted
them less by not holding such opiiyons (35-37).

The pestilences and other calamities are next dis-
cussed, which were supposed to have been sent by
the gods as punishments for sacrifices or other hon-
ours withheld from them (38). Thus it was related
that, the bcdi Circenscs having been violated, a pes-
tilence ensued until they were once more celebrated
in due form (39). Other pestilences also were got
rid of, and enemies overcome, when gods had been
brought across the seas and established at Rome;
while, on the Capitol's being struck by lightning,
evil was averted only by rearing towards the east
an image of Jupiter in a higher place (40). But
how can the story of the liidi Circenscs be believed,
which represents Jupiter as delighting in childish
amusements, angry without cause, and punishing
those who had done no wrong (41, 42), and going
so far astray in making choice of a man to declare
the cause of his anger (43) ? In like manner Arno-
bius discusses the transportation of yEsculapius, in
the form of a serpent, from Epidaurus to the island
in the Tiber, after which it was said the people
were restored to health (44-46). In reply to the
question how it was that the plague ceased if the
god did not really come to Rome, Arnobius asks
how it was that, if the god did come to Rome, he
did not preserve the city from all disease and pesti-
lence thereafter (47) ; and as to the argument, that
this did not happen because in later ages wicked-
ness and impiety prevailed, reminds his opponent
that at no epoch was Rome a city of the good and
pious (48). So, too, the Great Mother was said
to have been brought from Phrygia to enable the
Romans to overcome Hannibal. But all that was
brought was a stone (49) ; and are we to suppose
that Hannibal was overcome by a stone, and not by
the energy, resolution, and courage of the Romans ?
But if the Great Mother really drove Hannibal
from Italy, why did she delay doing so until carried
over the seas to Rome (50) } But without insisting
on these objections, who will call her a goddess who
is perfectlv capricious, abandons her worshippers
to settle arnongst those who are more powerful, and
loves to be in the midst of slaughter and bloodshed,
whilst the true gods must be perfectly just and
equally well disposed to all men (51) .''


ARNOBIUS.


INDEX OF SUBJECTS


[It has been thought best to include, in this Index to Arnoeius, the very full mythological and historical references of the Edinburgh edition,
as valuable to students in antiquarian and classical subjects, though less practically necessary as an aid to Christian inquiry.]


Abdera, proverbial for stupidity, 494.

Abusive language, punished by law,
487.

Acantho, mother of the fourth Sun,
480.

Acdestis, birth of, 491 ; a hermaphro-
dite, 491 ; self-mutilated by the
craft of Bacchus, 491 ; love of
Attis, 492; fatal consequences
of his fury, 492.

Achaia, Christianity attested by mir-
acles in, 438.

Acheron, 439, 500.

Achilles, 485.

Acorns and chestnuts, the food of
primitive men, 442, 459.

Acrisius, buried in temple of Minerva
at Larissa, 50S.

Actaeon, the horned hunter, 473.

Actors, freed from taxes, 488.

Admetus, served by Apollo, 484.

Adonis, loved by Proserpine, 485.

Adulterers, punished with death,

483-

.^acus, son of Jupiter, first builder
of temples, 507 ; loved by the
Nereid, 485.

.^lius, held that the Novensiles were
the Muses, 474.

JEneas, son-in-law of Latinus, 461 ;
son of Venus, 4S5; deified, 474.

/Esculapius, son of Coronis, 422 ;
killed by lightning, 424, 4S4;
deified because he discovered
use of herbs, 423, 424, 474 ; giver
of health, 459, 470 ; distinguished
by his staff, 517; golden beard
torn from a statue of, 515; three
gods named, 4S0 ; vintage festi-
val of, 531 ; brought to Rome
in form of a serpent, 536.

.(Ether, father of Jupiter, 480; shown
not to be a god, 473.

yEthusa, loved by Apollo, 485.

.^tna, torches of Ceres lit at, 499,

503
Agdus, Mount, 491.
Agesarchus, 509.
Aii Locutii, 420.


Alba, founded by Ascanius, 461 ;
flourished for 400 years, 528 ; in-
cense unknown in, 528.

Alban Hill, white bulls sacrificed on,
460.

Alcibiades, the Hernias modelled
after, 511.

Alcmena, seduced by Jupiter, 460,
49S ; mother of the Theban Her-
cules, 483.

Alcyone, 485 (note).

Alemanni, said to have been over-
come because Christians were
to be found amongst them, 417.

Alimontian mysteries, 500.

Allegorical explanation of myths,
464, 475; rejected by Arnobius,

475. 476.

Alope, loved by Neptune, 4S5.

Ambiguity of words, Jupiter en-
snared by, 4S9.

Amphitheatres, places of bloodshed
and wickedness, 488.

Amphitrite, loved by Neptune, 485.

Amymone, loved by Neptune, 485.

Anchises, loved by Venus, 422, 485.

Ancient customs, not adhered to by
heathens as well as by Chris-
tians, 459, 460.

Angels' names, used as incantations,
425 (note).

Animals, man closely allied to the
other, 440, 441, 443, 444; man
not morally superior to the other,
520, 521 ; deified and worshipped,
420.

Ant, Jupiter's conversion into an,

485-
Antiochus of Cyzicum, sacrilege of,

515-

Antiquity, the most fertile source of
errors, 429.

Anubis, dog-faced, 517.

Apis, born in the Peloponnese, 422 ;
called Serapis by the Egyptians,
422 ; those punished who re-
vealed the abode of, 509.

Apollo, son of Jupiter and Latona,
460, 483 (note), 485; son of Mi-


nerva and Vulcan, 4S0, 481 ; ac-
companied his mother in her
wanderings, 422 ; found refuge
on a floating island, 422; called
Clarian, Delian, Didymean, Phi-
lesian, Pythian, 419; bow-bear-
ing, 422, 4S3 ; Sminthian, 473;
deceived those who enriched his
temples, 484; served Admetus
and Laomedon, 484 ; pirates
plundered and burned temples
of, 516 (note) ; identified with
Bacchus and the sun, 473; Rit-
uals of Numa did not contain
name of, 462 ; four gods named,
480; human heads offered to Dis
and Saturn by advice of, 460,
and Neptune, the Penates, 475;
Hyperoche and Laodice buried
in temple of Delian, 508; Tel-
messus buried under the altar
of, 50S, 509; god of music, 526;
mistresses of, 485 ; represented
with lyre and plectrum, 511.

ApoUonius, the Magian, 428.

Aquilius, 424.

Arabia, Christianity tested by mira-
cles in, 438.

Arabians, worshipped an unshaped
stone, 510.

Arcadia, Mars born in, 484.

Archesilas, affirms that man knows
nothing, 437.

Archytas, assigns all things to num-
bers, 437.

Argos, destruction by fire of temple
of Juno at, 516.

Argus, slain by Mercury, 480, 517.

Aristotle, adds a fifth element to the
primary causes, 437 ; affirmed
that Minerva was the moon, 472.

Armenian, Zoroaster an, 428 (note).

Armenians, believed that one god
was cause of all divine manifes-
tations, 480.

Arnobius, life, character, and writ-
ings of, 403-411 ; editions of his
works, 410; his own account of
his conversion, 423.

5^3


564


ARNOBIUS: INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


Arsinoe, loved by Apollo, 485.

Art of man, no proof of participation
in the divine nature, 441.

Asia, aftiicted with mice and locusts
because of the Christians, 417;
Christianity attested by miracles
in, 43S.

Asses, sacrificed to Mars by the Scyth-
ians, 484.

Assyrians, war of Bactrians with,

'415-

Atellane farces, 531.

Athenians, made their Hermse like
Alcibiades, 511 .

Athens, fall of temple of Bacchus at,
516; Cecrojjs buried in temple
of Minerva at, 508.

Atlantis, the fabled island, 415.

Atlas, i^rojj of the skies, 460; grand-
father of Mercury, 469 (note).

Attagi, Phrygian name of goats, 492.

Attalus, sent from Phrygia to Rome
a stone as the Great Mother,

53S-.

Attica, visited by Ceres, 504.

Attis, vvorshi]:>ped in the temples of
Cybele, 424 (notes) ; son of Nana,
492 ; loved by Cybele, 486, 492 ;
self-mulilation and death of, 492;
rites established in honour of,
492 (note) ; exiDlained as the sun,

505-
Aulus, Capitol named from, 509.
Aurora's love of Tithonus, 485.
Aventine, Jupiter drawn down to the,

489.

Bacchanalia, two kinds of, 496, 497.

Bacchus, son of Semele, 473, 483 ;
dashed by lightning from his
mother's womb, 422 ; born again
from his father's thigh, 483 ;
giver of a good vintage, 459;
represented as effeminate, 511,
and as bearing a drinking-cup,
517 ; plnilli displayed at rites of,
500; identified with the sun, 473;
goats sacrificed to, 525 (note);
called Evius, 500, Nysius, 500,
Bromius, 483 ; torn in pieces by
Titans, 424, 497 ; destruction of
tem])le of, at Athens, 516.

Eacis, the soothsayer, 431.

Bactrian, Zoroaster a, 428 (note).

Bactrians, war of Assyrians with,

415-

Bsebulus, the Magian, 428.

Banquets of the gods, 531.

Bark, used in ancient times for cloth-
ing. 459-

Baubo, entertainer of Ceres at Eleu-
sis, 499.

Beetles, temples erected to, 420.

Bellonae, 420, 471.

Berecyntian, goddess, 494.

Binding of Mars and Venus, ex-
plained allegorically, 505.

Birthdays of the gods, 531.

Bocchores, 422.

Bona Dea, story of, 496 ; original
name, 422.

Branch, a, worshipped by the Thes-
pians, 510.

Brides, hair of, arranged with hasta
call bar is, 460.

Brimo, Ceres named, 497.


Bromius, name of Bacchus, 4S3.
Brunda, Simon Magus threw himself

from house-top at, 43S.
Burnus, god of lust, 478.

Ccelibai-is hasta, used in arranging

hair of brides, 460.
Caeselii, 430.
Cassius' enumeration of the Penates,

474.

Calamities, common to all ages, not
caused by Christians, 414.

Calliope's son, Orpheus, 499.

Canacheni, 516.

Canary Islands, 50S.

Cannae, jjroscription of Sulla com-
pared to the battle of, 504.

Capitol, Tolus Vulcentanus buried
in the, 509; named from Olus,
509 (note); destroyed by fire,
516; struck by lightning, 534.

Capitoline Jupiter, burned along with
the temple, 516.

Capitolme Hill, taken by Titus Ta-
tius, 476, 477.

Caprotina, name of Juno, 472.

Carians, the, sacrificed dogs to Mars,
484.

Carneades, affirmed man's ignorance
of all things, 437.

Castor and Pollux, called Tyndarian
brothers, 460 (note); Dioscori,
483 ; sons of Jupiter and Leda,
460, 483 ; sons of Tyndareus,
422 ; buried in Lacedsemonia,
484 (note); three sets of gods
named, 480.

Castor, famed for his skill in mana-
ging horses, 422.

Castiis, a fasting, 496.

Catamitus, carried off to be a cup-
bearer, 485 ; object of Jupiter's
lust, 49S.

Cato, 46S.

Cats, temples built to, 420.

Caudine Forks, Romans sent under
the yoke at, 477.

Cecrops, buried in the temple of
Minerva at Athens, 508.

Celeus, daughters of, buried in temj^le
at Eleusis, 508.

Cerberus, 500.

Ceres, born in Sicily, 422; deified
because she discovered use of
bread, 423 ; gives good crops,
459; lusted after Jasion, 4S5 ;
mother of Jupiter, according to
Phrygians, 497 ; violated by him,
497; wanderings of, 499; her
sacred rites called Grivca, 462 ;
identified with Diana and Luna,
473; said bv Caesius to be one
of the Penates, 474; represented
with protruding breasts, 466,
517 ; her temple at Eleusis, 508 ;
falling of rain upon the earth
denoted bv union of Juj^iter and,
502, 505 ; bread denoted by, 506;
feast in honour of, 531.

Cestus, Juno's, 517 (note).

Chjeronea, Plutarch of, 484.

Chaldeans, mysterious learning of,
415; believed that one God ap-
peared in all divine manifesta-
tions, 480.

Childbirth, Juno set over, 470.


Charms, used to appease unknown
powers, 439.

Christ, His worship no just cause
of offence to heathenism, 422;
effects of His teaching, 423,438;
His crucifixion and human na-
ture no reproach, 424 ; no Ma-
gian, 425; His miracles works
of blessing, 425, 426; gift of
tongues attributed to Him, 425;
proofs of His divinity, 425; not
paralleled in heathen mythology,
428; evidenced by the multitude
of believers, 429 ; why incarnate,
430, and enduring death, 431,
432; His words and works in
contrast with heathen philoso-
phy, 438 ; true knowledge only
in Him, 457.

Christianity, objection of its late ori-
gin answered, 461 ; other cavils
against, apply equally to heathen
mythology, 462, 463.

Christians, excellence of their wor-
ship, 419, contrasted with hea-
then, 422; increase of, a proof
of Christianity, 429; do not
teach philosophical theories of
the soul, nor of good and evil,

454> 455-
Chrvsippus, object of Jupiter's lust,

'485-

Chrysippus, asserted that the world
would be destroyed by fire, 437,

Chrysis, Juno's priestess, burned at
Argos, 516 (note).

Cicero, De Natiira Deorttrii, mutila-
tions of, 465.

Cincian law against gifts to advo-
cates, 460.

Cincius, regards the Novensiles as
the gods of conquered states,
deities brought from abroad, 474.

Cinxia, a name of Juno, 472 ; pre-
sides over the loosening of the
zone, 470; the Thespians wor-
ship a branch as, 510.

Cinyras, king of Cyprus, 484 ; king
of Pa])hos, 509; deified Venus,
a courtesan, 4S4; was buried in
temple of Venus, 509; founder
of the mysteries of Cyprian
Venus, 496.

Circe, mother of the fifth Sun, 480.

Circus, storv of re-celebration of the
games of the, 425.

Cleochus (or Clearchus), buried in
the Didymaeon at Miletus, 508
(note).
I Clitor, daughter of, seduced by Jupi-
ter, 485.

Cnidian Venus, copied from a cour-
tesan, 511.

Cocytus, river in Hades, 439.

Coelus, father of Saturn and Ops by
Hecate, 461, 472; of the second
Jupiter, 480; of the first Mer-
cury, 480; of the Muses, 473; of
Janus by Hecate, 471; Venus
produced from the genitals of,
484.

Coniphces and Conseiites, said to be
the Penates, 474 (note).

Concord, temples built to, 476.

Conserentes dii, parents of Servius
TuUius, 496.


ARNOBIUS: INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


565


Consus, god of devices, 470.
Corniculum, Ocrisia brought to Rome

from, 496.
Cornificius, maintains that Noven-

siles preside over renovation,

474 (note).
Coronis, mother of ^Esculapius, 422.
Corybantes, rites of the, 497.
Coryphasia, epithet of the fourth

Minerva, 4S0, 481.
Crates, affirms that there are eight

Muses, 473.
Crete, Jupiter born and buried in,

480, 484.
Cronius, 437 (note).
Cupids, three sets of winged, 480.
Curetes, drowned the cries of Jupiter,

475; saved him from death, 484.
Cyceon, the draught offered to Ceres

by Kaubo, 499.
Cyllenian, bearer of the cadiicetis, 472.
Cyprian Venus, statue of, loved by

Pygmalion, 515, 516.
Cyrus, 42S.

Cytherean, the, i.e., Venus, 511, 512.
Cyzicum, sacrilege of Antiochus of,

515-

Dactyli Idaei, identified with the
Digiti Samothracii, 475.

Dairas, buried in the enclosure at
Eleusis, 508.

Damigero, a Magian, 428.

Danae, loved by Jupiter, 498.

Dancer stops, expiation required if
the, 4S6.

Daphne, loved by Apollo, 485.

Dardanus, the Magian, 428 ; first
celebrated rites of the Phrygian
Mother, 462.

Dead, prayers for the, 488 (note).

Death, the second, nature of, 440.

Decemvirs, decrees of the, 487.

Deluge, Varro's computation of the
time of the, 493 ; human race
destroyed by, 415.

Democritus' atomic theory, 437.

Desires, Venus the mother of the,
471.

Deiicalion and Pyrrha, re-peopled
the earth, 491.

Diagoras of Melos, denies that there
are gods, 421 (note), 486.

Dialis, flamen, mitred, 427, 488.

Diana, daughter of Jupiter and La-
tona, 460, 483 ; daughter t f the
first .\Iinerva, 481 ; bow-bearing,
found refuge on floating islands,
422 ; mighty in hunting, 469,
483 ; wars of the virgin, 486 ;
represented with thighs half cov-
ered, 517; an unhewn log wor-
shipped by the Icarians for, 510;
fall of temple at Ephesus of,
516; Leucophryne buried in
temple of, 508 ; shrine in Delian
Apollo's temple of, 508; theolo-
gians mention three goddesses
named, 480; identified with
Ceres and Luna, 473.

Didymseon, Cleochus buried in the
Milesian, 508 (note).

Diespiter, son of Saturn and Ops,
482 ; lusted after his mother
Ceres, 497 ; names of some who
bore children to, 460.


Digiti Samothracii, said to be the
Lares, 475.

Dindymene, Pessinuntic, i.e., Cybele
worshipped at Pessinus, 488
(note).

Diomede, plains of, i.e., Cannae, 477
(note).

Dione, bore Venus to Jupiter, 422,
460.

Dionysius, robbed Jupiter and .^scu-
lapius of their beards, 515.

Dionysus (see Bacchus), five gods
named, 480.

Dioscori, sons of Leda and Jupiter,
483 (note).

Dis, identified with Summanus, 507 ;
human heads offered to, 460 ;
wounded by Hercules, 484; al-
legorical explanation of rape of
Proserpine by, 505; gate of,
i.e.. Hades, 500.

Discordiae, 471.

Dodona, Jupiter of, 516; fall of Ju-
piter's temple at, 516.

Dogs, employed to guard the Capi-
tols, 515.

Dysaules, a goatherd in Attica, 499.

Earth, the, identified with the Great
Mother, Ceres, and Vesta, 472;
a pregnant sow sacrificed to,
526 ; birthday of, 531.

Egeria, Numa advised by, 4S9.

Egypt, Christianity attested by
mighty works in, 43S ; Apis
called Serapis in, 422 ; letters
invented by the fifth Mercury in,
4S0.

Egyptians, dumb animals worshipped
by, 468 ; Christ said to have
stolen the secrets of His power
and teaching from the, 425 , pun-
ished those who revealed the
dwelling-place of Apis, 509;
called the second Minerva Neith,
481 ; were afraid to utter the
fourth Mercury's name, 480;
believed that one deity was man-
ifested under the various divine
manifestations, 479, 480.

Electra, seduced by Jupiter, 498.

Elements, number of the primary,
455 ; mistake as to Aristotle's
conception of the elements, 437.

Eleusinia, origin of the, 499; signs
used in, 500.

Eleusis, Ceres' visit to, 499 ; Dairas
and Immarnachus buried in the
enclosure of, 50S ; temple of
Ceres at, 508.

Eleutherius, temple at Athens of
Liber, 516.

Endymion, loved by Luna, 485.

Ennius, translated works of Euhem-
erus, 486.

Ephesus, fall of Diana's temple at,
. 516.

Epicurus, atomic theory of, 437 ;
teaches that the soul is mortal,

445-
Epidaurus, ^sculapius brought

from, 536; he of, i.e., .i^iscula-

pius, 469.
Epirus, Christianity attested by

mighty works in, 438.
Equity deified, 476.


Erechthidse, i.e., Athenians, 500
(notes).

Erichthonius, buried in shrine of Mi-
nerva, 508.

Ethiopian sun, Isis tanned by, 422.

Ethiopians, visited by the gods, 508.

Etruria, mother of superstition, 528.
arts of, i.e., charms and sacred
rites, 496.

Etruscans, the, identified Penates,
and Consentes, and Complices,

474-

Eubuleus, a swineherd in Attica,
499.

Eumolpidae, origin of, 499.

Eumolpus, keeper of sheep in Attica,
499.

Europa, seduced by Jupiter, 498 ;
represented on the stage, 531.

Evil, origin of, not a Christian doc-
trine, 454.

Evius, performance of his shameful
promise by, 500.

Fabius, a favourite of Jupiter, 485.
Fate, all things happen according to,

521-

Fatua Fauna, i.e.. Bona Dea, wife of
Faunus, 422 (note), 496; unlaw-
ful to bring in myrtle twigs to the
rites of, 496 ; account of her
death and rites, 496.

Fatuae, 420.

Fauni, 420.

Faunus, son of Picus, ana father
of Latinus, 461 ; ensnared and
bound by Numa's craft, 489;
made the Aventine his haunt,
489 (note).

Fawn's skin, worn by the initiated,
504 (note).

Februtis. a name of Juno, 472.

Fescennine verses, sung at marriages,
4S2.

Fetiales, the forms of the, neglected,
460 (note).

Fillets, worn by suppliants, 498
(note).

Fire, the origin of all things, 437.

Flint, people of Pessinus worship a,
510.

Flora, watches over the blossommg
of plants, 470; a harlot, 470;
shameful actions done openly at
games of, 531.

Floralia, the, 531.

Fluonia (or Fluvionia), a name of
Juno, 472 (note).

Fons, son of Janus, 471.

Forks, Caudine, overthrow of Ro-
mans at, 477. •

Fortuna Virginalis, maidens' gar-
ments offered to, 460.

Fortune, a deity, 459 ; one of the
Penates, according to Caesius,
474, 475; represented with a
horn filled with fruit, 517.

Free-will, necessary to man's nature,

458-
Frugifer, a god with lion's face

called, 510 (note).

Furies, the, 471, 500.

Gabinius, the consul, 462 (note).
Gsetuli, afflicted with droughts be-
cause of the Christians, 417.


566


ARNOBIUS: INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


Gain, gods of, 478.

Galaliaiis, Christianity attested by

mighty woi ks among the, 43S.
Galli, priests of the Great Mother,

424; beat their breasts, wailing

for Attis, 496.
Gallus, mutilation of a daughter of,

49-. 495-
Ganymede, carried off to satisfy

Jupiter's lust, 506; represented

on the stage in ballets, 531.
Garamantes, the tawny, 508.
Gaul, innumerable Christians in, 417

(note).
Geese, the guardians of the Capitol,

515-

Genii of husbands, mvoked at mar-
riages, 460.

Genii of states, 420 (note).

Genius Jovialis, said to be one of
the Penates, 474 (note), 475.

Germans, Irruptions of the, regarded
as special calamities caused by
the Christians, 415.

Ghosts, the Lares said to be, 475

Gnidus, statue of Venus at, loved by
a young man, 516.

Goats, sacrificed to Bacchus and
Mercury, 525 (note) ; torn in
pieces by bacchanals, 496.

God, the Creator of all, 420; belief
in Him intuitive, 421 ; why
alone worshipped, 464 ; incor-
poreal, 467-469; His unity ac-
knowledged by the heathen,
480.

Gods, heathen, human passions at-
tributed to, 417 ; have no power
over Christians, 418 ; not uncre-
ated, 420, 422; worshipped for
their crimes, 432 ; why not ac-
knowledged by Christians, 464,
507 ; their existence not proved,
465 ; vilely represented in hea-
then mythology, 466, 469, 470-
472, 4S2-4S8 ; proved false by
its contradictory fables, 473-
482 ; tutelary, belief in, absurd,
477-4S2 ; crimes and vices at-
tributed to, 482-499, 539, 540;
such fables not justified by alle-
gorical interpretation, 502-506;
deities not honoured by temples
and images, 50S-510, nor by sac-
rifices, 518, nor by incense and
wine, 528, nor by other heathen
rites, 530; anthropomorphic
ideas of, false, 532.

Gospel, the objections to, apply yet
more to heathen mythology, 429 ;
its language defended, 430; its
effects shown in the lives of
Christians, 435.

Grseca, rites of Ceres, 462.

Gratina, loved by Praxiteles, and
taken as model of Cnidian Ve-
nus, 511.

Grits mixed with salt, or sacrificial
meal offered to the gods, 470
(note), 490.

Grundules Lares, 419.

Guardian deities, favour of, withheld,
. 470.

Guilt, contracted if the dancer
halted or musician was silent,
486.


Hades, punishment in, 445 ; exist-
ence of, denied, 522.

Hammon, represented with a ram's
horns, 511.

Hannibal's invasion of Italy, Phry-
gian mother's worship intro-
duced at the time of, 462, 538;
driven out of Italy by the god-
dess, 538.

Happiness, deified and worshipped,
476.

Hasta calibaris, hair of brides ar-
ranged with, 460.

Hearths, presided over by the god
Lateranus, 477 (note).

Heathen, the, hatred of the Chris-
tians by, 422, 463, 4S8; reviled
Christians as illiterate, 430; dis-
honoured their own gods, 465,
466, 501 ; dishonoured their gods
in sacrificing to them, 524, 530.

Hecate, mother of .Saturn and Ops,
461 ; mother of Janus, 471.

Helenus, the soothsayer, 431.

Hellespontian Priapus, 466.

Henna, grove of, whence Proser-
pine was carried off, 503.

Heraclitus, referred the origin of all
things to fire, 437.

Hercules, burned alive after punish-
ment, 422, 424; son of Jupiter
and Alcmena, 460, 485; this
the Theban defended by his
club and hide, 483 ; worshipped
as divine, 462, 465 ; a mortal,
deified, 474; wounded by Hip-
pocoon's children, 484; entan-
gled in robe of Nessus, 488 ;
violated the fifty daughters of
Thestius, 485 ; wounded Dis and
Juno, 4S4 ; put an end to human
sacrifices in Italy, 460 ; was a
slave at Sardis, 484 ; burned on
Mount CEta after an attack of
epilepsy, 484 ; the Theban,
burned on Mount CEta, 422;
the Phcenician, buried in Spain,
422; six gods named, 480; dei-
fied because he subdued robbers.
wild beasts, and serpents, 423.

Hermse at Athens like Alcibiades,

Heroes of immense and huge bod-
ies, 462.

Heroic ages, incense unknown in
the, 52S.

Hesperides, golden apples of the,

497-

Hippo of Melos, 4S6.

Hip]5ocoon's children, Hercules
wounded by, 4S4.

Hippothoe, seduced by Neptune,
484, 485.

Hirtius and Pansa, deluge not quite
two thousand years before the
consulship of, 493 (note).

Honour, deified and worshipped, 476.

Hosthanes, grandfather of the Ar-
menian Zoroaster. 42S

Human sacrifices, offered to Dis
and Saturn, 460.

Hyacinthus, 485.

Hylas, 485.

Hyperboreans, 50S.

Hyperiona, mother by Jupiter of the
second Sun, 480, 4S3.


Hyperoche, buried in the shrine of

Diana, 508.
Hypsipyle, loved by Apollo, 485.

la, bride of Attis, 492 ; her blood
turned into violets, 492.

lachus, nursed (or loved) by Ceres,
466 (note).

lalysus, son of the fourth Sun, 480.

Icarians, the, worship an unhewn log,
510.

Idaci Dactyli, Greek name of Digiti
Samothracii, 475.

Ignorance the lot of man, 437.

Ilium, girt with walls by Apollo and
Neptune, 474.

Images, Christ raised men's thoughts
from senseless, 423 ; formed of
clay, 423, 464, 514; bones, stones,
brass, silver, gold, wood, and
other materials, 512; made like
infamous men and women, 511,
512; the gods said to be wor-
shipped through, 509; fanciful
shape of some, 510 ; disregarded
by birds and beasts, 513, 514;
the gods caused to dwell in, 514,
must be defended by men, not-
withstanding the indwelling di-
vinity, 515; despoiled by Antio-
chus and Dionysius, 515; used
lewdly, 515, 576, and even ut-
terly consumed by fire, 516; set
up to strike evil-doers with ter-
ror, 516.

Immarnachus, buried in the enclos-
ure at Eleusis, 508.

Immortality of the soul, ])hiiosophi-
cal theories discordant and un-
tenable, 446; a gift of God, 447.

Incense, unknown in the heroic age,
528 ; not used by the Etruscans
in their rites, 528, nor at Alba,
528, nor by Romulus and Numa,
528; termed Panchaean gum, 529.

India, Christianity attested by mighty
works in, 438 ; Liber sought to
make himself master of, 486.

Indians, the, believed that one god
showed himself in all the mani-
festations of the divine, 480.

Indigetes, deified mortals, 432.

Indigetes, living in the Numicius,
422.

Inferium vinum, phrase used in liba-
tions, 530 (note).

Inuus, guardian of flocks and herds,
470.

Iphigenia, stags spoken of instead
of, 502.

Isis, Ethiopian, 422; Egyptian, 486;
lamenting her lost child and hus-
band torn in pieces, 422 ; wor-
ship of, introduced after consul-
ship of Piso and Gabinius, 462
(note) ; statue of, burned, 516.

Itali, Saturn concealed in the terri-
tories of the, 484.

Italy, visit of Hercules to, 460.

Janiculum, founded by Janus, 422,
471.

Janus, 465; son of Coelus and Hec-
ate, 471 ; husband of Juturna
and father of Fons, 471 ; first
king in Italy, 471 ; represented


ARNOBIUS: INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


567


as doubled-faced, and carrying a
spiked key, 517; said to be the
world, the year, the sun, 471 ;
supposed to procure a hearing
for suppliants, 471, 472, and
therefore mentioned first in all
pravers, 471.

Jasion, loved by Ceres, 485.

Jovialis, genius, one of the Penates,
474 (note), 475 (note).

Julian, a magian, 428.

Juno, 459, 465, 4S3 ; daughter of
Saturn and Ops, 460 ; queen of
the gods, 483 ; wounded by Her-
cules, 484 ; named Lucina, and
aiding women in childbirth, 4(16,
469 ; said to be the air, 472
(note) ; destruction of the tem-
ple and priestess of, 516, and
in the Capitol, of the statue of,
516; named Caprotina, Cinxia,
Februtis, Fluonia, 472; Ossipa-
gina, Pomona, Populonia, 472;
the cestus of, 517 (note) ; as
Cinxia, a branch worshipped
for, 510; Samians worship a
plank instead of, 510 (note) ;
one of the Penates, 475.

Jupiter, the greatest and best, 421 ;
is not God, 421, 422 ; had father
and mother, 422 ; the Saturnian
king, 4S3 ; son of ^Ether, 480 ;
son of CceIus, 480 ; son of Sat-
urn, 4S0, of Saturn and Ops,
460,461,472,482; born in Crete,
480; concealed in Crete, 472;
buried in Crete, 480, 484 ; his
cries concealed, 475, and his
life saved by the Curetes, 484 ;
overthrew his father, 484; the
acts of, 485, made a meal unwit-
tingly on Lycaon's son, 484 ;
married his sister, 4S4 ; at-
tempted to violate the mother
of the gods, 491 ; lusted after
Alcmena, Danae, Electra, Eu-
ropa, and matrons and maidens
without number, 460, 461, 498;


2^r


4^, 498, and Fabius, 485 ; rav-
ished his daughter Proserpine,
498 ; for lustful purposes be-
came an ant, a golden shower, a
satyr, 506, a swan, 483, 506,
and a bull, 483, 497 ; spoken of
as recounting his amours to his
wife, 487 ; said to be the sun,
472, and by others to be the
ether, 472; three gods named,
480; father of Apollo, Diana,
Castor and Pollux, Hercules,
Liber, Mercury, 460, 483, of the
Muses, 473, of the Sun, 480, of
Hercules, 485, 488 ; Diespiter,
460, 461, 482 ; fall at Dodona of
the temple of, 516; destruction
of the statue of Capitoline, 516,
534; termed Capitolme, 427, 516,
the Thunderer, 516, the Olym-
pian, 512, 513, the Supreme,
460, the Stygian, i.e., Pluto,
460, Verveceus, 497 (note) ; of
Dodona, 419, 516; bulls sacri-
ficed to, 526 ; represented with
a thunderbolt in his right hand,
517, and as driving in a winged


chariot, 472 ; gave power to the
Novensiles to wield his thunder,
474 ; Pales the steward of, 474 ;
the counsellors of, 474, 475 ; one
of the Penates, 475 ; represented
as an adulterer, 488, and as eas-
ily overreached, 489, 490 ; forced
to leave heaven by Numa, 489;
statues of, dishonoured, 515;
descent of rain signified by the
embraces of Ceres, 502, 505 ;
the feast of, 531; ludi circenses
celebrated in honour of, 534.
Juturna, wife of Janus, 471.

Kings, speaking against, considered
treason, 487.

Knees of images touched by suppli-
ants, 513.

Kronos, explained as chronos, i.e.,
tnne, 472; son of Coelus and
progenitor of the di't magni, 472.

Lacedsemon, Castor and Pollux bur-
ied in, 484 (note).

Laodamia, seduced by Jupiter, 498.

Laodice, buried in the shrine of Di-
ana, 508.

Laomedon, served by Neptune, 484.

Lares, commonly said to be gods of
streets and ways, from the sup-
posed etymology, 475 ; guard-
ians of houses, 475; identified
sometimes with the Curetes,
sometimes with the Digiti Samo-
thracii, 475; identified with the
Manes, 475; said to be gods of
the air, and also to be ghosts,

475-

Lares Grundules, 419.

Larissa, Acrisius buried in Minerva's
temple at, 508 (note).

Lateranus, the genius of hearths,
477 (note), 479.

Latinus, grandson of Picus, and son
of Faunus, 461 ; father-in-law of
i^neas, 461.

Latium, Saturn concealed in, 484.

Latona, seduced by Jupiter, 498 ;
mother of Apollo and Diana,
422, 460, 469, 4S3 ; wanderings
of, 422.

Laurae, Lares said to be derived
from, 475.

Laverna, goddess of thieves, 484.

Lectisternium of Ceres, 531 (note).

Leda, seduced bv Jupiter, 460, 49S ;
mother of Dioscori, 4S3 ; repre-
sented on the stage, 531.

Left and right, merely relative terms,
477 ; lucky, 477.

Lemnos, Vulcan wrought as a smith
at, 480, 484.

Leucophryne, buried in Diana's sanc-
tuary, 508.

Libations, in honour of the gods,
529, 530; formula used in, 530.

Libels, severely punished, 487.

Libentina, goddess of lust, 478.

Libentini (?), 420 (note).

Liber, a deified mortal, 462, 474;
deified because he taught men
to use wine, 423 ; son of Jupiter
and Semele, 460, 483, 500 ; In-
dian campaign of, 486 ; torn in
pieces by the Titans, 424, 497 ;


called Eleutherius, 516, Xysius.

500 (note) ; visit to Tartarus of,

500 ; filthy practices of, 500, 501 ;

allegorical explanation of the

tearing in pieces of, 505.
Libera, i.e., Proserpine, daughter of

Ju])iter and Ceres, 497.
Lima, goddess of thresholds, 478.
Limentinus, god of thresholds, 478,

479 ; gives omens in entrails of

the victims, 479.
Limi, preside over obliquities, 479.
Lion, images with face of, 510.
Locusts, destruction of crops by,

said to be caused by Christians,

414, 416, 417.
Locutii, Ail, 419, 420 (note).
Log, worshipped by the Icarians for

Diana, 510.
Lucina, aiding women in childbirth,

469.
Lucretius on the immortality of the

soul, 445.
Lullabies, sung to the gods, 531.
Luna, lusted after Endymion, 485;

identified with Diana and Ceres,

473 ; cannot be a deity if a part

of the world, 473.
Luperca, a goddess named, because

the she-wolf did not rend Romu-
lus and Remus, 476.
Lust, unnatural, attributed to the

gods, 485.
Lycaon, Jupiter ate part of the son

of, 484.
Lydia, 492.
Lynceus, piercing gaze of, 483.

Macarus, father of Megalcon, 484.

Macedonia, Christianity attested by
mighty works in, 438 ; starting-
point of Alexander the Great,

415-

Magi, in heathen ceremonials, relics
of the arts of the, 527; arts of
the, had no good purpose, 425;
demons won over by the charms
of the, 457 ; said to raise by their
incantations other gods than
those invoked, 479; enumeration
of famous, 428 ; used herbs and
muttered spells in their incanta-
tions, 428.

Magian, used as equivalent to sor-
cerer, 425 (note).

Magistrate, insults to a, severely pun-
ished, 487.

Magnesia, Diana's sanctuary at, 508.

Magus, Simon, overthrown by Peter,

438-

Maia, the beautiful, 422 ; mother of
the third Mercury, 422, 460, 480,
483, 511. '

Man, ignorant of his own nature,
435' 436 ! such as the lower crea-
tures, 440 ; possessed of reason,
441 ; not immortal, 445, 446;
wretchedness of the life of, 449,
450, 451, 521 ; a microcosm, 443;
not necessary in the universe,
448 ; utmost extent of life of,
461 ; depraved in coming into
life, 440.

Manes, the Lares said to be the, 475;
inhabitants of infernal regions,
525.


568


ARNOBIUS: INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


Mania, mother of the Lares, 475.

Maniuni, dii, 525.

Marcius, a soothsayer, 431.

Marcus Cicero, 468.

Marpesian rock, proverbial compari-
son, 443.

Marpessa, loved by Apollo, 485.

Marriage, forms observed in, 460;
three modes of contracting, 482 ;
advocacy of promiscuous, 432.

Marriages, Fescennine verses sung
at, 4S2.

Mars, born in Arcadia (?), 484; born
in Thrace, 484 ; said to be Spar-
tanus, 484; set over war, 471;
held prisoner for thirteen months,
484 (note) ; loved by Ceres, 4S5;
ensnared by Vulcan, 48^;
wounded by men, 4S4; a spear
worshipped by the Romans as,
510; dogs and asses sacrificed
to, 484; otherwise Mavors, 511 ;
fighting signified by, 506; alle-
gorical explanation of the bind-
ing of Venus and, 505 ; the
Romans spoken of as the race
of, 488.

Marsi, sold charms against serpent
bites, 446.

Martins Picus, entrapped by Numa's
craft, 4S9 (note).

Mavors, i.e., Mars, 511.

Medes, Christianity attested by
mighty works amongst, 438.

Megalcon, daughter of Macarus, and
mistress of the Muses, 484.

Megalensia, mode of celebration of,

531-

Meles, son of the river, i.e.. Homer,
484.

Mellonia, goddess presiding over
bees and honey, 478 ; supposed
to introduce herself into the
entrails of the victim to give
omens, 479.

Memory, wife of Jupiter, 460 ; mother
of the Muses, 473.

Men, sprung from the stones cast by
Deucalion and Pyrrha, 491 ; in
early times of immense size, 462,
463; deified because of benefits
conferred on the race, 422, 423;
souls shut up in bodies, 439.

Menalippe, seduced by Neptune, 485.

Mens, wife of Jupiter, and mother
of the Muses, 473; mother of
Minerva, 472.

Mercury, of service to men, 459, 462 ;
son of Jupiter, 460, 480, 483 ; son
of Maia, 422, 460, 480, 483, 511 ;
grandson of Atlas, 469 (note) ;
five gods named, 480 ; lusted
after rroser]5ina, 480; eloquent
in speech, 469 (note), 483 ; bearer
of the caduceus, 472, of the
harmless snakes, 483 ; born on
the cold mountain top, 472 ; pre-
sides over boxing and wrestling,
470, and commercial intercourse
and markets, 472 ; contriver of
words, and named from the in-
terchange of speech, 472 ; rep-
resented with wings, 517, and
wearing a broad-brimmed cap,
511; beardless, 511; slayer of
Argus, 480, 517; a thief, 484;


termed Cyllenian, 472 ; the sec-
ond, named Trophonius, under
the earth, 480; the first, son of
Coelus, and the fourth, of the
Nile, 4S0 ; the fifth, slayer of
Argus, and inventor of letters,
4S0 ; goats sacrificed to, 525, 526.

Mercury, i.e., Hermes Trismegistus,
439 (note).

Merops, the first builder of temples,

507 (note).

Metrodorus, held the atomic theory,

437-

Midas, first to establish worship of
the Phrygian mother, 462 ; king
of Pessinus, 492 ; wished to give
his daughter in marriage to Attis,
492.

Milesian Didymason, Cleochus buried
in the, 508 (note).

Militaris Venus, presiding over the
debauchery of camps, 478.

Mind, the, affected by ailments of
the body, 436.

Minerva, 465 ; sprung from Jupiter's
head, 461, 472 ; daughter of Mens,
472; daughter of Victory, 472;
five goddesses named, 480 ; the
first, mother of Apollo by Vul-
can, 480; the second, identified
with Sais, daughter of the Nile,
4S0; the fourth, named Corypha-
sia by the Messenians, 4S0; the
fifth, daughter and slayer of Pal-
las, 4S0; said by some to be
one of the Penates, 475 ; the wars
of, 486; worshipped because she
discovered the olive, 423; gives
light to secret lovers, 4S4; tem-
ples of, used as places of burial,

508 ; image of, burned, 516 (see
p. 480) ; a heifer sacrificed to,
526; termed Tritonian, 469, 526;
represented with a helmet, 517 ;
said by Aristotle to be the moon,
472 ; said to be depth of ether,
and memory, 472 ; spins and
weaves, 469 (note) ; used to de-
note weaving, 506; citizens of,
i.e., Athenians, 500 (note) ; called
Polias, 508.

Miracles of Christ and His Apostles,
their power and benefits proofs
of the Gospel, 427.

Money, a goddess, 479.

Montinus, guardian of mountains,

479-

Moors, 417; worshipped the Titans
and Bocchores, 422.

Morning, hymns sung to the deities
in the, 531 (note).

Mother of the gods, married to
Saturn, 472 ; fed Nana with
apples, 491 ; a pine brought into
the sanctuary of, 496 (note), 504 ;
a flint worshipped by the people
of Pessinus for, 510; represented
as bearing a timbrel, 517.

Mother, Great, said to be the earth,
472 ; Attis worshipped in the
temples of, 424 (notes) ; repre-
sented with fillets, 488; termed
Pessinuntic Dindymene, 488
(note) ; birth and origin of rites
of, 491 ; did not exist more than
two thousand years before Christ,


493; brought from Pessinus to
repel Hannibal, 538 ; a black
stone worshipped instead of, 538 ;
why represented as crowned with
towers, 492, 496.

Mother, the Phrygian, first set up as
a goddess, 462.

Mulciber, dressed as a workman, 517.

Murcia, guardian of the slothful, 479.

Muses, the, daughters of Jupiter and
Memory, 460, 473 ; of Ca-Ius and
Tellus, 473 ; three sets of Muses,
480; nine in number, 473 (note),
474; number of, stated differ-
ently as three, four, seven, 473
(notes), and eight, 473; said by
some to be virgins, by others
matrons, 473 ; identified with the
Novensiles, 474 ; represented
with ])ipes and psalteries, 517 ;
handmaids of Megalcon, 484.

Musician, guilt contracted at the
games by the silence of the,
486.

Mutunus, a deity, 479.

Myndus, Zeno of, 508.

Myrmidon, son of Clitor's daughter,

485-
Mysteries, the pontifical, 527 ; named
initia, 496 (note) ; of Venus, 496;
Phrygian, 496, 497 (note) ; of
Ceres, 49S (note) ; Alimontian,
500, 504.

Noenia, goddess of those near death,
478.

Nana, daughter of king Sangarius,
491 ; debauched bv an apple, 491,
494 ; kept alive by the mother
of the gods, 491 ; mother of Attis,
492, 494.

Nativities, art of calculating, 460.

Natrix, the deadly, 417.

NebridcE, family of the, 504 (note).

Neith, name of the second Minerva
in Egypt, 481.

Nemestrinus, god of groves, 478
(note).

Neptune, believed to be serviceable
to men, 459 ; king of the sea,
472, 485, 511 ; brother of Pluto
and Jupiter, 472; mistresses of,
485; girt Ilium with walls, 474;
served the Trojan Laomedon,
4S4; lord of the fish and shaker
of the earth, 472 ; one kind of
Penates said by the Etruscans to
belong to, 474; the Atlantis of,
415 (note); armed with the tri-
dent, 472, 511; said to have
been one of the Penates, 474,
475 ; means the outspread water,
472, 506.

Nereid, loved ^^acus, 4S5.

Nile, father of the second Minerva,
480, 481 ; father of the fourth
Mercury and of Vulcan, 480.

Ninus, leader of the Assyrians
against the Bactrians, 415.

Nisi, 430.

Noduterensis, a goddess presiding
over the treading out of grain,
478 (note), 479.

Nodutis, a god presiding over the
shooting corn, 478.

Nomads, 417.


ARNOBIUS: INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


569


Novensiles, nine Sabine gods, or tlie
Muses, 474, 476; presiding over
renovation, 474; the nine gods
who can thunder, 474 (note) ;
foreign deities received by the
Romans, 474; deified mortals,

474-

Noma, established forms of worship
and sacrifice, 438, 528 ; unac-
quainted with incense, 528 ;
advised by Egeria how to learn
the way to draw Jupiter to earth,
489; overreached Jupiter by his
readiness, 489; 490, 491.

Numa Pompilius, name of Apollo
not found in the rituals of, 462.

Numenius, 437.

Numicius, frequented by the indigetes,
422.

Nysius, Liber, 500.

Ocrisia, brought as a captive from
Corniculum, 496 ; mother of
Servius, 496.

Qita, the Phoenician Hercules burned
on mount, 422, 4S4.

Olive, Minerva the discoverer of the,
472.

Olus, Capitol named from, 509.

Olympian Jupiter, 512, 513.

Omens derived from points of spears,
460 (note) ; from the entrails of
victims, 460, 479 ; no longer ob-
served in public business, 460.

Omophagia, i.e., Bacchanalia, 496.

Onion, thunder-portents averted with
an, 489, 490.

Ops, sprung from Coelus and Hecate,
461 ; mother of Jupiter and his
brothers, 422, 460, 461, 472, 4S2.

Orbona, guardian deity of bereaved
parents, 478.

Orcus, union of Proserpine with,
502.

Origin of things, Christ commanded
men not to inquire into, 457.

Ornytus, Pallus slain by, 4S4 (notes).

Orpheus, the Thracian hard, 497 ;
the Thracian soothsayer, 499
(note).

Osiris, husband of Isis, torn limb
from limb, 422.

Ossilago, a deity giving firmness to
the bones of children, 478.

Ossipagina, a name given to Juno,
472.

Pales, guardian of the flocks and
herds, 470 (note) ; not a female,
but a male steward of Jupiter,
474; one of the Penates, 474,

475-
Palladium, the, formed from the re-
mains of Pelops, 484.
Pallas, father of the fifth Minerva,

and slain by her, 480, 481.
Pallas, surname of Minerva, 481 ;

overcome and slain by Ornytus,

474-
Pamphilus, a magian and friend of

Cyrus, 428.
Panaetius, a Stoic philosopher, 437.
Panchasan gums burned to the gods,

529.
Panda, origin of the name, 476.
Pansa, consulship of, 493 (note).


Pantarces, a name inscribed on the
finger of the statue of Olympian
Jupiter, 512 (note).

Pantica, i.e.. Panda, 476.

Paphos, Cinyras king of, 509.

Parthians, Christianity attested by
mighty works amongst the, 438.

Patella, goddess of things to be
brought to light, 47S.

Patellana, goddess of things already
brought to light, 478.

Patrimtts, place in the ceremonies of
the boy called, 4S6 (note).

Pausi, 420.

Peace deified, 476.

Peleus, father of Achilles, loved by
Thetis, 4S5.

Pellonia, a goddess who repels ene-
mies, 477.

Peloponnese, Apis born in the, 422.

Pelops, 485; the Palladium formed
from the remains of, 484.

Penates, said to be Neptune and
Apollo, 474, 475; gods of the
recesses of heaven, 474; said to
be of four kinds, 474 ; said to
be Fortune, Ceres, the genius
Jovialis, and Pales, 474, 475;
and by the Etruscans to be the
Consentes and Complices, 474.

Perfica, goddess of filthy pleasures,
478 (note).

Peripatetics, Aristotle the father of
the, 437.

Persians, the, overcome because of
the Christians, 417 ; Christianity
attested by mighty works among,
438; worshipped rivers, 510;
skilled in secret arts, 480.

Pertunda, a goddess presiding over
the marriage couch, 478.

Pessinuntic Dindymene, 488.

Pessinus, people of, worshipped a
flint for the mother of the gods,
510; Great Mother brought
from, 538; Midas king of, 492.

Pestilence, sent to punish pollution
of the circus, 534 ; abated when
deities were brought from
abroad, 534; put to flight by
j^isculapius, 536.

Peta, presiding over prayers, 478.

Peter's victory over Simon I\iagus,
438 (note).

Phaethon, the sun the father of, 505 ;
loved by Ceres, 485.

Phalli displayed in honour of Bac-
chus, 500; given in the myste-
ries of Venus, 496.

Phidias, sculptor of the image of
Olympian Jupiter, 512 ; carved
on it the name of a boy loved
by him, 512 (note).

Philopator, i.e., Ptolemy IV., 509
(note).

Philosophers, pride of, 452, 453 ; by
their disagreement show that
nothing can be known, 437.

Phoenician Hercules, 422.

Phorbas, Attis found and brought
up by, 491.

Phoroneus, the first builder of tem-
ples, 507.

Phrygia, the rock Agdus in, 491 ;
mysteries celebrated in, 497.

Phrygianmother, the, i.e.,Cybele,462.


Phrygians, the, overcome with fear
at the sight of the Great Mother
and Acdestis, 492; Christianity
attested by mighty works among,
438 ; call their goats attagi, 492.

Phryne, native of Thespia, used as
model for the statues of Venus,
511 (note).

Picus, son of Saturn, and father of
Faunus, 461 ; drugged and made
prisoner by Numa, 489; sur-
named Martius, 489.

Piety, altars and temples built to,
476.

Pindar, the Boeotian, 484.

Pine, Attis self-mutilated under a,
492 ; borne to her cave by the
Great Mother, 492 ; carried into
the sanctuary of the Great
Mother on certain days, 496,
504 ; wreathed with flowers, 492,
496; bound with wool, 496
(note).

Pipe, a (tibia), borne by Acdestis
when he burst in upon the Phry-
gians, 492.

Piso, consulship of, 462 (note).

Plank, a, worshipped by the Sami-
ans for Juno, 510.

Plato, head of philosophers, 416;
the disciple of Socrates, 437 ;
acknowledges the resurrection
of the body, 439; contradictions
in his theory of future punish-
ment, 439 ; his doctrine of trans-
migration, 440 ; his theory of
reminiscences untenable, 443.

Plutarch of Chasronea, 484.

Pluto, brother of Jupiter and Nep-
tune, 472; king of the shades,
499.

Plutonian realms, i.e., infernal re-
gions, 525.

Polias, Erichthonius buried in the
sanctuary of, 508.

Pollux, son of Tyndareus, distin-
guished as a boxer, 422 ; buried
in Sparta, 484.

Pomegranate tree, a, springs from
the severed members of Acdes-
tis, 491.

Pomona, a name given to Juno, 472.

Pompilius, the revered, 468 ; sacri-
fices thoroughly cooked and con-
sumed in time of, 460.

Pontifex Maximus, 427, 488.

Populonia, a name given to Juno,
472.

Portents, thunder, how averted, 489.

Portunus, gives safety to sailors, 470.

Potua, presiding over drinking, 470.

Praestana, named because Romulus
excelled all with the javelin, 476.

Praxiteles, in the Cnidian Venus,
copied the courtesan Gratina,

5"-
Prayers for the departed in the early

Church, 541 (note).

Priapus, the Hellespontian god of
lust, 466 ; represented with im-
mense/«(/.?«</«, 517.

Proserpine, daughter of Ceres and
Jupiter, 497; violated by her
father, 497 ; carried off by Pluto
from Sicily, 422, 499; called
Libera, 497 ; named because


570


ARNOBIUS: INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


plants rise slowly, 472 ; lusted
after by the first Mercury, 4S0 ;
loved Adonis, 485 ; allegorical
explanation of the rape of, 502,
503 ; barren heifers sacrificed to,

Prosumnus, a vile lover of Bacchus,
500 ; the god's compliance with
his request, 500, 501.

Protagoras, doubts as to existence of
a deity, 421 (note).

Prothoe, loved by Apollo, 485.

Psylli, sellers of charms against ser-
pents, 446.

Punishment, future, nature of, 439.

Purification of the mother of the
gods, 531.

Puta, a goddess presiding over the
pruning of trees, 478.

Pygmalion, king of Cyprus, 515; an
image of Venus loved by, 515.

Pyriphlegethon, a river in Hades, 439.

Pyrrha, women formed from stones
cast by, 491.

Pythagoras of Samos, 437; placed
the cause of things in numbers,
437 ; burned to death in a tem-
ple, 424.

Pythian god, the, identified with the
sun and Bacchus, 472; served
Laomedon, 484 ; soothsayers are
taught by, 470.

Quindecemviri, the, wore wreaths of

laurel, 4S8.
Quirinus, excelled all in throwing

the javelin, 476.
Quirinus Martius, Romulus torn in

pieces by the senators, called,

424.
Quirites, 477.

Races, guilt contracted if the music
stopped at the, 4S6; in the
games of Jupiter, 534, 535,
seven rounds of the course in,

534-
Regulus, cruel death of, 424 ; a huge
serpent killed by the army of,

537-

Religion, credibility of, not depend-
ent on antiquity, 461 ; opinion
constitutes, not ceremony, 533.

Reminiscences, Platonic theory of,
untenable, 443.

Renovation, the Novensiles gods of,
474 (note).

Resurrection, the, symbolized in Plu-
to's myth, 439.

Rhodes, the fourth Sun born at, 480.

Right and left merely relative terms,

477-

Rites of the mother of the gods,
496 ; of Bona Dea, 496 ; of Bac-
chus, Cyprian Venus, and the
Corybantes, 496, 497 ; of Ceres
in Phrygia, 497.

Rituals of Numa, Apollo's name not
found in, 462.

Rivers, worshipped in ancient times
by the Persians, 510.

Roman matrons, not allowed to drink
wine, 460 ; kissed to test their
sobriety, 460.

Romans, the race of Mars, the im-
perial people, 488; had changed


their customs and ceremonies,
459, 460 ; Pellonia goddess only
of, 477 ; worshipped a spear for
Mars, 510.

Rome, age in time of Arnobius of
the city, 461 ; Christianity at-
tested by miracles in, 438.

Romulus, founder of Rome, 468 ;
sacrifices consumed in time
of, 460 ; and his brother, 476 ;
a deified mortal, 474 ; torn in
pieces by the senators, 424 ; un-
acquainted with incense, 528 ;
called Quirinus Martius, 424.

Sabine gods, the Novensiles, nine,

474-

Sabre, worshipped by the Scythians,
510.

Sacrifice, origin and meaning of, 542,
543 (note).

Sacrifices, Christians offered no, 507;
Varro's denial of any occasion
for, 518; cannot feed gods, 518;
cannot give pleasure to the gods,
519; can neither prevent their
anger, 520, nor satisfy their rage,
520; no reason can be found
for, 526 ; purity and cleanliness
required at, 523 (note).

Sadducees, attributing form to God,
467 (note).

Safety, temples and altars erected to,
476.

Sais, the Egyptian, offspring of the
Nile, 480, 481; identified with
the second Minerva, 4S0.

Salt-cellars, tables consecrated by
placing, 460.

Salvation, why conditional, 458.

Samians, the, worshipped a plank
for Juno, 510.

Samothracii Digiti, named Idaei Dac-
tyli, 475; said to be the Lares,

475-

Sangarius, a king or river, father of
Nana, 491 ; attempted to starve
his daughter to death, 491 ; ex-
posed her child, 491.

Sardis, Hercules a slave at, 484.

Satirical poems punished by law,
487.

Saturn, son of Coelus and Hecate,
461 ; overthrew his father, 4S5 ;
attempted to destroy his children,
485 ; was driven from power by
Jupiter, 484, 485 ; hid himself in
Latium, 4S4; was thrown into
chains for parricide, 4S4 ; father
by Ops of Jupiter, 460, 461, 472,
4S2, of the third Jupiter, 480 ;
mother of the gods married to,
472 ; founder of the Saturnian
state, 422 ; father of the third
Minerva. 480 ; when aged, taken
in adultery by his wife, 485;
tomb and remains of, in Sicily,
484; identified with Kronos, and
exjjlained as chronos, 472 ; pro-
genitor of the (///■ magm', 472;
planter of the vine, 472 ; laearer
of the pruning-knife, 472, '511,
517; presides over sown crops,
479 ; before Hercules' visit to
Italy, hum.an sacrifices offered
to, 460.


Saturnian king, the, i.e., Jupiter, 483.
Satyr, Jupiter assumed the form of,

' 48 5, 506.
Scauri, 430.
Scythian king and Circe, the fifth

Sun the son of a, 480.
Scythians, irruptions of the, laid to

the charge of the Christians,

415; sacrificed asses to Mars,

484.
Sebadia, 497 (note).
Semele, mother of Liber by Jupiter,

460. 473. 500, 506.
Senators, Romulus torn in pieces by,

424 ; abuse of, punished by law,

487.
Serapis, Apis in Egypt called, 422;

the Egyptian, 4S6; introduction

of the worship of, 462 ; temple

of, burned to ashes, 516.
Seres, the, 508; Christianity attested

by miracles among, 438.
Serpent, Jupiter assumed the form

of a, 485, 497.
Serpent-bites, charms against, 446

(note).
Servius Tullius, birth of, 496.
Shrine of Juno at Argos, 516.
Shrines, the Christians built no,

507-

Sibyl, the, 431.

Sicily, tomb and remains of Saturn
in, 484 ; Proserpine carried off
from, 499.

Sickle, borne by Saturn, 511.

Simon Magus, fiery car of, 438 ; over-
throw and death of, 438 (note).

Sinister deities, presiding over the
left, 477.

Sleep, what produces, 436.

.Slumber, is life anything but, 436.

Sminthian mice, Apollo the destroy-
er of, 473.

Socrates, condemnation of, spoken
of as the Trojan war, 504 ; not
made infamous by his condemna-
tion, 424; Plato the disciple of,

437- . , . ,

Solecisms and barbarisms objected

to Christianity, 430.
Sophists, pretentious show of the,

430-

Soul, the animal, does not partake
of the divine nature, 444 ; philo-
sophical theories of its immor-
tality uncertain and contradic-
tory, 446; made immortal only
by God's gift, 447, 454, 457.

Souls said to pass into cattle, 440.

Spain, 417 ; Hercules buried in, 422.

Sparta and Lacedaemon, Castor and
Pollux buried in, 4S5.

Spartanus, Mars identified with, 484.

Spear, a, worshipped by the Romans
for Mars, 510.

Stage, gods brought on, 487, 488.

States, genii of, 420 (note).

Stentors, 462 (note).

Sterope, loved by Apollo, 485.

Stoic theory, of the world, 455; that
souls survived death for a little,

455-
Stone, the Arabians worshipped an

unhewn, 510.
Stone, a, sent from Phrygia as the

Great Mother, 538.


ARNOBIUS : INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


571


Stones, after the deluge men sprung
from, 491 ; anointed with oil, and
worshipped, 423.

Stygian Jupiter, i.e., Pluto, 460.

Styx, a river in the infernal regions,
439 (note), 500.

Sulla, the proscription of, spoken of
as the battle of Cannas, 504.

Summanus, i.e., Pluto, 476, 503.

Sumptuary laws, not observed in
time of Arnobius, 460.

Sun, the, all things vivified by the
heat of, 413; said to be only a
foot in breadth, 457 ; identified
with Bacchus and Apollo, 473,
and with Attis, 505; five gods
said to be, 480; represented with
rays of light, 511 ; father of
Phaethon, 505.

Supreme Jupiter, the, in opposition
to the Stygian, 460.

Swan, Jupiter changed into a, 483,
506.

Syria, plagued with locusts because
of the Christians, 417.

Tages, the Etruscan, 460.

Tanaquil and the dii conserejttes, 496.

Tarpeian rock, the, taken by Titus
Tatius, 477.

Tartarus, the darkness of, has no
terrors to the immortal, 445 ;
visited by Liber, 500.

Tellene perplexities, proverbial
phrase, 500.

Tellus, mother of the Muses, 473.
(See also under Earth.)

Telmessus, city in Asia Minor, 508.

Telmessus, the prophet buried under
Apollo's altar, 508, 509.

Temples, in many cases tombs, 508,
509 ; destroyed with their im-
ages, and plundered, 516; built
to cats, beetles, and heifers,
420 (note); built that men might
come near and invoke the gods,
508 ; not raised by the Chris-
tians, 507.

Thales, attributed all things to water,

437-
Theatres, the gods exposed to insult

and mockery in the, 487, 488.
Theban Hercules, the, 422, 483.
Themis, the oracle of, 491 (note).
Theodorus of Cyrene, 421 (note), 486.
Thesmophoria, origin of the, 498

(note).
Thespia, Phryne a native of, 511.
Thespians, the, worshipped a branch

for Juno, 510.
Thessaly, home of the Myrmidons,

485.

Thestius' fifty daughters, and Her-
cules, 485.

Thetis, loved Peleus, 485.

Theutis, the Egyptian, founder of
astrology, 460.

Thieves, Laverna the goddess of, 491.

Thiace, Mars born in, 4S4.

Thracian, the, bard, i.e., Orpheus,
497 ; soothsayer, son of Calliope,
499.


Thrasimene lake, Roman defeat at
the, 477.

Thunder, evil portended by, how
averted, 489, 490.

Thunderer, the, i.e., Jupiter, 516.

Thyle, remotest, 508.

Tiber, /Esculapms brought to the
island in the, 536.

Tinguitani, the, afflicted with
droughts because of the Chris-
tians, 417 (note).

Titans, the, w'orshipped by the
Moors, 422 ; Liber torn in pieces
by, 424, 497.

Tithonus, loved by Aurora, 48 5.

Titus Tatius, the Capitoline taken
by, 476, 477.

Tolus Vulcentanus, Capitol named
from, 509 (note).

Transmigration of souls, 440.

Treason to speak evil of kings, 487.

Trebia, Novensiles worshipped at,
474 (note). _

Trebian gods, i.e., the Novensiles,
476.

Trebonius, cruelly put to death, 424.

Tree wreathed with flowers in mem-
ory of Attis, 492 (note).

Triptolemus deified because he in-
vented the plough, 423 ; native
of Attica, first to yoke oxen, 499.

Tritonian maid, the, 469 (note), 526.

Trojan wars, the condemnation of
Socrates spoken of as the, 504.

Trophonius, the second Mercury, 480.

Tullius (M. Cicero), 504; the most
eloquent of the Romans, 465.

Tullius (Servius), king, half-raw sac-
rifices offered under, 460.

Tutelary demons, the Lares, 475.

Tutunus, 478, 479.

Tyndareus, father of Castor and Pol-
lux, 422.

Tyndarian brothers, the, 460 (note).

Unxia, presiding over anointing, 470.
Upibilia, keeps from wandering, 478.

Varro, distinguished by the diver-
sity of his learning, 493 ; denies
that sacrifices are acceptable to
the gods, 518.

Velus, a magian, 428.

Venus, the Cytherean, sprung from
the sea-foam and the genitals of
Coelus, 4S4; daughter of Dione,
422 ; lusted after Anchises, 422,
485; a courtesan, 484, 486 ; dei-
fied by Cinyras, 484 ; mother of
the Desires, 471, of the imperial
people, 488 ; wounded by a mor-
tal, 484 ; represented on the stage
by lustful gestures, 48S ; in stat-
ues and paintings nude, 511, 517 ;
used to denote lust, 506; alle-
gorical explanation of the bind-
ing of, 505 ; named because love
comes to all, 472; four goddesses
named, 480; Cinyras buried in
the temple of, 509; the courtesan
Gratina the model of the Cnidi-
an, 511 J Phryne of more than


one, 51 1; Pygmalion's love for

the Cyprian, 515; a youth's love

for the Cnidian, 516; mysteries

of Cyprian, 496.
Venus Militaris, presiding over the

debauchery of camps, 478.
Vermilion, the images of the gods

smeared with, 510.
Verrii, 430.
Vesta, the earth said to be, 472;

ever-burning fire of, 460 (note).
Vestals, guarding the sacred fire,

488.
Victa, presiding over eating, 470

(note).
Victims, Christians slew no, 507.
Victory, Minerva the daughter of,

.472;

Vigils in the Thesmophoria, 498
(note).

Vintage festival of ^'Esculapius, 531.

Violets, sprung from blood of Attis,
492.

Virginalis, Fortuna, 460.

Virtue,, altars and temples reared to,
476.

Vulcan, explained as fire, 472 ; lame,
48J ; wrought as a smith in Lem-
nos, 4S0, 484 ; son of the Nile,
480 ; loved by Ceres, 485 ; father
of the third Sun, 480, and of
Apollo by the first Minerva,
480 ; four gods named, 480 ;
lord of fire, 460, 469, 470 ; repre-
sented in workman's dress, 51 1,
with cap and hammer, 511.

Vulturnus, the father-in-law of Janus,
471.

Wheat, introduced into Attica by
Ceres, 504.

Wicked, souls of, pass into beasts,
440.

Will, free, in salvation, 458.

Winds, the, represented as blowing
trumpets, 510.

Wine, in the rites of Bona Dea,
496 ; sanctuary of Attis not
entered by those who had drunk,
492 ; Roman matrons not al-
lowed to drink, 460.

Within, the Penates said to be those,

474-
World, the, uncreated and everlast-
ing, 455 (note) ; created, but
everlasting, 455; created and
perishable, 455 ; theories of,
421,437,455; destruction by fire

of, 437-
Worship, true, in the heart, 486.

Xerxes, the bridge and canal made
by, 415.

Zeno, the Stoic, 437 ; of Myndus,

508.
Zeuxippe, loved by Apollo, 485.
Zoroaster, Bactrians led against the

Assyrians by, 4.15; assigned by

tradition to ditferent countries

and ages, 428 (note).


ARNOBIUS.


INDEX OF TEXTS.


PAGE

PAGE

PAGE

Ex. xxix. 13, 14

524

Matt. V. 39 .... 415

John viii. 46. . .

434

I Cor. iii. T9 . . .

Lev. X. 10 ...

525

xxvii. 51

428

X. 9. . . .

459

iii. 19

xi

525

Mark x. 42, 43

523

X. 35^ • • •

482

XV. 6 .

I Kings xviii. 27 .

477

Luke xi. 41 .

525

xiv. 6 . . .

459

Col. i. 21, 22

Ps. xlviii. . . .

440

xxiii. 45

428

xvii. 3 . . .

446

I Tim. iv. 7 .

cxv. 4-8 . . .

513

John ii. 25 .

425

Acts X. 15 ...

525

2 Tim. iv. 8 .

Isa. xl. 18-20 . .

512

iv. 13-15

458

Rom. viii. 3-39

541

I Pet. ii, 17 .

xliv. 9-20 . .

512

VI- 35-37

458

viii. 19 . .

543

Rev. i. 13 .

xlvi. 5-8 . .

512

viii. 46 .

432

xiv. 14 . .

525

xiv. 13 . .

Ezek. xxii. 26 . .

525

572


A A 1


1 ,;,
T


Th.
T'


^^^^


PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE
CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET


UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY
