Ante-Nicene Fathers, Vol. 3: Latin Christianity: Its Founder, Tertullian
Alexander Roberts & James Donaldson (eds.), various translators (1885)
Source: Internet Archive
https://archive.org/details/antenicenefather03robeuoft
Public Domain. Staged for the Tower of Babel digital library.

========================================================================

Digitized by the Internet Archive

in 2007 with funding from

IVIicrosoft Corporation


http://www.archive.org/details/antenicenefather03robeuoft


THE


NTE-NICENE FATHERS


TRANSLATIONS OF


The Writings of the Fathers dowji to A.D, j2j

THE REV. ALEXANDER ROBERTS, D.D.,

AND

JAMES DONALDSON, LL.D.,

EDITORS.

AMERICAN REPRINT OF THE EDINBURGH EDITION.


REVISED AND CHRONOLOGICALLY ARRANGED, WITH BRIEF PREFACES AND

OCCASIONAL NOTES,

15 Y

A. CLEVELAND COXE D.D.


VOLUME III.

LATIN CHRISTIANITY: ITS FOUNDER, TERTULLIAN.

I. APOLOGETIC; II. ANTI-MARCION ; III. ETHICAL.


\ BUFFALO: ^Gy

-4 THE CHRISTIAN LITERATURE PUBLISHING COMPANY.

1885.


Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1885, by
THE CHRISTIAN LITERATURE PUBLISHING COMPANY.


I>^


>t , The Publishers'

Book Composition AND Elkctrotyping Co^
^ 39 * 41 Park Place, New York,


LATIN CHRISTIANITY:

ITS FOUNDER, TERTULLIAN

THREE PARTS: I. APOLOGETIC ; II. ANTI-MARCION ; III. ETHICAL.


AMERICAN EDITION.

CHRONOLOGICALLY ARRANGED, WITH BRIEf NOTES AND PREFACES,

BY
A. CLEVELAND COXE, D.D.


Ta a.p\axa. Wt) KpareLTO).

The NicENE Council.


PUBLISHERS' ADVERTISEMENT.


We present a volume widely differing, in its contents, from those which have gone before;
it contains the works of the great founder of Latin Christianity, the versatile and brilliant
Tertullian. Not all his works, indeed, for they could not be contained in one of our books.
This book, however, considerably overruns the promised number of pages: and gives three
complete parts of Tertullian's writings, according to the classification of our Editor-in-chief.
The Fourth volume will begin with the fourth class of his works, those which exhibit our
author's ascetic ideas and the minor morals of the Primitive Christians, that collection being
closed by the four treatises which were written in support of a defined and schismatical
Montanism.

The Editor-in-chief has been in active correspondence with representative men of divers
theological schools, hoping to secure their co-operation in editorial work. As yet, however,
the result has not enabled us to announce more than one additional collaborator: the rapidity
with which the successive volumes must be furnished proving an almost insurmountable ob-
stacle in the way of securing as co-workers, divines actively engaged in professional duties
and literary tasks. The sympathy and encouragement which have been expressed by all with
whom a correspondence has been opened, have been most cheering. To the Rev. Dr.
Riddle, ot Hartford, well known as one of the most learned of the American Revisers of the
New Testament, we are indebted for his consent to edit one of the concluding volumes of
the Series, accompanying it with a Bibliographical Review of the entire Literature of the
Patrologia of the Ante-Nicene period: supplying therein a compendious view of all the writers
upon this period and of the latest critical editions of the Ante-Nicene authors themse ves.
The editor-in-chief will continue his annotations and the usual prefaces, in Professor Riddle's
volume, but will be relieved, in some degree, of the laborious and minute attention to details
which earlier volumes have necessarily exacted.

It is needful to remind the reader that he possesses in this volume what has long been a
desideratum among divines. The crabbed Latin of the great Tertullian has been thought
to defy translation: and the variety and uncertain dates of his works have rendered classi-
fication and arrangement almost an equal difficulty. But here is the work achieved by com-
petent hands, and now, for the first time, reduced to orderly and methodical plan. We have
Httle doubt that the student on comparing our edition with that of the Edinburgh Series,
will congratulate himself on the great gain of the arrangement; and we trust the original
matter with which it is illustrated may be found not less acceptable.


*i.


/


Contents of Volume III.


THE WRITINGS OF TERTULLIAN.


INTRODUCTORY NOTE


PAGE

I


PART FIRST.


I. THE APOLOGY

II. ON IDOLATRY

III. THE SHOWS, OR DE SPECTACULIS

IV. THE CHAPLET, OR DE CORONA

V. TO SCAPULA

VI. AD NATIONES 109

APPENDIX, FRAGMENT 149

VII. AN ANSWER TO THE JEWS 151

VIII. THE SOUL'S TESTIMONY 175

IX. A TREATISE ON THE SOUL 181


III.

IV.

V.

VI.

VII.

VIII.

IX.


I.

II.
III.
IV.

V.
VI.


PART SECOND.

THE PRESCRIPTION AGAINST HERETICS
THE FIVE BOOKS AGAINST MARCION

Book I.

Book II

Book III. .

Book IV

Book V

AGAINST HERMOGENES

AGAINST THE VALENTINIANS

ON THE FLESH OF CHRIST

ON THE RESURRECTION OF THE FLESH

AGAINST PRAXEAS

SCORPIACE

APPENDIX. Against all Heresies .


PART THIRD.


243
269
271
297
321

345
429

477
503
521

545
597

^n

649


ON REPENTANCE 657

ON BAPTISM 669

ON PRAYER 681

AD MARTYRAS . . • 693

APPENDIX. The Martyrdom of Perpetua and Felicitas . . 697

OF PATIENCE 707


TERTULLIAN.


PART FIRST.


<\


INTRODUCTORY NOTE.


[a.d. 145-220.] When our Lord repulsed the woman of Canaan (Matt. xv. 22) with
apparent harshness, he applied to her people the epithet dogs^ with which the children of
Israel had thought it piety to reproach them. When He accepted her faith and caused
it to be recorded for our learning, He did something more: He reversed the curse of
the Canaanite and showed that the Church was designed "for all people;" Catholic alike
for all time and for all sorts and conditions of men.

Thus the North-African Church was loved before it was born: the Good Shepherd was
gently leading those " that were with young." Here was the charter of those Christians
to be a Church, who then were Canaanites in the land of their father Ham. It is remarkable
indeed that among these pilgrims and strangers to the West the Arst elements of Latin
Christianity come into view. Even at the close of the Second Century the Church in Rome
is an inconsiderable, though prominent, member of the great confederation of Christian
Churches which has its chief seats in Alexandria and Antioch, and of which the entire Lit-
etatureis-Greek. It is an African presbyter who takes from Latin Christendom the reproach
of theological and literary barrenness and begins the great work in which, upon his founda-
tions, Cyprian and Augustine built up, with incomparable genius, that Carthaginian School
of Christian thought by which Latin Theology was dominated for centuries. It is impor-
tant to note (i.) that providentially not one of these illustrious doctors died in Communion
with the Roman See, pure though it was and venerable at that time; and (2.) that to the
works of Augustine the Reformation in Germany and Continental Europe was largely due;
while (3.) the specialties of the Anglican Reformation were, in like proportion, due to the
writings of Tertullian and Cyprian. The hinges of great and controlling destinies for West-
ern Europe and our own America are to be found in the period we are now approaching.
The merest school-boy knows much of the history of Carthage, and how the North

_Afri£ans__-be£ame Roman^citizens. How they became Christians is not so clear. A melan-
choly destiny has enveloped Carthage from the outset, and its glory and greatness as a
Christian See were transient indeed. It blazed out all at once in Tertullian, after about a
century of missionary labours had been exerted upon its creation : and having given a Mi-
nucius Felix, an ArijolDius and a Lactantius to adorn the earliest period of Western Ecclesi-
astical learning, in addition to its nobler luminaries, it rapidly declined. At the beginning
of the Third Cenfeury,'at a council presided over by Agrippinus, Bishop of Carthage, there
were present not less than seventy bishops of the Province. A period of cruel persecutions
followed, and the African Church received a baptism of blood.

Tertullian was born a heathen, and seems to have been educated at Rome, where he

_probably practiced as a jurisconsult. We may, perhaps, adopt most oi the ideas of Allix,
as conjecturally probable, and assign his birth to a.d. 141;. He became a Christian about


INTRODUCTORY NOTE.


185, and a presbyter about 190. The period of his strict orthodoxy very nearly expires with
the century. He lived to an extreme old age, and some suppose even till a.d. 240. More
probably we must adopt the date preferred by recent writers, a.d. 220.

It seems to be the fashion to treat of Tertullian as a Montanist, and only incidentally to
celebrate his services to the Catholic Orthodoxy of Western Christendom. Were I his
biographer I should reverse this course, as a mere act of justice, to say nothing of gratitude
to a man of splendid intellect, to whom the filial spirit of Cyprian accorded the loving tribute
of a disciple, and whose genius stamped itself upon the very words of Latin theology, and
prepared the language for the labours of a Jerome. In creating the Vulgate, and so lifting
the Western Churches into a position of intellectual equality with the East, the latter as
well as St. Augustine himself were debtors to Tertullian in a degree not to be estimated by
any other than the Providential Mind that inspired his brilliant career as a Christian.

In speaking of Tatian I laid the base for what I wished to say of Tertullian. Let God
only be their judge ; let us gratefully recognize the debt we owe to them. Let us read
them, as we read the works of King Solomon. We must, indeed, approve of the discipline
of the Primitive Age, which allowed of no compromises. The Church was struggling for
existence, and could not permit any man to become her master. The more brilliant the
intellect, the more dangerous to the poor Church were its perversions of her Testimony.
Before the heathen tribunals, and in the market-places, it would not answer to let Christian-
ity appear double-tongued. The orthodoxy of .the Church, not less than her children, was
.undergoing_an ordeal of fire. It seems a miracle that her Testimony preserved its unity,
and that heresy was branded as such by the instinct of the Faithful. Poor Tertullian was
cut off by his own act. The weeping Church might bewail him as David mourned for Absa-
lom, but like David, she could not give the Ark of God into other hands than those of the
loyal and the true. I have set the writings of Tertullian in a natural and logical order,' so
as to aid the student, and to relieve him from the distractions of such an arrangement as
one finds in Oehler's edition. Valuable as it is, the practical use of it is irritating and con-
fusing. The reader of that edition may turn to the slightly differing schemes of Neander
and Kaye, for a theoretical order of the works; but here he will find a classification which
will aid his inquiries. He will find, first, those works which connect with the Apologists of
the former volumes of this series: which illustrate the Church's position toward the outside
world, the Jews ajLwelJjis the Gentiles. Next come those works which contend with internal
differences and heresies. And then, those which reflect the morals and manners of Chris-
tians. These are classed with some reference to their degrees of freedom from the Mon-
tanistic taint, and are followed, last of all, by the few tracts which belong to the melancholy
period of his lapse, and are directed against the Church's orthodoxy.

Let it be borne in mind, that if this sad close of Tertullian's career cannot be extenuated,
the later history of Latin Christianity forbids us to condemn him, in the tones which pro-
ceeded from the Virgin Church with authority, and which the law of her testimony and the
instinct of self-preservation forced her to utter. Let us reflect that St. Bernard and after
him the Schoolmen, whom we so deservedly honour, separated themselves far more absolutely
than ever Tertullian did from the orthodoxy of Primitive Christendom. The schjsmjwhich
withdrew the West from Communion with the original seats of Christendom, and from
-NlQcne Catholicity, was formidable beyond all expression, in comparison with Tertullian's
entanglements with a delusion which the See of Rome itself had momentarily patronized.
Since the Council of Trent, not a theologian of the Latins has been free from organic her-
esies, compared with which the fanaticism of our author was a trifling aberration. Since
the late Council of the Vatican, essential Montanism has become organized in the Latin


,^«^ I Elucidation I.


INTRODUCTORY NOTE.


Churches: for what are the new revelations and oracles of the pontiff but the deliria of
another claimant to the voice and inspiration of the Paraclete ? Poor Tertullian ! The sad
influences of his decline and folly have been fatally felt in all the subsequent history of the
West, .but, surely subscribers to the Modern Creed of the Vatican have reason to "speak
gently of their father' s fall." To Dollinger, with the " Old Catholic " remnant only, is left the
right to name the Montanists heretics, or to upbraid Tertullian as a lapser from Catholicity.*
From Dr. Holmes, I append the following Introductory Notice:'

(I.) Quintus Septimius Florens Tertullianus, as our author is called in the mss. of his
works, is thus noticed by Jerome in his Catalogus Scriptorum Ecclestasticorum:^ ** Tertul.-
Jian^^a^resbyter, the first Latin writer after Victor and Apollonius, was a native of the
province of Af nca and city of Carthage^_theL&QiL_QfLa_piQCQasular centurioji: he was a man
of a sharp and vehement temper, flourished under Severus and Antoninus Caracalla,
and wrote numerous works, which (as they are generally known) I think it unneces-
sary to particularize. I saw at Concordia, in Italy, an old man named Paulus. He
said that when young he had met at Rome with an aged amanuensis of the blessed
Cyprian, who told him that Cyprian never passed a day without reading some portion
of Tertullian' s works, and used frequently to say, Give me my master^ meaning Ter-
tullian. After remaining a presbyter of the church until he had attained the middle age
of life, Tertullian was, by the envy and contumelious treatment of the Roman clergy,
driven to embrace the opinions of Montanus, which he has mentioned in several of his
works under the title of the New Prophecy. . . . He is reported to have lived to a very
advanced age, and to have composed many other works which are not extant." We add
Bishop Kaye's notes on this extract, in an abridged shape: " The correctness of some parts
of this account has been questioned. Doubts have been entertained whether Tertullian was
a presbyter, although these have solely arisen from Roman Catholic objections to a married
priesthood; for it is certain that he was married, there being among his works two treatises
addressed to his wife. . . . Another question has been raised respecting the place where
Tertullian ofliciated^^a presbyter::::7whejher at Carthage, or at Rome. That he at one time
resided at Carthage maybe inferred from Jerome's statement, and is rendered certain by
several passages of his own writings. AUix supposes that the notion of his having been a
presbyter of the Roman Church owed its rise to what Jerome said of the envy and abuse of
the Roman clergy impelling: him to espouse the party of Montanus. Optatus,* and the
author of the work de Haresibus, which Sirmond edited under the title of Praedestinatus, ex-
pressly call him a Carthaginian presbyter. Semler, however, in a dissertation inserted in
his edition of Tertullian' s works,s contends that he was a presbyter of the Roman Church.
Eusebius*^ tells us that he was accurately acquainted with the Roman laws, and on other ac-
counts a distinguished person at Rome.^ Tertullian displays, moreover, a knowledge of the


I The notes of Dr. Holmes were bracketted, and I have been forced to remove this feature, as brackets are tokens in this edition
of the contributions of American editors. The perpetuaV recurrence of brackets in his translations has led mc to improve the page
by parenthetical marks instead, which answer as well and rarely can be mistaken for the author's parentheses, while these disfig-
ure the printer's work much less. I have sometimes substituted italics for brackets, where an inconsiderable word, like and or for,
was bracketted by the translator. In every case that I have noted, an intelligent reader will readily perceive such instances ; but a
critic who may wish to praise, or condemn, should carefully compare the Edinburgh pages with our own. I found them so painful
to the eye and so needlessly annoying to the reader, that I have taken the responsibility of making what seems to me a very great
typographical improvement.

2(1.) Concerning Tertullian; (ii.) Concerning his Work against Marcion,,its date, etc.; (iii.) Concerning Marcion; (iv.) Concern-
ing Tertullian's Bible; (v.) Influence of his Montanism on his writings.

3 We quote Bishop Kaye's translation of Jerome's article; see his Account of the Writings of Tertullian, pp. 5-8.

^Adv. Parmenia7iu7n,\. SChap. ii. (> Eccl. Hist.,\\. 1.

7 Valesius, however, supposes the historian's words ri>v ^dKurra iitl 'PwMfe Aa/uiirpwi' to mean, that Tertullian had obtained disunc-
tion among Latin writers.


INTRODUCTORY NOTE.


proceedings of the Roman Church with respect to Marcion and Valentinus, who were once
members of it, which could scarcely have been obtained by one who had not himself been
numbered amongst its presbyters.' Semler admits that, after Tertullian seceded from the
church, he left and returned to Carthage. Jerome does not inform us whether Tertullian
was born of Christian parents, or was converted to Christianity. There are passages in his
writings' which seem to imply that he had been a Gentile; yet he may perhaps mean to
describe, not his own condition, but that of Gentiles in general, before their conversion.
Alli.x and the majority of commentators understand them literally, as well as some other
passages in which he speaks of his own infirmities and sinfulness. His writings show that
he flourished at the period specified by Jerome — that is, during the reigns of Severus and
Antoninus Caracalla, or between the years a.d. 193 and 216; but they supply no precise in-
formation respecting the date of his birth, or any of the principal occurrences of his life.
Allix places his birth about 145 or 150; his conversion to Christianity about a.d. 185; his
marriage about 186; his admission to the priesthood ^ about 192; his adoption of the opinions
of Montanus about 199; and his death about a.d. 220. But these dates, it must be under-
stood, rest entirely on conjecture." *

(II.) Tertullian's work against Marcion, as it happens, is, as to its date, the best au-
thenticated— perhaps the only well authenticated — particular connected with the author's life.
He himself 5 mentions the fifteenth year of the reign of Severus as the time when he was
writing the work: " Ad xv. jam Severi imperatoris." This agrees with Jerome's Chronicle,
where occurs this note: *' Anno 2223 Severi xv** Tertullianus . . . celebratur." ^ This
year is assigned to the year of our Lord 207; ' but notwithstanding the certainty of this
date, it is far from clear that it describes more than the time of the publication of the
first book. On the contrary, it is nearly certain that the other books, although connected
manifestly enough in the author's argument and purpose (compare the initial and the
final chapters of the several books), were yet issued at separate times. Noesselt^ shows
that between the Book i. and Books ii.-iv. Tertullian issued his De Prescript. Haret., and
previous to Book v. he published his tracts, De Came Christi and De Resurrectione Car?iis.
After giving the incontestable date of the xv. of Severus for the first book, he says it is a
mistake to suppose that the other books were published with it. He adds: *' Although we
cannot undertake to determine whether Tertullian issued his Books ii., iii., iv., against
Marcion, together or separately, or in what year, we yet venture to affirm that Book v. ap-
peared apart from the rest. For the tract De Resurr. Carnis appears from its second chapter
to have been published after the tract De Came Christi, in which latter work (chap, vii.) he
quotes a passage from the fourth book against Marcion. But in his Book v. against Marcion
(chap, X.), he refers to his work De Resurr. Carnis; which circumstance makes it evident that
Tertullian published his Book v. at a different time from his Book iv. In his Book i. he
announces his intention (chap, i.) of some time or other completing his tract De Pr(rscript.
Haret., but in his book De Car?ie Christi (chap, ii.), he mentions how he had completed it,
— a conclusive proof that his Book i. against Marcion preceded the other books."

» See Df Prtrstri/>t. /ftrretic. xxx.

^ De PcrniteHtia,\. Hoc genus hominum, quod ef ipsi retro fuimus, caeci, sine Domini lumine, natura tenus norunt; De Fuga
in Persccutione, vi. Nobis autem et via nationum patet, in qui et inventi sumus; Adii. Marcionetn, iii. 21. Et nationes, quod suinus
nc»; Apolog. xviii. Haec et nos risimus aliquando; de vestris fuiinus; also De Spectac. xix.

3 [Kaye, p. 9. A fair view of this point.]

4 These notes of Bishop Kaye nuiy be found, in their fuller form, in his work on Tertullian, pp. 8-ia.

3 Book i., chap. xv.

6 Jerome probably took this date as the central period, when Tertullian "flourished," because of its being the only clearly au-
thenticated one, and because also (it may be) of the importance and fame of the Treatise against Marcion.

7 So Clinton, Fasti Romani, i. 204; or ao8, Pamelius, ^7M Tcrtull.

8 In his treatise, De vera atate ac doctrina script. Tertutliani, sections 28, 45.


INTRODUCTORY NOTE.


(III.) Respecting Marcion himself, the most formidable heretic who had as yet opposed
revealed truth, enough will turn up in this treatise, with the notes which we have added in
explanation, to satisfy the reader. It will, however, be convenient to give here a few intro-
ductory particulars of him. Tertullian ' mentions Marcion as being, with Valentinus, in
communion with the Church at Rome, " under the episcopate of the blessed Eleutherus."
He goes on to charge them with *' ever-restless curiosity, with which they infected even the
brethren; " and informs us that they were more than once put out of communion — '* Marcion,
indeed, with the 200 sesterces which he brought into the church."' He goes on to say,
that ** being at last condemned to the banishment of a perpetual separation, they sowed
abroad the poisons of their doctrines. Aftenvards, when Marcion, having professed peni-
tence, agreed to the terms offered to him, that he should receive reconciliation on condition
that he brought back to the church the rest also, whom he had trained up for perdition, he
was prevented by death." He was a native of Sinope in Pontus, of which city, according
to an account preserved by Epiphanius,' which, however, is somewhat doubtful, his father
was bishop, and of high character both for his orthodoxy and exemplary practice. He
came to Rome soon after the death of Hyginus, probably about a.d. 141 or 142; and soon
after his arrival he adopted the heresy of Cerdon/

(IV.) It is an interesting question as to what edition of the Holy Scriptures Tertullian
used in his very copious quotations. It may at once be asserted that he did not cite from
the Hebrew, although some writers have claimed for him, among his varied learning, a
knowledge of the sacred language. Bp. Kaye observes, page 61, n. i, that '* he sometimes
speaks as if he was acquainted with Hebrew," and refers to the Anti-Marcimi iv. 39, the
Adv. Praxeam v., and the Adv. Judceos ix. Be this as it may, it is manifest that Tertullian's
Scripture passages never resemble the Hebrew, but in nearly every instance the Septuagint,
whenever, as is most frequently the case, that version differs from the original. In the New
Testament there is, as might be expected, a tolerably close conformity to the Greek. There
is, however, it must be allowed, a sufficiently frequent variation from the letter of both the
Greek Testaments to justify Semler's suspicion that Tertullian always quoted from the old
Latin version, s whatever that might have been, which was current in the African church in
the second and third centuries. The most valuable part of Semler's Dissertatio de varia et
inccrta indole Libroru?n Q. S. F. Tertulliani '\% his investigation of this very point. In section
iv. he endeavours to prove this proposition: " Hie scriptor^ non in manibus habuit Graecos
libros sacros;" and he states his conclusion thus: *' Certissimum est nee Tertullianum nee
Cyprianum nee ullum scriptorem e Latinis illis ecclesiasticis provocare unquam ad Gn-ecorum
librorum auctoritatem si vel maxime obscura aut contraria lectio occurreret;" and again:
" Ex his satis certum est, Latinos satis diu secutos fuisse auctoritatem suorum librorum ad-
versus Grsecos, nee concessisse nisi serius, cum Augustini et Hieronymi nova auctoritas
juvare videretur." It is not ignorance of Greek which is imputed to Tertullian, for he is
said to have well understood that language, and even to have composed in it. He probably
followed the Latin, as writers now usually quote the authorized English, as being current
and best known among their readers. Independent feeling, also, would have weight with
such a temper as Tertullian's, to say nothing of the suspicion which largely prevailed in the
African branch of the Latin church, that the Greek copies of the Scriptures were much cor-
rupted by the heretics, who were chiefly, if not wholly, Greeks or Greek-speaking persons.

(V.) Whatever perverting effect Tertullian's secession to the sect of Montanus' may have

I De PrcFscript. Hceret. xxx. » Comp. Adv. Marcionem, iv. 4,

3 I., Adv. Hceret. xHi. i.

4 Dr. Burton's Lectures on Eccl. Hist, of First Three Centuries, ii. 105-109. 5 Or versions. 6 Tertullianus.

7 Vincentius Lirinensis, in his celebrated Commonitorium, expresses the opinion of Catholic churchmen concerning Tertullian
thus : " Tertullian, among the Latins, without controversy, is the chief of all our writers. For who was more learned than he ? Who


8 INTRODUCTORY NOTE.

had on his judgment in his latest writings, it did not vitiate the work against Marcion. With
a few trivial exceptions, this treatise may be read by the strictest Catholic without any feel-
ing of annoyance. His lapse to Montanism is set down conjecturally as having taken place
A.D. 199. Jerome, we have seen, attributed the event to his quarrel with the Roman clergy,
but this is at least doubtful; nor must it be forgotten that Tertullian's mind seems to have
been peculiarly suited by nature ' to adopt the mystical notions and ascetic principles of
Montanus. It is satisfactory to find that, on the whole, *'the authority of Tertullian," as
the learned Dr. Burton says, " upon great points of doctrine is considered to be little,
if at all, affected by his becoming a Montanist." {Lectures on Eccl. Hist. vol. ii. p.
234.) Besides the different works which are expressly mentioned in the notes of
this volume, recourse has been had by the translator to Dupin's Hist. Eccl. Writers
(trans.), vol. i. pp. 69-86; Tillemont's M^moires Hist. Eccl. iii. 85-103; Dr. Smith's
Greek atid Roman Biography, articles "Marcion" and "Tertullian;" Schaff's arti-
cle, in Herzog's Cyclopcedia, on "Tertullian;" Hunter's Primordia Eccl. Africans,
pp. 1 18-150; Robertson's Church Hist. vol. i. pp. 70-77; Dr. P. Schaff's Hist, of
Christian Church (New York, 1859, pp. 51 1-5 19), and Archdeacon Evans* Biography of the
Early Churchy vol. i. (Lives of "Marcion," pp. 93-122, and "Tertullian," pp. 325-363).
This last work, though of a popular cast, shows a good deal of research and learning, ex-
pressed in the pleasant style of the once popular author of The Rectory of Vale Head. The
translator has mentioned these works, because they are all quite accessible to the general
reader, and will give him adequate information concerning the subject treated in the present
volume.

To this introduction of Dr. Holmes must be added that of Mr. Thelwall, the translator
of the Third volume in the Edinburgh Series, as follows:

To arrange chronologically the works (especially if numerous) of an author whose own
date is known with tolerable precision, is not always or necessarily easy: witness the con-
troversies as to the succession of St. Paul's epistles. To do this- in the case of an author
whose own date is itself a matter of controversy may therefore be reasonably expected to
be still less so; and such is the predicament of him who attempts to perform this task for
Tertullian. I propose to give a specimen or two of the difficulties with which the task is
beset; and then to lay before the reader briefly a summary of the results at which eminent
scholars, who have devoted much time and thought to the subject, have arrived. Such a
course, I think, will at once afford him means of judging of the absolute impossibility of
arriving at definite certainty in the matter; and induce him to excuse me if I prefer furnish-
ing him with materials from which to deduce his own conclusions, rather than venturing on
an ex cathedra decision on so doubtful a subject.

I. The book, as Dr. Holmes has reminded us,' of the date of which we seem to have the

in divinity or humanity more practised ? For, by a certain wonderful capacity of mind, he attained to and understood all philos-
ophy, all the »ccU of philosophers, all their founders and supporters, all their systems, all sorts of histories .md studies. And
for his wit, was he not so excellent, so grave, so forcible, that he scarce ever undertook the overthrow of any position, but either by
quickness of wit he undermined, or by weight of reason he crushed it ? Further, who is able to express the praises which his style of
speech deserves, which is fraught (I know none like it) with that cogency of reason, that such as it cannot persuade, it compels to
aaaent ; whose so many words almost are so many sentences; whose so many senses, so many victories ? This know Marcion and Apel-
Ics, Praxeas and Hcrmogenes, Jews, Gentiles, Gnostics, and divers others, whose blasphemous opinions he hath overthrown with
hii many and great volumes, as it had been thunderbolts. And yet this man after all, this Tertullian, not retaining the Catholic
doctrine— that, is, the old faith— hath discredited with his later errorhis worthy writings," etc. — Chap. xxiv. (Oxford trans, chap, xviii.)

• Neander's introduction to his Antigytostikus should be read in connection with this topic. He powerfully delineates the dispo-
sition of Tertullian and the character of Montanism, and attributes his secession to that sect not to outward causes, but to " his
internal congeniality of mind." But, inasmuch as a man's subjective developmenr is very much guided by circumstances, it is
DOtJgMasary, in agreeing with Neander, to disbelieve some such account as Jerome has given us of Tertullian (Neander's Anti-
fM0mtM*, etc. Bohn's trans., vol. ii. pp. 200-207).

"Introductory Notice to the Anit-Marcion, pp. xiii. xiv.


INTRODUCTORY NOTE.


surest evidence, is adv. Marc. i. This book was in course of writing, as its author himself
(c. 15) tells us, '* in the fifteenth year of the empire of Severus." Now this date would be
clear if there were no doubt as to which year of our era corresponds to Tertullian's fifteenth
of Severus. Pamelius, however, says Dr. Holmes, makes it a.d. 208; Clinton, (whose au-
thority is more recent and better,) 207.

2. Another book which promises to give some clue to its date is the de Pallio.^ The
writer uses these phrases: " praesentis imperii triplex virtus;** " Deo tot Augustis in unum
favente;" which show that there were at the time three persons unitedly bearing the title
Augusti — not Ccesarcs only, but the still higher Augusti; — while the remainder of that con-
text, as well as the opening of c. i, indicates a time of peace of some considerable duration;
a time of plenty; and a time during and previous to which great changes had taken place in
the general aspect of the Roman Empire, and some particular traitor had been discovered
and frustrated. Such a combination of circumstances might seem to fix the date with some
degree of assurance. But unhappily, as Kaye reminds us," commentators cannot agree as
to who the three Augusti are. Some say Severus, Caracalla, and Albiniis; some say Severus,
Caracalla, and Geta. Hence we have a difference of some twelve years or thereabouts in
the computations. For Albinus was defeated by Severus in person, and fell by his own
hand, in a.d. 197; and Geta, Severus' second son, brother of Caracalla, was not associated
by his father with himself and his other son as Augustus until a.d. 208, though he had re-
ceived the title of Ccesar ten years before, in the same year in which Caracalla had received
that of Augustus.^ For my own part, I may perhaps be allowed to say that I should incline
to agree, like Salmasius, with those who assign the later date. The limits of the present
Introduction forbid my entering at large into my reasons for so doing. I am, however,
supported in it by the authority of Neander.-* In one point, though, I should hesitate to
agree with Oehler, who appears to follow Salmasius and others herein, — namely, in under-
standing the expression " et cacto et rubo subdolae familiaritatis convulso" of Albinus. It
seems to me the words might with more propriety be applied to Flautianus; and that in the
word "familiaritatis" we may see (after Tertullian's fashion) a play upon the* meaning,
with a reference not only to the long-standing but mischievous intimacy which existed
between Severus and his countryman (perhaps fellow-townsman) Plautianus, who for his
harshness and cruelty is fitly compared to the prickly cactus. He alludes likewise to the
alliance which this ambitious praetorian prsefect had contrived to contract with thtfajnily of
the emperor, by the marriage of his daughter Plautilla to Caracalla, — an event which, as it
turned out, led to his own death. Thus in the ''rubo'' there may be a reference to the
ambitious and conceited " bramble " of Jotham's parable, s and perhaps, too, to the " thistle "
of Jehoash's.^ If this be so, the date would be at least approximately fixed, as Plautianus
did not marry his daughter to Caracalla till a.d. 203, and was himself put to death in the
following year, 204, while Geta, as we have seen, was made Augustus in 208.

3. The date of the Apology, however, is perhaps at once the most contested, and the
most strikingly illustrative of the difficulties to which allusion has been made. It is not
surprising that its date should \\2iwt been more disputed than that of other pieces, inasmuch
as it is the best known, and (for some reasons) the most interesting and famous, of all our
author's productions. In fact, the dates assigned to it by different authorities vary from
Mosheim's 198 to that suggested by the very learned AUix, who assigns it to 217. ^


1 In the end of Chapter Second.

2 Ecci. Hist, illust. from Tertullian's Writings, p. 36 sqq. (ed. 3, Lond. 1845).

3 See Kaye, as above. ■♦ ^ ntignostikus, p. 424 (Bohn's tr., ed. 1851).

S See Judg. ix. 2 sqq. ^ See 2 Kings (4 Kings in LXX. and Vulg.) xiv. 9.

7 Here, again, our limits forbid a discussion ; but the allusion to the Rhone having " scarcely yet lost the stain of blood " which
-we find in the ad. Natt. i. 17, compared with Afol. 35, seems to favour the idea of those who date the ad. Natt. earlier than the


lO INTRODUCTORY NOTE.


4. Once more. In the tract de Monogamia (c. 3) the author says that since the date of
St. Paul's first Epistle to the Corinthians "about 160 years had elapsed." Here, again,
did we only know with certainty the precise date of that epistle, we could ascertain ''*' about''
the date of the tract. But {a) the date of the epistle is itself variously given, Burton giving
it as early as a.d. 52, Michaelis and Mill as late as 57; and {b) Tertullian only says, " Armis
circiter CLX. exinde productis;" while the way in which, in the ad Natf., within the short
space of three chapters, he states first' that 250, and then (in c. 9) that 300, years had not
elapsed since the rise of the Christian name, leads us to think that here again = he only
desires to speak in round numbers, meaning perhaps vwre than 150, but less than 170.

These specimens must suffice, though it might be easy to add to them. There is, how-
ever, another classification of our author's writings which has been attempted. Finding the
hoplessness of strict chronological accuracy, commentators have seized on the idea that
peradventure there might be found at all events some internal marks by which to determine
which of them were written before, which after, the writer's secession to Montanism. It
may be confessed that this attempt has been somewhat more successful than the other. Yet
even here there are two formidable obstacles standing in our way. The first and greatest
is, that the natural temper of Tertullian was from the first so akin to the spirit of Montanism,
that, unless there occur distinct allusions to the " New Prophecy," or expressions specially
connected with Montanistic phraseology, the getieral tone of any treatise is not a very safe
guide. The second is, that the subject-matter of so7fte of the treatises is not such as to
a£ford much scope for the introduction of the peculiarities of a sect which professed to differ
in discipline only, not doctrine, from the church at large.

Still the result of this classification seems to show one important feature of agreement
between commentators, however they may differ upon details; and that is, that considerably
the larger part of our author's rather voluminous productions ^ must have been subsequent
to his lamented secession. I think the best way to give the reader means for forming his
own judgment will be, as I have said, to lay before him in parallel columns a tabular view
of the disposition of the books by Dr. Neander and Bishop Kaye. These two modern
writers, having given particular care to the subject, bringing to bear upon it all the advan-
tages derived from wide reading, eminent abilities, and a diligent study of the works of
preceding writers on the same questions,* have a special right to be heard upon the matter
in hand; and I think, if I may be allowed to say so, that, for calm judgment, and minute
acquaintance with his author, I shall not be accused of undue partiality if I express my
opinion that, as far as my own observation goes, the palm must be awarded to the Bishop.
In this view I am supported by the fact that the accomplished Professor Ramsay, s follows
Dr. Kaye's arrangement. I premise that Dr. Neander adopts a threefold division, into:

1. Writings which were occasioned by the relation of the Christians to the heathen, and
refer to their vindication of Christianity against the heathen; attacks on heathenism; the
sufferings and conduct of Christians under persecution; and the intercourse of Christians
with heathens:

2. Writings which relate to Christian and church life, and to ecclesiastical discipline:

3. The dogmatic and dogmatico-controversial treatises.
And under each head he subdivides into:

a. Pre-Montanist writings: b. Post-Montanist writings:

c ____^_^

A^hgy, and consider the latter as a kind of new edition of the former : while it would fix the date of the ad. Natt. as not cer-
Uinly earlier than 197. in which year (as we have seen) Albinus died. The fatal battle took place on the banks of the Rhone.

' ^" ^- f- a Viz. in the de Monog.

3 It looks stranjfc to see Tertullian's works referred to as consisting of "about thirty short treatises"' in Murdock's note on
MosWrm. See the cd. of the Eccl. Hist, by Dr. J. Seaton Reid, p. 65, n. 2, Lond. and Bel. 1852.

•» This last qualification is very specially observable in Dr. Kaye.

5 Ip^his article on Tertullian in Smith's Diet. 0/ Biog. and Myth


INTRODUCTORY NOTE.


II


thus leaving no room for what Kaye calls " works respecting which nothing certain can be
pronounced." For the sake of clearness, this order has not been followed in the table.
On the other side, it will be seen that Dr. Kaye, while not assuming to speak with more
than a reasonable probability, is careful so to arrange the treatises under each head as to
show the order ^ so far as it is discoverable, in which the books under that head were pub-
lished; i.e., if one book is quoted \n another book, the book so quoted, if distinctly referred
to as already before the world, is plainly anterior to that in which it is quoted. Thus, then,
we have:


Neander.
I. Pre-Montanist.

1. De Poenitentia.

2. De Oratione.

3. De Baptismo

4. Ad Uxorem i.

5. Ad Uxorem ii,

6. Ad Martyres.

7. De Patientia.

8. De Spectaculis.

9. De Idololatria

10. II. Ad Nationes i. ii.

12. Apologeticus.

13. De Testimonio Animse.

14. De Praescr. Hsereticorum.

15. De Cult. Fern. i.

16. De Cult. Fern. ii.

2. Montanist.
17-21. Adv. Marc. i. ii. iii. iv. v.

22. De Anima.

23. De Carne Christi.

24. De Res. Carn.

25. De Cor. Mil.

26. De Virg. Vel.

27. De Ex. Cast.

28. De Monog.

29. De Jejuniis.

30. De Pudicitia.

31. De Pallio.

32. Scorpiace.

33. Ad Scapulam

34. Adv. Valentinianos.

35. Adv. Hermogenem.

36. Adv. Praxeam.

37. Adv. Judseos.

38. De Fuga in Persecutione.


Kaye.


I. Pre-Montanist (probably).

I.

De Poenitentia.*

2.

De Oratione.

3-

De Baptismo.

4-

Ad Uxorem i.

5-

Ad Uxorem ii.

6.

Ad Martyres.

7-

De Patientia.

8.

Adv. Judaeos.

9-

De Praescr. Hsereticorum."

2. Montanist (certainly).

10.

Adv. Marc. i.

II.

Adv. Marc, ii.3

12.

De Anima.^

13.

Adv. Marc. iii.

14.

Adv. Marc, iv.s

15.

De Carne Christi.^

i6.

De Resurrectione Carnis.7

17-

Adv. Marc. v.

18.

Adv. Praxeam.

19.

Scorpiace.^

20.

De Corona Militis.

21.

De Virginibus Velandis.

22.

De Exhortatione Castitatis.

23-

De Fuga in Persecutione.

24.

De Monogamia.s

25-

De Jejuniis.

26.

De Pudicitia.

3. Montanist (probably).

27. Adv. Valentinianos.

28. Ad Scapulam.

29. De Spectaculis.^"

30. De Idololatria.

31. De Cultu Feminarum i.

32. De Cultu Feminarum ii.

|.. Works respecting which nothing certain
can be pronounced.

33. The Apology.^'

34. Ad Nationes i.

35. Ad Nationes ii.

36. De Testimonio Animae.

37. De Pallio.

38. Adv. Hermogenem.


1 Referred to apparently in de Pudic. ad init.—T^.

2 The de Prcescr. is ref. to in adv. Marc, i.; adv. Prax. 2 ; de Carne Christi., 2 ; adv. Hermog. i.

3 Ref. to in de Res. Carn. 2, 14 ; Scorp. 5 ; de Anima, 21. The only mark, as the learned Bishop's remarks imply, for fixing the
date of publication as Montanistic, is the fact that Tertullian alludes, in the opening sentences, to B. i. Hence B. ii. could not,
in its present form, have appeared till after B. i. Now B. i. contains evident marks of Montanism : see the last chapter, for instance.
But the writer speaks (in the same passage) of B. ii. as being the treatise, the ill fate of which in its unfinished condition he there
relates— at least such seems the legitimate sense of his words— «^w remodelled. Hence, when ori^nally written, it may not have
been Montanistic— Tr. 4 Ref. to in de Res. Carn. 2, 17, 45 ; comp. cc. 18, 21. 5 Ref. to in de Carn. Chr. 7.

6 Ref. to in de Res. Carn. 2. 7 See the beginning and end of the de Carne Christi.— Tk. Ref. to in adv. Marc. v. 10.

8 In c. 4 Tertullian speaks as if he had already refuted all the heretics. 9 Ref. to in de/ej. c. i.

10 Ref. to in de Idolol. 13 ; in de Cult. Fern. i. 8. In the de Cor. 6 is a reference to the Greek tract de .Spectaculis by our author.
"Archdeacon Evans, in his Biography 0/ the Early Church (in the Theological Library), suggests that the success which the


12 INTRODUCTORY NOTE.


A comparison of these two lists will show that the difference between the two great au-
thorities is, as Kaye remarks, ** not great; and with respect to some of the tracts on which
we differ, the learned author expresses himself with great diffidence." ' The main difference,
in fact, is that which affects two tracts upon kindred subjects, the de Spectaculis, and Idolola-
tria, the de Cultu Fcminarum (a subject akin to the other two), and the adv. JudcBos. With
reference to all these, except the last, to which I believe the Archdeacon does not once refer,
the Bishop's opinion appears to have the support of Archdeacon Evans, whose learned and
interesting essay, referred to in the note, appears in a volume published in 1837. Dr. Kaye's
Lectures, on which his book is founded, were delivered in 1825. Of the date of his first
edition I am not aware. Dr. Neander's Antignostikus also first appeared in 1825. The
preface to his second edition bears date July i, 1849.' As to the adv. JudcBos, I confess I
agree with Neander in thinking that, at all events from the beginning of c. 9, it is spurious.
If it be urged that Jerome expressly quotes it as TertuUian's, I reply, Jerome so quotes it, I
believe, when he is expounding Daniel. Now all that the'^^z;. Jud. has to say about Da?iiel
ends with the end of c. 8. It is therefore quite compatible with the fact thus stated to rec-
ognize the earlier half of the book as genuine, and to reject the rest, beginning, as it
happens, just after the eighth chapter, as spurious. Perhaps Dr. Neander's Jewish birth
and training peculiarly fit him to be heard on this question. Nor do I think Professor
Ramsay (in the article above alluded to) has quite seen the force of Kaye's own remarks on
Neander.5 What he does say is equally creditable to his candour and his accuracy; namely:
*' The instances alleged by Dr. Neander, in proof of this position, are undoubtedly very
remarkable; but if the concluding chapters of the tract are spurious, no ground seems to be
left for asserting that the genuine portion was posterior to the third Book against Marcion,*
— and none, consequently, for asserting that it was written by a Montanist." With which
remark I must draw these observations on the genuine extant works of Tertullian to a close.

The next point to which a brief reference must be made is the lost works of Tertullian,
lists of these are given both by Oehler and by Kaye, viz. :

1. A Book on Aaron's Robes: mentioned by Jerome, Epist. 128, ad Fabiolam de Veste
Sacerdotali (torn. ii. p. 586, Opp. ed. Bened.).

2. A Book on the Superstition of the Age.s

3. A Book on the Submission of the Soul.

4. A Book on the Flesh and the Soul.

Nos. 2, 3, and 4 are known only by their titles, which are found in the Index to Tertul-
lian's works given in the Codex Agobardi; but the tracts themselves are not extant in the
MS., which appears to have once contained —

5. A Book on Paradise, named in the Index, and referred to in de Anima 55, adv. Marc.
iii. 13; and

6. A Book on the Hope of the Faithful: also named in the Index, and referred to adv.

Apology met with, or at lea«t the fame it brought its author, may have been the occasion of TertuUian's visit to Rome. He rejects
entirely the supposition that Tertullian was a presbyter of the Roman church ; nor does he think Eusebius' words, koX rwy
MoAtara «wi 'Pwfi'W Ao^wpw^ (Kcci. Hist. ii. a. 47 ad yf«., 48 ad init.), sufficiently plain to be relied on. One thing does seem pretty
plain, that the rendering of them which Rufinus gives, and Valesius follows, "inter nostros" {sc. Latinos) " Scriptores admodum
clarus," cannot be correct. That we find a famous Roman lawyer Tertullianus, or Tertyllianus, among the writers fragments of
whom arc preserved in the Pandects, Neander reminds us ; but (as he says) it by no means follows, even if it could be proved that the
date of the said lawyer corresponded with the supposed date of our Tertullian, that they were identical. Still it is worth bearing in
mind, especially as a similarity of language exisU, or has been thought to exist, between the jurist and the Christian author. And
the juridical language and tone of our author do seem to point to his having— though Mr. Evans regards that as doubtful— been a
trained lawyer.— Tr.

• Kaye, as above. Pref. to ad ed. pp. xxi. xxii. incorporated in the 3d ed., which I always quote.

=> i.e., four years after Kaye's third. 3 See Pref. ad ed. p. xix. n. 9.

4 It being from that book that the quoUtions are taken which make up the remainder of the tract, as Semler, worthless as his
theories are, has well shown.

5 Sax:uli • " or " of the world," or perhaps '* of heathenism."


INTRODUCTORY NOTE. 13


Marc. iii. 24; and by Jerome in his account of Papias,* and on Ezek. xxxvi.;' and by
Gennadius of Marseilles. ^

7. Six Books on Ecstasy, with a seventh in reply to Apollonius:* see Jerome. » See,
too, J. A. Fabricius on the words of the unknown author whom the Jesuit Sirmond edited
under the name Pradestinatus ; who gathers thence that *' Soter, pope of the City,* and
Apollonius, bishop 7 of the Ephesians, wrote a book against the Montanists; in reply to whom
TertulUan, a Carthaginian presbyter, wrote." J. Pamelius thinks these seven books
were originally published m Greek.

8. A Book in reply to the Apellesites (i.e. the followers of Apelles^): referred to in de
Came Christie c. 8.

9. A Book on the Origin' of the Soul, in reply to Hermogenes: referred to in de Animas
cc. I, 3, 22, 24.

10. A Book on Fate: referred to by Fulgentius Planciades, p. 562, Merc; also referred
to as either written, or intended to be written, by TertuUian himself, de Anijna, c. 20.
Jerome '° states that there was extant, or had been extant, a book on Fate under the name
of Minucius Felix, written indeed by a perspicuous author, but not in the style of Minucius
Felix. This, Pamelius judged, should perhaps be rather ascribed to TertuUian.

11. A Book on the Trinity. Jerome" says: " Novatian wrote a large

volume on the Trinity, as if maki?ig ati epitome of a work of TertuUian' s, ichich most men fwt
kno7uing regard it as Cyprian's.'* Novatian 's book stood in Tertullian's name in the Mss.
of J. Gangneius, who was the first to edit it; in a Malmesbury ms. which Sig. Gelenius used;
and in others.

12. A Book addressed to a Philosophic Friend on the Straits of Matrimony. Both Kaye
and Oehler ^' are in doubt whether Jerome's words, '^ by which some have been led to conclude
that TertuUian wrote some book or books on this and kindred subjects, really imply as
much, or whether they may not refer merely to those tracts and passages in his extant
writings which touch upon such matters. Kaye hesitates to think that the " Book to a Phil-
osophic Friend" is the same as the de Exhortatione Castitatis, because Jerome says Ter-
tuUian wrote on the subject of celibacy "/« his youthj" but as Cave takes what Jerome
elsewhere says of Tertullian's leaving the Church *' about the middle of his age" to mean his
spiritual age, the same sense might attach to his words here too, and thus obviate the
Bishop's difficulty.

There are some other works which have been attributed to TertuUian — on Circumcision;
on Animals Clean and Unclean; on the truth that God is a Judge — which Oehler likewise
rejects, believing that the expressions of Jerome refer only to passages in the Anti-Marcion
and other extant works. To Novatian Jerome does ascribe a distinct work on Circumcision, '•♦
and this may (comp. 11, just above) have given rise to the view that TertuUian had written
one also.

There were, moreover, three treatises at least written by TertuUian in Greek. They are:

1. A Book on Public Shows. See de Cor. c. 6.

2. A Book on Baptism. See de Bapt. c. 15.

3. A Book on the Veiling of Virgins. See de V. V. c. i.

I Catal. Scrippt. Eccles. c. 18. = P. 95a, torn. iii. 0pp. ed. Bened.

3 De Ecclesice doginatibus^ c. 55.

4 Referred to in Adv. Marc. iv. 22. So Kaye thinks; but perhaps the reference is doubtful. See, however, the passage in Dr.
Holmes' translation in the present series, with his note thereon. 5 De Scriptt. Eccles. 53, 24, 40.

6 i.e., Rome. 7 Antistes.

8 A Marcionite at one time : he subsequently set up a sect of his own. He is mentioned in the adv. omn. Heer. c. 6.

9 Censu. 10 Catal. Scrippt. Eccles. c. 58.

I' Catal. Scrippt. Eccles. c. 70. *' Oehler speaks more decidedly than Kaye.

^^ Epist. ad Eustochium de Custodia Virginitatis^ p. 37, tom. iv. Opp. ed. Bened.; adv. Jovin. i. p. 157, torn. iv. 0pp. ed.
Bened. . M In the Catal. Scrippt. Eccles.


INTRODUCTORY NOTE.


Oehler adds that J. Pamelius, in his epistle dedicatory to Philip ii. of Spain, makes
mention of a Greek copy of Tertullian in the library of that king. This report, however,
since nothing has ever been seen or heard of the said copy from that time, Oehler judges to
be erroneous.'

It remains briefly to notice the confessedly spurious works which the editions of Tertul-
lian generally have appended to them. With these Kaye does not deal. The fragment,
adi\ omnes Hareses, Oehler attributes to Victorinus Petavionensis, i.e., Victorinus bishop
of Pettaw, on the Drave, in Austrian Styria. It was once thought he ought to be called
Pictavitfisis, i.e. of Poictiers; but John Launoy' has shown this to be an error. Victorinus
is said by Jerome to have ** understood Greek better than Latin; hence his works are excel-
lent for the sense, but mean as to the style." ^ Cave believes him to have been a Greek by
birth. Cassiodorus* states him to have been once a professor of rhetoric. Jerome's state-
ment agrees with the style of the tract in question; and Jerome distinctly says Victorinus
did write adi^ersus omties Hcereses. Allix leaves the question of its authorship quite uncer-
tain. If Victorinus be the author, the book falls clearly within the ante-Nicene period; for
Victorinus fell a martyr in the Diocletian persecution, probably about a.d. 303.

The next fragment — " Of the Execrable Gods of the Heathens " — is of quite uncertain
authorship. Oehler would attribute it "to some declaimer not quite ignorant of Tertullian's
writings," but certainly not to Tertullian himself.

Lastly we come to the metrical fragments. Concerning these, it is perhaps impossible
to assign them to their rightful owners. Oehler has not troubled himself much about them;
but he seems to regard the Jonah as worthy of more regard than the rest, for he seems to
have intended giving more labour to its editing at some future time. Whether he has ever
done so, or given us his German version of Tertullian's own works, which, " si Deus ad-
juverit," he distinctly promises in his preface, I do not know. Perhaps the best thing to be
done under the circumstances is to give the judgment of the learned Peter Allix. It may
be premised that by the celebrated George Fabricius s — who published his great work, Poetarum
Veterum Ecclesiasticorum Opera Christiafia, etc., in 1564 — the Five Books in Reply to Mar-
cioUy and the Judgmefit of the Lord, are ascribed to Tertullian, the Gefiesis and Sodom to
Cyprian. Pamelius likewise seems to have ascribed the Five Books, the Jofiah, and the
Sodom^ to Tertullian; and according to Lardner, Bishop Bull likewise attributed the Five
Books to him. 7 They have been generally ascribed to the Victorinus above mentioned.
Tillemont, among others, thinks they may well enough be his.^ Rigaltius is content to de-
monstrate that they are not Tertullian's, but leaves the real authorship without attempting
to decide it. Of the others the same eminent critic says, " They seem to have been written
at Carthage, at an age not far removed from Tertullian's."' Allix, after observing that
Pamelius is inconsistent with himself in attributing the Genesis and Sodom at one time to Ter-
tullian, at another to Cyprian, rejects both views equally, and assigns the Genesis with some
confidence to Salvian, a presbyter of Marseilles, whose " floruit " Cave gives cir. 440, a con-
temporary of Gennadius, and a copious author. To this it is, Allix thinks, that Gennadius
alludes in his Catalogue 0/ Illustrious Men, c. 77.

» " Mendaccm" is his word. 1 know not whether he intends to charge Pamelius with wilful fraud.

» Doctor of the Sorbonne, said by Bossuet to have proved himself "a semi-Pelagian and Jansenist ! " born in 1603, in Normandy,
died in 1678.

3 Jcf. de Vir, Illutt. c. 74.

4 B. 470, d. 560.

5 He must not be confounded with the still more famous John Albert Fabricius of the next century, referred to in p. xv. above.
f> Whole of these metrical fragments.

7 Lardner, Credibility, vol. iii. p. 169, under " Victorinus of PetUw," cd. Kippis, Lond. 1838.

■See Lardner, as above.

9 See Migne, who prefixes this judgment of Rig. to the dejudicio Domini.


\


INTRODUCTORY NOTE. 15


The Judgment of the Lord Allix ascribes to one Verecundus, an African bishop, whose
date he finds it difficult to decide exactly. He refers to two of the name: one Bishop of
Tunis, whom Victor of Tunis in his chronicle mentions as having died in exile at Chalcedon
A.D. 552; the other Bishop of Noba, who visited Carthage with many others a.d. 482, at
the summons of King Huneric, to answer there for their faith; — and would ascribe the poem
to the former, thinking that he finds an allusion to it in the article upon that Verecundus in
the de Viris Illustribus of Isidore of Seville. Oehler agrees with him. The Five Books
Allix seems to hint may be attributed to some imitator of the Victorinus of Pettaw named
above. Oehler attributes them rather to one Victorinus, or Victor, of Marseilles, a rheto-
rician, who died a.d. 450. He appears in G. Fabricius as Claudius Marius Victorinus,
writer of a Commentary on Genesis, and an epistle ad Salomofiem Abbata, both in verse, and
of some considerable length.


I.


APOLOGY.

[TRANSLATED BY THE REV. S. THELWALL, LATE SCHOLAR OF CHRIST'S

COLLEGE, CANTAB.]


THE APOLOGY.i
CHAP. I.

Rulers of the Roman Empire, if, seated
for the administration of justice on your lofty
tribunal, under the gaze of every eye, and
occupying there all but the highest position
in the state, you may not openly inquire into
and sift before the world the real truth in
regard to the charges made against the Chris-
tians; if in this case alone you are afraid or
ashamed to exercise your authority in making
public inquiry with the carefulness which be-
comes justice; if, finally, the extreme se-
verities inflicted on our people in recently
private judgments, stand in the way of our
being permitted to defend ourselves before
you, you cannot surely forbid the Truth to
reach your ears by the secret pathway of a
noiseless book.= She has no appeals to make
to you in regard of her condition, for .that
does not excite her wonder. She knows that
she is but a sojourner on the earth, and that
among strangers she naturally finds foes; and
more than this, that her origin, her dwelling-
place, her hope, her recompense, her honours,
are above. One thing, meanwhile, she anx-
iously desires of earthly rulers — not to be
condemned unknown. What harm can it do
to the laws, supreme in their domain, to give
her a hearing ? Nay, for that part of it, will
not their absolute supremacy be more con-
spicuous in their condemning her, even after
she has made her plea ? But if, unheard, sen-
tence is pronounced against her, besides the
odium of an unjust deed, you will incur the
merited suspicion of doing it with some idea
that it is unjust, as not wishing to hear what
you may not be able to hear and condemn.


1 [Great diversity exists among the critics as to the date of this
Apology ; see Kaye, pp. xvi. 48, 65. Mosheira says, a.d, 198, Kaye
A.D. 204.]

2 Elucidation II.


We lay this before you as the first ground on
which we urge that your hatred to the name
of Christian is unjust. And the very reason
which seems to excuse this injustice (I mean
ignorance) at once aggravates and convicts it.
For what is there more unfair than to hate a
thing of which you know nothing, even though
it deserve to be hated ? Hatred is only merited
when it is knmvn to be merited. But without
that knowledge, whence is its justice to be
vindicated ? for that is to be proved, not from
the mere fact that an aversion exists, but from
acquaintance with the subject. When men,
then, give way to a dislike simply because
they are entirely ignorant of the nature of the
thing disliked, why may it not be precisely
the very sort of thing they should not dislike ?
So we maintain that they are both ignorant
while they hate us, and hate us unrighteously
while they continue in ignorance, the one thing
being the result of the other either way of it.
The proof of their ignorance, at once con-
demning and excusing their injustice, is this,
that those who once hated Christianity because
they knew nothing about it, no sooner come
to know it than they all lay down at once their
enmity. From being its haters they become
its disciples. By simply getting acquainted
with it, they begin now to hate what they had
formerly been, and to profess what they had
formerly hated; and their numbers are as
great as are laid to our charge. The outcry
is that the State is filled with Christians — that
they are in the fields, in the citadels, in the
islands: they make lamentation, as for some
calamity, that both sexes, every age and con-
dition, even high rank, are passing over to
the profession of the Christian faith; and yet
for all, their minds are not awakened to the
thought of some good they have failed to
notice in it. They must not allow any truer
suspicions to cross their minds; they have no


i8


APOLOGY.


[chap. II.


desire to make closer trial. Here alone the
curiosity of human nature slumbers. They
like to be ignorant, though to others the knowl-
edge has been bliss. Anacharsis reproved
the rude venturing, to criticise the cultured;
how much more this judging of those who
know, by men who are entirely ignorant,
might he have denounced ! Because they
already dislike, they want to know no more.
Thus they prejudge that of which they are
ignorant to be such, that, if they came to
know it, it could no longer be the object of
their aversion; since, if inquiry finds nothing
worthy of dislike, it is certainly proper to
cease from an unjust dislike, while if its bad
character comes plainly out, instead of the de-
testation entertained for it being thus di-
minished, a stronger reason for perseverance
in that detestation is obtained, even under
the authority of justice itself. But, says one,
a thing is not good merely because multitudes
go over to it; for how many have the bent of
their nature towards whatever is bad ! how
many go astray into ways of error ! It is un-
doubted. Yet a thing that is thoroughly evil,
not even those whom it carries away venture
to defend as good. Nature throws a veil
either of fear or shame over all evil. For in-
stance, you find that criminals are eager to
conceal themselves, avoid appearing in public,
are in trepidation when they are caught, deny
their guilt, when they are accused; even when
they are put to the rack, they do not easily or
always confess; when there is no doubt about
their condemnation, they grieve for what they
have done. In their self-communings they
admit their being impelled by sinful dispo-
sitions, but they lay the blame either on fate
or on the stars. They are unwilling to acknowl-
edge that the thing is theirs, because they
own that it is wicked. But what is there like
this in the Christian's case ? The only shame
or regret he feels, is at not having been a
Christian earlier. If he is pointed out, he
glories in it; if he is accused, he offers no de-
fence; interrogated, he makes voluntary con-
fession; condemned he renders thanks. What
sort of evil thing is this, which wants all the
ordinary peculiarities of evil — fear, shame,
subterfuge, penitence, lamenting? What! is
that a crime in which the criminal rejoices ?
to be accused of which is his ardent wish, to
be punished for which is his felicity? You
cannot call it madness, you who stand con-
victed of knowing nothing of the matter.

CHAP. li.

"■ If, again, it is certain that we are the most
wicked of men, why do you treat us so differ-


ently from our fellows, that is, from other
criminals, it being only fair that the same crime
should get the same treatment ? When the
charges made against us are made against
others, they are permitted to make use both
of their own lips and of hired pleaders to show
their innocence. They have full opportunity
of answer and debate; in fact, it is against
the law to condemn anybody undefended and
unheard. Christians alone are forbidden to
say anything in exculpation of themselves, in
defence of the truth, to help the judge to a
righteous decision; all that is cared about is
having what the public hatred demands — the
confession of the name, not examination of
the charge: while in your ordinary judicial in-
vestigations, on a man's confession of the
crime of murder, or sacrilege, or incest, or
treason, to take the points of which we are
accused, you are not content to proceed at
once to Sentence, — you do not take that step
till you thoroughly examine the circumstances
of the confession — what is the real character
of the deed, how often, where, in what way,
when he has done it, who were privy to it, and
who actually took part with him in it. Noth-
ing like this is done in our case, though the
falsehoods disseminated about us ought to
have the same sifting, that it might be found
how many murdered children each of us had
tasted; how many incests each of us had
shrouded in darkness; what cooks, what dogs
had been witness of our deeds. Oh, how
great the glory of the ruler who should bring
to light some Christian who had devoured a
hundred infants ! But, instead of that, we
find that even inquiry in regard to our case is
forbidden. For the younger Pliny, when he
was ruler of a province, having condemned
some Christians to death, and driven some
from their stedfastness, being still annoyed
by their great numbers, at last sought the
advice of Trajan,'' the reigning emperor, as
to what he was to do with the rest, explaining
to his master that, except an obstinate dis-
inclination to offer sacrifices, he found in the
religious services nothing but meetings at
early morning for singing hymns to Christ
and' God, and sealing home their way of life
by a united pledge to be faithful to their
religion, forbidding murder, adultery, dis-
honesty, and other crimes. Upon this
Trajan wrote back that Christians were by
no means to be sought after; but if they were
brought before him, they should be punished.


' [For chronological dates in our author's age, see Elucidation
III. Tertullian places an interval of 115 years, 6 months and 15
days between Tiberius and Antoninus Pius. See Answer to the
Jews, cap. vii. in/rajy

2 Another reading is *' ut Deo," as God,


I


CHAP. II.]


APOLOGY.


19


O miserable deliverance, — under the neces-
sities of the case, a self-contradiction ! It
forbids them to be sought after as innocent,
and it commands them to be punished as
guilty. It is at once merciful and cruel; it
passes by, and it punishes. Why dost thou
play a game of evasion upon thyself, O
Judgment? If thou condemnest, why dost
thou hot also inquire. If thou does not
inquire, why dost thou not also absolve ?
Military stations are distributed through all
the provinces for tracking robbers. Against
traitors and public foes every man is a sol-
dier; search is made even for their con-
federates and accessories. The Christian
alone must not be sought, though he may be
brought and accused before the judge; as if
a search had any other end than that in view !
And so you condemn the man for whom no-
body wished a search to be made when he is
presented to you, and who even now does not
deserve punishment, I suppose, because of
his guilt, but because, though forbidden to be
sought, he was found. And then, too, you do
not in that case deal with us in the ordinary
way of judicial proceedings against offenders;
for, in the case of others denying, you apply
the torture to make them confess — Christians
alone you torture, to make them deny; where-
as, if we were guilty of any crime, we should
be sure to deny it, and you with your tortures
would force us to confession. Nor indeed
should you hold that our crimes require no
such investigation merely on the ground that
you are convinced by our confession of the
name that the deeds were done, — you who are
daily wont, though you know well enough
what murder is, none the less to extract from
the confessed murderer a full account of how
the crime was perpetrated. So that with all
the greater perversity you act, when, holding
our crimes proved by our confession of the
name of Christ, you drive us by torture to fall
from our confession, that, repudiating the
name, we may in like manner repudiate also
the crimes with which, from that same con-
fession, you had assumed that we were charge-
able. I suppose, though you believe us to be
the worst of mankind, you do not wish us to
perish. For thus, no doubt, you are in the
habit of bidding the murderer deny, and of
ordering the man guilty of sacrilege to the
rack if he persevere in his acknowledgment!
Is that the way of it ? But if thus you do not
deal with us as criminals, you declare us there-
by innocent, when as innocent you are anx-
ious that we do not persevere in a confession
which you know will bring on us a condem-
nation of necessity, not of justice, at your
hands. " I am a Christian," the man cries out.


He tells you what he is; you wish to hear
from him what he is not. Occupying your
place of authority to extort the truth, you do
your utmost to get lies from us. *' I am," he
says, '* that which you ask me if I am. Why
do you torture me to sin ? I confess, and you
put me to the rack. What would you do if I
denied ? Certainly you give no ready credence
to others when they deny. When we deny,
you believe at once. Let this perversity of
yours lead you to suspect that there is some
hidden power in the case under whose in-
fluence you act against the forms, against the
nature of public justice, even against the very
laws themselves. For, unless I am greatly
mistaken, the laws enjoin offenders to be
searched out, and not to be hidden away.
They lay it down that persons who own a
crime are to be condemned, not acquitted.
The decrees of the senate, the commands of
your chiefs, lay this clearly down. The power
of which you are servants is a civil, not a
tyrannical domination. Among tyrants, in-
deed, torments used to be. inflicted even as
punishments: with you they are mitigated to
a means of questioning alone. Keep to your
law in these as necessary till confession is ob-
tained; and if the torture is anticipated by
confession, there will be no occasion for it:
sentence should be passed; the criminal should
be given over to the penalty which is his due,
not released. Accordingly, no one is eager for
the acquittal of the guilty; it is not right to
desire that, and so no one is ever compelled
to deny. Well, you think the Christian a
man of every crime, an enemy of the gods,
of the emperor, of the laws, of good morals,
of all nature; yet you compel him to deny,
that you may acquit him, which without his
denial you could not do. You play fast and
loose with the laws. You wish him to deny
his guilt, that you may, even against his will,
bring him out blameless and free from all
guilt in reference to the past ! Whence is this
slrange perversity on your part? How \%
it you do not reflect that a spontaneous con-
fession is greatly more worthy of credit than a
compelled denial; or consider whether, when
compelled to deny, a man's denial may not be
in good faith, and whether acquitted, he may
not, then and 'there, as soon as the trial is
over, laugh at your hostility, a Christian as
much as ever? Seeing, then, that in every-
thing you deal differently with us than with
other criminals, bent upon the one object or
taking from us our name (indeed, it is ours
no more if we do what Christians never do),
it is made perfectly clear that there is no
crime of any kind in the case, but merely a
name which a certain system, ever working


20


APOLOGY


[chap. IV.


against the truth, pursues with its enmity,
doing this chiefly with the object of securing
that men may have no desire to know for cer-
tain what they know for certain they are entire-
ly ignorant of. Hence, too, it is that they be-
lieve about us things of which they have no
proof, and they are disinclined to have them
looked into, lest the charges, they would
rather take on trust, are all proved to have no
foundation, that the name so hostile to that
rival power — its crimes presumed, not proved
— may be condemned simply on its own con-
fession. So we are put to the torture if we
confess, and we are punished if we persevere,
and if we deny we are acquitted, because all
the contention is about a name. Finally, why
do you read out of your tablet-lists that such
a man is a Christian? Why not also that he is
a murderer? And if a Christian is a mur-
derer, why not guilty, too, of incest, or any
other vile thing you believe of us ? In our
case alone you are either ashamed or unwil-
ling to mention the very names of our crimes.
If to be called a " Christian " does not im-
ply any crime, the name is surely very hate-
ful, when that of itself is made a crime.

CHAP. III.

What are we to think of it, that most people
so blindly knock their heads against the
hatred of the Christian name; that when they
bear favourable testimony to any one, they
mingle with it abuse of the name he bears ?
"A good man," says one, '* is Gains Seius,
only that he is a Christian." So another, " 1
am astonished that a wise man like Lucius
should have suddenly become a Christian."
Nobody thinks it needful to consider whether
Gains is not good and Lucius wise, on this
very account that he is a Christian ; or a Chris-
tian, for the reason that he is wise and good.
They praise what they know, they abuse what
they are ignorant of, and they inspire their
knowledge with their ignorance; though in
fairness you should rather judge of what h
unknown from what is known, than what is
known from what is unknown. Others, in
the case of persons whom, before they took
the name of Christian, they had known as
loose, and vile, and wicked, put on them a
brand from the very thing which they praise.
In the blindness of their hatred, they fall foul
of their own approving judgment ! '* What
a woman she was ! how wanton ! how gay !
What a youth he was ! how profligate ! how li-
bidinous ! — they have become Christians!"
So the hated name is given to a reformation
of character. Some even barter away their
comforts for that hatred, content to bear in-
jury^^ if they are kept free at home from the


object of their bitter enmity. The wife,
now chaste, the husband, now no longer jeal-
ous, casts out of his house; the son, now
obedient, the father, who used to be so pa-
tient, disinherits; the servant, now faithful,
the master, once so mild, commands away
from his presence; it is a high offence for
any one to be reformed by the detested name.
Goodness is of less value than hatred of
Christians. Well now, if there is this dislike
of the name, what blame can you attach to
names ? What accusation can you bring
against mere designations, save that some-
thing in the word sounds either barbarous,
or unlucky, or scurrilous, or unchaste ? But
Christian, so far as the meaning of the word
is concerned, is derived from anointing.
Yes, and even when it is wrongly pronounced
by you " Chrestianus " (for you do not even
know accurately the name you hate), it comes
from sweetness and benignity. You hate,
therefore, in the guiltless, even a guiltless
name. But the special ground of dislike to
the sect is, that it bears the name of its
Founder. Is there anything new in a reli-
gious sect getting for its followers a designa-
tion from its master ? Are not the philoso-
phers called from the founders of f/ieir sys-
tems— Platonists, Epicureans, Pythagoreans ?•
Are not the Stoics and Academics so called
also from the places in which they assembled
and stationed themselves ? and are not phy-
sicians named from Erasistratus, grammarians
from Aristarchus, cooks even from Apicius ?
And yet the bearing of the name, transmitted
from the original institutor with whatever he
has instituted, offends no one. No doubt^
if it is proved that the sect is a bad one, and
so its founder bad as well, that will prove that
the name is bad and deserves our aversion,
in respect of the character both of the sect
and its author. Before, therefore, taking up^
a dislike to the name, it behoved you to con-
sider the sect in the author, or the author in
the sect. But now, without any sifting and
knowledge of either, the mere name is made
matter of accusation, the mere name is as-
sailed, and a sound alone brings condemna-
tion on a sect and its author both, while of
both you are ignorant, because they have such
and such a designation, not because they are
convicted of anything wrong.

CHAP. IV.

And so, having made these remarks as it
were by way of preface, that I might show in
its true colours the injustice of the public
hatred against us, I shall now take my stand
on the plea of our blamelessness; and I shall
not only refute the things which are objected


CHAi'. v.]


APOLOGY.


21


to us, but I shall also retort them on the ob-
jectors, that in this way all may know that
Christians are free from the very crimes they
are so well aware prevail among themselves,
that they may at the same time be put to the
blush for their accusations against us, — accu-
sations I shall not say of the worst of men
against the best, but now, as they will have it,
against those who are only their fellows in
sin. We shall reply to the accusation of all
the various crimes we are said to be guilty of
in secret, such as we find them committing
in the light of day, and as being guilty of
which we are held to be wicked, senseless,
worthy of punishment, deserving of ridicule.
But since, when our truth meets you success-
fully at all points, the authority of the laws as
a last resort is set up against it, so that it is
either said that their determinations are abso-
lutely conclusive, or the necessity of obedi-
ence is, however unwillingly, preferred to the
truth, I shall first, in this matter of the laws,
grapple with you as with their chosen pro-
tutors. Now first, when you sternly lay it

'!> down in your sentences, "It is not lawful for
you to exist," and with unhesitating rigour
you enjoin this to be carried out, you exhibit
the violence and unjust domination of mere
tyranny, if you deny the thing to be lawful,
simply on the ground that you wish it to be
unlawful, not because it ought to be. But if
you would have it unlawful because it ought
not to be lawful, without doubt that should
have no permission of law which does harm;
and on this ground, in fact, it is already de-
termined that whatever is beneficial is legiti-
mate. Well, if I have found what your law
prohibits to be good, as one who has arrived
at such a previous opinion, has it not lost its
power to debar me from it, though that very
thing, if it were evil, it would justly forbid to
me ? If your law has gone wTong, it is of

' human origin, I think; it has not fallen from
heaven. Is it wonderful that man should err
in making a law, or come to his senses in
rejecting it? Did not the Lacedaemonians
amend the laws ol Lycurgus himself, thereby
inflicting such pain on their author that he
shut himself up, and doomed himself to
death by starvation ? Are you not yourselves
every day, in your efforts to illumine the
darkness of antiquity, cutting and hewing
with the new axes of imperial rescripts and
edicts, that whole ancient and rugged forest
of your laws ? Has not Severus, that most
resolute of rulers, but yesterday repealed the
ridiculous Papian laws' which compelled


I [A reference in which Kaye sees no reason to doubt that the
Apology was written during the reign under the emperor. See
Kaye's Tertullian^ p. 49.]


people to have children before the Julian laws
allow matrimony to be contracted, and that
though they have the authority of age upon
their side ? There were laws, too, in old
times, that parties against whom a decision
had been given might be cut in pieces by
their creditors; however, by common consent
that cruelty was afterwards erased from the
statutes, and the capital penalty turned into a
brand of shame. By adopting the plan of con-
fiscating a debtor's goods, it was sought rather
to pour the blood in blushes over his face than
to pour it out. How many laws lie hidden
out of sight which still require to be reformed !
For it is neither the number of their years
nor the dignity of their maker that commends
them, but simply that they are just; and
therefore, when their injustice is recognized,
they are deservedly condemned, even though
they condemn. Why speak we of them as un-
just ? nay, if they punish mere names, we
may well call them irrational. But if they
punish acts, why in our case do they punish
acts solely on the ground of a name, while in
others they must have them proved not from
the name, but from the wrong done ? I am
a practiser of incest (so they say); why do
they not inquire into it? I am an infant-
killer; why do they not apply the torture to
get from me the truth ? I am guilty of crimes
against the gods, against the Caesars; why am
I, who am able to clear myself, not allowed
to be heard on my own behalf ? No law for-
bids the sifting of the crimes which it prohib-
its, for a judge never inflicts a righteous ven-
geance if he is not well assured that a crime
has been committed; nor does a citizen ren-
der a true subjection to the law, if he does
not know the nature of the thing on which the
punishment is inflicted. It is not enough that
a law is just, nor that the judge should be
convinced of its justice; those from whom
obedience is expected should have that con- ^
viction too. Nay, a law lies under strong^
suspicions which does not care to have itself
tried and approved: it is a positively wicked
law, if, unproved, it tyrannizes over men.

CHAP. V.

To say a word about the origin of laws of
the kind to which we now refer, there was an
old decree that no god should be consecrated
by the emperor till first approved by the
senate. Marcus ^milius had experience of
this in reference to his god Alburnus. And
this, too, makes for our case, that among
you divinity is allotted at the judgment of
human beings. Unless gods give satisfaction
to men, there will be no deification for them:
the god will have to propitiate the man. Ti-


22


APOLOGY.


[chap. VI.


berius ' accordingly, in whose days the Chris-
tian name made its entry into the world,
having himself received intelligence from
Palestine of events which had clearly shown
the truth of Christ's divinity, brought the
matter before the senate, with his own deci-
sion in favour of Christ. The senate, because
it had not given the approval itself, rejected
his proposal. Caesar held to his opinion,
threatening wrath against all accusers of the
Christians. Consult your histories; you will
there find that Nero was the first who assailed
with the imperial sword the Christian sect,
making progress then especially at Rome.
But we glory in having our condemnation
hallowed by the hostility of such a wretch.
For any one who knows him, can understand
that not except as being of singular excellence
did anything bring on it Nero's condemnation.
Domitian, too, a man of Nero's type in
cruelty, tried his hand at persecution; but as
he had something of the human in him, he
soon put an end to what he had begun, even
restoring again those whom he had banished.
Such as these have always been our perse-
cutors,— men unjust, impious, base, of whom
even you yourselves have no good to say, the
sufferers under whose sentences you have
been wont to restore. But among so many
princes from that time to the present day,
with anything of divine and human wisdom
in them, point out a single persecutor of the
Christian name. So far from that, we, on the
contrary, bring before you one who was their
protector, as you will see by examining the
letters of Marcus Aurelius, that most grave of
emperors, in which he bears his testimony that
that Germanic drought was removed by the
rains obtained through the prayers of the
Christians who chanced to be fighting under
him. And as he did not by public law re-
move from Christians their legal disabilities,
yet in another way he put them openly aside,
even adding a sentence of condemnation, and
that of greater severity, against their accusers.
What sort of laws are these which the impious
alone execute against us — and the unjust, the
vile, the bloody, the senseless, the insane ? —
which Trajan to some extent made naught by
forbidding Christians to be sought after; which
neither a Hadrian, though fond of searching
into all things strange and new, nor a Vespa-
sian, though the subjugator of the Jews, nor
a Pius, nor a Verus, ever enforced ? It
should surely be judged more natural for bad
men to be eradicated by good princes as
being their natural enemies, than by those of
a spirit kindred with their own.


CHAP. VI.


I would now have these most religious pro-
tectors and vindicators of the laws and insti-
tutions of their fathers, tell me, in regard to
their own fidelity and the honour, and sub-
mission they themselves show to ancestral in-
stitutions, if they have departed from nothing
— if they have in nothing gone out of the old
paths — if they have not put aside whatsoever
is most useful and necessary as rules of a
virtuous life. What has become of the laws
repressing expensive and ostentatious ways of
living? which forbade more than a hundred
asses to be expended on a supper, and more
than one fowl to be set on the table at a time,
and that not a fatted one; which expelled a
patrician from the senate on the serious
ground, as it was counted, of aspiring to be
too great, because he had acquired ten pounds
of silver; which put down the theatres as
quickly as they arose to debauch the manners
of the people; which did not permit the in-
signia of official dignities or of noble birth^
be rashly or with impunity usurped ? For I
see the Centenarian suppers must now bear
the name, not from the hundred asses, but
from the hundred sestertia' expended on
them; and that mines of silver are made into
dishes (it were little if this applied only to
senators, and not to freedmen or even mere
whip-spoilers =). I see, too, that neither is a
single theatre enough, nor are theatres un-
sheltered: no doubt it was that immodest
pleasure might not be torpid in the winter-
time, the Lacedaemonians invented their
woollen cloaks for the plays. I see now no
difference between the dress of matrons and
prostitutes. In regard to women, indeed,
those laws of your fathers, which used to be
such an encouragement to modesty and so-
briety, have also fallen into desuetude, when
a woman had yet known no gold upon her save
on the finger, which, with the bridal ring,
her husband had sacredly pledged to himself;
when the abstinence of women from wine was
carried so far, that a matron, for opening the
compartments of a wine cellar, was starved to
death by her friends,— while in the times of
Romulus, for merely tasting wine, Mecenius
killed his wife, and suffered nothing for the
deed. With reference to this also, it was the
custom of women to kiss their relatives, that
they might be detected by their breath.
Where is that happiness of married life, ever
so desirable, which distinguished our earlier
manners, and as the result of which for about
600 years there was not among us a single


•■ [Elucidation IV.]


1 As = a'/i farthings, Sestertium = £7, i6s. 3d.

2 Slaves still bearing the marks of the scourge.


ciiAr. VII.]


APOLOGY.


divorce ? Now, women have every member
of the body heavy laden with gold; wine-bib-
bing is so common among them, that the kiss
is never offered with their will; and as for
divorce, they long for it as though it were the
natural consequence of marriage. The laws,
too, your fathers in their wisdom had enacted
concerning the very gods themselves, you
their most loyal children have rescinded. The
consuls, by the authority of the senate, ban-
ished Father Bacchus and his mysteries not
merely from the city, but from the whole of
Italy. The consuls Piso and Gabinius, no
Christians surely, forbade Serapis, and Isis,
and Arpocrates, with their dogheaded friend,'
admission into the Capitol — in the act casting
them out from the assembly of the gods —
overthrow their altars, and expelled them
from the country, being anxious to prevent
the vices of their base and lascivious religion
from spreading. These, you have restored,
and conferred highest honours on them.
What has come to your religion — of the vene-
ration due by you to your ancestors? In
your dress, in your food, in your style of life,
in your opinions, and last of all in your very
speech, you have renounced your progeni-
tors. You are always praising antiquity, and
yet every day you have novelties in your way
of living. From your having failed to main-
tain what you should, you make it clear, that,
while you abandon the good ways of your
fathers, you retain and guard the things you
ought not. Yet the very tradition of your
fatners, which you still seem so faithfully to
defend, and in which you find your principal
matter of accusation against the Christians —
I mean zeal in the worship of the gods, the
point in which antiquity has mainly erred —
although you have rebuilt the altars of Se-
rapis, now a Roman deity, and to Bacchus,
now become a god of Italy, you offer up your
orgies, — I shall in its proper place show that
?you despise, neglect, and overthrow, casting
entirely aside the authority of the men of old.
I go on meantime to reply to that infamous
charge of secret crimes, clearing my way to
things of open day.

CHAP. VII.

Monsters of wickedness, we are accused
of observing a holy rite in which we kill a little
child and then eat it; in which, after the feast,
we practise incest, the dogs — our pimps, for-
sooth, overturning the lights and getting us
the shamelessness of darkness for our impious
lusts. This is what is constantly laid to our
charge, and yet you take no pains to elicit the


Anubis.


truth of what we have been so long accused.
Either bring, then, the matter to the light of
day if you believe it, or give it no cTedit as
having never inquired into it. On the ground
of your double dealing, we are entitled to lay
it down to you that there is no reality in the
thing which you dare not expiscate. You
impose on the executioner, in the case of
Christians, a duty the very opposite of expis-
cation: he is not to make them confess what 4-
they do, but to make them deny what they
are. We date the origin of our religion, as
we have mentioned before, from the reign of
Tiberius. Truth and the hatred of truth come
into our world together. As soon as truth ap-
pears, it is regarded as an enemy. It has as
many foes as there are strangers to it: the
Jews, as was to be looked for, from a spirit
of rivalry; the soldiers, out of a desire to extort
money; our very domestics, by their nature.
We are daily beset by foes, we are daily be-
trayed; we are oftentimes surprised in our
meetings and congregations. Whoever hap-
pened withal upon an infant wailing, according
to the common story ? Whoever kept for the
judge, just as he had found them, the gory
mouths of Cyclops and Sirens? Whoever
found any traces of uncleanness in their wives ?
Where is the man who, when he had discov-
ered such atrocities, concealed them; or, in
the act of dragging the culprits before the
judge, was bribed into silence ? If we always
keep our secrets, when were our proceedings
made known to the world ? Nay, by whom
could they be made known ? Not, surely, by
the guilty parties themselves; even from the
very idea of the thing, the fealty of silence
being ever due to mysteries. The Samothra-
cian and Eleusinian make no disclosures — how
much more will silence be kept in regard to
such as are sure, in their unveiling, to call forth
punishment from man at once, while wrath
divine is kept in store for the future ? If, then,
Christians are not themselves the publishers
of their crime, it follows of course it must be
strangers. And whence have they their knowl-
edge, when it is also a universal custom in
religious initiations to keep the profane aloof,
and to beware of witnesses, unless it be that
those who are so wicked have less fear than
their neighbors ? Every one knows what sort
of thing rumour is. It is one of your own say-
ings, that " among all evils, none flies so fast
as rumour." Why is rumour such an evil
thing? Is it because it is fleet ? Is it because
it carries information ? Or is it because it is in
the highest degree mendacious ? — a thing, not
even when it brings some truth to us, without
a taint of falsehood, either detracting, or add-
ing, or changing from the simple fact ? Nay ^


24


APOLOGY.


[chap. IX.


more, it is the very law of its being to con-
tinue only while it lies, and to live but so long
as there is no proof; for when the proof is
given, it ceases to exist; and, as having done
its work of merely spreading a report, it de-
livers up a fact, and is henceforth held to be
a fact, and called a fact. And then no one
says, for instance, " They say that it took
place at Rome," or, " There is a rumour that
he has obtained a province," but, "He has
got a province," and, "It took place at
Rome. ' ' Rumour, the very designation of un-
certainty, has no place when a thing is certain.
Does any but a fool put his trust in it ? For
a wise man never believes the dubious. Every-
body knows, however zealously it is spread
abroad, on whatever strength of asseveration
it rests, that some time or other from some one
fountain it has its origin. Thence it must creep
into propagating tongues and ears; and a small
seminal blemish so darkens all the rest of the
story, that no one can determine whether the
lips, from which it first came forth, planted
the seed of falsehood, as often happens, from
a spirit of opposition, or from a suspicious
judgment, or from a confirmed, nay, in the
case of some, an inborn, delight in lying. It
is well that time brings all to light, as your
proverbs and sayings testify, by a provision
of Nature, which has so appointed things that
nothing long is hidden, even though rumour
has not disseminated it. It is just then as it
should be, that fame for so long a period has
been alone aware of the crimes of Christians.
This is the witness you bring against us — one
that has never been able to prove the accusa-
tion it some time or other sent abroad, and at
last by mere continuance made into a settled
opinion in the world; so that I confidently
appeal to Nature herself, ever true, against
those who groundlessly hold that such things
are to be credited.

CHAP. VIII.

See now, we set before you the reward of
these enormities. They give promise of eter-
nal life. Hold it meanwhile as your own
belief. I ask you, then, whether, so believ-
ing, you think it worth attaining with a con-
science such as you will have. Come, plunge
your knife into the babe, enemy of none,
accused of none, child of all; or if that is
another's work, simply take your place beside
a human being dying before he has really
lived, await the departure of the lately given
soul, receive the fresh young blood, saturate
your bread with it, freely partake. The while
as you recline at table, take note of the places
which your mother and your sister occupy;
mark them well, so that when the dog-made


darkness has fallen on you, you may make no
mistake, for you will be guilty of a crime —
unless you perpetrate a deed of incest. Ini-
tiated and sealed into things like these, you
have life everlasting. Tell me, I pray you,
is eternity worth it? If it is not, then these
things are not to be credited. Even although
you had the belief, I deny the will; and even '^
if you had the will, I deny the possibility. \
Why then can others do it, if you cannot ? why
cannot you, if others can ? I suppose we are
of a different nature — are we Cynopae or Sci-
apodes ?' You are a man yourself as well as
the Christian: if you cannot do it, you ought
not to believe it of others, for a Christian is
a man as well as you. But the ignorant, for-
sooth, are deceived and imposed on. They
were quite unaware of anything of the kind
being imputed to Christians, or they would
certainly have looked into it for themselves,
and searched the matter out. Instead of that,
it is the custom for persons wishing initiation
into sacred rites, I think, to go first of all to
the master of them, that he may explain what
preparations are to be made. Then, in this
case, no doubt he would say, " You must have
a child still of tender age, that knows not what
it is to die, and can smile under thy knife;
bread, too, to collect the gushing blood; in
addition to these., candlesticks, and lamps,
and dogs — with tid-bits to draw them on to the
extinguishing of the lights: above all things,
you will require to bring your mother and
your sister with you." But what if mother
and sister are unwilling? or if there be neither
the one nor the other? What if there are
Christians with no Christian relatives ? He
will not be counted, I suppose, a true follower
of Christ, who has not a brother or a son.
And what now, if these things are all in store
for them without their knowledge ? At least
afterwards they come to know them; and they
bear with them, and pardon them. They fear,
it may be said, lest they have to pay for it if
they let the secret out: nay, but they will
rather in that case have every claim to pro-
tection; they will even prefer, one might think,
dying by their own hand, to living under the
burden of such a dreadful knowledge. Admit
that they have this fear; yet why do they still
persevere ? For it is plain enough that you
will have no desire to continue what you would
never have been, if you had had previous
knowledge of it.

CHAP. IX.

That I may refute more thoroughly these
charges, I will show that in part openly, in '"^


Fabulous monsters.


CHAP. IX.]


APOLOGY.


25


part secretly, practices prevail among you
which have led you perhaps to credit similar
things about us. Children were openly sacri-
ficed in Africa to Saturn as lately as the pro-
consulship of Tiberius, who exposed to public
gaze the priests suspended on the sacred trees
overshadowing their temple — so many crosses
on which the punishment which justice craved
overtook their crimes, as the soldiers of our
country still can testify who did that very work
for that proconsul. And even now that sacred
crime still continues to be done in secret. It
is not only Christians, you see, who despise
you; for all that you do there is neither any
crime thoroughly and abidingly eradicated,
nor does any of your gods reform his ways.
When Saturn did not spare his own children,
he was not likely to spare the children of
others; whom indeed the very parents them-
selves were in the habit of offering, gladly re-
sponding to the call which was made on them,
and keeping the little ones pleased on the oc-
casion, that they might not die in tears. At
the same time, there is a vast difference be-
tween homicide and parricide. A more ad-
vanced age was sacrificed to Mercury in Gaul.
I hand over the Tauric fables to their own
theatres. Why, even in that most religious
city of the pious descendants of ^neas, there
is a certain Jupiter whom in their games they
lave with human blood. It is the blood of a
beast-fighter, you say. Is it less, because of
that, the blood of a man ? ' Or is it viler blood
because it is from the veins of a wicked man ?
At any rate it is shed in murder. O Jove,
thyself a Christian, and in truth only son of
thy father in his cruelty ! But in regard to
child murder, as it does not matter whether it
is committed for a sacred object, or merely at
one's own self-impulse — although there is a
great difference, as we have said, between
parricide and homicide — I shall turn to the
people generally. How many, think you, of
those crowding around and gaping for Chris-
tian blood, — how many even of your rulers,
notable for their justice to you and for their
severe measures against us, may I charge in
their own consciences with the sin of putting
their offspring to death ? As to any difference
in the kind of murder, it is certainly the more
cruel way to kill by drowning, or by exposure
to cold and hunger and dogs. A maturer
age has always preferred death by the sword.
In our case, murder being once for all forbid-
den, we may not destroy even the foetus in
the womb, while as yet the human being de-
rives blood from other parts of the body for


:H


Another example of what Christianity was doing for man as


its sustenance. To hinder a birth is merely a
speedier man-killing; nor does it matter
whether you take away a life that is born, or
destroy one that is coming to the birth. That
is a man which is going to be one; you have
the fruit already in its seed. As to meals of
blood and such tragic dishes, read — I am not
sure where it is told (it is in Herodotus, I
think) — how blood taken from the arms, and
tasted by both parties, has been the treaty
bond among some nations. I am not sure
what it was that was tasted in the time of
Catiline. They say, too, that among some
Scythian tribes the dead are eaten by their
friends. But I am going far from home. At
this day, among ourselves, blood consecrated
to Bellona, blood drawn from a punctured
thigh and then partaken of, seals initiation
into the rites of that goddess. Those, too,
who at the gladiator shows, for the cure of
epilepsy, quaff with greedy thirst the blood
of criminals slain in the arena, as it flows fresh
from the wound, and then rush oft — to whom
do they belong ? those, also, who make meals
on the flesh of wild beasts at the place of com-
bat— ^who have keen appetites for bear and
stag ? That bear in the struggle was bedewed
with the blood of the man whom it lacerated;
that stag rolled itself in the gladiator's gore.
The entrails of the very bears, loaded with as
yet undigested human viscera, are in great re-
quest. And you have men rifting up man-
fed flesh ? If you partake of food like this,
how do your repasts differ from those you
accuse us Christians of ? And do those, who,
with savage lust, seize on human bodies, do
less because they devour the living ? Have
they less the pollution of human blood on
them because they only lick up what is to turn
into blood ? They make meals, it is plain,
not so much of infants, as of grown-up men.
Blush for your vile ways before the Chris-
tians, who have not even the blood of animals
at their meals of simple and natural food; who
abstain from things strangled and that die a
natural death, for no other reason than that
they may not contract pollution, so much as
from blood secreted in the viscera. To clench
the matter with a single example, you tempt
Christians with sausages of blood, just because
you are perfectly aware that the thing by
which you thus try to get them to transgress
they hold unlawful.' And how unreasonable
it is to believe that those, of whom you are
convinced that they regard with horror the
idea of tasting the blood of oxen, are eager
after blood of men; unless, mayhap, you have


= [See Elucidation VII., p. 58,
in cap. xxxix.]


'//Vrt in connection with usages


26


APOLOGY.


[CHAI-. X.


tried it, and found it sweeter to the taste!
Nay, in fact, there is here a test you should
apply to discover Christians, as well as the
fire-pan and the censer. They should be
proved by their appetite for human blood, as
well as by their refusal to offer sacrifice; just
as otherwise they should be affirmed to be
free of Christianity by their refusal to taste
of blood, as by their sacrificing; and there
would be no want of blood of men, amply sup-
plied as that would be in the trial and con-
demnation of prisoners. Then who are more
given to the crime of incest than those who
have enjoyed the instruction of Jupiter him-
self ? Ctesias tells us that the Persians have
illicit intercourse with their mothers. The
Macedonians, too, are suspected on this point;
for on first hearing the tragedy of CEdipus
they made mirth of the incest-doer's grief,
exclaiming, jyAawe cif t7> finrkpa. Even now

^reflect what opportunity there is for mis-
takes leading to incestuous comminglings —
your promiscuous looseness supplying the
materials. You first of all expose your chil-
dren, that they may be taken up by any com-
passionate passer-by, to whom they are quite
unknown; or you give them away, to be
adopted by those who will do better to them
the part of parents. Well, some time or other,
all memory of the alienated progeny must be
lost; and when once a mistake has been made,
the transmission of incest thence will still go
on — the race and the crime creeping on to-
gether. Then, further, wherever you are —
at home, abroad, over the seas — your lust is
an attendant, whose general indulgence, or
even its indulgence in the most limited scale,
may easily and unwittingly anywhere beget
children, so that in this way a progeny scat-
tered about in the commerce of life may have
intercourse with those who are their own kin,
and have no notion that there is any incest in
the case. A persevering and stedfast chastity
has protected us from anything like this: keep-
ing as we do from adulteries and all post-
matrimonial unfaithfulness, we are not ex-
posed to incestuous mishaps. Some of us,
making matters still more secure, beat away
from them entirely the power of sensual sin,
by a virgin continence, still boys in this
respect when they are old. If you would but
-y take notice that such sins as I have mentioned

' prevail among you, that would lead you to see
that they have no existence among Christians.
The same eyes would tell you of both facts.
But the two blindnesses are apt to go together ;
so that those who do not see what is, think
they see what is not. I shall show it to be so
in everything. But now let me speak of
matters which are more clear.


CHAP. X.

" You do not worship the gods," you say; <
*' and you do not offer sacrifices for the em-
perors." Well, we do not offer sacrifice for
others, for the same reason that we do not for
ourselves, — namely, that your gods are not
at all the objects of our worship. So we are
accused of sacrilege and treason. This is the
chief ground of charge against us — nay, it is
the sum-total of our offending; and it is
worthy then of being inquired into, if neither
prejudice nor injustice be the judge, the one
of which has no idea of discovering the truth,
and the other simply and at once rejects it.
We do not worship your gods, because we know^ _
that there are no such beings. This, there-
fore, is what you should do: you should call
on us to demonstrate their non-existence, and
thereby prove that they have no claim to
adoration; for only if your gods were truly
so, would there be any obligation to render
divine homage to them. And punishment
even were due to Christians, if it were made
plain that those to whom they refused all
worship were indeed divine. But you say,
They are gods. We protest and appeal from
yourselves to your knowledge; let that judge
us; let that condemn us, if it can deny that all
these gods of yours were but men. If even^_
it venture to deny that, it will be confuted by
its own books of antiquities, from which it has
got its information about them, bearing wit-
ness to this day, as they plainly do, both of
the cities in which they were born, and the
countries in which they have left traces of
their exploits, as well as where also they are
proved to have been buried. Shall I now,
therefore, go over them one by one, so nu-
merous and so various, new and old, barbarian,
Grecian, Roman, foreign, captive and adopted,
private and common, male and female, rural
and urban, naval and military? It were use-
less even to hunt out all their names: so I
may content myself with a compend; and this
not for your information, but that you may
have what you know brought to your recol-
lection, for undoubtedly you act as if you had
forgotten all about them. No one of your
gods is earlier than Saturn: from him you
trace all your deities, even those of higher
rank and better known. What, then, can be
proved of the first, will apply to those that fol-
low. So far, then, as books give us infor-
mation, neither the Greek Diodorus or Thai- •
lus, neither Cassius Severus or Cornelius
Nepos, nor any writer upon sacred antiquities,
have ventured to say that Saturn was any but h
a man: so far as the question depends on ■
facts, I find none more trustworthy than those


CHAP. XI.j


APOLOGY.


27


— that in Italy itself we have the country in
which, after many expeditions, and after hav-
ing partaken of Attic hospitalities, Saturn set-
tled, obtaining cordial welcome from Janus,
or, as the Salii will have it, Janis. The
mountain on which he dwelt was called Saturn-
ius; the city he founded is called Saturnia
to this day; last of all, the whole of Italy,
after having borne the name of Oenotria, was
called Saturnia from him. He first gave you
the art of writing, and a stamped coinage,
and thence it is he presides over the public
treasury. But if Saturn were a man, he had
undoubtedly a human origin; and having a
human origin, he was not the offspring of
heaven and earth. As his parents were un-
known, it was not unnatural that he should
be spoken of as the son of those elements
from which we might all seem to spring. For
who does not speak of heaven and earth as
father and mother, in a sort of way of ven-
eration and honour ? or from the custom which
prevails among us of saying that persons of
whom we have no knowledge, or who make
a sudden appearance, have fallen from the
skies ? In this way it came about that Saturn,
everywhere a sudden and unlooked-for guest,
got everywhere the name of the Heaven-born.
For even the common folk call persons whose
stock is unknown, sons of earth. I say noth-
ing of how men in these rude times were
wont to act, when they were impressed by the
look of any stranger happening to appear
among them, as though it were divine, since
even at this day men of culture make gods
of those whom, a day or two before, they ac-
knowledged to be dead men by their public
mourning for them. Let these notices of
Saturn, brief as they are, suffice. It will
thus also be proved that Jupiter is as certainly
a man, as from a man he sprung; and that
li one after another the whole swarm is mortal
like the primal stock.

CHAP. XI.

And since, as you dare not deny that these
deities of yours once were men, you have taken
it on you to assert that they were made gods
after their decease, let us consider what ne-
cessity there was for this. In the first place,
you piust concede the existence of one higher
God — a certain wholesale dealer in divinity,
who has made gods of men. For they could
neither have assumed a divinity which was
not theirs, nor could any but one himself
possessing it have conferred it on them. If
there was no one to make gods, it is vain to
dream of gods being made when thus you
have no god-maker. Most certainly, if they


could have deified themselves, with a higher
state at their command, they never would have
been men. If, then, there be one who is
able to make gods, I turn back to an exami-
nation of any reason there maybe for making
gods at all; and I find no other reason than
this, that the great God has need of their min-
istrations and aids in performing the offices
of Deity. But first it is an unworthy idea
that He should need the help of a man, and
in fact a dead man, when, if He was to be in
want of this assistance from the dead. He
might more fittingly have created some one a
god at the beginning. Nor do I see any place
for his action. For this entire world-mass —
whether self-existent and uncreated, as Py-
thagoras maintains, or brought into being by
a creator's hands, as Plato holds — was mani-
festly, once for all in its original construction,
disposed, and furnished, and ordered, and
supplied with a government of perfect wis-
dom. That cannot be imperfect which has
made all perfect. There was nothing waiting
on for Saturn and his race to do. Men will
make fools of themselves if they refuse to
believe that from the very first rain poured
down from the sky, and stars gleamed, and
light shone, and thunders roared, and Jove
himself dreaded the lightnings you put in his
hands; that in like manner before Bacchus,
and Ceres, and Minerva, nay before the first
man, whoever that was, every kind of fruit
burst forth plentifully from the bosom of the
earth, for nothing provided for the support
and sustenance of man could be introduced
after his entrance on the stage of being.
Accordingly, these necessaries of life are said
to have been discovered, not created. But the ^
thing you discover existed before; and that
which had a pre-existence must be regarded as
belonging not to him who discovered it, but to
him who made it, for of course it had a being
before it could be found. But if, on account
of his being the discoverer of the vine, Bac-
chus is raised to godship, Lucullus, who first
introduced the cherry from Pontus into Italy,
has not been fairly dealt with; for as the dis-
coverer of a new fruit, he has not, as though
he were its creator, been awarded divine
honours. Wherefore, if the universe existed
from the beginning, thoroughly furnished, with
its system working under certain laws for the
performance of its functions, there is, in this
respect, an entire absence of all reason for
electing humanity to divinity; for the posi-
tions and powers which you have assigned to
your deities have been from the beginning
precisely what they would have been, although
you had never deified them. But you turn to
another reason, telling us that the conferring


28


APOLOGY.


[chap. xn.


of deity was a way of rewarding worth. And
hence you grant, I conclude, that the god-
making God is of transcendent righteousness,
—one who will neither rashly, improperly,
nor needlessly bestow a reward so great. I
> would have you then consider whether the
merits of your deities are of a kind to have
raised them to the heavens, and not rather to
have sunk them down into lowest depths of
Tartarus,— the place which you regard, with
many, as the prison-house of infernal punish-
ments. For into this dread place are wont to
be cast all who offend against filial piety, and
such as are guilty of incest with sisters, and
seducers of wives, and ravishers of virgins,
and boy-polluters,and men of furious tempers,
and murderers, and thieves, and deceivers;
all, in short, who tread in the footsteps ot
your gods, not one of whom you can prove
free from crime or vice, save by denying that
they had ever a human existence. But as you
cannot deny that, you have those foul blots
also as an added reason for not believing that
they were made gods afterwards. For if you
rule for the very purpose of punishing such
deeds; if every virtuous man among you re-
jects all correspondence, converse, and in-
timacy with the wicked and base, while, on the
other hand, the high God has taken up their
mates to a share of His majesty, on what
ground is it that you thus condemn those
whose fellow-actors you adore ? Your good-
ness is an affront in the heavens. Deify your
vilest criminals, if you would please your gods.
You honour them by giving divine honours to
their fellows. But to say no more about a way
of acting so unworthy, there have been men
virtuous, and pure, and good. Yet how many
of these nobler men you have left in the re-
gions of doom ! as Socrates, so renowned for
his wisdom, Aristides for his justice, Themis-
tocles for his warlike genius, Alexander for
his sublimity of soul, Polycrates for his good
fortune, Croesus for his wealth, Demos-
thenes for his eloquence. Which of these
gods of yours is more remarkable for gravity
and wisdom than Cato, more just and warlike
than Scipio? which of them more magnan-
imous than Pompey, more prosperous than
Sylla, of greater wealth than Crassus, more
eloquent than Tullius ? How much better it
would have been for the God Supreme to have
waited that He might have taken such men
as these to be His heavenly associates, pre-
scient as He must have surely been of their
worthier character ! He was in a hurry, I
suppose, and straightway shut heaven's gates;
and now He must surely feel ashamed at
these worthies murmuring over their lot in
the regions below.


CHAP. XII.

But I pass from these remarks, for I know
and I am going to show what your gods are
not, by showing what they are. In reference,
then, to these, I see only names of dead men
of ancient times; I hear fabulous stories; I
recognize sacred rites founded on mere
myths. As to the actual images, I regard
them as simply pieces of matter akin to the
vessels and utensils in common use among
us, or even undergoing in their consecration
a hapless change from these useful articles at
the hands of reckless art, which in the trans-
forming process treats them with utter con-
tempt, nay, in the very act commits sacrilege;
so that it might be no slight solace to us in all
our punishments, suffering as we do because
of these same gods, that in their making they
suffer as we do themselves. You put Chris-
tians on crosses and stakes:' what image is
not formed from the clay in the first instance,
set on cross and stake ? The body of your
god is first consecrated on the gibbet. You
tear the sides of Christians with your claws;
but in the case of your own gods, axes, and
planes, and rasps are put to work more vigor-
ously on every member of the body. We lay
our heads upon the block; before the lead,
and the glue, and the nails are put in requi-
sition, your deities are headless. We are cast
to the wild beasts, while you attach them to
Bacchus, and Cybele, and Caelestis. We are
burned in the flames; so, too, are they in
their original lump. We are condemned to
the mines; from these your gods originate.
We are banished to islands; in islands it is a
common thing for your gods to have their
birth or die. If it is in this way a deity is
made, it will follow that as many as are pun-
ished are deified, and tortures will have to
be declared divinities. But plain it is these ^
objects of your worship have no sense of the
injuries and disgraces of their consecrating,
as they are equally unconscious of the honours
paid to them. O impious words ! O blas-
phemous reproaches! Gnash your teeth upon
us— foam with maddened rage against us— ye
are the persons, no doubt, who censured a
certain Seneca speaking of your superstition
at much greater length, tind far more sharply !
In a word, if we refuse our homage to statues
and frigid images, the very counterpart of
their dead originals, with which hawks, and
mice, and spiders are so well acquainted,
does it not merit praise instead of penalty,
that we have rejected what we have come to
see is error ? We cannot surely be made out


1


* [Inconsistent this with Gibbon's mini tniztng theory of the
imber of the Christian martyrs.] Elucidation VIII.


CHAP. XIV.]


APOLOGY.


29


;^


I


to injure those who we are certain are nonen-
tities. What does not exist, is in its non-
existence secure from suffering.

CHAP. XIII.

'* But they are gods to us," you say. And
how is it, then, that in utter inconsistency
with this, you are convicted of impious, sac-
rilegious, and irreligious conduct to them,
neglecting those you imagine to exist, de-
stroying those who are the objects of your
fear, making mock of those whose honour you
avenge ? See now if I go beyond the truth.
First, indeed, seeing you worship, some one
god, and some another, of course you give
offence to those you do not worship. You
cannot continue to give preference to one
without slighting another, for selection im-
plies rejection. You despise, therefore, those
V whom you thus reject; for in your rejection
'^ of them, it is plain you have no dread of
giving them offence. For, as we have al-
ready shown, every god depended on the de-
cision of the senate for his godhead. No
god was he whom man in his own counsels
did not wish to be so, and thereby condemned.
The family deities you call Lares, you exer-
cise a domestic authority over, pledging them,
selling them, changing them — making some-
times a cooking-pot of a Saturn, a firepan of
a Minerva, as one or other happens to be
worn done, or broken in its long sacred use,
or as the family head feels the pressure of
some more sacred home necessity. In like
manner, by public law you disgrace your state
gods, putting them in the auction-catalogue,
and making them a source of revenue. Men
seek to get the Capitol, as they seek to
get the herb market, under the voice of the
crier, under the auction spear, under the reg-
istration of the quaestor. Deity is struck off
and farmed out to the highest bidder. But
indeed lands burdened with tribute are of less
value; men under the assessment of a poll-
tax are less noble; for these things are the
marks of servitude. In the case of the gods,
on the other hand, the sacredness is great in
proportion to the tribute which they yield;
nay, the more sacred is a god, the larger is
^ the tax he pays. Majesty is made a source
^ of gain. Religion goes about the taverns
begging. You demand a price for the privi-
lege of standing on temple ground, for access
to the sacred services; there is no gratuitous
knowledge of your divinities permitted — you
must buy their favours with a price. What
~j honours in any way do you render to them
that you do not render to the dead ? You
have temples in the one case just as in the
other; you have altars in the one case as in


the other. Their statues have the same dress^
the same insignia. As the dead man had his
age, his art, his occupation, so it is with the
deity. In what respect does the funeral feast
differ from the feast of Jupiter? or the bowl
of the gods from the ladle of the manes ? or
the undertaker from the soothsayer, as in fact
this latter personage also attends upon the
dead ? With perfect propriety you give di-
vine honours to your departed emperors, as
you worship them in life. The gods will
count themselves indebted to you; nay, it will
be matter of high rejoicing among them that
their masters are made their equals. But
when you adore Larentina, a public prostitute
— I could have wished that it might at least
have been Lais or Phryne — among your
Junos, and Cereses, and Dianas; when you
instal in your Pantheon Simon Magus,' giving
him a statue and the title of Holy God; when
you make an infamous court page a god of
the sacred synod, although your ancient dei-
ties are in reality no better, they will still
think themselves affronted by you, that the
privilege antiquity conferred on them alone,
has been allowed to others.

CHAP. XIV.

I wish now to review your sacred rites; and
I pass no censure on your sacrificing, when
you offer the worn-out, the scabbed, the cor-
rupting; when you cut off from the fat and
the sound the useless parts, such as the head
and the hoofs, which in your house you would
have assigned to the slaves or the dogs; when
of the tithe of Hercules you do not lay a
third upon his altar (I am disposed rather to
praise your wisdom in rescuing something
from being lost); but turning to your books,
from which you get your training in wisdom^
and the nobler duties of life, what utterly ridic-
ulous things I find ! — that for Trojans and
Greeks the gods fought arhong themselves
like pairs of gladiators; that Venus was
wounded by a man, because she would rescue
her son ^neas when he was in peril of his
life from the same Diomede; that Mars was
almpst wasted away by a thirteen months'
imprisonment; that Jupiter was saved by a
monster's aid from suffering the same violence
at the hands of the other gods; that he now
laments the fate of Sarpedon, now foully
makes love to his own sister, recounting (to
her) former mistresses, now for a long time
past not so dear as she. After this, what poet
is not found copying the example of his chief,
to be a disgracer of the gods ? One gives


I [Confirming the statement of Justin Martyr. See Vol. I.,
p. 187, note 1, and p. 193, this Series.]


30


APOLOGY.


[chap. XVI.


Apollo to king Admetus to tend his sheep;
another hires out the building labours of Nep-
tune to Laomedon. A well-known lyric poet,
too — Pindar, I mean — sings of ^sculapius
deservedly stricken with lightning for his
greed in practising wrongfully his art. A
wicked deed it was of Jupiter — if he hurled
the bolt — unnatural to his grandson, and ex-
hibiting envious feeling to the Physician.
-^Things like these should not be made public
•'■'^if they are true; and if false, they should not
be fabricated among people professing a great
respect for religion. Nor indeed do either
tragic or comic writers shrink from setting
-/orth the gods as the origin of ali family ca-
''^lamities and sins. I do not dwell on the phi-
losophers, contenting myself with a reference
to Socrates, who, in contempt of the gods, was
in the habit of swearing by an oak, and a
goat, and a dog. In fact, for this very thing
Socrates was condemned to death, that he
overthrew the worship of the gods. Plainly,
at one time as well as another, that is, always
truth is disliked. However, when rueing
their judgment, the Athenians inflicted pun-
ishment on his accusers, and set up a golden
image of him in a temple, the condemnation
was in the very act rescinded, and his wit-
ness was restored to its former value. Diog-
enes, too, makes utter mock of Hercules;
and the Roman cynic Varro brings forward
three hundred Joves, or Jupiters they should
be called, all headless.

CHAP. XV.

Others of your writers, in their wantonness,
>even minister to your pleasures by vilifying
-^ the gods. ' Examine those charming farces of
your Lentuli and Hostilii, whether in the jokes
and tricks it is the buffoons or the deities
which afford you merriment; such farces I
mean as Anubis the Adulterer, and Luna of
the masculine gender, and Diana under the
lash, and the reading the will of Jupiter de-
ceased, and the three famishing Herculeses
held up to ridicule. Your dramatic literature,
^ too, depicts all the vileness of your gods.
The Sun mourns his offspring ' cast down from
heaven, and you are full of glee; Cybele sighs
after the scornful swain,' and you do not
blush; you brook the stage recital of Jupiter's
misdeeds, and the shepherd ^ judging Juno,
Venus, and Minerva. Then, again, when the
likeness of a god is put on the head of an ig-
nominious and infamous wretch, when one
impure and trained up for the art in all effem-
inacy, represents a Minerva or a Hercules, is


* Phaethon.

2 Atys or Attis.

3 Paris.


not the majesty of your gods insulted, and
their deity dishonored ? Yet you not merely/
look on, but applaud. You are, I suppose,^
more devout in the arena, where after the
same fashion your deities dance on human
blood, on the pollutions caused by inflicted
punishments, as they act their themes and
stories, doing their turn for the wretched
criminals, except that these, too, often put
on divinity and actually play the very gods.
We have seen in our day a representation of
the mutilation of Attis, that famous god of
Pessinus, and a man burnt alive as Hercules.
We have made merry amid the ludicrous cruel-
ties of the noonday exhibition, at Mercury
examining the bodies of the dead with his
hot iron; we have witnessed Jove's brother,-*
mallet in hand, dragging out the corpses of
the gladiators. But who can go into every-
thing of this sort? If by such things as these
the honour of deity is assailed, if they go to
blot out every trace of its majesty, we musty
explain them by the contempt in which the"^
gods are held, alike by those who actually do
them, and by those for whose en joyment they
are done. This it will be said, however, is all
in sport. But if I add — it is what all know
and will admit as readily to be the fact — that
in the temples adulteries are arranged, that
at the altars pimping is practised, that often
in the houses of the temple-keepers and
priests, under the sacrificial fillets, and the
sacred hats,s and the purple robes, amid the
fumes of incense, deeds of licentiousness are
done, I am not sure but your gods have more
reason to complain of you than of Christians.
It is certainly among the votaries of your re-
ligion that the perpetrators of sacrilege are
always found, for Christians do not enter your
temples even in the day-time. Perhaps they
too would be spoilers of them, if they wor-
shipped in them. What then do they worship, /
since their objects of worship are different'
from yours? Already indeed it is implied,
as the corollary from their rejection of the lie,
that they render homage to the truth ; nor
continue longer irj an error which they have
given up in the very fact of recognizing it to
be an error. Take this in first of all, and
when we have offered a preliminary refutation
of some false opinions, go on to derive from
it our entire religious system.

CHAP. XVI.

For, like some others, you are under the
delusion that our god is an ass's head.^ Cor-


4 Pluto.

5 [" Sacred hats and purple robes and incense fumes " have been
associated with the same crimes, alas ! in widely different relations.]

6 [Caricatures of the Crucifixion are extant which show how
greedily the heathen had accepted this profane idea.]


CHAP. XVII.]


APOLOGY.


31


nelius Tacitus first put this notion into
people's minds. In the fifth book of his his-
tories, beginning the (narrative of the) Jewish
war with an account of the origin of the na-
tion ; and theorizing at his pleasure about the
origin, as well as the name and the religion
of the Jews, he states that having been de-
livered, or rather, in his opinion, expelled
from Egypt, in crossing the vast plains of
Arabia, where water is so scanty, they were in
extremity from thirst ; but taking the guid-
ance of the wild asses, which it was thought
might be seeking water after feeding, they
discovered a fountain, and thereupon in their
gratitude they consecrated a head of this
species of animal. And as Christianity is
nearly allied to Judaism, from this, I suppose,
it was taken for granted that we too are de-
voted to the worship of the same image. But
the said Cornelius Tacitus (the very opposite
of tacit in telling lies) informs us in the work
already mentioned, that when Cneius Pom-
peius captured Jerusalem, he entered the tem-
ple to see the arcana of the Jewish religion,
but found no image there. Yet surely if wor-
ship was rendered to any visible object, the
very place for its exhibition would be the
shrine ; and that all the more that the worship,
however unreasonable, had no need there to
fear outside beholders. For entrance to the
holy place was permitted to the priests alone,
while all vision was forbidden to others by an
outspread curtain. You will not, however,
deny that all beasts of burden, and not parts
of them, but the animals entire, are with their
goddess Epona objects of worship with you.
It is this, perhaps, which displeases you in
us, that while your worship here is universal,
we do homage only to the ass. Then, if any
of you think we render superstitious adoration
-to the cross, in that adoration he is sharer
with us. If you offer homage to a piece of
wood at all, it matters little what it is like
when the substance is the same : it is of no
consequence the form, if you have the very
body of the god. And yet how far does the
Athenian Pallas differ fro^ the stock of the
cross, or the Pharian Ceres as she is put up
uncarved to sale, a mere rough stake and
piece of shapeless wood ? Every stake fixed
in an upright position is a portion of the cross ;
we render our adoration, if you will have it
so, to a god entire and complete. We have
shown before that your deities are derived
from shapes modelled from the cross. But you
also worship victories, for in your trophies the
cross is the heart of the trophy.' The camp
religion of the Romans is all through a wor-


I [A premonition of the Labarum.]


ship of the standards, a setting the standards
above all gods. Well, a^ those images deck-
ing out the standards are ornaments of crosses.
All those hangings of your standards and
banners are robes of crosses. I praise your
zeal : you would not consecrate crosses un-
clothed and unadorned. Others, again, cer-
tainly with more information and greater veri-
similitude, believe that the sun is our god. <^
We shall be counted Persians perhaps, though
we do not worship the orb of day painted on
a piece of linen cloth, having himself every-
where in his own disk. The idea no doubt
has originated from our being known to turn to
the east in prayer.' But you, many of you, also
under pretence sometimes of worshipping the
heavenly bodies, move your lips in the direc-
tion of the sunrise. In the same way, if we
devote Sun-day to rejoicing, from a far differ-
ent reason than Sun-worship, we have some
resemblance to those of you who devote the.
day of Saturn to ease and luxury, though they
too go far away from Jewish ways, of which
indeed they are ignorant. But lately a new
edition of our god has been given to the world
in that great city : it originated with a certain
vile man who was wont to hire himself out to
cheat the wild beasts, and who exhibited a
picture with this inscription : The God of the
Christians, born of an ass.' He had the ears ^
of an ass, was hoofed in one foot, carried a''--
book, 3 and wore a toga. Both the name and
the figure gave us amusement. But our op-
ponents ought straightway to have done hom-
age to this biformed divinity, for they have
acknowledged gods dog-headed and lion-
headed, with horn of buck and ram, with
goat-like loins, with serpent legs, with wings
sprouting from back or foot. These things
we have discussed ex abundantly that we might
not seem willingly to pass by any rumor
against us unrefuted. Having thoroughly
cleared ourselves, we turn now to an exhibi-
ition of what our religion really is.

CHAP. XVII.

The object of our worship is the One God,*<
He who by His commanding word, His ar-
ranging wisdom, His mighty power, brought
forth from nothing this entire mass of our
world, with all its array of elements, bodies,
spirits, for the glory of His majesty ; whence
also the Greeks have bestowed on it the name
of K<5(T//oc. The eye cannot see Him, though
He is (spiritually) visible. He is incompre-


i[As noted by Clement of Alexandria. See p. 535. Vol. II.,
and note.] , • • .. •

a Onocoites. If with Oehler, Onochoictes, the meaning is asi-
narius sacerdos " (Oehler). ... .1.

3 Referring evidently to the Scriptures ; and showing what the
Bible was to the early Christians.

4[Kaye, p. 168. Remarks on natural religion.]


32


APOLOGY.


[chap. XVIII.


I


hensible, though in grace He is manifested.
He is beyond our utmost thought, though our
human faculties conceive of Him. He is
therefore equally real and great. But that
which, in the ordinary sense, can be seen and
handled and conceived, is inferior to the eyes
by which it is taken in, and the hands by which
it is tainted, and the faculties by which it is
discovered ; but that which is infinite is known
only to itself. This it is which gives some
notion of God, while yet beyond all our con-
ceptions— our very incapacity of fully grasp-
ing Him affords us the idea of what He really
is. He is presented to our minds in His
transcendent greatness, as at once known and
unknown. And this is the crowning guilt of
men, that they will not recognize One, of
whom they cannot possibly be ignorant.
Would you have the proof from the works of
His hands, so numerous and so great, which
.both contain you and sustain you, which min-
ister at once to your enjoyment, and strike
you with awe ; or wo"M you rather have it
from the testimony ot tne soul itself ? Though
under the oppressive bondage of the body,
though led astray by depraving customs,
though enervated by lusts and passions, though
in slavery to false gods ; yet, whenever the
soul comes to itself, as out of a surfeit, or a
sleep, or a sickness, and attains something of
its natural soundness, it speaks of God ; using
no other word, because this is the peculiar
name of the true God. " God is great and
good" — *' Which may God give," are the
words on every lip. It bears witness, too,
that God is judge, exclaiming, "God sees,"
and, "I commend myself to God," and,
** God will repay me." O noble testimony
of the soul by nature ' Christian ! Then, too,
in using such words as these, it looks not to
the Capitol, but to the heavens. It knows
that there is the throne of the living God, as
from Him and from thence itself came down.

CHAP. XVIII.

But, that we might attain an ampler and
more authoritative knowledge at once of Him-
self, and of His counsels and will, God has
. added a written revelation for the behoof of
every one whose heart is set on seeking Him,
that seeking he may find, and finding believe,
and believing obey. For from the first He
sent messengers into the world, — men whose
stainless righteousness made them worthy to
know the Most High, and to reveal Him, —
men abundantly endowed with the Holy Spirit,
that they might proclaim that there is one


I [ThouRh we are not by nature good, in our present estate; this
is elsewhere demonstrated by TertuUian, as see cap. xviii.]


God only who made all things, who formed
man from the dust of the ground (for He is
the true Prometheus who gave order to the
world by arranging the seasons and their
course), — these have further set before us the
proofs He has given of His majesty in His
judgments by floods and fires, the rules ap-
pointed by Him for securing His favour, as
well as the retribution in store for the ignor-
ing, forsaking and keeping them, as being
about at the end of all to adjudge His wor-
shippers to everlasting life, and the wicked to
the doom of fire at once without ending and
without break, raising up again all the dead
from the beginning, reforming and renewing
them with the object of awarding either recom-
pense. Once these things were with us, too,
the theme of ridicule. We are of your stock
and nature : men are made, not born. Chris-
tians. The preachersof whom we have spoken
are called prophets, from the office which be-
longs to them of predicting the future. Their
words, as well as the miracles which they per-
formed, that men might have faith in their
divine authority, we have still in the literary
treasures they have left, and which are open
to all. Ptolemy, surnamed Philadelphus, the
most learned of his race, a man of vast ac-
quaintance with all literature, emulating, I
imagine, the book enthusiasm of Pisistratus,
among other remains of the past which either
their antiquity or something of peculiar inter-
est made famous, at the suggestion of Deme-
trius Phalereus, who was renowned above all
grammarians of his time, and to whom he had
committed the management of these things,
applied to the Jews for their writings — I mean
the writings peculiar to them and in their
tongue, which they alone possessed, for from
themselves, as a people dear to God for their
fathers' sake, their prophets had ever sprung,
and to them they had ever spoken. Now in
ancient times the people we call Jews bare
the name of Hebrews, and so both their writ-
ings and their speech were Hebrew. But
that the understanding of their books might
not be wanting, this also the Jews supplied to
Ptolemy ; for they gave him seventy-two in-
terpreters— men whom the philosopher Mene-
demus, the well-known asserter of a Provi-
dence, regarded with respect as sharing in his
views. The same account is given by Aris-
taeus. So the king left these works unlocked
to all, in the Greek language." To this day,
at the temple of Serapis, the libraries of Ptol-
emy are to be seen, with the identical Hebrew
originals in them. The Jews, too, read them
publicly. Under a tribute-liberty, they are


'[Kaye, p. 291. See Elucidation I. Also Vol. II., p. 334.I


CHAP. XXI.]


APOLOGY.


33


in the habit of going to hear them every Sab-
bath. Whoever gives ear will find God in
them ; whoever takes pains to understand,
will be compelled to believe.

CHAP. XIX.

> Their hi^h antiquityf first of all, daims an-
thority for these writings.,, With^.yQUy_toOy -it-
is a kind of religion to de"mandbeliel r>n this
very ground. Well, all the substances, all
the materials, the origins, classes, contents of
your most ancient writings, even most nations
and cities illustrious in the records of the past
and noted for their antiquity in books" of
annals, — the very forms of your letters, those
revealers and custodiers of events, nay (I
think I speak still within the mark), y^rv^^y
gods themselves, your very temples and ora-
"cles, ahcl^^cred rites, are less ancient than
the work of a single prophet, in whom you
haye the thesaurus of the entire Jewish.- r el i-
gionj_aridj;herefore_taQ-Of Qiirs. If you hap-
pen to have heard of a certainj^loses, I speak
first of him: he is as far back as the Argive
Inachus ; by nearly four hundred years — only
seven less — he precedes Danaus, your most
ancient name ; while he antedates by a mil-
lennium the death of Priam. I might affirm,
too, that he is^fiye hundred^ears earlier than
Honier, and have supporters of that view.
The other prophets also, though of later date,
are, even the most recent of them, as far back
as the first of your philosophers, and legisla-
tors, and historians. It is not so much the
difficulty of the subject, as its vastness, that
stands in the way of a statement of the grounds
on which these statements rest ; the matter is
not so arduous as it would be tedious. It
would require the anxious study of many
books, and the fingers' busy reckoning. The
histories of the most ancient nations, such as
the Egyptians, the Chaldeans, the Phoeni-
cians, would need to be ransacked ; the men
of these various nations who have information
to give, would have to be called in as wit-
nesses. Manetho the Egyptian, and Berosus
the Chaldean, and Hieromus the Phoenician
king of Tyre ; their successors too, Ptolemy
the Mendesian, and Demetrius Phalereus, and
King Juba, and Apion, and Thallus, and their
critic the Jew Josephus, the native vindicator
of the ancient history of his people, who either
authenticates or refutes the others. Also the
Greek censors' lists must be compared, and
the dates of events ascertained, that the chron-
ological connections may be opened up, and
thus the reckonings of the various annals be
made to give forth light. We must gb abroad
into the histories and literature of all nations.
And, in fact, we /have already brought the
3


proof in part before you, in giving those hints
as to how it is to be effected. But it seems
better to delay the full discussion of this, lest
in our haste we do not sufficiently carry it out,
or lest in its thorough handling we make too
lengthened a digression.

CHAP. XX.

To make up for our delay in this, we bring
under your notice something of even greater
importance ; we point to the niajesty of our
Scriptures, if not to their antiquity. If you
doubt that they are as ancient as we say, we
offer proof that they are divine. And you
may convince yourselves of this at once, and
without going very far. Your instructors, the
world, and the age, and the event, are all be-
fore you. All that is taking place around you
was fore-announced ; all that you now see
with your eye was previously heard by the
ear. The swallowing up of cities by the earth ;
the theft of islands by the sea ; wars, bringing
external and internal"*'- avulsions ; the collis-
ion of kingdoms with kingdoms ; famines
and pestilences, and local massacres, and
widespread desolating mortalities ; the exalt-
ation of the lowly, and the humbling of the
proud ; the decay of righteousness, the growth
of sin, the slackening interest in all good
ways ; the very seasons and elements going
out of their ordinary course, monsters and
portents taking the place of nature's forms —
it was all foreseen and predicted before it^
came to pass. While we suffer thgpalamitie!:;,
we read of them in the /^rriptiirps ; as. wp ex-


amine, they are proved. Well, the ttutlLoLa


prophecy, I think, is thp demnnsfraHnn r\{ ifc
being from above. Hence there is among us
an assured faith in regard to coming events
as things already proved to us, for they were
predicted along with what we have day by day
fulfilled. They are uttered by the same voices,
they are written in the same books — the same
Spirit inspires them. All time is one to^
prophecy foretelling the future. Among men,
it may be, a distinction of times is made while
the fulfilment is going on : from being future
we think of it as present, and then from be-
ing present we count it as belonging to the
past. How are we to blame, I pray you, that
we believe in things to come as though they
already were, with the grounds we have for
our faith in these two steps ?

CHAP. XXI.

But having asserted that ^our religion is
supported by the writings of the Jews, the
oldest which exist, though it is generally
known, and we fully admit that it dates from ,
a comparatively recent period — no further'


34


APOLOGY.


[chap. XXI.


back indeed than the reign of Tiberius — a
question may perhaps be raised on this ground
about its standing, as if it were hiding some-
thing of its presumption under shadow of an
illustrious religion, one which has at any rate
undoubted allowance of the law, or because,
apart from the (juestion of age^ we neither
accord with the Jews in their peculiarities in
regard to foody-nox in their sarreddays^, nor
even in their well-known _bodily sign, nor in
the possession of a common name, which
surely behoved to be the case if we did homage
loathe same God as they. Then, too, the
common people have now some knowledge of
Christ, and think of Him as but a man, one
indeed such as the Jews condemned, so that
some may naturally enough have taken up the
idea that we are worshippers of a mere human
bejn^. But we are neither ashamed of Christ
—for we rejoice to be counted His disciples,
and in His name to suffer — nor do we differ

->from the Jews concerning God. We must
make, therefore, a remark or two as to Christ's
divinity. In former times the Jews enjoyed
much of God's favour, when the fathers of their
race were noted for tTieir righteousness and
laTth. So it was that as a people they flour-
ished greatly, and their kingdom attained to
a lofty eminence; and so highly blessed were
they, that for their instruction God spake to
them in special revelations, pointing out to
them beforehand how they should merit His
favor and avoid His displeasure. But how
deeply they have sinned, puffed up_ to their
fail with a false trust in their noble ancestors,
turning from God's way into a way. of sheer
impiety, though they themselves should refuse
to admit it, their present national ruin would
afford sufficient proof. Scattered abroad, a
race of wanderers, exiles from their own land
ajLd.clime, they roam over the whole world
.mthoiil either a human or a heavenly king,
not possessing even the stranger's right to set
so much as a simple footstep in their native
country. The sacred writers withal, in giving
previous warning of these things, all with
equal clearness ever declared that, in the last

~ ' days of the world, God would, out of every
nation, and people, and country, choose for
Himself more faithful worshippers, upon
whom He would bestow His grace, and that
indeed in ampler measure, in keeping with
the enlarged capacities of a nobler dispensa-
tion. Accordingly, He appeared among us,
; whose coming to renovate and illuminate
man's nature was pre-announced by God — I
mean Christ, that Son of God. And so the su-
preme Head and Master of this grace and
discipline, the Enlightener and Trainer of the
human race, God's own Son, was announced


among us, born — but not so born as to make
Him ashamed of the name of Son or of His
paternal origin. It was not His lot to have
as His father, by incest with a sister, or by
violation of a daughter or another's wife, a
god in the shape of serpent, or ox, or bird,
or lover, for his vile ends transmuting himself
into the gold of Danaus. They are your divini-
ties upon whom these base deeds of Jupiter
were done. But the Son of God has no mother
in any sense which involves impurity; she,
whom men suppose to be His mother in the or-
dinary way, had never entered into the mar-
riage bond.* But, first, I shall discuss His es-
sential nature, and so the nature of His birth
will be understood. We have already asserted
that God made the world, and all which it
contains, by His Word, and Reason, and
Power. It is abundantly plain that your phi-
losophers, too, regard the Logos — that is, the
Word and Reason — as the Creator of the uni-
verse. For Zeno lays it down that he is the
creator, having made all things according to
a determinate plan; that his name is Fate,
and God, and the soul of Jupiter, and the
necessity of all things. Cleanthes ascribes
all this to spirit, which he maintains pervades
the universe. And we, in like manner, hold
that the Word, and Reason, and Power, by
which we have said God made all, have spirit as
their proper and essential substratum, in which
the Word has inbeing to give forth utterances,
and reason abides to dispose and arrange, and
power is over all to execute. We have been
taught that He proceeds forth from God, and
in that procession He is generated; so that
He is the Son of God, and is called God from
unity of substance with God. For God, too,
is a Spirit. Even when the ray is shot from
the sun, it is still part of the parent mass; the
•sun will still be in the ray, because it is
a ray of the sun — there is no division of sub-
stance, but merely an extension. Thus Christ
is Spirit of Spirit, and God of God, as lightfc^
of light is kindled. = The material matrix re-
mains entire and unimpaired, though you
derive from it any number of shoots possessed
of its qualities; so, too, that which has come
forth out of God is at once God and the Son
of God, and the two are one. In this way
also, as He is Spirit of Spirit and God of God,
He is made a second in manner of existence
— in position, not in nature; and He did not.
withdraw from the original source, but went
forth. This ray of God, then, as it was always
foretold in ancient times, descending into a ^
certain virgin, and made flesh in her womb, ■


1 [That is, by the consummation of her marriage with Joseph.]

2 [LanKuage common among Christians, and adopted afterwards
into the Creed.] \


<:hap. XXI.]


APOLOGY.


35


» is in His birth God and man united. The
flesh formed by the Spirit is nourished, grows
up to manhood, speaks, teaches, works, and
-is the Christ. Receive meanwhile this fable,
if you choose to call it so — it is like some of
your own — while we go on to show how Christ's
claims are proved, and who the parties are
with you by whom such fables have been set
agoing to overthrow the truth, which they re-
semble. The Jews, too, were well aware that
Christ was coming,as those to whom the proph-
ets spake. Nay, even now His advent is
expected by them; nor is there any other con-
tention between them and us, than that they
believe the advent has not yet occurred. For
two comings of Christ having been revealed
to us: a first, which has been fulfilled in the
, lowliness of a human lot; a second, which
Impends over the world, now near its close, in
all the majesty of Deity unveiled; and, by
misunderstanding the first, they have con-
cluded that the second — which, as matter of
more manifest prediction, they set their hopes
on — is the only one. It was the merited pun-
ishment of their sin not to understand the
Lord's first advent: for if they had, they
would have believed ; and if they had believed,
they would have obtained salvation. They
themselves read how it is written of them that
they are deprived of wisdom and understand-
ing— of the use of eyes and ears.' As, then,
under the force of their pre-judgment, they
had convinced themselves from His lowly
guise that Christ was no more than man, it fol-
lowed from that, as a necessary consequence,
that they should hold Him a magician from the
powers which He displayed, — expelling devils
from men by a word, restoring vision to the
blind, cleansing the leprous, reinvigorating
the paralytic, summoning the dead to life
again, making the very elements of nature
obey Him, stilling the storms and walking on
the sea; proving that He was the Logos of God,
that primordial first-begotten Word, accom-
panied by power and reason, and based on
Spirit, — that He who was now doing all things
by His word, and He who had done that of
old, were one and the same. But the Jews
were so exasperated by His teaching, by which
their rulers and chiefs were convicted of the
truth, chiefly because so many turned aside
to Him, that at last they brought Him before
Pontius Pilate, at that time Roman governor
of Syria; and, by the violence of their outcries
against Him, extorted a sentence giving Him
up to them to be crucified. He Himself had
predicted this; which, however, would have
signified little had not the prophets of old


* Isa. vi. lo.


done it as well. And yet, nailed upon the
cross. He exhibited many notable signs, by <:
which His death was distinguished from all
others. At His own free-will, He with a word
dismissed from Him His spirit, anticipating
the executioner's work. In the same hour,
too, the light of day was withdrawn, when the
sun at the very time was in his meridian blaze.
Those who were not aware that this had been
predicted about Christ, no doubt thought it
an eclipse. You yourselves have the account
of the world-portent still in your archives.'
Then, when His body was taken down from
the cross and placed in a sepulchre, the Jews
in their eager watchfulness surrounded it with
a large military guard, lest, as He had pre-
dicted His resurrection from the dead on the
third day, His disciples might remove by
stealth His body, and deceive even the in-
credulous. But, lo, on the third day there .
was a sudden shock of earthquake, and the
stone which sealed the sepulchre was rolled
away, and the guard fled off in terror: without
a single disciple near, the grave was found
empty of all but the clothes of the buried One.
But nevertheless, the leaders of the Jews,
whom it nearly concerned both to spread
abroad a lie, and keep back a people tributary
and submissive to them from the faith, gave
it out that the body of Christ had been stolen
by His followers. For the Lord, you see,
did not go forth into the public gaze, lest the
wicked should be delivered from their error ;
that faith also, destined to a great reward,
might hold its ground in difficulty. But He
spent forty days with some of His disciples
down in Galilee, a region of Judea, instructing
them in the doctrines they were to teach to
others. Thereafter, having given them com-
mission to preach the gospel through the
world, He was encompassed with a cloud and
taken up to heaven, — a fact more certain far
than the assertions of your Proculi concerning
Romulus. 3 All these things Pilate did to
Christ; and now in fact a Christian in his own
convictions, he sent word of Him to the reign-
ing Caesar, who was at the time Tiberius.
Yes, and the Caesars too would have believed
on Christ, if either the Caesars had not been
necessary for the world, or if Christians could
have been Caesars. His disciples also, spread-
ing over the world, did as their Divine Master
bade them ; and after suffering greatly them-
selves from the persecutions of the Jews, and
with no unwilling heart, as having faith un-
doubting in the truth, at last by Nero's cruel
sword sowed the seed of Christian blood at


» Elucidation V.

3 Proculus was a Roman senator who affirmed that Romulus
had appeared to him after his death.


APOLOGY.


[chap. XXII,


Rome.' Yes, and we shall prove that even
•your own gods are effective witnesses for
Christ. It is a great matter if, to give you
faith in Christians, I can bring fonvard the
authority. of the very beings on account of
whom you refuse them credit. Thus far we
have carried out the plan we laid down. We
/have set forth this origin of our sect and name,
with this account of the Founder of Christian-
ity. Let no one henceforth charge us with infa-
mous wickedness; let no one think that it is
otherwise than we have represented, for none
may give a false account of his religion. For in
the very fact that he says he worships another
god than he really does, he is guilty of deny-
ing the object of his worship, and transferring
his worship and homage to another; and, in
the transference, he ceases to worship the god
he has repudiated. We say, and before all
men we say, and torn and bleeding under
your tortures, we cry out, " We worship God
through Christ." Count Christ a man, if you
please; by Him and in Him God would be
known and be adored. If the Jews object,
we answer that Moses, who was but a man,
taught them their religion; against the Greeks
we urge that Orpheus at Pieria, Musaeus at
Athens, Melampus at Argos, Trophonius in
Boeotia, imposed religious rites; turning to
yourselves, who exercise sway over the na-
tions, it was the man Numa Pompilius who
laid on the Romans a heavy load of costly
superstitions. Surely Christ, then, had a right
to reveal Deity, which was in fact His own es-
sential possession, not with the object of
bringing boors and savages by the dread of
multitudinous gods, whose favour must be won,
into some civilization, as was the case with
Numa; but as one who aimed to enlighten
men already civilized, and under illusions
from their very culture, that they might come
to the knowledge of the truth. Search, then,
and see if that divinity of Christ be true. If
it be of such a nature that the acceptance of
it transforms a man, and makes him truly
good, there is implied in that the duty of re-
nouncing what is opposed to it as false; es-
pecially and on every ground that which,
hii^ing itself under the names and images of
^ad/tlie labours to convince men of its divin-
ity by certain signs, and miracles, and oracles..

CHAP. XXII.

And we affirm indeed the existence of cer-
tain sjpiritual essences; nor is their name un-
familiar. The philosophers acknowledge there
are demons; Socrates himself waiting on a


' [Chapter I. at close. " The blood of Christians is the seed of

the Church."]


demon's will. Why not ? since it is said an
evil spirit attached itself specially to him even
from his childhood — turning his mind no
doubt from what was good. The poets are
all acquainted with demons too; even the ig-
norant common people make frequent use of
them in cursing. In fact, they call upon Satan,
the demon-chief, in their execrations, as
though from some instinctive soul-knowledge
of him. Plato also admits the existence of
angels. The dealers in magic, no less, come
forward as witnesses to the existence of both
kinds of spirits. We are instructed, more-
over, by our sacred books how from certain
angels, who fell of their own free-will, there y
sprang a more wicked demon-brood, con-^
demned of God along with the authors of their
race, and that chief we have referred to. It
will for the present be enough, however, that
some account is given of their work. Their
great business is the ruin of mankind. So,
from the very first, spiritual wickedness sought
our destruction. They inflict, accordingly,
upon our bodies diseases and other grievous
calamities, while by violent assaults they hurry
the soul into sudden and extraordinary ex-
cesses. Their marvellous subtleness and
tenuity give them access to both parts of our
nature. As spiritual, they can do no harm ;
for, invisible and intangible, we are not cog-
nizant of their action save by its effects, as
when some inexplicable, unseen poison in the
breeze blights the apples and the grain while
in the flower, or kills them in the bud, or
destroys them when they have reached ma-
turity ; as though by the tainted atmosphere
in some unknown way spreading abroad its
pestilential exhalations. So, too, by an in-
fluence equally obscure, demons and angels
breathe into the soul, and rouse up its corrup-
tions with furious passions and vile excesses ;
or with cruel lusts accompanied by various
errors, of which the worst is that by which
these deities are commended to the favour of
deceived and deluded human beings, that they
may get their proper food of flesh-fumes and
blood when that is offered up to idol-images.
What is daintier food to the spirit of evil, than
turning men's minds away from the true God
by the illusions of a false divination ? And
here I explain how these illusions are man-
aged. Every spirit is possessed of wings.
This is a common property of both angels and
demons. So they are everywhere in a single
moment *, the whole world is as one place to
them ; all that is done over the whole extent
of it, it is as easy for them to know as to re-
port. Their swiftness of motion is taken for
divinity, because their nature is unknown. /
Thus they would have themselves thought N


CHAP. XXIII.]


APOLOGY.


0/


sometimes the authors of the things which
they announce; and sometimes, no doubt, the
bad things are their doing, never the good.
The purposes of God, too, they took up of
old from the lips of the prophets, even as they
spoke them; and they gather them still from
their works, when they hear them read aloud.
Thus getting, too, from this source some in-
timations of the future, they set themselves
**?up as rivals of the true God, while they steal
' His divinations. But the skill with which
their responses are shaped to meet events,
your Croesi and Pyrrhi know too well. On
the other hand, it was in that way we have ex-
plained, the Pythian was able to declare that
they were cooking a tortoise ' with the flesh
of a lamb ; in a moment he had been to Lydia.
From dwelling in the air, and their nearness to
the stars, and their conimerce with the clouds,
they have means of knowing the prepara-
tory processes going on in these upper regions,
and thus can give promise of the rains which
they already feel. Very kind too, no doubt,
they are in regard to the healing of diseases.
For, first of all, they make you ill ; then, to
get a miracle out of it, they command the ap-
plication of remedies either altogether new,
or contrary to those in use, and straightway
withdrawing hurtful influence, they are sup-
posed to have wrought a cure. What need,
then, to speak of their other artifices, or yet
further of the deceptive power which they have
as spirits: of these Castor apparitions, = of
water carried by a sieve, and a ship drawn
along by a girdle, and a beard reddened by a
touch, all done with the one object of showing
that men should believe in the deity of stones,
and not seek after the only true God ?

CHAP. XXIII.

Moreover, if sorcerers call forth ghosts, and
even make what seem the souls of the dead to
appear; if they put boys to death, in order
to get a response from the oracle; if, with
their juggling illusions, they make a pretence
of doing various miracles; if they put dreams
into people's minds by the power of the angels
and demons whose aid they have invited, by
whose influence, too, goats and tables are
made to divine, — how much more likely is
this power of evil to be zealous in doing with
all its might, of its own inclination, and for
its own objects, what it does to serve the ends
of others ! Or if both angels and demons do
just what your gods do, where in that case is
the pre-eminence of deity, which we must
surely think to be above all in might ? Will


1 Herodotus, I. 47. [See Wilberforce's Five Empires^ p. 67.!

2 [Castor and Pollux. Imitated in saint worship. J


it not then be more reasonable to hold that
these spirits make themselves gods, giving as
they do the very proofs which raise your gods
to godhead, than that the gods are the equals
of angels and demons? You make a distinc-
tion of places, I suppose, regarding as gods
in their temple those whose divinity you do
not recognize elsewhere; counting the mad-
ness which leads one man to leap from the
sacred houses, to be something different from
that which leads another to leap from an ad-
joining house; looking on one who cuts his
arms and secret parts as under a different
furor from another who cuts his throat. The
result of the frenzy is the same, and the man-
ner of instigation is one. But thus far we
have been dealing only in words : we now
proceed to a proof of facts, in which we shall
show that under different names you have real
identity. Let a person be brought before
your tribunals, who is plainly under demoni-
acal possession. The wicked spirit, bidden to
speak by a follower of Christ, ^ will as readily
make the truthful confession that he is a de-
mon, as elsewhere he has falsely asserted that
he is a god. Or, if you will, let there be pro-
duced one of the god-possessed, as they are
supposed, who, inhaling at the altar, conceive
divinity from the fumes, who are delivered of
it by retching, who vent it forth in agonies of
gasping. Let that same Virgin Caelestis her-
self the rain-promiser, let yEsculapius dis-
coverer of medicines, ready to prolong the life
of Socordius, and Tenatius, and Asclepiodo-
tus, now in the last extremity, if they would
not confess, in their fear of lying to a Chris-
tian, that they were demons, then and there
shed the blood of that most impudent follower
of Christ. What clearer than a work like
that? what more trustworthy than such a
proof? The simplicity of truth is thus set
forth ; its own worth sustains it; no ground
remains for the least suspicion. Do you say
that it is done by magic, or some trick of that
sort? You will not say anything of the sort,
if you have been allowed the use of your ears
and eyes. For what argument can you bring
against a thing that is exhibited to the eye in
its naked reality ? If, on the one hand, they
are really gods, why do they pretend to be de-
mons ? Is it from fear of us ? In that case
your divinity is put in subjection to Christians ;
and you surely can never ascribe deity to that
which is under authority of man, nay (if it
adds aught to the disgrace) of its very ene-
mies. If, on the other hand, they are demons
or angels, why, inconsistently with this, do


3 [This testimony must be noted as something of which Tertul-
lian confidently challenges denial.]


3^


APOLOGY.


[chap. XXIV.


they presume to set themselves forth as acting
the part of gods? For as beings who put
themselves out as gods would never willingly
call themselves demons, if they were gods
indeed, that they might not thereby in fact
abdicate their dignity ; so those whom you
know to be no more than demons, would not
dare to act as gods, if those whose names they
take and use were really divine. For they
would not dare to treat with disrespect the
higher majesty of beings, whose displeasure
they would feel was to be dreaded. So this
divinity of yours is no divinity; for if it were,
it would not be pretended to by demons, and
it would not be denied by gods. But since
on both sides there is a concurrent acknowl-
edgment that they are not gods, gather from
this that there is but a single race — I mean the

-^rrace of demons, the real race in both cases.

/ Let your search, then, now be after gods ; for
those whom you had imagined to be so you
find to be spirits of evil. The truth is, as we
have thus not only shown from our own gods
that neither themselves nor any others have
claims to deity, you may see at once who is
really God, and whether that is He and He
alone whom we Christians own ; as also
whether you are to believe in Him, and wor-
ship Him, after the manner of our Christan
faith and discipline. But at once they will
say. Who is this Christ with his fables ? is he
an ordinary man? is he a sorcerer ? was his
body stolen by his disciples from its tomb ?
is he now in the realms below? or is he not
rather up in the heavens, thence about to
come again, making the whole world shake,
filling the earth with dread alarms, making all
but Christians wail — as the Power of God, and
the Spirit of God, as the Word, the Reason,
the Wisdom, and the Son of God ? Mock as
you like, but get the demons if you can to
join you in your mocking ; let //lem deny that
Christ is coming to judge every human soul

; which has existed from the world's beginning,
clothing it again with the body it laid aside
at death; let //lem declare it, say, before your
tribunal, that this work has been allotted to
Minos and Rhadamanthus, as Plato and the
poets agree; let them put away from them at
least the mark of ignominy and condemna-
tion. They disclaim being unclean spirits,
which yet we must hold as indubitably proved
by their relish for the blood and fumes and
foetid carcasses of sacrificial animals, and even
by the vile language of their ministers. Let
them deny that, for their wickedness con-
demned already, they are kept for that very
judgment-day, with all their worshippers and
their works. Why, all the authority and power
we have over them is from our naming the


name of Christ, and recalling to their memory
the woes with which God threatens them at
the hands of Christ as Judge, and which they
expect one day to overtake them. Fearing
Christ in God, and God in Christ, they be-
come subject to the servants of God and
Christ. So at our touch and breathing, over-
whelmed by the thought and realization of
those judgment fires, they leave at our com-/
mand the bodies they have entered, unwilling,'^
and distressed, and before your very eyes put
to an open shame. You believe them when
they lie ; give credit to them, then, when they
speak the truth about themselves. No one
plays the liar to bring disgrace upon his own
head, but for the sake of honour rather. You
give a readier confidence to people making
confessions against themselves, than denials
in their own behalf. It has not been an un-
usual thing, accordingly, for those testimonies
of your deities to convert men to Christianity ;
for in giving full belief to them, we are led to
believe in Christ. Yes, your very gods kindle
up faith in our Scriptures, they build up the
confidence of our hope. You do homage, as
I know, to them also with the blood of Chris-
tians. On no account, then, would they lose
those who are so useful and dutiful to them,
anxious even to hold you fast, lest some day
or other as Christians you might put them to
the rout, — if under the power of a follower of
Christ, who desires to prove to you the Truth,
it were at all possible for them to lie.

CHAP. XXIV.

This whole confession of these beings,,
in which they declare that they are not
gods, and in which they tell you that there
is no God but one, the God whom we
adore, is quite sufficient to clear us from*\
the crime of treason, chiefly against the
Roman religion. For if it is certain the gods '
have no existence, there is no religion in the
case. If there is no religion, because there
are no gods, we are assuredly not guilty of
any offence against religion. Instead of that, *"
the charge recoils on your own head : wor-
shipping a lie, you are really guilty of the<^
crime you charge on us, not merely by refus-
ing the true religion of the true God, but by
going the further length of persecuting it.
But now, granting that these objects of your
worship are really gods, is it not generally
held that there is one higher and more potent,
as it were the world's chief ruler, endowed
with absolute power and majesty ? For the
common way is to apportion deity, giving an
imperial and supreme domination to one,
while its offices are put into the hands of
many, as Plato describes great Jupiter in the


CHAP. XXV.]


APOLOGY.


39


heavens, surrounded by an array at once of
deities and demons. It behooves us, therefore,
to show equal respect to the procurators, pre-
fects, and governors of the divine empire. And
yet how great a crime does he commit, who,
with the object of gaining higher favour with
the Caesar, transfers his endeavours and his
hopes to another, and does not confess that
the appellation of God as of Emperor belongs
only to the Supreme Head, when it is held a
capital offence among us to call, or hear called,
by the highest title any other than Caesar him-
self ! Let one man worship God, another
Jupiter; let one lift suppliant hands to the
heavens, another to the altar of Fides ; let one
— if you choose to take this view of it — count
in prayer the clouds, and another the ceiling
panels; let one consecrate his own life to his
God, and another that of a goat. For see that
you do not give a further ground for the
charge of irreligion, by taking away religious
liberty," and forbidding free choice of deity,
so that I may no longer worship according to
my inclination, but am compelled to worship
against it. Not even a human being would
care to have unwilling homage rendered him;
and so the very Egyptians have been permitted
the legal use of their ridiculous superstition,
liberty to make gods of birds and beasts,
nay, to condemn to death any one who kills a
god of their sort. Every province even, and
■every city, has its god. Syria has Astarte,
Arabia has Dusares, the Norici have Belenus,
Africa has its Caelestis, Mauritania has its
own princes. I have spoken, I think, of
Roman provinces, and yet I have not said
their gods are Roman; for they are not wor-
shipped at Rome any more than others who
are ranked as deities over Italy itself by
municipal consecration, such as Delventinus
of Casinum, Visidianus of Narnia, Ancharia
of Asculum, Nortia of Volsinii, Valentia of
Ocriculum, Hostia of Satrium, Father Curis
of Falisci, in honour of whom, too, Juno got
her surname. In, fact, we alone are pre-
vented having a religion of our own. We give
offence to the Romans, we are excluded from
the rights and privileges of Romans, because
we do not worship the gods of Rome. It is
well that there is a God of all, whose we all
are, whether we will or no. But with you
liberty is given to worship any god but the
true God, as though He were not rather the
God all should worship, to whom all belong.

CHAP. XXV.

I think I have offered sufficient proof upon


I [Observe our author's assertion that in its own nature, worship
must be a voluntary act, and note this expression libertatevi re-
ligionis.'\


the question of false and true divinity, having
shown that the proof rests not merely on de-
bate and argument, but on the witness of the
very beings whom you believe are gods, so
that the point needs no further handling.
However, having been led thus naturally to
speak of the Romans, I shall not avoid the
controversy which is invited by the groundless
assertion of those who maintain that, as a
reward of their singular homage to religion,
the Romans have been raised to such heights,-
of power as to have become masters of the^
world; and that so certainly divine are the
beings they worship, that those prosper be-
yond all others, who beyond all others honour
them.' This, forsooth, is the wages the gods
have paid the Romans for their devotion. The
progress of the empire is to be ascribed to C
Sterculus, the Mutunus, and Larentina !
For I can hardly think that foreign gods would
have been disposed to show more favour to
an alien race than to their own, and given
their own fatherland, in which they had their
birth, grew up to manhood, became illustri-
ous, and at last were buried, over to invaders
from another shore ! As for Cybele, if she
set her affections on the city of Rome as sprung
of the Trojan stock saved from the arms
of Greece, she herself forsooth being of the *
same race, — if she foresaw her transference ^
to the avenging people by whom Greece the
conqueror of Phrygia was to be subdued, let
her look to it (in regard of her native coun-
try's conquest by Greece). Why, too, even
in these days the Mater Magna has given a
notable proof of her greatness which she has
conferred as a boon upon the city; when,
after the loss to the State of Marcus Aurelius
at Sirmium, on the sixteenth before the Kal-
ends of April, that most sacred high priest
of hers was offering, a week after, impure
libations of blood drawn from his own arms,
and issuing his commands that the ordinary
prayers should be made for the safety of the
emperor already dead. O tardy messengers !
O sleepy despatches ! through whose fault
Cybele had not an earlier knowledge of the
imperial decease, that the Christians might
have no occasion to ridicule a goddess so
unworthy. Jupiter, again, would surely never
have permitted his own Crete to fall at once
before the Roman Fasces, forgetful of that
Idean cave and the Corybantian cymbals, and
the sweet odour of her who nursed him there.
Would he not have exalted his own tomb above
the entire Capitol, that the land which covered
the ashes of Jove might rather be the mistress


afSee Augustine's City of God. III. xvii. p. 95, Ed. Migne.]
3 Her image was taken from Pessinus to Rome.


40


APOLOGY


[chap. XXVII.


of the world ? Would Juno have desired the
destruction of the Punic city, beloved even to
the neglect of Samos, and that by a nation of
^^neadae ? As to that I know, " Here were her
arms, here was her chariot, this kingdom, if
the Fates permit, the goddess tends and cher-
ishes to be mistress of the nations." * Jove's
hapless wife and sister had no power to pre-
vail against the Fates ! " Jupiter himself is
sQstained by fate." And yet the Romans
have never done such homage to the Fates,
which gave them Carthage against the purpose
and the will of Juno, as to the abandoned
harlot Larentina. It is undoubted that not a
few of your gods have reigned on earth as
kings. If, then, they now possess the power
of bestowing empire, when they were kings
themselves, from whence had they received
their kingly honours? Whom did Jupiter
and Saturn worship? A Sterculus, I suppose.
But did the Romans, along with the native-
born inhabitants, afterwards adore also some
who were never kings ? In that case, how-
ever, they were under the reign of others,
who did not yet bow down to them, as not
yet raised to godhead. It belongs to others,
then, to make gift of kingdoms, since there
were kings before these gods had their names
v'^ on the roll of divinities. But how utterly

/foolish it is to attribute the greatness of the
Roman name to religious merits, since it was
after Rome became an empire, or call it still
a kingdom, that the religion she professes
made its chief progress ! Is it the case now ?
Has its religion been the source of the pros-
perity of Rome ? Though Numa set agoing
an eagerness after superstitious observances,
yet religion among the Romans was not yet a
matter of images or temples. It was frugal
in its ways, its rites were simple, and there
were no capitols struggling to the heavens;
but the altars were offhand ones of turf, and
the sacred vessels were yet of Samian earthen-
ware, and from these the odours rose, and no
likeness of God was to be seen. For at that
time the skill of the Greeks and Tuscans in
image-making had not yet overrun the city
with the products of their art. The Romans,
therefore, were not distinguished for their
devotion to the gods before they attained to
greatness; and so their greatness was not the
result of their religion. Indeed, how could

> religion make a people great who have owed
their greatness to their irreligion ? For, if I
am not mistaken, kingdoms and empires are
acquired by wars, and are extended by victo-
ries. More than that, you cannot have wars
and^victories without the taking, and often


the destruction, of cities. That is a thing in
which the gods have their share of calamity.
Houses and temples suffer alike ; there is in-
discriminate slaughter of priests and citizens ;
the hand of rapine is laid equally upon sacred
and on common treasure. Thus the sacri-
leges of the Romans are as numerous as their
trophies. They boast as many triumphs over
the gods as over the nations ; as many spoils
of battle they have still, as there remain im-
ages of captive deities. And the poor gods
submit to be adored by their enemies, and
they ordain illimitable empire to those whose
injuries rather than their simulated homage
should have had retribution at their hands.
But divinities unconscious are with impunity
dishonoured, just as in vain they are adored.
You certainly never can believe that devotion
to religion has evidently advanced to greatness
a people who, as we have put it, have either
grown by injuring religion, or have injured
religion by their growth. Those, too, whose
kingdoms have become part of the one great
whole of the Roman empire, were not without
religion when their kingdoms were taken from
them.

CHAP. XXVI.

Examine then, and see if He be not the
dispenser of kingdoms, who is Lord at once
of the world which is ruled, and of man him-
self who rules ; if He have not ordained the
changes of dynasties, with their appointed
seasons, who was before all time, and made
the world a body of times ; ifjthe rise and the
fall of states are not the work of Him. un^Y


whose sovereignty the human race once ex-
isted without states at all. How do you allow
yourselves to fall into such error ? Why, the
Rome of rural simplicity is older than some
of her gods; she reigned before her proud,
vast Capitol was built. The Babylonians ex-
ercised dominion, too, before the days of the
Pontiffs; and the Medes before the Quinde-
cemvirs; and the Egyptians before the Salii;
and the Assyrians before the Luperci; and
the Amazons before the Vestal Virgins. And
to add another point : if the relij:ions of
Rome give empire, ancient Judeawou Id never

have been a kingdom, despising as it d id gn£.^

and all th£5.e idol deities; Judea, whose God
you Romans once honoured with victims, and

its temple with gifts, and its people with

treaties ; and whicn would never have been be-
neath your sceptre but forthat last and crown-
ing offence against God, in rejecting and cru-
ci tying Chrrst


CHAP. XXVII.


»£|^*miliar reference to Virgil, i'Eneid,


Enough has been said in these remarks to
1 confute the charge of treason against your re-


CHAP. XXIX.]


APOLOGY.


41


ligion ; for we cannot be held to do harm to
. that which has no existence. When we are
called therefore to sacrifice, we resolutely re-
fuse, relying on the knowledge we possess,
by which we are well assured of the real ob-
jects to whom these services are offered,
under profaning of images and the deifica-
tion of human names. Some, indeed, think
it a piece of insanity that, when it is in our
power to offer sacrifice at once, and go away
unharmed, holding as ever our convictions,
we prefer an obstinate persistence in our con-
fession to our safety. You advise us, for-
sooth, to take unjust advantage of you ; but
we know whence such suggestions come, who
is at the bottom of it all, and how every
^effort is made, now by cunning suasion, and
now by merciless persecution, to overthrow
, our constancy. No other than that spirit,
half devil and half angel, who, hating us be-
cause of his own separation from God, and
stirred with envy for the favour God has shown
us, turns your minds against us by an occult
influence, moulding and instigating them to
all that perversity in judgment, and that un-
righteous cruelty, which we have mentioned
at the beginning of our work, when entering
on this discussion. For, though the whole
power of demons and kindred spirits is sub-
ject to us, yet still, as ill-disposed slaves
sometimes conjoin contumacy with fear, and
delight to injure those of whom they at the
same time stand in awe, so is it here. For

N fear also inspires hatred. Besides, in their
desperate condition, as already under con-
demnation, it gives them some comfort, while
punishment delays, to have the usufruct of
their malignant dispositions. And yet, when
hands are laid on them, they are subdued at
once, and submit to their lot; and those whom
at a distance they oppose, in close quarters
they supplicate for mercy. So when, like in-
surrectionary workhouses, or prisons, or
mines, or any such penal slaveries, they break
forth against us their masters, they know all
the while that they are not a match for us,
and just on that account, indeed, rush the
more recklessly to destruction. We resist
them, unwilHngly, as though they were equals,
and contend against them by persevering in
that which they assail ; and our triumph over

^ them is never more complete than when we
^ are condemned for resolute adherence to our
faith.

CHAP. XXVIII.

But as it was easily seen to be unjust to
compel freemen against their will to offer sac-
rifice (for even in other acts of religious ser-
vice a wiUing mind is required), it should be


counted quite absurd for one man to compel
another to do honour to the gods, when he
ought ever voluntarily, and in the sense of
his own need, to seek their favour, lest in the
liberty which is his right he should be ready
to say, "I want none of Jupiter's favours;
pray who art thou ? Let Janus meet me with
angry looks, with whichever of his faces he
likes ; what have you to do with me ? " You
have been led, no doubt, by these same evil
spirits to compel us to offer sacrifice for the
well-being of the emperor; and you are under /
a necessity of using force, just as we are unden
an obligation to face the dangers of it. This
brings us, then, to the second ground of accu-
sation, that we are guilty of treason against a/
majesty more august ; for you do homage
with a greater dread and an intenser rever-
ence to Caesar, than Olympian Jove himself.
And if you knew it, upon sufficient grounds.
For is not any living man better than a dead
one, whoever he be ? But this is not done by
you on any other ground than regard to a
power whose presence you vividly realize; so
that also in this you are convicted of impiety
to your gods, inasmuch as you show a greater /^
reverence to a human sovereignty than you^-
do to them. Then, too, among you, people
far more readily swear a false oath in the
name of all the gods, than in the name of the
single genius of Caesar.

CHAP. XXIX.

Let it be made clear, then, first of all, if
those to whom sacrifice is offered are really
able to protect either emperor or anybody
else, and so adjudge us guilty of treason, if
angels and demons, spirits of most wicked
nature, do any good, if the lost save, if the
condemned give liberty, if the dead (I refer
to what you know well enough) defend the
living. For surely the first thing they would
look to would be the protection of their stat-
ues, and images, and temples, which rather
owe their safety, I think, to the watch kept
by Caesar's guards. Nay, I think the very
materials of which these are made come from
Caesar's mines, and there is not a temple but
depends on Caesar's will. Yes, and many
gods have felt the displeasure of the Caesar.
It makes for my argument if they are also
partakers of his favour, when he bestows on
them some gift or privilege. How shall they
who are thus in Caesar's power, who belong"
entirely to him, have Caesar's protection in
their hands, so that you can imagine them
able to give to Caesar what they more readily
get from him ? This, then, is the ground on
which we are charged with treason against the
imperial majesty, to wit, that we do not put


42


APOLOGY.


[chap. XXXII.


the emperors under their own possessions ;
that we do not offer a mere mock service on
their behalf, as not believing their safety rests
in leaden hands. But you are impious in a
high degree who look for it where it is not,
who seek it from those who have it not to
give, passing by Him who has it entirely in
His power. Besides this, you persecute those
who know where to seek for it, and who,
knowing where to seek for it, are able as well
to secure it.

CHAP. XXX.

For we offer prayer for the safety of our
h' princes to the eternal, the true, the living
God, whose favour, beyond all others, they
must themselves desire. They know from
whom they have obtained their power; they
know, as they are men, from whom they have
received life itself; they are convinced that
He is God alone, on whose power alone they
are entirely dependent, to whom they are
second, after whom they occupy the highest
places, before and above all the gods. Why
not, since they are above all living men, and
the living, as living, are superior to the dead ?
They reflect upon the extent of their power,
and so they come to understand the highest;
they acknowledge that they have all their
might from Him against whom their might is
nought. Let the emperor make war on
heaven ; let him lead heaven captive in his
triumph ; let him put guards on heaven ; let
him impose taxes on heaven ! He cannot.
Just because he is less than heaven, he is
great. For he himself is His to whom heaven
and every creature appertains. He gets his
sceptre where he first got his humanity; his
power where he got the breath of life. Thither
we lift our eyes, with hands outstretched,
because free from sin; with head uncovered,
for we have nothing whereof to be ashamed ;
finally, witYiout a monitor, because it is from
the heart we supplicate. Without ceasing,
for all our emperors we offer prayer. We
pray for life prolonged; for security to the
empire; for protection to the imperial house;
for brave armies, a faithful senate, a virtuous
people, the world at rest, whatever, as man
or Csesar, an emperor would wish. These
things I cannot ask from any but the God
^from whom I know I shall obtain them, both
/because He alone bestows them and because
I have claims upon Him for their gift, as
being a servant of His, rendering homage to
Him alone, persecuted for His doctrine,
offering to Him, at His own requirement,
that costly and noble sacrifice of prayer* de-


» Heb. X. 22. [See cap. xlij. in/ra p. 49.]


spatched from the chaste body, an unstained
soul, a sanctified spirit, not the few grains of
incense a farthing buys = — tears of an Arabian
tree, — not a few drops of wine, — not the blood
of some worthless ox to which death is a re-
lief, and, in addition to other offensive things,,
a polluted conscience, so that one wonders,
when your victims are examined by these vile
priests, why the examination is not rather of
the sacrificers than the sacrifices. With our
hands thus stretched out and up to God, rend
us with your iron claws, hang us up on crosses,
wrap us in flames, take our heads from us
with the sword, let loose the wild beasts on
us, — the very attitude of a Christian praying
is one of preparation for all punishment. ^ Let
this, good rulers, be your work : wring from
us the soul, beseeching God on the emperor's
behalf. Upon the truth of God, and devotion
to His name, put the brand of crime.

CHAP. XXXI.

But we merely, you say, flatter the em-
peror, and feign these prayers of ours to es- ;
cape persecution. Thank you for your mis- "~-
take, for you give us the opportunity of prov-
ing our allegations. Do you, then, who think
that we care nothing for the welfare of Caesar,
look into God's revelations, examine our
sacred books, which we do not keep in hiding,
and which many accidents put into the hands
of those who are not of us. Learn from them
that a large benevolence is enjoined upon us,
even so far as to supplicate God for our ene-
mies, and to beseech blessings on our perse-
cutors."♦ Who, then, are greater enemies and
persecutors of Christians, than the very par-
ties with treason against whom we are charged >
Nay, even in terms, and most clearly, the
Scripture says, " Pray for kings, and rulers,
and powers, that all may be peace with you." s
For when there is disturbance in the empire,
if the commotion is felt by its other members,
surely we too, though we are not thought to
be given to disorder, are to be found in
some place or other which the calamity
affects.

CHAP. XXXII.

There is also another and a greater neces-
sity for our offering prayer in behalf of the
emperors, nay, for the complete stability of
the empire, and for Roman interests in gene-
ral. For we know that a mighty shock im-


s [Once more this reflection on the use of material incense, which
is common to early Christians, as in former volumes noted.]

3 [A reference to kneeling, which see the dc Corona cap. 3, in-
fra. Christians are represented as standing at prayer, in the de-
lineations of the Catacombs. But, see Nicene Canon, xx.'\

4 Matt. V. 44,

5 I Tim. ii. 2.


CHAP. XXXV.]


APOLOGY.


43


/


pending over the whole earth — in fact, the
very end of all things threatening dreadful
woes — is only retarded by the continued exist-
>ence of the Roman empire.' We have no
desire, then, to be overtaken by these dire

t events; and in praying that their coming may
be delayed, we are lending our aid to Rome's
duration. More than this, though we decline
to swear by the genii of the Caesars, we swear
by their safety, which is worth far more than
all your genii. Are you ignorant that these
genii are called *' Daemones," and thence the
diminutive name '*Daemonia" is applied to
them ? We respect in the emperors the ordi-
\ nance of God, who has set them over the
/ nations. We know that there is that in them
which God has willed ; and to what God has
willed we desire all safety, and we count an
oath by it a great oath. But as for daemons,
that is, your genii, we have been in the habit
of exorcising them, not of swearing by them,
and thereby conferring on them divine honour.

CHAP. XXXIII.

But why dwell longer on the reverence and
sacred respect of Christians to the emperor,
whom we cannot but look up to as called by
our Lord to his office ? So that on vaUd
grounds I might say Caesar is more ours than
yours, for our God has appointed him.
Therefore, as having this propriety in him, I
do more than you for his welfare, not merely
because I ask it of Him who can give it, or
because I ask it as one who deserves to get
it, but also because, in keeping the majesty
of Caesar within due hmits, and putting it
under the Most High, and making it less than
divine, I commend him the more to the favour
of Deity, to whom I fnake him alone inferior.
But I place him in subjection to one I regard
as more glorious than himself. Never will I
call the emperor God, and that either because

I it is not in me to be guilty of falsehood; or
that I dare not turn him into ridicule ; or that
not even himself will desire to have that high
name applied to him. If he is but a man, it
is his interest as man to give God His higher
' place. Let him think it enough to bear the
name of emperor. That, too, is a great name
of God's giving. To call him God, is to rob
him of his title. If he is not a man, emperor
> he cannot be. Even when, amid the honours
of a triumph, he sits on that lofty chariot, he
is reminded that he is only human. A voice
at his back keeps whispering in his ear,
" Look behind thee; remember thou art but
a man." And it only adds to his exultation.


I [Cap. xxxix. infra.
of which more hereafter.]


And see Kaye, pp. 20, 348. A subject


that he shines with a glory so surpassing as
to require an admonitory reference to his
condition.' It adds to his greatness that he
needs such a reminiscence, lest he should
think himself divine.

CHAP. XXXIV.

Augustus, the founder of the empire, would
not even have the title Lord; for that, too, is
a name of Deity. For my part, I am willing
to give the emperor this designation, but in
the common acceptation of the word, and
when I am not forced to call him Lord as in
God's place. But my relation to him is one
of freedom ; for I have but one true Lord,
the God omnipotent and eternal, who is Lord
of the emperor as well. How can he, who is
truly father of his country, be its lord ? The
name of piety is more grateful than the name<
of power; so the heads of families are called
fathers rather than lords. Far less should
the emperor have the name of God. We can
only profess our belief that he is that by the
most unworthy, nay, a fatal flattery ; it is
just as if, having an emperor, you call another
by the name, in which case will you not give
great and unappeasable offence to him who
actually reigns ? — an offence he, too, needs
to fear on whom you have bestowed the title.
Give all reverence to God, if you wish Him
to be propitious to the emperor. Give up all
worship of, and belief in, any other being as
divine. Cease also to give the sacred name
to him who has need of God himself. If such
adulation is not ashamed of its lie, in address-
ing a man as divine, let it have some dread
at least of the evil omen which it bears. It
is the mvocation of a curse, to give Caesar the-'
name of god before his apotheosis.

CHAP. XXXV.

This is the reason, then, why Christians are^
counted public enemies : that they pay no
vain, nor false, nor foolish honours to the em-
peror ; that, as men believing in the true re-
ligion, they prefer to celebrate their festal
days with a good conscience, instead of with,
the common wantonness. It is, forsooth, a^
notable homage to bring fires and couches out
before the public, to have feasting from street
to street, to turn the city into one great tavern,
to make mud with wine, to run in troops to
acts of violence, to deeds of shamelessness
to lust allurements! What! is public joy
manifested by public disgrace? Do things
unseemly at other times beseem the festal
days of princes ? Do they who observe the
rules of virtue out of reverence for Caesar, for


'■ [A familiar story of Alexander is alluded to.]


44


APOLOGY.


[chap. XXXVI.


his sake turn aside from them ? Shall piety-
be a license to immoral deeds, and shall re-
ligion be regarded as affording the occasion
for all riotous extravagance ? Poor we, worthy
of all condemnation ! For why do we keep
the votive days and high rejoicings in honour
of the Caesars with chastity, sobriety, and
Virtue ? Why, on the day of gladness, do we
neither cover our door-posts with laurels, nor
intrude upon the day with lamps ? It is a
proper thing, at the call of a public festivity,
to dress your house up like some new brothel.'
However, in the matter of this homage to a
lesser majesty, in reference to which we are
accused of a lower sacrilege, because we do
not celebrate along with you the holidays of
the Caisars in a manner forbidden alike by
modesty, decency, and purity, — in truth they
have been established rather as affording op-
portunities for licentiousness than from any
worthy motive, — in this matter I am anxious to
point out how faithful and true you are, lest
perchance here also those who will not have us
counted Romans, but enemies of Rome's chief
rulers, be found themselves worse than we
wicked Christians ! I appeal to the inhabitants
of Rome themselves, to the native population
of the seven hills : does that Roman vernacu-
lar of theirs ever spare a Caesar ? The Tiber
and the wild beasts' schools bear witness.
Say now if nature had covered our hearts with
a transparent substance through which the
light could pass, whose hearts, all graven over,
would not betray the scene of another and
another Caesar presiding at the distribution of
a largess ? And this at the very time they are
shouting, ** May Jupiter take years from us,
and with them lengthen like to you," — words
as foreign to the lips of a Christian as it is out
of keeping with his character to desire a change
of emperor. But this is the rabble, you say;
yet, as the rabble, they still are Romans, and
none more frequently than they demand the
death of Christians.' Of course, then, the
other classes, as befits their higher rank, are
religiously faithful. No breath of treason is
there ever in the senate, in the equestrian
order, in the camp, in the palace. Whence,
then, came a Cassius, a Niger, an Albinus ?
Whence they who beset the Caesar ^ between
the two laurel groves? Whence they who
practised wrestling, that they might acquire
skill to strangle him ? Whence they who in
full armour broke into the palace,^ more
audacious than all your Tigerii and Parthe-


» [Note this reference to a shameless custom of the heathen in
Rome and elsewhere.]

2 [See cap. 1. and Note on cap. xl. in/ra.'\

3 Commodus.

^ To murder Pertinax.


nii.5 If I mistake not, they were Romans; that
is, they were not Christians. Yet all of them,
on the very eve of their traitorous outbreak,
offered sacrifices for the safety of the emperor,
and swore by his genius, one thing in profes-
sion, and another in the heart; and no doubt
they were in the habit of calling Christians
enemies of the state. Yes, and persons who
are now daily brought to light as confederates
or approvers of these crimes and treasons,
the still remnant gleanings after a vintage of
traitors, with what verdant and branching
laurels they clad their door-posts, with what
lofty and brilliant lamps they smoked their
porches, with what most exquisite and gaudy
couches they divided the Forum among them-
selves ; not that they might celebrate public
rejoicings, but that they might get a foretaste
of their own votive seasons in partaking of the
festivities of another, and inaugurate the
model and image of their hope, changing in
their minds the emperor's name. The same
homage is paid, dutifully too, by those who
consult astrologers, and soothsayers, and au-
gurs, and magicians, about the life of the
Caesars, — arts which, as made known by the
angels who sinned, and forbidden by God,
Christians do not even make use of in their own
affairs. But who has any occasion to inquire
about the life of the emperor, if he have not
some wish or thought against it, or some hopes
and expectations after it ? For consultations of
this sort have not the same motive in the case
of friends as in the case of sovereigns. The
anxiety of a kinsman is something very differ-
ent from that of a subject.

CHAP. XXXVI.

If it is the fact that men bearing the name
of Romans are found to be enemies of Rome,
why are we, on the ground that we are regarded
as enemies, denied the name of Romans ?
We may be at once Romans and foes of Rome,
when men passing for Romans are discovered
to be enemies of their country. So the aft'ec-
tion, and fealty, and reverence, due to the
emperors do not consist in such tokens of
homage as these, which even hostility may be
zealous in performing, chiefly as a cloak to
its purposes; but in those ways which Deity
as cerainly enjoins on us, as they are held to
be necessary in the case of all men as well as
emperors. Deeds of true heart-goodness are
not due by us to emperors alone. We never
do good with respect of persons; for in our
own interest we conduct ourselves as those who
take no payment either of praise or premium


5 Tigerius and Parthenius were among the murderers of Com-
mod,us.


CHAP. XXXVIII.]


APOLOGY.


45


from man, but from Gqd, who both requires I
and remunerates an impartial benevolence.'
>We are the same to emperors as to our ordi-
nary neighbors. For we are equally forbidden
to wish ill, to do ill, to speak ill, to think ill of
all men. The thing we must not do to an em-
peror, we must not do to any one else: what
we would not do to anybody, a fortiori, per-
haps we should not do to him whom God
has been pleased so highly to exalt.

CHAP. XXXVII.

If we are enjoined, then, to love our ene-
mies, as I have remarked above, whom have
^we to hate ? If injured, we are forbidden to
retaliate, lest we become as bad ourselves :
who can suffer injury at our hands ? In regard
to this, recall your own experiences. How
often you inflict gross cruelties on Christians,
partly because it is your own inclination, and
partly in obedience to the laws ! How often,
too, the hostile mob, paying no regard to you,
takes the law into its own hand, and assails
us with stones and flames ! With the very
frenzy of the Bacchanals, they do not even
spare the Christian dead, but tear them, now
sadly changed, no longer entire, from the rest
of the tomb, from the asylum we might say
of death, cutting them in pieces, rending them
asunder. Yet, banded together as we are,
ever so ready to sacrifice our lives, what sin-
gle case of revenge for injury are you able to
point to, though, if it were held right among us
to repay evil by evil, a single night with a torch
or two could achieve an ample vengeance?
But away with the idea of a sect divine
avenging itself by human fires, or shrinking
from the sufferings in which it is tried. If we
desired, indeed, to act the part of open ene-
mies, not merely of secret avengers, would
there be any lacking in strength, whether of
numbers or resources ? The Moors, the Mar-
comanni, the Parthians themselves, or any
single people, however great, inhabiting a dis-
tinct territory, and confined within its own
boundaries, surpasses, forsooth, in numbers,
one spread over all the world ! We are but
of yesterday, and we have filled every place
among you — cities, islands, fortresses, towns,
market-places, the very camp, tribes, com-
panies, palace, senate, forum,— we have left
nothing to you but the temples of your gods.
, ' For what wars should we not be fit, not eager,
•. even with unequal forces, we who so willingly
yield ourselves to the sword, if in our religion
it were not counted better to be slain than to
slay ? Without arms even, and raising no in-


^ [Cap. ix. p. 25, note
honouring all men."]


supra. Again, Christian democracy,


surrectionary banner, but simply in enmity to
you, we could carry on the contest with you
by an ill-willed severance alone. For if such
multitudes of men were to break away from
you, and betake themselves to some remote
corner of the world, why, the very loss of so
many citizens, whatever sort they were, would
cover the empire with shame ; nay, in the
very forsaking, vengeance would be inflicted.^
Why, you would be horror-struck at the soli-
tude in which you would find yourselves, at
such an all-prevailing silence, and that stupor
as of a dead world. You would have to seek
subjects to govern. You would have more
enemies than citizens remaining. For now it
is the immense number of Christians which
makes your enemies so few, — almost all the
inhabitants of your various cities being fol-
lowers of Christ. = Yet you choose to call us
enemies of the human race, rather than of
human error. Nay, who would deliver you
from those secret foes, ever busy both de-
stroying your souls and ruining your health ?
Who would save you, I mean, from the attacks
of those spirits of evil, which without reward .^
or hire we exorcise ? This alone would be re-
venge enough for us, that you were henceforth
left free to the possession of unclean spirits.
But instead of taking into account what is due
to us for the important protection we afford
you, and though we are not merely no trouble
to you, but in fact necessary to your well-
being, you prefer to hold us enemies, as in-
deed we are, yet not of man, but rather of his .
error.

CHAP. XXXVIII.

Ought not Christians, therefore, to receive
not merely a somewhat milder treatment, but
to have a place among the law-tolerated socie-
ties, seeing they are not chargeable with any
such crimes as are commonly dreaded from
societies of the illicit class? For, unless I
mistake the matter, the prevention of such as-
sociations is based on a prudential regard to
public order, that the state may not be divided
into parties, which would naturally lead to
disturbance in the electoral assemblies, the
councils, the curiae, the special conventions,
even in the public shows by the hostile collis-
ions of rival parties ; especially when now,
in pursuit of gain, men have begun to consider
their violence an article to be bought and sold.
But as those in whom all ardour in the pursuit
of glory and honour is dead, we have no press-
ing inducement to take part in your public
meetings ; nor is there aught more entirely
foreign to us than affairs of state. We ac-


a [Elucidation VI.]


46


APOLOGY.


[chap. XXXIX.


knowledge one all-embracing commonwealth
— the world. We renounce all your specta-
cles, as strongly as we renounce the matters
originating them, which we know were con-
ceived of superstition, when we give up the
very things which are the basis of their repre-
sentations. Among us nothing is ever said,
or seen, or heard, which has anything in com-
mon with the madness of the circus, the im-
modesty of the theatre, the atrocities of the
arena, the useless exercises of the wrestling-
ground. Why do you take offence at us
because we differ from you in regard to your
pleasures? If we will not partake of your
enjoyments, the loss is ours, if there be loss
in the case, not yours. We reject what pleases
you. You, on the other hand, have no taste
for what is our delight. The Epicureans were
allowed by you to decide for themselves one
true source of pleasure — I mean equanimity ;
the Christian, on his part, has many such en-
joyments— what harm in that ?

CHAP. XXXIX.

I shall at once go on, then, to exhibit the
peculiarities of the Christian society, that, as
I have refuted the evil charged against it, I
may point out its positive good.' We are a
body knit together as such by a common re-
ligious profession, by unity of discipline, and
by the bond of a common hope. We meet
together as an assembly and congregation,
that, offering up prayer to God as with united
force, we may wrestle with Him in our suppli-
cations. This violence God delights in. We
pray, too, for the emperors, for their ministers
and for all in authority, for the welfare of the
world, for the prevalence of peace, for the
delay of the final consummation." We as-
semble to read our sacred writings, if any
peculiarity of the times makes either fore-
warning or reminiscence needful. ^ However
it be in that respect, with the sacred words
we nourish our faith, we animate our hope,
we make our confidence more stedfast ;
and no less by inculcations of God's precepts
we confirm good habits. In the same place
also exhortations are made, rebukes and sa-
cred censures are administered. For with a
great gravity is the work of judging carried on
among us, as befits those who feel assured
that they are in the sight of God ; and you
have the most notable example of judgment
to come when any one has sinned so griev-
ously as to require his severance from us in
prayer, in the congregation and in all sacred


« [Elucidation VII.]
sfChap. xxxii. supra p. 43.]

3 \k\\ argument for Days of Public Thanksgiving, Fasting and
the hke.]


intercourse. The tried men of our elders
preside over us, obtaining that honour not by
purchase, but by established character. There
is no buying and selling of any sort in the
things of God. Though we have our treasure-
chest, it is not made up of purchase-money,
as of a religion that has its price. On the
monthly day,* if he likes, each puts in a small
donation ; but only if it be his pleasure, and
only if he be able : for there is no compulsion ;
all is voluntary. These gifts are, as it were,
piety's deposit fund. For they are not taken
thence and spent on feasts, and drinking-
bouts, and eating-houses, but to support and
bury poor people, to supply the wants of boys
and girls destitute of means and parents, and
of old persons confined now to the house ;
such, too, as have suffered shipwreck ; and if
there happen to be any in the mines, or ban-
ished to the islands, or shut up in the prisons,
for nothing but their fidelity to the cause of
God's Church, they become the nurslings of
their confession. But it is mainly the deeds
of a love so noble that lead many to put a
brand upon us. See^ they say, hmv they love
o?ie^ another, for themselves are animated by
mutual hatred ; how they are ready even to
die for one another, for they themselves will
sooner put to death. And they are wroth with
us, too, because we call each other brethren ;
for no other reason, as I think, than because
among themselves names of consanguinity are
assumed in mere pretence of affection. But
we are your brethren as well, by the law of
our common mother nature, though you are
hardly men, because brothers so unkind. At
the same time, how much more fittingly they
are called and counted brothers who have been
led to the knowledge of God as their common
Father, who have drunk in one spirit of holi-
ness, who from the same womb of a common
ignorance have agonized into the same light
of truth ! But on this very account, perhaps,
we are regarded as having less claim to be
held true brothers, that no tragedy makes a
noise about our brotherhood, or that the family
possessions, which generally destroy brother-
hood among you, create fraternal bonds among
us. One in mind and soul, we do not hesitate
to share our earthly goods with one another.
All things are common among us but our j
wives. We give up our community where it
is practised alone by others, who not only take"
possession of the wives of their friends, but
most tolerantly also accommodate their friends
with theirs, following the example, 1 believe.


4 [On ordinary Sundays, " they laid by in store," apparently :
once a month they offered.]

5 [A precious testimony, although the caviller asserts that after-
wards the heathen used this expression derisively.]


CHAP. XL.]


APOLOGY.


47


/ of those wise men of ancient times, the Greek
Socrates and the Roman Cato, who shared with
their friends the wives whom they had married,
I it seems for the sake of progeny both to them-
V_selves and to others ; whether in this acting
against their partners' wishes, I am not able
to say. Why should they have any care over
their chastity, when their husbands so readily
bestowed it away ? O noble example of Attic
wisdom, of Roman gravity — the philosopher
and the censor playing pimps ! What won-
der if that great love of Christians towards one
another is desecrated by you ! For you abuse
K also our humble feasts, on the ground that
H^ they are extravagant as well as infamously
^■wicked. To us, it seems, applies the saying
^Hof Diogenes : " The people of Megara feast
^B as though they were going to die on the mor-
^" row; they build as though they were never to
die!" But one sees more readily the mote
in another's eye than the beam in his own.
Why, the very air is soured with the eructa-
tions of so many tribes, and atrice, and de-
curice. The Salii cannot have their feast
without going into debt ; you must get the
accountants to tell you what the tenths of
Hercules and the sacrificial banquets cost ;
the choicest cook is appointed for the Apatu-
ria, the Dionysia, the Attic mysteries ; the
smoke from the* banquet of Serapis will call
out the firemen. Yet about the.modest supper-
room of the Christians alone a great ado is
made. Our feast explains itself by its name.
The Greeks call it agape^ i.e., affection. What-
ever it costs, our outlay in the name of piety
is gain, since with the good things of the feast
we benefit the needy; not as it is with you, do
parasites aspire to the glory of satisfying their
licentious propensities, selling themselves for
a belly-feast to all disgraceful treatment, — but
as it is with God himself, a peculiar respect is
shown to the lowly. If the object of our feast

»be good, in the light of that consider its fur-
ther regulations. As it is an act of religious
service, it permits no vileness or immodesty.
The participants, before reclining, taste first

tof prayer to God. As much is eaten as satis-
fies the cravings of hunger; as much is drunk
as befits the chaste. They say it is enough,
as those who remember that even during the
night they have to worship God; they talk as
those who know that the Lord is one of their
auditors. After manual ablution, and the
bringing in of lights, each ' is asked to stand
forth and sing, as he can, a hymn to God,
either one from the holy Scriptures or one of
his own composing, — a proof of the measure


I [Or, perhaps — " One is prompted to stand forth and bring to
God. as every one can, whether from the Holy Scriptures, or of
his own mind "—i.e. according to his taste.]


of our drinking. As the feast commenced
with prayer, so with prayer it is closed. We
go from it, not like troops of mischief-doers,
nor bands of vagabonds, nor to break out into
licentious acts, but to have as much care of
our modesty and chastity as if we had been at
a school of virtue rather than a banquet. Give
the congregation of the Christians its due,
and hold it unlawful, if it is like assemblies
of the illicit sort: by all means let it be con-
demned, if any complaint can be validly laid
against it, such as lies against secret factions.
But who has ever suffered harm from our as-
semblies ? We are in our congregations just
what we are when separated from each other ;
we are as a community what we are indi-
viduals ; we injure nobody, we trouble no-
body. When the upright, when the virtuous
meet together, when the pious, when the pure
assemble in congregation, you ought not to
call that a faction, but a curia — [i.e., the court
of God.]

CHAP. XL.

On the contrary, they deserve the name of
faction who conspire to bring odium on good
men and virtuous, who cry out against inno-
cent blood, offering as the justification of their
enmity the baseless plea, that they think the
Christians the cause of every public disaster,
of every affliction with which the people are
visited. If the Tiber rises as high as the city
walls, if the Nile does not send its waters up
over the fields, if the heavens give no rain, if
there is an earthquake, if there is famine or
pestilence, straightway the cry' is, "Away
with the Christians to the lion ! " What ! shall
you give .such multitudes to a single beast?
Pray, tell me how many calamities befell the
world and particular cities before Tiberius
reigned — before the coming, that is, of
Christ? We read of the islands of Hiera,
and Anaphe, and Delos, and Rhodes, and
Cos, with many thousands of human beings,
having been swallowed up. Plato informs us
that a region larger than Asia or Africa was
seized by the Atlantic Ocean. An earthquake,
too, drank up the Corinthian sea ; and the
force of the waves cut off a part of Lucania,
whence it obtained the name of Sicily. These
things surely could not have taken place with-
out the inhabitants suffering by them. But
where — I do not say were Christians, those
despisers of your gods — but where were your
gods themselves in those days, when the flood
poured its destroying waters over all the
world, or, as Plato thought, merely the level
portion of it ? For that they are of later date


^{Christinnos ad leonem. From what class, chiefly, see cap.
XXXV. supra. Elucidation VIII.]


48


APOLOGY.


[chap. xli.


I


than that calamity, the very cities in which they
were born and died, nay, which they founed,
bear ample testimony ; for the cities could
have no existence at this day unless as belong-
ing to postdiluvian times. Palestine had not
yet received from Egypt its Jewish swarm (of
emigrants), nor had the race from which
Christians sprung yet settled down there,
when its neighbors Sodom and Gomorrah were
consumed by fire from heaven. The country
yet smells of that conflagration ; and if there
are apples there upon the trees, it is only a
promise to the eye they give — you but touch
them, and they turn to ashes. Nor had Tuscia
and Campania to complain of Christians in
the days when fire from heaven overwhelmed
Vulsinii, and Pompeii was destroyed by fire
from its own mountain. No one yet w^or-
shipped the true God at Rome, when Hannibal
at Cannce counted the Roman slain by the
pecks of Roman rings. Your gods were all
objects of adoration, universally acknowl-
edged, when the Senones closely besieged the
very Capitol. And it is in keeping with all
this, that if adversity has at any time befallen
cities, the temples and the walls have equally
shared in the disaster, so that it is clear to
demonstration the thing was not the doing of
the gods, seeing it also overtook themselves.

V. The truth is, the human race has always de-
served ill at God's hand. First of all, as un-
dutiful to Him, because when it knew Him
in part, it not only did not seek after Him,
but even invented other gods of its own to
worship ; and further, because, as the result
of their willing ignorance of the Teacher of
righteousness, the Judge and Avenger of sin,
' all vices and crimes grew and flourished. But
had men sought, they would have come to
know the glorious object of their seeking ;
and knowledge would have produced obedi-
ence, and obedience would have found a gra-

^cious instead of an angry God. They ought
then to see that the very same God is angry
with them now as in ancient times, before
Christians were so much as spoken of. It
was His blessings they enjoyed — created be-
fore they made any of their deities : and why
can they not take it in, that their evils come
from the Being whose goodness they have
failed to recognize ? They suffer at the hands
of Him to whom they have been ungrateful.
And, for all that is said, if we compare the
calamities of former times, they fall on us
more lightly now, since God gave Christians
to the world ; for from that time virtue put
some restraint on the world's wickedness, and
men began to pray for the averting of God's
wrath. In a word, when the summer clouds
give no rain, and the season is matter of


anxiety, you indeed — full of feasting day by
day, and ever eager for the banquet, baths
and taverns and brothels always busy — offer
up to Jupiter your rain-sacrifices ; you enjoin
on the people barefoot processions ; you seek
heaven at the Capitol ; you look up to the
temple-ceilings for the longed-for clouds —
God and heaven not in all your thoughts.
We, dried up with fastings, and our passions
bound tightly up, holding back as long as
possible from all the ordinary enjoyments of
life, rolling in sackcloth and ashes, assail
heaven with our importunities — touch God's
heart — and when we have extorted divine
compassion, why, Jupiter gets all the honour !

CHAP. XLI.

You, therefore, are the sources of trouble
in human affairs ; on you lies the Wame of
public adversities, since you are ever attract-
ing them — you by whom God is despised and
images are worshipped. It should surely
seem the more natural thing to believe that it
is the neglected One who is angry, and not
they to whom all homage is paid ; or most
unjustly they act, if, on account of the Chris-
tians, they send trouble on their own devotees,
whom they are bound to keep clear of the
punishments of Christians. But this, you
say, hits your God as well, since He permits
His worshippers to suffer on account of those
who dishonour Him. But admit first of all
His providential arrangings, and you will not
make this retort. For He who once for all
appointed an eternal judgment at the world's-
close, does not precipitate the separation,
which is essential to judgment, before the end.
Meanwhile He deals with all sorts of men
alike, so that all together share His favours
and reproofs. His will is, that outcasts and
elect should have adversities and prosperities
in common, that we should have all the same
experience of His goodness and severity.
Having learned these things from His own
lips, we love His goodness, we fear His wrath,
while both by you are treated with contempt ;
and hence the sufferings of life, so far as it is
our lot to be overtaken by them, are in our
case gracious admonitions, while in yours
they are divine punishments. We indeed are
not the least put about : for, first, only one
thing in this life greatly concerns us, and that
is, to get quickly out of it ; and next, if any
adversity befalls us, it is laid to the door of
your transgressions. Nay, though we are
likewise involved in troubles because of our
close connection with you, we are rather glad
of it, because ^e recognize irrtfThvine fore-
tellings, which, in fact, go to confirm the con-
fidence and faith of our hope. But if all the


CHAP. XLIV.]


APOLOGY.


49


evils you endure are inflicted on you by the
Sj gods you worsiiip out of spite to us, why do
IP you continue to pay homage to beings so un-
grateful, and unjust ; who, instead of being
angry with you, should rather have been aid-
ing and abetting you by persecuting Christians
— keeping jw^ clear of their sufferings ?

If CHAP. XLII.

But we are called to account as harm-doers
on another' ground, and are accused of being
S useless in the affairs of life. How in all the
^ world can that be the case with people who
are living among you, eating the same food,
wearing the same attire, having the same
habits, under the same necessities of exist-
ence ? We are not Indian Brahmins or Gym-
nosophists, who dwell in woods and exile
themselves from ordinary human life. We
do not forget the debt of gratitude we owe to
God, our Lord and Creator ; we reject no
creature of His hands, though certainly we
exercise restraint upon ourselves, lest of any
gift of His we make an immoderate or sinful
use. So we sojourn with you in the world,
abjuring neither forum, nor shambles, nor
bath, nor booth, nor workshop, nor inn, nor
weekly market, nor any other places of com-
merce. We sail with you, and fight with
you,^ and till the ground with you ; and in
like manner we unite with you in your traffick-
ings — even in the various arts we make public
property of our works for your benefit. How
• it is we seem useless in your ordinary busi-
ness, living with you and by you as we do, "I
am not able to understand. But if I do not
frequent your religious ceremonies, I am still
on the sacred day a man. I do not at the
Saturnalia bathe myself at dawn, that I may
not lose both day and night ; yet I bathe at
a decent and healthful hour, which preserves
ft: me both in heat and blood. I can be rigid
» and pallid like you after ablution when I am
dead. I do not recline in public at the feast

»of Bacchus, after the manner of the beast-
fighters at their final banquet. Yet of your
resources I partake, laherever I may chance to
eat. I do not buy a crown for my head.
What matters it to you how I use them, if
nevertheless the flowers are purchased ? I
think it more agreeable to have them free
and loose, waving all about. Even if they
are woven into a crown, we smell the crown
with our nostrils : let those look to it who
scent the perfume with their hair. We do
not go to your spectacles ; yet the articles
that are sold there, if I need them, I will ob-


^ [Elucidation IX. See Kaye, p. 361. J

2 [The occupation of a soldier was regarded as lawful therefore.
But see, afterwards, the De Corona cap. xi."]
4


tain more readily at their proper places. We
certainly buy no frankincense. If the Arabias
complain of this, let the Sabaeans be well
assured that their more precious and costly
merchandise is expended as largely in the
burying of Christiansens in the fumigating
of the gods. At any rate, you say, the tem-
ple revenues are every day falling off : * how
few now throw in a contribution ! In truth,
we are not able to give alms both to your
human and your heavenly mendicants ; nor
do we think that we are required to give any
but to those who ask for it. Let Jupiter
then hold out his hand and get, for our com-
passion spends more in the streets than yours*
does in the temples. But your other taxes
will acknowledge a debt of gratitude to Chris-
tians ; for in the faithfulness which keeps us
from fraud upon a brother, we make con-
science of paying all their dues: so that, by
ascertaining how much is lost by fraud and
falsehood in the census declarations — the cal-
culation may easily be made — it would be
seen that the ground of complaint in one de-
partment of revenue is compensated by the
advantage which others derive.

CHAP. XLIII.

I will confess, however, without hesitation,
that there are some who in a sense may com-
plain of Christians that they are a sterile race :
as, for instance, pimps, and panders, and
bath-suppliers ; assassins, and poisoners, and
sorcerers ; soothsayers, too, diviners, and
astrologers. But it is a noble fruit of Chris-
tians, that they have no fruits for such as
these. And yet, whatever loss your interests
suffer from the religion we profess, the pro-
tection you have from us makes amply up for
it. What value do you set on persons, I do
not here urge who deliver you from demons,
I do not urge who for your sakes present
prayers before the throne of the true God, for
perhaps you have no belief in that — but from
whom you can have nothing to fear ?

CHAP. XLIV.

Yes, and no one considers what the loss is,
to the common weal, — a loss as great as it is
real, no one estimates the injury entailed
upon the state, when, men of virtue as we
are, we are put to death in such numbers;
when so many of the truly good suffer the
last penalty. And here we call your own acts
to witness, you who are daily presiding at the
trials of prisoners, and passing sentence upon
crimes. Well, in your long lists of those ac-


3 [An interesting fact as to the burial-rites of Early Cbristiaos.
As to incense, see cap. xxx. supra p. 42.]

4 .An index of the growth of Christianity.


50


APOLOGY.


[chap. xlvi.


cused of many and various atrocities, has any
assassin, any cutpurse, any man guilty of
sacrilege, or seduction, or stealing bathers'
clothes, his name entered as being a Chris-
tian too ? Or when Christians are brought
before you on the mere ground of their name,
is there ever found among them an ill-doer
of the sort ? It is always with your folk the
prison is steaming, the mines are sighing, the
wild beasts are fed: it is from you the exhibit-
ors of gladiatorial shows always get their
herds of criminals to feed up for the occa-
sion. You find no Christian there, except
simply as being such ; or if one is there as
something else, a Christian he is no longer.'

CHAP. XLV.

We, then, alone are without crime. Is
there ought wonderful in that, if it be a very
necessity with us ? For a necessity indeed it
;is. Taught of God himself what goodness
is, we have both a perfect knowledge of it as
revealed to us by a perfect Master; and faith-
fully we do His will, as enjoined on us by a
Judge we dare not despise. But your ideas
of virtue you have got from mere human
X opinion; on human authority, too, its obliga-
' tion rests: hence your system of practical
morality is deficient, both in the fulness and
authority requisite to produce a life of real
virtue. Man's wisdom to point out what is
good, is no greater than his authority to exact
the keeping of it ; the one is as easily de-
ceived as the other is despised. And so,
which is the ampler rule, to say, " Thou shalt
not kill," or to teach, " Be not even angry ? "
Which is more perfect, to forbid adultery, or
to restrain from even a single lustful look ?
Which indicates the higher intelligence, inter-
dicting evil-doing, or evil-speaking ? Which is
more thorough, not allowing an injury, or not
even suffering an injury done to you to be re-
paid ? Though withal you know that these
very laws also of yours, which seem to lead
to virtue, have been borrowed from the law
of God as the ancient model. Of the age of
Moses we have already spoken. But what
^is the real authority of human laws, when it
is in man's power both to evade them, by
generally managing to hide himself out of
sight in his crimes, and to despise them
sometimes, if inclination or necessity leads
him to offend ? Think of these things, too,
~7in the light of the brevity of any punishment
' you can inflict — never to last longer than till
death. On this ground Epicurus makes
light of all suffering and pain, maintaining


* [An appeal so defiant that its very boldness confirms this trib-
ute to the character of our Christian fathers, p. 42.]


that if it is small, it is contemptible ; and if
it is great, it is not long-continued. No
doubt about it, we, who receive our awards
under the judgment of an all-seeing God,
and who look forward to eternal punishment
from Him for sin, — we alone make real effort
to attain a blameless life, under the influ-
ence of our ampler knowledge, the impossi-
bility of concealment, and the greatness of
the threatened torment, not merely long-en-
during but everlasting, fearing Him, whom
he too should fear who the fearing judges, —
even God, I mean, and not the proconsul.

CHAP. XLVI.

We have sufficiently met, as I think, the
accusation of the various crimes on the
ground of which these fierce demands are
made for Christian blood. We have made a
full exhibition of our case ; and we have
shown you how we are able to prove that our
statement is correct, from the trustworthi-
ness, I mean, and antiquity of our sacred
writings, and from the confession likewise of
the powers of spiritual wickedness themselves.
Who will venture to undertake our refutation;
not with skill of words, but, as we have man-
aged our demonstration, on the basis of real-
ity ? But while the truth we hold is made
clear to all, unbelief meanwhile, at the very
time it is convinced of the worth of Chris-
tianity, which has now become well known
for its benefits as well as from the intercourse
of life, takes up the notion that it is not •
really a thing divine, but rather a kind of
philosophy. These are the very things, it
says, the philosophers counsel and profess —
innocence, justice, patience, sobriety, chas-
tity. Why, then, are we not permitted an
equal liberty and impunity for our doctrines
as they have, with whom, in respect of what
we teach, we are compared ? or why are not
they, as so like us, not pressed to the same
offices, for declining which our lives are im-
perilled ? For who compels a philosopher to
sacrifice or take an oath, or put out useless
lamps at midday ? Nay, they openly over-
throw your gods, and in their writings they
attack your superstitions ; and you applaud
them for it. Many of them even, with your
countenance, bark out against your rulers,
and are rewarded with statues and salaries, ^
instead of being given to the wild beasts. H
And very right it should be so. For they are ^
called philosophers, not Christians. This
name of philosopher has no power to put
demons to the rout. Why are they not able
to do that too? since philosophers count
demons inferior to gods. Socrates used to
say, " If the demon grant permission." Yet


CHAP. XLVII.]


APOLOGY.


51


he, too, though in denying the existence of
your divinities he had a glimpse of the truth,
at his dying ordered a cock to be sacrificed
to ^sculapius, I believe in honour of his
father, ' for Apollo pronounced Socrates the
wisest of men. Thoughtless Apollo! testify-
ing to the wisdom of the man who denied the
existence of his race. In proportion to the
enmity the truth awakens, you give offence
by faithfully standing by it ; but the man who
corrupts and makes a mere pretence of it
precisely on this ground gains favour with its
persecutors. The truth which philosophers,
these mockers and corrupters of it, with hos-
/ tile ends merely aflfect to hold, and in doing
so deprave, caring for nought but glory. Chris-
tians both intensely and intimately long for
and maintain in its integrity, as those who
have a real concern about their salvation. So
that we are like each other neither in our
knowledge nor our ways, as you imagine.
For what certain information did Thales, the
first of natural philosophers, give in reply to'
the inquiry of Croesus regarding Deity, the
delay for further thought so often proving in
vain ? There is not a Christian workman but
finds out God, and manifests Him, and hence
assigns to Him all those attributes which go
to constitute a divine being, though Plato
affirms that it is far from easy to discover the
Maker of the universe ; and when He is found,
it is difficult to make Him known to all. But
if we challenge you to comparison in the vir-
tue of chastity, I turn to a part of the sentence
passed by the Athenians against Socrates,
who was pronounced a corrupter of youth.
The Christian confines himself to the female
sex. I have read also how the harlot Phryne
kindled in Diogenes the fires of lust, and how
a certain Speusippus, of Plato's school, per-
ished in the adulterous act. The Christian
husband has nothing to do with any but his
own wife. Democritus, in putting out his
eyes, because he could not look on women
without lusting after them, and was pained if
his passion was not satisfied, owns plainly, by
the punishment he inflicts, his incontinence.
But a Christian with gface-healed eyes is
sightless in this matter ; he is mentally blind
against the assaults of passion. If I maintain
our superior modesty of behaviour, there at
once occurs to me Diogenes with filth-covered
feet trampling on the proud couches of Plato,
under the influence of another pride : the
Christian does not even play the proud man
to the pauper. If sobriety of spirit be the
virtue in debate, why, there are Pythagoras


' [Tertullian's exposition of this enigmatical fact (see the Pkiedo)
is better than divers other ingenious theories.]


at Thurii, and Zeno at Priene, ambitious of

the supreme power: the Christian does not
aspire to the aedileship. If equanimity be
the contention, you have Lycurgus choosing
death by self-starvation, because the Lacons
had made some emendation of his laws : the
Christian, even when he is condemned, gives
thanks.' . If the comparison be made in re-
gard to trustworthiness, Anaxagoras denied
the deposit of his enemies : the Chris-
tian is noted for his fidelity even among
those who are not of his religion. If
the matter of sincerity is to be brought
to trial, Aristotle basely thrust his friend
Hermias from his place : the Christian does
no harm even to his foe. With equal baseness
does Aristotle play the sycophant to Alex-
ander, instead of exercising to keep him in
the right way, and Plato allows himself to be
bought by Dionysius for his belly's sake.
Aristippus in the purple, with all his great
show of gravity, gives way to extravagance ;
and Hippias is put to death laying plots
against the state : no Christian ever attempted
such a thing in behalf of his brethren, even
when persecution was scattering them abroad
with every atrocity. But it will be said that
some of us, too, depart from the rules of our
discipline. In that case, however, we count
them no longer Christians ; but the philoso-
phers who do such things retain still the name
and the honour of wisdom. So, then, where is
there any likeness between the Christian and/*^^
the philosopher? between the disciple of
Greece and of heaven ? between the man
whose object is fame, and whose object is life ?
between the talker andthe doer ? between the
man who builds up and the man who pulls
down? between the friend and the foe of
error ? between one who corrupts the truth,
and one who restores and teaches it ? between
its chief and its custodier ?

CHAP. XLVII.

Unless I am utterly mistaken, there is noth-
ing so old as the truth; and the already
proved antiquity of the divine writings is so
far of use to me, that it leads men more easily
to take it in that they are the treasure-source
whence all later wisdom has been taken. And
were it not necessary to keep my work to a
moderate size, I might launch forth also into
the proof of this. What poet or sophist
has not drunk at the fountain of the prophets ?
Thence, accordingly, the philosophers watered
their arid minds, so that it is the things they


3 [John xxi. 19. A pious habit which long sur\-ived among
Christians, when learning that death was at hand : as in Shake-
speare's /f,-»ry //'.," Laud be to God, ev'n there my life must
end." See i Ihess. v. 18.]


52


APOLOGY,


[chap, xi.vmi.


have from us which bring us into comparison
with them. For this reason, I imagine, phi-
losophy was banished by certain states — I
mean by the Thebans, by the Spartans also,
and the Argives— its disciples sought to imitate
our doctrines; and ambitious, as I have said,
of glory and eloquence alone, if they fell
upon anything in the collection of sacred Scrip-
tures which displeased them, in their own
peculiar style of research, they perverted it to
serve their purpose: for they had no adequate
faith in their divinity to keep them from
changing them, nor had they any sufificient
understanding of them, either, as being still
at the time under veil — even obscure to the
Jews themselves, whose peculiar possession
they seemed to be. For so, too, if the truth
was distinguished by its simplicity, the more
on that account the fastidiousness of man,
too proud to believe, set to altering it; so that
even what they found certain they made un-
certain by their admixtures. Finding a simple
revelation of God, they proceeded to dispute
about Him, not as He had revealed to them,
but turned aside to debate about His prop-
erties, His nature. His abode. Some assert
Him to be incorporeal; others maintain He
has a body, — the Platonists teaching the one
doctrine, and the Stoics the other. Some
think that He is composed of atoms, others
of numbers: such are the different views of
Epicurus and Pythagoras. One thinks He is
made of fire; so it appeared to Heraclitus.
The Platonists, again, hold that He admin-
isters the affairs of the world; the Epicureans,
on the contrary, that He is idle and inactive,
and, so to speak, a nobody in human things.
Then the Stoics represent Him as placed out-
side the world, and whirling round this huge
mass from without like a potter; while the
Platonists place Him within the* world, as a
pilot is in the ship he steers. So, in like
manner, they differ in their views about the
world itself, whether it is created or uncreated,
whether it is destined to pass away or to re-
main for ever. So again it is debated con-
cerning the nature of the soul, which some
contend is divine and eternal, while others
hold that it is dissoluble. According to each
one's fancy. He has introduced either
something new, or refashioned the old.
Nor need we wonder if the speculations
of philosophers have perverted the older
Scriptures. Some of their brood, with
their opinions, have even adulterated our
new-given Christian revelation, and corrupted
it into a system of philosophic doctrines, and
from the one path have struck off many and
inexplicable by-roads.* And I have alluded


[See Iraeneus, vol. i. p. 377 this Series.]


to this, lest any one becoming acquainted with
the variety of parties among us, this might
seem to him to put us on a level with the phi-
losophers, and he might condemn the truth
from the different ways in which it is defended.
But we at once put in a plea in bar against
these tainters of our purity, asserting that this
is the rule of truth which comes down from
Christ by transmission through His compan-
ions, to whom we shall prove that those de-
visers of different doctrines are all posterior.
Everything opposed to the truth has been got
up from the truth itself, the spirits of error
carrying on this system of opposition. By
them all corruptions of wholesome discipline
have been secretly instigated ; by them, too,
certain fables have been introduced, that, by
their resemblance to the truth, they might im-
pair its credibility, or vindicate their own
higher claims to faith ; so that people might
think Christians unworthy of credit because
the poets or philosophers are so, or might
regard the poets and philosophers as worthier
of confidence from their not being followers
of Christ. Accordingly, we get ourselves
laughed at for proclaiming that God will one
day judge the world. For, like us, the poets
and philosophers set up a judgment-seat in
the realms below. And if we threaten Ge-
henna, which is a reservoir of secret fire under
the earth for purposes of punishment, we
have in the same way derision heaped on us.
For so, too, they have their Pyriphlegethon,
a river of flame in the regions of the dead.
And if we speak of Paradise,^ the place of
heavenly bliss appointed to receive the spirits
of the saints, severed from the knowledge of
this world by that fiery zone as by a sort of
enclosure, the Elysian plains have taken pos-
session of their faith. Whence is it, I pray
you have all this, so like us, in the poets and
philosophers? The reason simply is, that ^
they have been taken from our religion. But
if they are taken from our sacred things, as
being of earlier date, then ours are the truer,
and have higher claims upon belief, since
even their imitations find faith among you.
If they maintain their sacred mysteries to
have sprung from their own minds, in that
case ours will be reflections of what are later
than themselves, which by the nature of things
is impossible, for never does the shadow pre-
cede the body which casts it, or the image the
reality. 3

CHAP. XLVIII.

Come now, if some philosopher affirms, as


2 [Elucidation X.]

^ Tnie, in the sense that a shadow cannot be projected by a
body not yet existent.


CHAP. XLVIlKj


APOLOGY.


53


Laberius holds, following an opinion of Py-
thagoras, that a man may have his origin from
a mule, a serpent from a woman, and with
skill of speech twists every argument to prove
his view, will he not gain acceptance for it,
and work in some the conviction that, on ac-
count of this, they should even abstain from
eating animal food ? May any one have the
persuasion that he should so abstain, lest by
chance in his beef he eats of some ancestor
of his ? But if a Christian promises the re-
turn of a man from a man, and the very actual
Gaius from Gaius,' the cry of the people will
be to have him stoned; they will not even so
much as grant him a hearing. If there is any
ground for the moving to and fro of human
souls into different bodies, why may they not
return into the very substance they have left,
seeing this is to be restored, to be that which
had been ? They are no longer the very
things they had been ; for they could not be
what they were not, without first ceasing to be
what they had been. If we were inclined to
give all rein upon this point, discussing into
what various beasts one and another might
probably be changed, we would need at our
leisure to take up many points. But this we
would do chiefly in our own defence, as set-
ting forth what is greatly worthier of belief,
that a m^n will come back from a man — any
given person from any given person, still re-
taining his humanity; so that the soul, with
its qualities unchanged, may be restored to
the same condition, thought not to the same
outward framework. Assuredly, as the rea-
son why restoration takes place at all is the
appointed judgment, every man must needs
y come forth the very same who had once ex-
Y isted, that he may receive at God's hands a
judgment, whether of good desert or the op-
posite. And therefore the body too will ap-
pear; for the soul is not capable of suffering
without the solid substance (that is, the flesh;
and for this reason, also) that it is not right
that souls should have all the wrath of God
to bear : they did not sin without the body,
within which all was done by them. But how,
you say, can a substance which has been dis-
solved be made to reappear again ? Consider
thyself, O man, and thou wilt believe in it !
Reflect on what you were before you came
into existence. Nothing. For if you had
been anything, you would have remembered
it. You, then, who were nothing before you
existed, reduced to nothing also when you
cease to be, why may you not come into being
again out of nothing, at the will of the same
Creator whose will created you out of nothing


[.i.e., Caius, used (likejo/fn Z>^^ with us) in Roman Law.]


at the first ? Will it be anything new in your
case? You who were not, 7£'ere made; when
you cease to be again, you sAa// be made.
Explain, if you can, your original creation,
and then demand to know how you shall \)c
re-created. Indeed, it will be still easier
sui(iby to make you what you were once, when
the very same creative power made you with-
out difficulty what you never were before.
There will be doubts, perhaps, as to the power
of God, of Him who hung in its place this
huge body of our world, made out of what
had never existed, as from a death of emp-
tiness and inanity, animated by the Spirit
who quickens all living things, its very self the
unmistakable type of the resurrection, that
it might be to you a witness — nay, the exact
image of the resurrection. Light, every day
extinguished, shines out again; and, with like
alternation, darkness succeeds light's outgo-
ing. The defunct stars re-live; the seasons, as
soon as they are finished, renew their course;
the fruits are brought to maturity, and then are
reproduced. The seeds do not spring up with
abundant produce, save as they rot and dis-
solve away ; — all things are preserved by per-
ishing, all things are refashioned out of death.
Thou, man of nature so exalted, if thou under-
standest thyself, taught even by the Pythian^
words, lord of all these things that die and
rise, — shalt thou die to perish evermore ?
Wherever your dissolution shall have taken
place, whatever material agent has destroyed
you, or swallowed you up, or swept you away,
or reduced you to nothingness, it shall again
restore you. Even nothingness is His who
is Lord of a//. You ask. Shall we then be al-
ways dying, and rising up from death? If so
the Lord of all things had appointed, you
would have to submit, though unwillingly, to
the law of your creation. But, in fact. He
has no other purpose than that of which He
has informed us. The Reason which made
the universe out of diverse elements, so that
all things might be composed of opposite
substances in unity — of void and solid, of
animate and inanimate, of comprehensible
and incomprehensible, of light and darkness,
of life itself and death — has also disposed time
into order, by fixing and distinguishing its
mode, according to which this first portion
of it, which we inhabit from the beginning of
the world, flows down by a temporal course
to a close; but the portion which succeeds,
and to which we look forward continues
forever. When, therefore, the boundary


3 Know thyself. [Juvenal, xi. 27, on which see jfreat wealth of
references in J. E. B. Mayor's Juvenal (xiii. Satires), and note
especially, Bernard, Serm. de Divers x\. 3. In Cant. Canttc.
xxxvi. 5-7.]


54


APOLOGY.


[chap. l.


1


and limit, that millennial interspace, has
been passed, when even the outward fash-
ion of the world itself — which has been
spread like a veil over the eternal econ-
omy, equally a thing of time — passes
away, then the whole human race shall be
raised again, to have its dues meted out ac-
cording as it has merited in the period of
good or evil, and thereafter to have these
paid out through the immeasurable ages of
eternity. Therefore after this there is neither
death nor repeated resurrections, but we shall
be the same that we are now, and still un-
changed— the servants of God, ever with God,
clothed upon with the proper substance of eter-
nity; but the profane, and all who are not true
worshippers of God, in like manner shall be
consigned to the punishment of everlasting
fire — that fire which, from its very nature in-
deed, directly ministers to their incorrupt-
ibility. The philosophers are familiar as well
as we with the distinction between a common
and a secret fire. Thus that which is in
common use is far different from that which
we see in divine judgments, whether striking
as thunderbolts from heaven, or bursting up
out of the earth through mountain-tops; for
it does not consume what it scorches, but while
it burns it repairs. So the mountains continue
ever burning; and a person struck by light-
ing is even now kept safe from any destroying
flame. A notable proof this of the fire
eternal ! a notable example of the endless
judgment which still supplies punishment with
fuel ! The mountains burn, and last. How
will it be with the wicked and the enemies of
God?^

CHAP. XLIX.

These are what are called presumptuous
speculations in our case alone ; in the phi-
losophers and poets they are regarded as sub-
lime speculations and illustrious discoveries.
They are men of wisdom, we are fools. They
are worthy of all honour, we are folk to have
the finger pointed at ; nay, besides that, we
are even to have punishments inflicted on us.
But let things which are the defence of vir-
tue, if you will, have no foundation, and give
them duly the name of fancies, yet still they
are necessary; let them be absurd if you will,
yet they are of use : they make all who be-
lieve them better men and women, under the
fear of never-ending punishment and the
hope of never-ending bliss. It is not, then,
wise to brand as false, nor to regard as ab-
surd, things the truth of which it is expedient
to presume. On no ground is it right posi-


» [Our author's philosophy may be at fault, but his testimony is
not to be mistaken.]


tively to condemn as bad what beyond all
doubt is profitable. Thus, in fact, you are
guilty of the very presumption of which you
accuse us, in condemning what is useful. It
is equally out of the question to regard them
as nonsensical ; at any rate, if they are false
and foolish, they hurt nobody. For they are
just (in that case) like many other things on
which you inflict no penalties — foolish and fab-
ulous things, I mean, which, as quite innocu-
ous, are never charged as crimes or punished.
But in a thing of the kind, if this be so in-
deed, we should be adjudged to ridicule, not
to swords, and flames, and crosses, and wild
beasts, in which iniquitous cruelty not only
the blinded populace exults and insults over
us, but in which some of you too glory, not
scrupling to gain the popular favour by your
injustice. As though all you can do to us
did not depend upon our pleasure. It is as-
suredly a matter of my own inclination, being
a Christian. Your condemnation, then, will
only reach me in that case, if I wish to be
condemned; but when all you can do to me,
you can do only at my will, all you can do is
dependent on my will, and is not in your
power. The joy of the people in our trouble
is therefore utterly reasonless. For it is our
joy they appropriate to themselves, since we
would far rather be condemned than, aposta-
tize from God; on the contrary, our haters
should be sorry rather than rejoice, as we
have obtained the very thing of our own
choice.

CHAP. L.

In that case, you say, why do you complain
of our persecutions ? You ought rather to be
grateful to us for giving you the sufferings you
want. Well, it is quite true that it is our desire
to suffer, but it is in the way that the soldier
longs for war. No one indeed suffers will-
ingly, since suffering necessarily implies fear
and danger. Yet the man who olDJected to
the conflict, both fights with all his strength,
and when victorious, he rejoices in the battle,
because he reaps from it glory and spoil. It
is our battle to be summoned to your tribunals
that there, under fear of execution, we may
battle for the truth. But the day is won when
the object of the struggle is gained. This
victory of ours gives us the glory of pleasing
God, and the spoil of life eternal. But we
are overcome. Yes, when we have obtained
our wishes. Therefore we conquer in dying; ""
we go forth victorious at the very time we are
subdued. Call us, if you like, Sannenticii and
Semaxii, because, bound to a half-axle stake,


2\_l'icivius cum occiditnur.']


\


CHAP. L.]


APOLOGY.


55


we are burned in a circle-heap of fagots. This
is the attitude in which we conquer, it is our
victory-robe, it is for us a sort of triumphal
car. Naturally enough, therefore, we do not
please the vanquished; on account of this,
indeed, we are counted a desperate, reckless
race. But the very desperation and reckless-
ness you object to in us, among yourselves
lift high the standard of virtue in the cause
of glory and of fame. Mucius of his own will
left his right hand on the altar : what sublimity
of mind ! Empedocles gave his whole body
at Catana to the fires of ^tna: what mental
resolution ! A certain foundress of Carthage
gave herself away in second marriage to the
funeral pile: what a noble witness of her
chastity! Regulus, not wishing that his one life
should count for the lives of many enemies,
endured these crosses over all his frame: how
brave a man — even in captivity a conqueror !
Anaxarchus, when he was being beaten to
death by a barley-pounder, cried out, " Beat
on, beat on at the case of Anaxarchus ; no
stroke falls on Anaxarchus himself." O mag-
nanimity of the philosopher, who even in such
an end had jokes upon his lips ! I omit all
reference to those who with their own sword,
or with any other milder form of death, have
bargained for glory. Nay, see how even
torture contests are crowned by you. The
Athenian courtezan, having wearied out the
executioner, at last bit off her tongue and spat
it in the face of the raging tyrant, that she
might at the same time spit away her power
of speech, nor be longer able to confess her
fellow-conspirators, if even overcome, that
might be her inclination. Zeno the Eleatic,
when he was asked by Dionysius what good
philosophy did, on answering that it gave con-
tempt of death, was all unquailing, given over
to the tyrant's scourge, and sealed his opin-
ion even to the death. We all know how
the Spartan lash, appHed with the utmost
cruelty under the very eyes of friends en-
couraging, confers on those who bear it honor
proportionate to the blood which the young
men shed. O glory legitimate, because it is
human, for whose sake it is counted neither
reckless foolhardiness, nor desperate obsti-
nacy, to despise death itself and all sorts


of savage treatment ; for whose sake you may

for your native place, for the empire, for
friendship, endure all you are forbidden to
do for God! And you cast statues in honour
of persons such as these, and you put in-
scriptions upon images, and cut out epitaphs
on tombs, that their names may never perish.
In so far you can by your monuments, you
yourselves afford a sort of resurrection to the
dead. Yet he who expects the true resurrec-
tion from God, is insane, if for God he suffers !
But go zealously on, good presidents, you will
stand higher with the people if you sacrifice
the Christians at their wish, kill us, torture us,
condemn us, grind us to dust ; your injus-
tice is the proof that we are innocent. There-
fore God suffers that we thus suffer; for but
very lately, in condemning a Christian woman
to the Ictio rather than to the leo you made
confession that a taint on our purity is con-
sidered among us something more terrible
than any punishment and any death.' Nor
does your cruelty, however exquisite, avail
you; it is rather a temptation to us. The
oftener we are mown down by you, the more
in number we grow; the blood of Christiatis is
seed. ' Many of your writers exhort to the
courageous bearing of pain and death, as Cic-
ero in the Tusculans^ as Seneca in his Chatices,
as Diogenes, Pyrrhus, Callinicus; and yet
their words do not find so many disciples as
Christians do, teachers not by words, but by
their deeds. That very obstinacy you rail
against is the preceptress. For who that con-
templates it, is not excited to inquire what is
at the bottom of it? who, after inquiry, does
not embrace our doctrines ? and when he has
embraced them, desires not to suffer that he
may become partaker of the fulness of God's
grace, that he may obtain from God complete
forgiveness, by giving in exchange his blood ?
For that secures the remission of all offences
On this account it is that we return thanks on
the very spot for your sentences. As the
divine and human are ever opposed to each
other, when we are condemned by you, we ^
are acquitted by the Highest. *""


I [Elucidation XI.]
- [Elucidation XI L]


56 ELUCIDATIONS.


ELUCIDATIONS.
I.

(Arrangement, p. 4, supra.)

The arrangement I have adopted in editing these Edinburgh Translations of Tertullian
is a practical one. It will be found logical and helpful to the student, who is referred to the
Prefatory pages of this volume for an Elucidation of the difficulties, with which any arrange-
ment of these treatises is encumbered. Yor, first, an attempt to place them in chronological
order is out of the question;' dind,secofid, all efforts to separate precisely the Orthodox from
the Montanistic or Montanist works of our author have hitherto defied the acumen of
critics. It would be mere empiricism for me to attempt an original classification in the face
of questions which even experts have been unable to determine.

If we bear in mind, however, a few guiding facts, we shall see that difficulties are less
than might appear, assuming our object to be a practical one. (i.) Only four of these
essays were written against Orthodoxy; (2.) Jive more are reckoned as wholly uncertain,
which amounts to saying that they are not positively heretical. (3.) Again, Jive are colourless,
as to Montanism, and hence should be reputed Orthodox. (4.) Of others, written after the
influences of Montanism had, more or less, tainted his doctrine, the whole are yet valuable
and some are noble defences of the Catholic Faith. (5.) Finally eight or ten of his treatises
were written while he was a Catholic, and are precious contributions to the testimony of the
Primitive Church.

From these facts, we may readily conclude that the mass of Tertullian's writings is Ortho-
dox. Some of them are to be read with caution; others, again, must be rejected for their
heresy; but yet all are most instructive historically, and as defining even by errors *' the
faith once delivered to the Saints." I propose to note those which require caution
as we pass them in review. Those written against the Church are classed by them-
selves, at the end of the list, and all the rest may be read with confidence. A most
interesting inquiry arises in connection with the quotations from Scripture to be found
in our author. Did a Latin version exist in his day, or does he translate from the
Greek of the New Testament and the lxx? A paradoxical writer (Semler) contends that
Tertullian "never used a Greek ms." (see Kaye, p. 106.) But Tertullian's rugged Latin
betrays everywhere his familiarity with Greek idioms and forms of thought. He wrote,
also, in Greek, and there is no reason to doubt that he knew the Greek Scriptures primarily,
if he knew any Greek whatever. Possibly we owe to Tertullian the prii?iordia of the Old
African Latin Versions, some of which seem to have contained the disputed text I. John
V. 7 ; of which more when we come to the Praxeas. For the present in the absence of defi-
nite evidence we must infer that Tertullian usually translated from the lxx, and from the
originals of the New Testament. But Mosheim thinks the progress. of the Gospel in the
West was now facilitated by the existence of Latin Versions. Observe, also, Kaye's im-
portant note, p. 293, and his reference to Lardner, Cred. xxvii. 19.

II.

(Address to Magistrates, cap. i., p. 17.)
The Apology comes first in order, on logical grounds. It is classed with our author's
ortl^odox works by Neander, and pronounced colourless by Kaye. It is the noblest of his


^


Kaye, p. 36. Also, p. 8, supra.


ELUCIDATIONS. 57


productions in its purpose and spirit, and it falls in with the Primitive System of Apologetics.
I have placed next in order to it several treatises, mostly unblemished, which arcof the
same character; which defend the cause of C-hristians against Paganism, against Gentile
Philosophy, and against Judaism; closing this portion by the two books Ad Natimies^ which
may be regarded as a recapitulation of the author's arguments, especially those to be found
in the Apology. In these successive works, as compared with those of Justin Martyr, we
obtain a fair view of the progressive relations of the Church with the Roman Empire and
with divers antagonistic systems in the East and West.

III.

(History of Christians, cap. ii., p. 18.)

The following Chronological outline borrowed from the Benedictines and from Bishop
Kaye, will prove serviceable here.'

TertuUian born {circa) A.D. 150.

" converted {surmise) .......... 185.

" married {say) ........... 1S6.

" ordained presbyter {cijxa) ......... 192.

" lapsed {circa) ........... 200.

" deceased (extreme surmise) 240.

The Imperial history of his period may be thus arranged:

Birth of Caracalla A.D. 188.

" Geta 189.

Reign of Severus 193.

Defeat of Niger 195.

Caracalla made a Ccssar ............ 196.

Capture of Byzantium . 196.

Defeat of Albinus I97-

Geta made a Ccesar 198.

Caracalla called Augustus 198.

Caracalla associated in the Empire 198.

War against the Parthians 198.

Severus returns from the war 203.

Celebration of the Secular Games 204.

Plautianus put to death {circa) 205.

Geta called Atigustus 208.

War in Britain , 208.

Wall of Severus 210.

Death of Severus 211.

IV.

(Tiberius, capp. v. and xxiv., pp. 22 and 35.)
A fair examination of what has been said on this subject, pro and con, may be found in
Kaye's Tertullia7i,'' pp. 102-105. In his abundant candour this author leans to the doubters,
but in stating the case he seems to me to fortify the position of Lardner and Mosheim.
What the brutal Tiberius may have thought or done with respect to Pilate's report concerning
the holy victim of his judicial injustice is of little importance to the believer. Nevertheless,
as matter of history it deserves attention. Great stress is to be placed on the fact that Ter-
tullian was probably a jurisconsult, familiar with the Roman archives, and influenced by

1 Kaye (following VArt de verifier les Dates) pp. 11 and 456.

2 My references are to the Third Edition, London, Rivingtons, 1845.


58 ELUCIDATIONS.


them in his own acceptance of Divine Truth. It is not supposable that such a man would
have hazarded his bold appeal to the records, in remonstrating with the Senate and in the
very faces of the Emperor and his colleagues, had he not known that the evidence was
irrefragable.

V.

The darkness at the Crucifixion, cap. xxi., p. 35.)

Kaye disappoints us (p. 150) in his slight notice of this most interesting subject With-
out attempting to discuss the story of Phlegon and other points which afford Gibbon an
opportunity for misplaced sneering, such as even a Pilate would have rebuked, while it may
be well to recall the exposition of Milman,' at the close of Gibbon's fifteenth chapter, I
must express my own preference for another view. This will be found candidly summed up
and stated, in the Speaker's Commentary, in the concise note on St. Matt., xxvii. 45.

VI.

(Numbers of the Faithful, cap. xxxvii., p. 45.)

Kaye, as usual, gives this vexed question a candid survey.' Making all allowances,
however, I accept the conjecture of some reputable authorities, that there were 2,000,000 of
Christians, in the bounds of the Roman Empire at the close of the Second Century. So
mightily grew the testimony of Jesus and prevailed. When we reflect that only a century
intervened between the times of Tertullian and the conversion of the Roman Emperor, it
is not easy to regard our author's language as merely that of fervid genius and of rhetorical
hyperbole. He could not have ventured upon exaggeration without courting scorn as well
as defeat. What he affirms is probable in the nature of the case. Were it otherwise, then
the conditions, which, in a single century rendered it possible for Constantine to effect the
greatest revolution in mind and manners that has ever been known among men, would be
a miracle compared with which that of his alleged Vision of the Cross sinks into insignifi-
cance. To this subject it will be necessary to recur hereafter.

VII.
(Christian usages, cap. xxxix., p. 46.)

A candid review of the matters discussed in this chapter will be found in Kaye (pp. 146,
209.) The important fact is there clearly stated that " the primitive Christians scrupulously
complied with the decree pronounced by the Apostles at Jerusalem in abstaining from things
strangled and from blood " (Acts xv. 20). On this subject consult the references given
in the Speaker's Commentary, ad locum. The Greeks, to their honour, still maintain this
prohibition, but St. Augustine's great authority relaxed the Western scruples on this matter,
for he regarded it is a decree of temporary obligation, while the Hebrew and Gentile Chris-
tians were in peril of misunderstanding and estrangement. ^

On the important question as to the cessation of miracles Kaye takes a somewhat original
position. But see his interesting discussion and that of the late Professor Hey, in Kaye's
Tertullian^ pp. 80-102, 151-161. I do not think writers on these subjects have sufficiently
distinguished between miracles properly so called, and providences vouchsafed in answer to
prayer. There was no ifiiracle in the case of the Thundering Legion, assuming the story
to be true; and I dare to affirm that marked answers to prayer, by providential interpositions,

» In his edition of The Decline and Fall, Vol. I., p. 589, American reprint.

' pp. 85-88.

3Ep. ad Faust, xxxii. 13. and see Conybeare and Howson.


ELUCIDATIONS.


59


I


but wholly distinct from miraculous agencies, have never ceased among those who "ask in
the Son's Name." Such interpositions are ohtn preternatural only; that is, they economize
certain powers which, though natural in themselves, lie outside of the System of Nature with
which we happen to be familiar. This distinction has been overlooked.

VIII,

(Multitudes, cap, xl., p, 47.)

Note the words — '"''multitudes to a single beast." Can it be possible that Tertullian
would use such language to the magistrates, if he knew that such sentences were of rare
occurrence ? The disposition of our times to minimize the persecutions of our Christian
forefathers calls upon us to note such references, all the more important because occurring
obiter and mentioned as notorious. Note also, the closing chapter of this Apology, and
reference to the outcries of the populace, in Cap. xxxv.' See admirable remarks on the
benefits derived by the Church from the sufferings of Christian martyrs, with direct reference
to Tertullian, Wordsworth, Church Hist, to Couticil of Niccea, cap. xxiv., p. 3 74.

IX.

(Christian manners, cap. xlii,, p. 49.)

A study of the manners of Christians, in the Ante-Nicene Age, as sketched by the un-
sparing hand of Tertullian, will convince any unprejudiced mind of the mighty power of the
Holy Ghost, in framing such characters out of heathen originals. When, under Montanistic
influences our severely ascetic author complains of the Church's corruptions, and turns
inside-out the whole estate of the faithful, we see all that can be pressed on the other side;
but, this very important chapter must be borne in mind, together with the closing sentence
of chap, xliv., as evidence that whatever might be said by a rigid disciplinarian, the Church,
as compared with our day, was still a living embodiment of Philip, iv. 8.


(Paradise, cap. xlvii., p. 52.)

See Kaye, p. 248. Our author seems not always consistent with himself in his references
to the Places of departed spirits. Kaye thinks he identifies Paradise with the Heaven of
the Most High, in one place (the De Exhort. Cast., xiii.) where he probably confuses the
Apostle's ideas, in Galat. v., 12, and Ephes. v., 5. Commonly, however, though he is not
consistent with himself, this would be his scheme: —

1. The Infcri, or Hades, where the soul of Dives was in one continent and that of
Lazarus in another, with a gulf between. Our author places " Abraham's bosom "
in Hades.

2. Paradise. In Hades, but in a superior and more glorious region. This more
blessed abode was opened to the soids of the martyrs and other greater saints, at
our Lord's descent into the place of the dead. After the General Resurrection and
Judgment, there remain:

1. Gehenna, for the lost, prepared for the devil and his angels.

2. The Heaven of Heavens, the eternal abode of the righteous, in the vision of the
Lord and His Eternal Joy.

Tertullian' s variations on this subject will force us to recur to it hereafter; but, here it
may be noted that the confusions of Latin Christianity received their character in this par-
ticular, from the genius of our author. Augustine caught from him a certain indecision


! ComjMire Kaye on Moshefm. p. 107.


6o ELUCIDATIONS.


about the terms and places connected with the state of the departed which has continued,
to this day, to perplex theologians in the West. Taking advantage of such confusions, the
stupendous Roman system of "Purgatory" was fabricated in the middle ages; but the
Greeks never accepted it, and it differs fundamentally from what the earlier Latin Fathers,
including Tertullian, have given us as speculations.

XL

(The Leo and the Leno, cap. 1., p. 55.)

Here we find the alliterative and epigrammatic genius of Tertullian anticipating a
similar poetic charm in Augustine. The Christian maid or matron preferred the Leo to the
leno; to be devoured rather than to be debauched. Our author wrests a tribute to the
chastity of Christian women from the cruelty of their judges, who recognizing this fact, were
accustomed as a refinement of their injustice to give sentence against them, refusing the
mercy of a horrible death, by committing them to the ravisher: " damnando Christianam
ad lenofiem potius quam ad Iconem.''

XIL

(The Seed of the Church, cap. 1., p. 55.)

Kaye has devoted a number of his pages ' to the elucidation of this subject, not only
showing the constancy of the martyrs, but illustrating the fact that Christians, like St. Paul,
were forced to " die daily," even when they were not subjected to the fiery trial. He who
confessed himself a Christian made himself a social outcast. All manner of outrages and
wrongs could be committed against him with impunity. Rich men, who had joined them-
selves to Christ,' were forced to accept " the spoiling of their goods." Brothers denounced
brothers, and husbands their wives; " a man's foes were they of his own household." But
the Church triumphed through suffering, and " out of weakness was made strong."

' pp. 129-140. ' Even under Commodus, vol. ii. p. 598, this series


\


II.
ON IDOLATRY.

[TRANSLATED BY THE REV. S. THELWALL,]


CHAP. 1. — WIDE SCOPE OF THE WORD IDOLATRY.

The principal crime of the human race, the
highest guilt charged upon the world, the
whole procuring cause of judgment, is idola-
try.^_y For, although each single fault retains
its own proper feature, although it is destined
to judgment under its own proper name also,
yet it is marked off under the general account
of idolatry. Set aside names, examine works,
the idolater is likewise a murderer. Do you
inquire whom he has slain ? If it contributes
ought to the aggravation of the indictment,
no stranger nor personal enemy, but his own
self. By what snares ? Those of his error.
By what weapon ? The offence done to God.
By how many blows ? As many as are his
idolatries. He who affirms that the idolater
perishes ?wf,'' will affirm that the idolater has
not committed murder. Further, you may
recognize in the same crime ^ adultery and
fornication; for he who serves false gods is
doubtless an adulterer '^ of truth, because all
falsehood is adultery. So, too, he is sunk in
fornication. For who that is a fellow-worker
with unclean spirits, does not stalk in general
pollution and fornication ? And thus it is that
the Holy Scriptures ^ use the designation of
fornication in their upbraiding of idolatry.


1 [This solemn sentence vindicates the place I have given to the
De Idololatria in the order adopted for this volume. After this
and the Apology come three treatises confirming its positions, and
vindicating the principles of Christians in conflict with Idolatry,
the great generic crime of a world lying in wickedness. These
three are the De Spectactilis^ the De Corona and the Ad Scaf>u-
lam. The De Spcctaciilis was written after this treatise, in which
indeed it is mentioned,* but logically it follows, illustrates and en-
forces it. Hence my practical plan : which will be concluded by
a scheme (conjectural in part) of chronological order in which pre-
cision is affirmed by all critics to be impossible, but, by which we
may reach appro.ximate accuracy, with great advantage. The De
Idololatria is free from Montanism. Hut see Kaye, p. xvi.l

2 Lit., "has not perished," as if the perishing were already
complete ; as, of course, it is judicially as soon as the guilt is in-
curred, though not actually.

3 i.e., in idolatry.

4 A play on the word : we should say, " an adulterator.^^

5 Oehler refers to Ezek. xxiii.; but many other references might
be given— m the Pentateuch and Psalms, for instance.


'Cap. xiii.


The essence of fraud, I take it, is, that any
should seize what is another's, or refuse to
another his due ; and, of course, fraud done
toward man is a name of greatest crime. Well,
but idolatry does fraud to God, by refusing
to Him, and conferring on others, His honours;
so that to fraud it also conjoins cofitumcly.
But if fraud, just as much as fornication and
adultery, entails death, then, in these cases,
equally with the former, idolatry stands un-
acquitted of the impeachment of murder.
After such crimes, so pernicious, so devouring
of salvation, all other crimes also, after some
manner, and separately disposed in order, find
their own essence represented in idolatry. In
it also are the coftcupiscences of the world. For
what solemnity of idolatry is without the cir-
cumstance of dress and ornament? In it are
lasciviousnesses and drufikcfinesses ; since it is,
for the most part, for the sake of food, and
stomach, and appetite, that these solemnities
are frequented. In it is unrighteousness. For
what more unrighteous than it, which knows
not the Father of righteousness ? In it also
is vafiity, since its whole system is vain. In
it is mendacity, for its whole substance is false.
Thus it comes to pass, that in idolatry all
crimes are detected, and in all crimes idolatry.
Even otherwise, since all faults savour of op-
position to God, and there is nothing which
savours of opposition to God which is not as-
signed to demons and unclean spirits, whose
property idols are ; doubtless, whoever com-
mits a fault is chargeable with idolatry, for he
does that which pertains to the proprietors of
idols.

CHAP. n. — IDOLATRY IN ITS MORE LIMITKD
SENSE. ITS COPIOUSNESS.

But let the universal names of crimes with-
draw to the specialities of their own works ;
let idolatry remain in that which it is itself.
Sufficient to itself is a name so inimical to
God, a substance of crime so copious, which


62


ON IDOLATRY.


[chap. IV.


reaches forth so many branches, diffuses so
many veins, that from this ?iamey for the
greatest part, is drawn the material of all the
modes in which the expansiveness of idolatry
has to be foreguarded against by us, since in
manifold wise it subverts the servants of God ;
and this not only when unperceived, but also
when cloaked over. Most men simply re-
gard idolatry as to be interpreted in these
senses alone, viz.: if one burn incense, or
immolate a victim^ or give a sacrificial banquet,
or be bound to some sacred functions or
priesthoods ; just as if one were to regard
adultery as to be accounted in kisses, and in
embraces, and in actual fleshly contact ; or
murder as to be reckoned only in the shed-
ding forth of blood, and in the actual taking
away of life. But how far wider an extent
the Lord assigns to those crimes we are sure :
when He defines adultery to consist even in
concupiscence,' " if one shall have cast an eye
lustfully on," and stirred his soul with im-
modest commotion ; when He judges murder =
to cimsist even in a word of curse or of re-
proach, and in every impulse of anger, and
in the neglect of charity toward a brother :
just as John teaches, ^ that he who hates his
brother is a murderer. Else, both the devil's
ingenuity in malice, and God the Lord's in
the Discipline by which He fortifies us against
the devil's depths,-* would have but limited
scope, if we were judged only in such faults
as even the heathen nations have decreed
punishable. How will our " righteousness
abound above that of the Scribes and Phari-
sees," as the Lord has prescribed, s unless we
shall have seen through the abundance of that
adversary quality, that is, of ?/«righteousness ?
But if the head of unrighteousness is idolatry,
the first point is, that we be fore-fortified
against the abundance of idolatry, while we
recognise it not only in its palpable manifesta-
tions.

CHAP. III. — idolatry: origin and meaning

OF THE NAME.

Idol in ancient times there was none. Be-
fore the artificers of this monstrosity had
bubbled into being,^ temples stood solitary and
shrines empty, just as to the present day in
some places traces of the ancient practice re-
main permanently. Yet idolatry used to be
practised, not under that name, but in that
function ; for even at this day it can be prac-


I Matt. V. 28.
»Matt. V. 22.
3 1 John, iii. 15.

4 Rev. ii. 24.

5 Matt. V. 20.

6 "Boiled out," "bubbled out.


tised outside a temple, and without an idol.
But when the devil introduced into the world
artificers of statues and of images, and of every
kind of likenesses, that former rude business
of human disaster attained from idols both a
name and a development. Thenceforward
every art which in any way produces an idol
instantly became a fount of idolatry. For it
makes no difference whether a moulder cast,
or a carver grave, or an embroiderer weave
the idol; because neither is it a question of
material, whether an idol be formed of gyp-
sum, or of colors, or of stone, or of bronze, ^
or of silver, or of thread. For since even
without an idol idolatry is committed, when
the idol is there it makes no difference of what c,
kind it be, of what material, or what shape ;
lest any should think that only to be held an
idol which is consecrated in human shape.
To establish this point, the interpretation of
the word is requisite. Eid^s, in Greek, sig-
nifies form ; eidolon, derived diminutively
from that, by an equivalent process in our
language, makes formlifig.^ Every foryn or
formli^ig, therefore, claims to be called an
idol. Hence idolatry \^ " all attendance and
service about every idol. ' ' Hence also, every
artificer of an idol is guilty of one and the
same crime,' unless, the People '° which con-
secrated for itself the likeness of a calf, and
not of a man, fell short of incurring the guilt
of idolatry."

CHAP. IV. — IDOLS not TO BE MADE, MUCH
LESS WORSHIPPED. IDOLS AND IDOL-MAKERS
IN THE SAME CATEGORY.

God prohibits an idol as much to be made ^
as to be worshipped. In so far as the 7fiaking
what may be worshipped is the prior act, so
far is the prohibition to make (if the worship
is unlawful) the prior prohibition. For this
cause — the eradicating, namely, of the ma-
terial of idolatry — the divine law proclaims,
" Thou shalt make no idol ;" " and by con-
joining, " Nor a similitude of the things which
are in the heaven, and which are in the earth,
and which are in the sea," has interdicted the
servants of God from acts of that kind all the
universe over. Enoch had preceded, pre-
dicting that "the demons, and the spirits of
the angelic apostates, '^ would turn into idola-


7 Or, brass.

8 i.e., a little form.

9 Idolatry, namely.

10 [Capitalized to mark its emphatic sense, i.e., the People of God
=the Jews.]

" See Ex. xxxii.; and compare i Cor. x. 7, where the latter part
of Ex. xxxii. 6 is quoted.

'2 Lev. xxvi. 1 ; Ex. xx. 4 ; Deut. v. 8. It must of course be
borne in mind that Tertullian has defined the meaning of the word
idol in the former chapter, and speaks with reference to that defi-
nition.

'3 Compare de Oratioite, c. 23, and de Virg. Vel. c. 7.


CHAP, v.]


ON IDOLATRY.


63


try all the elements, all the garniture of the
universe, all things contained in the heaven,
in the sea, in the earth, that they might be
consecrated as God, in opposition to God."
All things, therefore, does human error wor-
ship, except the P'ounder of all Himself. The
images of those things are idols; the conse-
cration of the images is idolatry. Whatever
guilt idolatry incurs, must necessarily be im-
puted to every artificer of every idol. In
short, the same Enoch fore-condemns in
general menace both idol-worshippers and
idol-makers together. And again: "I swear
to you, sinners, that against the day of perdi-
tion of blood ' repentance is being prepared.
Ye who serve stones, and ye who make images
of gold, and silver, and wood, and stones and
clay, and serve phantoms, and demons, and
spirits in fanes, ^ and all errors not according
to knowledge, shall find no help from them."
But Isaiah 3 says, " Ye are witnesses whether
there is a God except Me." " And they who
mould and carve out at that time were not : all
vain ! who do that which liketh them, which
shall not profit them ! " And that whole ensu-
ing discourse sets a ban as well on the artificers
as the worshippers : the close of which is,
*' Learn that their heart is ashes and earth,
and that none can free his own soul." In
which sentence David equally includes the
makers too. "Such," says he, "let them
become who make them. ' ' * And why should
I, a man of Hmited memory, suggest anything
further ? Why recall anything more from the
Scriptures ? As if either the voice of the Holy
Spirit were not sufficient ; or else any further
deliberation were needful, whether the Lord
cursed and condemned by priority the «r///f-
re/'s of those things, of which He curses and
condemns the worshippers !

CHAP. V.5 SUNDRY OBJECTIONS OR EXCUSES

DEALT WITH.

We will certainly take more pains in an-
swering the excuses of artificers of this kind,
who ought never to be admitted into the house
of God, if any have a knowledge of that Dis-
cipline.^ To begin with, that speech, wont


1 " Sanguinis perditionis : " such is the reading of Oehler and
others. If it be correct, probably the phrase " perdition of blood
must be taken as equivalent to " bloody perdition," after the He-
brew fashion. Compare, for similar instances, 2 Sam. xyi. 7 ; Ps.
V. 6, xxvi. 9, Iv. 23; Ezek. xxii. 2, with the marginal readings. But
Fr. Junius would read, " Of blood and of perdition "—sanguinis
et perditionis. Oehler's own interpretation of the reading he gives
—"blood-shedding" — appears unsatisfactory.

2 " In fanis." This is Oehler's reading on conjecture. Other
readings are — infamis, infamibus, insanis, infernis.

3 Isa. xliv. 8 et seqq.

4Ps. cxv. 8. In our version, " They that make them are like
unto them." TertulHan again agrees with the LXX.

SCf. chaps, viii. and xii.

6 i.e., the Discipline of the house of God, the Church. Oehler
reads, " eavi disciplinam," and takes the meaning to be that no


to be cast in our teeth, " I have nothing else
whereby to live," may be more severely re-
torted, " You have, then, whereby to live ? If
by your own laws, what have you to do with
God ? " 7 Then, as to the argument they have
the hardihood to bring even from the Scrip-
tures, "that the apostle has said, 'As each
has been found, so let him persevere.'"*
We may all, therefore, persevere in sim, as
the result of that interpretation ! for there is
not any one of us who has not been found as
a sififier, since no other cause was the source
of Christ's descent than that of setting sinners
free. Again, they say the same apostle has
left a precept, according to his own example,
" That each one work with his own hands for
a living."' If this precept is maintained in
respect to all hands, I believe even the bath-
thieves '° live by their hands, and robbers
themselves gain the means to live by their
hands ; forgers, again, execute their evil
handwritings, not of course with their feet,
but hands ; actors, however, achieve a liveli-
hood not with hands alone, but with their
entire limbs. Let the Church, therefore, stand
open to all who are supported by their hands
and by their own work ; if there is no excep-
tion of arts which the Discipline of God re-
ceives not. But some one says, in opposition
to our proposition of " similitude being inter-
dicted," " Why, then, did Moses in the desert
make a likeness of a serpent out of bronze ? "
The figures, which used to be laid as a ground-
work for some secret future dispensation, not
with a view to the repeal of the law, but as a
type of their own final cause, stand in a class
by themselves. Otherwise, if we should in-
terpret these things as the adversaries of the
law do, do we, too, as the Marcionites do,
ascribe inconsistency to the Almighty, whom
they " in this manner destroy as being mutable,
while in one place He forbids, in another
commands ? /But if any feigns ignorance of
the fact that that effigy of the serpent of
bronze, after the manner of one uphung, de-
noted the shape of the Lord's cross," which


artificer of this class should be admitted into the Church, if he ap-
plies for admittance, with a knowledge of the law of God referred
to in the former chapters, yet persistinjr in his unlawful craft. Fr.
Junius would read, " ejus disciplinam. '

7 i.e.. If laws of your own, and not the will and law of God, are
the source and means of your life, you owe no thanks and no obe-
dience to God, and therefore need not to seek admituncc into His
house (Oehler).

81 Cor. vii. 20. In Eng. ver.. "Let every man abide in the
same calling wherein he was called."

9 1 Thess. iv. n ; 2 Thess. iii. 6-13.

•oi.e., thieves who frequented the public baths, which were a
favorite resort at Rome.
" The Marcionites.

"2 [The argument amounts to this, that symbols were not idols :
yet even so, God only could ordain symbols that were innocent.
The Nehushtan of King Hezekiah teaches us the " peril of Idol-
atry" (2 Kings, xviii. 4) and that even a divine symbijl may be
destroyed justly if it be turned to a violation of the Second Com-
mandment.]


64


ON IDOLATRY.


[chap. VIII.


was to free us from serpents — that is, from
the devil's angels — while, through itself, it
hanged up the devil slain ^' or whatever other
exposition of that figure has been revealed to
worthier men ' no matter, provided we re-
member the apostle affirms that all things
happened at that time to the People =* figura-
tively.^ It is enough that the same God, as
by law He forbade the making of similitude,
did, by the extraordinary precept in the case
of the serpent, interdict similitude/ If you
reverence the same Cxod, you have His law,

7" Thou shalt make no similitude." s \{ you
look back, too, to the precept enjoining the
subsequently made similitude, do you, too,
imitate Moses : make not any likeness in op-
position to the law, unless to you^ too, God
have bidden it.*^

CHAP. VI. — IDOLATRY CONDEMNED BY BAP-
TISM. TO MAKE AN IDOL IS, IN FACT, TO
WORSHIP IT.

If no law of God had prohibited idols to be
made by us ; if no voice of the Holy Spirit
uttered general menace no less against the
makers than the worshippers of idols ; from
our sacrament itself we would draw our inter-
pretation that arts of that kind are opposed
to the faith. For how have we renou?iced Xht
devil and his angels, if we make them ? What
divorce have we declared from them, I say
not 7uith whom, but depende^it on whom, we
live ? What discord have we entered into with
those to whom we are under obligation for the
sake of our maintenance ? Can you have de-
nied with the tongue what with the hand you
confess ? unmake by word what by deed you
make? preach one God, you who make so
many? preach the true God, you who make
false ones? "I jnake," says one, "but I
worship not ;" as if there were some cause
for which he dare not worships besides that
for which he ouglu not also to 7nake^ — the
offence done to God, namely, in either case.
■>Nay, you who viake^ that they may be able
i to be worshipped, do worship ; and you wor-
ship, not with the spirit of some worthless


» [On which see Dr. Smith, Diet, of the Bible, ad 7>ocem " Ser-
pent. ]

2 i.e., the Jewish people, who are generally meant by the ex-
pression " the People in the sinKular number in Scripture. We
shall endeavour to mark that distinction by writing the word, as
here, with a capital.

3 See I Cor. x. 6, ii.

4 On the principle that the exception proves the rule. As Oehler
explains it: " l?y the fact of the extraordinary precept in that par-
ticular case, God gave an indication that likeness-making had be-
fore been forbidden and interdicted by Him."

5 Ex. XX. 4, etc. [The absurd " brazen serpent " which I have
seen in the Church of St. Ambrose, in Milan, is with brazen hardi-
hood affirmed to be the identical serpent which Moses lifted up in
the wilderness. Hut it lacks all symbolic character, as it is not
set upon a pole nor in any way fitted to a cross. It greatly resem-
bles.a r</«.' set upon a pivot.]

6 [Elucidation L]


perfume, but with your own; nor at the ex-
pense of a beast's soul, but of your own. To
them you immolate your ingenuity; to them
you make your sweat a libation; to them you
kindle the torch of your forethought. More
are you to them than a priest, since it is by
your means they have a priest ; your diligence
is their divinity. ^ Do you affirm that you
7C'orship not what you make ? Ah ! but they
affirm not so, to whom you slay this fatter,
more precious and greater victim, your salva-
tion.

CHAP. VII. GRIEF OF THE FAITHFUL AT THE

ADMISSION OF IDOL-MAKERS INTO THE
church; NAY, EVEN INTO THE MINISTRY.

A whole day the zeal of faith will direct its
pleadings to this quarter : bewailing that a
Christian should come from idols into the.;.
Church; should come from an adversary work-
shop into the house of God; should raise to
God the Father hands which are the mothers
of idols; should pray to God with the hands
which, out of doors, are prayed to in op-
position to God; should apply to the Lord's
body those hands which confer bodies on
demons. Nor is this sufficient. Grant that
it be a small matter, if from other hands they
receive what they contaminate; but even those
very hands deliver to others what they have
contaminated. Idol-artificers are chosen even <^
into the ecclesiastical order. Oh wickedness !
Once did the Jews lay hands on Christ ;
these mangle His body daily. Oh hands to
be cut off ! Now let the saying, "If thy hand
make thee do evil, amputate it,"^ see to it
whether it were uttered by way of similitude
merely. What hands more to be amputated
than those in which scandal is done to the
Lord's body ?

CHAP. VIII. OTHER ARTS MADE SUBSERVIENT

TO IDOLATRY. LAWFUL MEANS OF GAINING
A LIVELIHOOD ABUNDANT.

There are also other species of very many
arts which, although they extend not to the
making of idols, yet, with the same crim- ^
inality, furnish the adjuncts without which
idols have no power. For it matters not
whether you erect or equip: if you have em-
bellished his temple, altar, or niche ; if you
have pressed out gold-leaf, or have wrought
his insignia, or even his house : work of that
kind, which confers not shape, but authority,
is more important. If the necessity of main-


7 i.e.. Unless you tuade them, the>r would not exist, and there-
fore [would not be regarded as divinities; therefore] your diligence
gives them their divinity.

8 Matt, xviii. 8.


(


CHAP. IX.]


QN IDOLATRY.


65


tenance ' is urged so much, the arts have other
species withal to afford means of livehhood,
without outstepping the path of discipHne,
that is, without the confiction of an idol. The
plasterer knows both how to mend roofs, and
lay on stuccoes, and polish a cistern, and trace
ogives, and draw in relief on party-walls many
other ornaments beside likenesses. The
painter, too, the marble mason, the bronze-
worker, and every graver whatever, knows ex-
pansions ^ of his own art, of course much easier
of execution. For how much more easily
does he who delineates a statue overlay a side-
board ! 3 How much sooner does he who carves
a Mars out of a lime-tree, fasten together a
chest! No art but is either mother or kins-
woman of some neighbour " art: nothing is in-
dependent of its neighbour. The veins of the
arts are many as are the concupiscences of
men. " But there is difference in wages and
the rewards of handicraft;" therefore there
is difference, too, in the labour required.
Smaller wages are compensated by more fre-
quent earning. How many are the party-
walls which require statues ? How many the
temples and shrines which are built for
idols ? But houses, and official residences,
and baths, and tenements, how many are they ?
Shoe- and slipper-gilding is daily work ;
not so the gilding of Mercury and Serapis.
Let that suffice for the gain s of handicrafts.
Luxury and ostentation have more votaries
than all superstition. Ostentation will re-
quire dishes and cups more easily than super-
stition. Luxury deals in wreaths, also, more
than ceremony. When, therefore, we urge
men generally to such kinds of handicrafts as
do not come in contact with an idol indeed,
and with the things which are appropriate to
an idol ; since, moreover, the things which
are common tq idols are often common to
men too ; of this also we ought to beware,
that nothing be, with our knowledge, de-
manded by any person from our idols' service.
For if we shall have made that concession,
and shall not have had recourse to the reme-
dies so often used, I think we are not free of
the contagion of idolatry, we whose (not
unwitting) hands* are found busied in the
tendence, or in the honour and service, of
demons.


1 See chaps, v. and xii.

2 See chap, ii., " The expansiveness of idolatry."

3 Abacum. The word has various meanings ; but this, perhaps,
is its most general use : as, for instance, in Horace and Juvenal.

4 Alterius = kzipov which in the New Testament is = to " neish-
bour" in Rom. xiii. 8, etc. [Our author must have borne in mind
Cicero's beautiful words—" Etenim omnes artes quae ad humanita
tem pertinent habent quoddam commune vinculum," etc. Pro
Arckia, i. torn. x. p. 10. Ed. Paris, 1817.]

5 Quasstum. Another reading is " questum," which would re-
quire us to translate " plaint."

5


CHAP. IX. — PROFESSIONS OF SO.ME KINDS ALLIED
TO IDOLATRY. OF ASTROLOGY IN PARTICU-
LAR.

We observe among the arts ^ also some pro-
fessions liable to the charge of idolatry. Of
astrologers there should be no speaking even ;'
but since one in these days has challenged us,
defending on his own behalf perseverance in
that profession, I will use a few words. I
allege not that he honours idols, whose names
he has inscribed on the heaven,' to whom he
has attributed all God's power; because men,
presuming that we are disposed of by the im-
mutable arbitrament of the stars, think on that
account that God is not to be sought after.
One proposition I lay down: that those angels,
the deserters from God, the lovers of women,'" V
were likewise the discoverers of this curious
art, on that account also condemned by God.
Oh divine sentence, reaching even unto the
earth in its vigour, whereto the unwitting ren-
der testimony! The astrologers are expelled
just like their angels. The city and Italy are
interdicted to the astrologers, just as heaven
to their angels." There is the same penalty
of exclusion for disciples and masters. " But
Magi and astrologers came from the east." "
We know the mutual alliance of magic and
astrology. The interpreters of the stars,
then, were the first to announce Christ's birth
the first to present Him "gifts." By this
bond, [must] I imagine, they put Christ under
obligation to themselves ? What then ? Shall
therefore the religion of those Magi act as
patron now also to astrologers? Astrology
now-a-days, forsooth, treats of Christ — is the
science of the stars of Christ ; not of Saturn,
or Mars, and whomsoever else out of the
same class of the dead '^ it pays observance
to and preaches ? But, however, that science
has been allowed until the Gospel, in order
that after Christ's birth no one should thence-
forward interpret any one's nativity by the
heaven. For they therefore offered to the
then infant Lord that frankincense and myrrh
and gold, to be, as it were, the close of
worldly '♦ sacrifice and glory, which Christ was


6 " Quorum manus non ignorantium," i.e., " the hands of whom
not unwitting;" which may be rendered as above, because in En-
glish, as in tlie I.atin, the adjective " unwitting" belongs to the
"whose," not to the "hands. '

7 " Ars " in Latin is very generally used to mean " a scignti/ic
art." [See Titus iii. 14. English margin.]

8 See Eph. v. 11, 12, and similar passages.

9 i.e., by naming the stars after them.

•o Comp. chap, iv., and the references there given. The idea ,
seems founded on an ancient reading found in the Codex Alexan-
drinus of the LXX. in Gen. vi. a, " angels of God," for "sons of
God." - — ^^-

" See Tac. Ann. ii. 31, etc. (Oehler.)

«2 See Matt. ii.

"3 Because the names of the heathen divinities, which used to be
given to the stars, were in many cases only names of dead men
deified.

14 Or, heathenish.


66


ON IDOLATRY


[chap. X.


about to do away. What, then ? The dream —
sent, doubtless, of the will of God — suggested
to the same Magi, namely, that they should
go home, but by another way, not that by
which they came. It means this : that they
should not walk in their ancient path.' Not
that Herod should not pursue them, who in
fact did not pursue them; unwitting even that
they had departed by another way^ since he was
withal unwitting by what way they came. Just
so we ought to understand by it the right Way
and Discipline. And so the precept was
rather, that thenceforward they should icalk
otiiemnse. So, too, that other species of magic
which operates by miracles, emulous even in
opposition to Moses, "^ tried God's patience
until the Gospel. Yox thenceforward Simon
Magus, just turned believer, (since he was
still thinking somewhat of his juggling sect;
to wit, that among the miracles of his pro-
fession he might buy even the gift of the
Holy Spirit through imposition of hands) was
cursed by the apostles, and ejected from the
faith.' Both he and that other magician, who
was with Sergius Paulus, (since he began op-,
posing himself to the same apostles) was
mulcted with loss of eyes.** The same fate, I
believe, would astrologers, too, have met, if
any had fallen in the way of the apostles.
But yet, when magic is punished, of which
- astrology is a species, of course the species
/ is condemned in the genus. After the
' Gospel, you will nowhere find either sophists,
Chaldeans, enchanters, diviners, or magicians,
except as clearly punished. "Where is the
wise, where the grammarian, where the dis-
puter of this age ? Hath not God made foolish
the wisdom of this age ? " s You know noth-
ing, astrologer, if you know not that you
should be a Christian. If you did know it,
you ought to have known this also, that you
should have nothing more to do with that pro-
fession of yours which, of itself, fore-chants
the climacterics of others, and might instruct
you of its own danger. There is no part nor
lot for you in that system of yours. ^ He can-
not hope for the kingdom of the heavens,
whose finger or wand abuses ' the heaven.

CHAP. X. — OF SCHOOLMASTERS AND THEIR DIF-
FICULTIES. .

Moreover, we must inquire likewise touch-
ing schoolmasters ; nor only of them, but


» Or, sect.

"See Ex. vii., viii., and comp. 2 Tim. iii. 8.

3 See Acts viii. 9-24.

4 See Actsxiii. 6-11.

5 I Cor. i. 20.

* See Acts viii. 21.

7 See I Cor. vii. 31, " They that use this world as not abusing
it." The astrologer abuses the heavens by putting the heavenly
bodies tu a sinful use.


also all other professors of literature. Nay,
on the contrary, we must not doubt that they
are in affinity with manifold idolatry : firsts in
that it is necessary for them to preach the
gods of the nations, to express their names,
genealogies, honourable distinctions, all and
singular; and ///r/Z/^v, to observe the solem-
nities and festivals of the same, as of them
by whose means they compute their reve-
nues. What schoolmaster, without a table
of the seven idols, ^ will yet frequent the Quin-
quatria? The very first payment of every
pupil he consecrates both to the honour and
to the name of Minerva ; so that, even though
he be not said " to eat of that which is sacri-
ficed to idols ' ' 9 fiommally (not being dedicated
to any particular idol), he is shunned as an
idolater. What less of defilement does he
incur on that ground, '° than a business brings
which, both nominally and virtually, is conse-
crated publicly to an idol ? The Minerv-alia
are as much Minerva's, as the Saturnalia
Saturn's ; Saturn's, which must necessarily
be celebrated even by little slaves at the time
of the Saturnalia. New-year's gifts likewise
must be caught at, and the Septimontium
kept; and all the presents of Midwinter and
the feast of Dear Kinsmanship must be ex-
acted ; the schools must be wreathed with
flowers ; the flamens' wives and the aediles
sacrifice; the school is honoured on the ap-
pointed holy-days. The same thing takes
place on an idol's birthday ; every pomp of
the devil is frequented. Who will think that
these things are befitting to a Christian mas-
ter," unless // be he who shall think them
suitable likewise to one who is not a master?
We know it may be said, " If teaching litera-
ture is not lawful to God's servants, neither
will learning be likewise ;" and, " How could
one be trained unto ordinary human intelli-
gence, or unto any sense or action whatever,
since literature is the means of training for
all life ? How do we repudiate secular studies,
without which divine studies cannot be pur-
sued ? " Let us see, then, the necessity of
literary erudition ; let us reflect that partly
it cannot be admitted, partly cannot be avoid-
ed. Learning literature is allowable for be-
lievers, rather than teaching ; for the princi-
ple of learning and of teaching is difterent.
If a believer teach literature, while he is teach-
ing doubtless he commends, while he de-
livers he affirms, while he recalls he bears
testimony to, the praises of idols interspersed


8 i.e., the Seven planets.

9 See I Cor. viii. 10.

'oi.e., because " he does not nominally eat," etc.

" [Note the Christian Schoolmaster, already distinguished as
such, implying the existence and the character of Christian schools.
Of which, learn more from the Emperor Julian, afterwards.]


CHAP. XI.]


ON IDOLATRY,


67


therein. He seals the gods themselves with
this name ; ' whereas the Law, as we have
said, prohibits " the names of gods to be pro-
nounced," ' and this name 3 to be conferred
on vanity. '^ Hence the devil gets men's early
faith built up from the beginnings of their
erudition. Inquire whether he who catechizes
about idols commit idolatry. But when a
believer lear?is these things, if he is already
capable of understanding what idolatry is, he
neither receives nor allows them ; much more
if he is not yet capable. Or, when he begins
to understand, it behoves him first to under-
stand what he has previously learned, that is,
touching God and the faith. Therefore he
will reject those things, and will not receive
them ; and will be as safe as one who from
one who knows it not, knowingly accepts
poison, but does not dri?ik it. To hi7n ne-
cessity is attributed as an excuse, because
he has no other way to learn. Moreover, the
not teaching literature is as much easier than
the not lear?n?ig, as it is easier, too, for the
pupil not to attend, than for the master not
to frequent, the rest of the defilements inci-
dent to the schools from public and scholastic
solemnities.

CHAP. XI. — CONNECTION BETWEEN COVETOUS-
NESS AND IDOLATRY. CERTAIN TRADES,
HOWEVER GAINFUL, TO BE AVOIDED.

If we think over the rest of faults, tracing
them from their generations, let us begin with
covetousness, " a root of all evils," ^ where-
with, indeed, some having been ensnared,
. "have suffered shipwreck about faith." ^
/ Albeit covetousness is by the same apostle
called idolatry J In the next place proceeding
to mendacity, the minister of covetousness
(of false swearing I am silent, since even
swearing is not lawful^) — is trade adapted for
a servant of God ? But, covetousness apart,
what is the motive for acquiring ? When the
motive for acquiring ceases, there will be no
necessity for trading. Grant now that there
be some righteousness in business, secure
from the duty of watchfulness against covet-
ousness and mendacity ; I take it that that
trade which pertains to the very soul and
spirit of idols, which pampers every demon,
falls under the charge of idolatry. Rather,


I


1 i.e., the name of g;ods.

2 Ex. xxiii. 13 ; Josh, xxiii.


7;


Ps. xvi. 4 ; Hos. ii. 17; Zech,


3 i.e., the name of God.

4 i.e., on an idol, which, as Isaiah says, is "vanity." •

5 I Tim. vi. 10.
61 Tim. i. 19.

7 Col. iii. 5. It has been suggested that for " quamvis we
should read " quum bis;" i.e. '^'^ seeing covetousness is twice
called," etc. The two places are Col. iii. 5, and Eph. v. 5.

8 Matt. V. 34-37 ; Jas. v. 12.


is not that the principal idolatry ? If the* self-
same merchandises — frankincense, I mean,
and all other foreign productions — used as
sacrifice to idols, are of use likewise to men
for medicinal ointments, to us Christians ahso,
over and above, for solaces of sepulture, let
them see to it. At all events, while the
pomps, while the priesthoods, while the sacri-
fices of idols, are furnished by dangers, by
losses, by inconveniences, by cogitations, by
runnings to and fro, or trades, what else are
you demonstrated to be but an idols' agent ?
Let none contend that, in this way, exception
may be taken to all trades. All graver faults
extend the sphere for diligence in watchful-
ness proportionably to the magnitude of the
danger ; in order that we may withdraw not
only from the faults, but from the means
through which they have being. For although
the fault be done by others, it makes no dif-
erence if it be by viy means. In no case ought
I to be fiecessary to another, while he is doing
what to me is unlawful. Hence I ought to
understand that care must be taken by me,
lest what I am forbidden to do be done by ?ny
i?ieans. In short, in another cause of no lighter
guilt I observe that fore-judgment. In that
I am interdicted from fornication, I furnish
nothing of help or connivance to others for
that purpose; in that I have separated my own
flesh itself from stews, I acknowledge that I
cannot exercise the trade of pandering, or
keep that kind of places for my neighbour's
behoof. So, too, the interdiction of murder
shows me that a trainer of gladiators also is
excluded from the Church ; nor will any one
fail to be the means of doing what he submin-
isters to another to do. Behold, here is a
more kindred fore-judgment : if a purveyor of
the public victims come over to the faith,
will you permit him to remain permanently in
that trade ? or if one who is already a believer
shall have undertaken that business, will you
think that he is to be retained in the Church ?
No, I take it ; unless any one will dissemble
in the case of a frankincense-seller too. In
sooth, the agency of blood pertains to some,
that of odours to others. If, before idols were
in the world, idolatry, hitherto shapeless, used
to be transacted by these wares ; if, even
now, the work of idolatry is perpetrated, for
the most part, without the idol, by burnings of
odours ; the frankincense-seller is a something
even more serviceable even toward demons,
for idolatry is more easily carried on without
the idol, than without the ware of the frank-
incense-seller.9 Let us interrogate thoroughly


9 [The aversion of the early Christian Fathers passim to the
ceremonial use of incense finds one explanation here.]


68


ON IDOLATRY.


[chap. XIII.


the conscience of the faith itself. With what
mouth will a Christian frankincense-seller, if
he shall pass through temples, with what
mouth will he spit down upon and blow out
the smoking altars, for which himself has
made provision ? With what consistency will
he exorcise his own foster-children,' to whom
he affords his own house as store-room ? In-
deed, if he shall have ejected a demon,' let
///;// not congratulate himself on his faith, for
he has not ejected an eneiny ; he ought to have
had his prayer easily granted by one whom
he is daily feeding. ^ No art, then, no pro-
-^fession, no trade, which administers either to
/equipping or forming idols, can be free from
the title of idolatry ; unless we interpret idol-
atry to be altogether something else than the
service of idol-tendence.


CHAP. XII. — FURTHER ANSWERS TO THE PLEA,
HOW AM I TO LIVE ?

In vain do we flatter ourselves as to the
necessities of human maintenance, if — after
faith sealed^ — we say, " I have no means to
live ? " 5 For here I will now answer more fully
that abrupt proposition. It is advanced too
late. For after the similitude of that most
prudent builder,*^ who first computes the
costs of the work, together with his own
means, lest, when he has begun, he afterwards
blush to find himself spent, deliberation should
have been made before. But even now you
have the Lord's sayings, as examples taking
away from you all excuse. For what is it you
say? "I shall be in need." But the Lord
calls the needy " happy." ? '* I shall have no
food," But "think not," says He, "about
food;"' and as an example of clothing we
have the lilies.' " My work was my subsist-
ence." Nay, but " all things are to be sold,
and divided to the needy." '° " But provision
must be made for children and posterity."
" None, putting his hand on the plough, and
looking back, is fit " for work." " But I was
under contract." "None can serve two
lords." " If you wish to be the Lord's disci-


'i.e., the demf)ns, nr idols, to whom incense inhumed.
=»i.e., from one possessed.

3 i.e., The demon, if gratitude for the incense which the man
daily feeds him with, ought to depart out of the possessed at his
request.

4 i.e., in baptism.

5 See above, chaps, v. and viii, [One is reminded here of the
famous pleasantry of Dr. Johnson; see BasweilJ]

^See Luke xiv. 28-30.

7 Luke vi. 20.

8 .Matt. vi. 25, 31, etc. • Luke xii. 22-24.

9 Matt. vi. 28 ; Luke xii. 28.
*oMatt. xix. 21 ; Luke xviii. 22.

»i Luke ix. 62, where the words are, " is fit for the kingdom of
God."
"Matt. vi. 24 ; Luke xvi. 13.


pie, it is necessary you " take your cross, and
follow the Lord : " '^ your cross; that is, your
own straits and tortures, or your body only,
which is after the manner of a cross. Parents,
wives, children, will have to be left behind,
for God's sake.'-* Do you hesitate about arts,
and trades, and about professions likewise,
for the sake of children and parents ? Even
there was it demonstrated to us, that both
"dear pledges," 's and handicrafts, and
trades, are to be quite left behind for the
Lord's sake ; while James and John, called
by the Lord, do leave quite behind both father
and ship ; '^ while Matthew is roused up from
the toll-booth ;'7 while even burying a father
was too tardy a business for faith. '^ None of
them whom the Lord chose to Him said, " I
have no means to live." Faith fears not
famine. It knows, likewise, that hunger i^
no less to be contemned by it for God's sake,
than every kind of death. It has learnt not
to respect lifej how vauch'mort food? [You
ask] " How many have fulfilled these condi-
tions ? " But what with men is difficult, with
God is easy. '9 Let us, however, comfort our-
selves about the gentleness and clemency of
God in such wise, as not to indulge our " ne-
cessities " up to the point of affinities with
idolatry, but to avoid even from afar every
breath of it, as of a pestilence. [And this]
not merely in the cases forementioned, but
in the universal series of human superstition ;
whether appropriated to its gods, or to the
defunct, or to kings, as pertaining to the
selfsame unclean spirits, sometimes through
sacrifices and priesthoods, sometimes through
spectacles and the hke, sometimes through
holy-days.

CHAP. XIII. OF THE OBSERVANCE OF DAYS

CONNECTED WITH IDOLATRY.

But why speak of sacrifices and priest-
hoods ? Of spectacles, moreover, and pleas-
ures of that kind, we have already filled a
volume of their own.^ In this place must be
handled the subject of holidays and other ex-
traordinary solemnities, which we accord
sometimes to our wantonness, sometimes to
our timidity, in opposition to the common
faith and Discipline. The first point, indeed,
on which I shall join issue is this : whether a
servant of God ought to share with the very


13 Matt. xvi. 24 ; Mark viii. 34 ; Luke ix. 23, xiv. 27


xiv. 26: Mark x. 29, lo
with TertuIIian's wordfs,


Matt


XIX. 27-jo. Compare
and see the testimony he thus


'4 Luke xiv. 26 ;
these texts
gives to the deity of Christ.

'5 i.e.,' any dear relations.

>6 Matt. iv. 21, 22, Mark i. 19, 20 ; Luke v. 10, 11.

>7 Matt. ix. 9; Mark ii. 14; Luke v. 29.

•8 Luke ix. 59, 60.

»9 Matt. xix. 26; Luke i. 37, xviii. 27.

20 The treatise De Upcctaculis [soon to follow, in this volume.]


CHAP. XIV.]


ON IDOLATRY.


69


nations themselves in matters of his kind,
v^ either in dress, or in food, or in any other
/ kind of their gladness. " To rejoice with the
rejoicing, and grieve with the grieving," ' is
said about brethren by the apostle when ex-
horting to unanimity. But, for //j!^^<? purposes,
*' There is nought of communion between
light and darkness," = between life and death;
or else we rescind what is written, "The
world shall rejoice, but ye shall grieve." ^ If
we rejoice with the world, there is reason to
fear that with the world we shall grieve too.
But when the world rejoices, let us grieve ;
and when the world afterward grieves, we
shall rejoice. Thus, too, Eleazar-* in Hades, s
{attaining refreshment in Abraham's bosom)
and the rich man, (on the other hand, set in
the torment of fire) compensate, by an an-
swerable retribution, their alternate vicissi-
tudes of evil and good. There are certain
gift-days, which with some adjust the claim
of honour, with others the debt of wages.
" Now, then," you say, " I shall receive back
what is mine, or pay back what is another's."
If men have consecrated for themselves this
custom from superstition, why do you, es-
tranged as you are from all their vanity,
participate in solemnities consecrated to idols ;
as if for you also there were some prescript
about a day, short of the observance of a par-
ticular day, to prevent your paying or receiv-
ing what you owe a man, or what is owed you
by a man ? Give me the form after which
you wish to be dealt with. * For why should
you skulk withal, when you contaminate
your own conscience by your neighbour's ig-
norance ? If you are not unknown to be a
Christian, you are tempted, and you act as if
you were not a Christian against your neigh-
bour's conscience ; if, however, you shall be
disguised withal,^ you are the slave of the
temptation. At all events, whether in the
latter or the former way, you are guilty of
being " ashamed of God." ^ But " whosoever
shall be ashamed of Me in the presence of
men, of him will I too be ashamed," says He,
" in the presence of my Father who is in the
heavens." ^


I Rom. xii. 15.

2 See 2 Cor. vi. 14. In the De Sped. xxvi. TertuUian has the
•same quotation (Oehler). And there, too, he adds, as here, " be-
tween Hfe and death."

3 John xvi. 20. It is observable that TertuUian here translates
Koo-juo? by "seculum."

4 i.e., Lazarus, Luke xvi. 19-31.

5 " Apud inferos," used clearly here by TertuUian of a place of
happiness. Augustine says he never finds it so used in Scripture.
See Ussher's " Answer to a Jesuit " on the Article, " He descended
into hell." [See Elucid. X. p. 50, supra.'\

6 i.e., if you are unknown to be a Christian : " dissimulaberis."
This is Oehler's reading^ ; but Latinius and Fr. Junius would read
*' Dissimulaveris," = " If you dissemble the fact of being a Chris-
tian, which perhaps is better.

7 So Mr. Dodgson renders very well.

8 Matt. X. 33 ; Mark viii. 38 ; Luke ix. 26 ; 2 Tim. ii. 12.


chap. xiv.— of blasphemy. one of st.
Paul's savings.

But, however, the majority (of Christians)
have by this time induced the belief in their
mind that it is pardonable if at any time they
do what the heathen do, for fear ** the Name
be blasphemed." Now the blasphemy which
must quite be shunned by us in every way is,
I take it, this : If any of us lead a heathen
into blasphemy with good cause, either by
fraud, or by injury, or by contumely, or any
other matter of worthy complaint, in which
" the Name " is deservedly impugned, so that
the Lord, too, be deservedly angry. Else, if
of «// blasphemy it has been said, '* By your
means My Name is blasphemed," ' we all
perish at once ; since the whole circus, with
no desert of ours, assails " the Name " with
wicked suffrages. Let us cease (to be Chris-
tians) and it will not be blasphemed ! On the
contrary, while we are, let it be blasphemed :
in the observance, not the overstepping, of
discipline ; while we are being approved, not
while we are being reprobated. Oh blas-
phemy, bordering on martyrdom, which now
tf /tests me to be a Christian,'" while for that
very account it ^/^'tests me ! The cursing of
well-maintained Discipline is a blessing of
the Name. "If," says he, "I wished to
please men, I should not be Christ's servant. ""
But the same apostle elsewhere bids us take
care to please all : " As I," he says, " please
all by all means."" No doubt he used to
please them by celebrating the Saturnalia
and New-year's day ! [Was it so] or was it
by moderation and patience ? by gravity, by
kindness, by integrity? In like manner,
when he is .«ia»//Ag, " I have become all things
to ail, that I may gain all," '^ does he mean
"to idolaters an idolater?" "to heathens a
heathen ? " " to the worldly worldly ? " But
albeit he does not prohibit us from having
our conversation with idolaters and adulterers,
and the other criminals, saying, "Otherwise
ye would go out from the world," '■♦ of course
he does not so slacken those reins of con-
versation that, since it is necessary for us both
to live and to mingle with sinners, we may be
able to si7i with them too. Where there is
the intercourse of life, which the apostle con-
cedes, there is sinning, whi(^ no one permits.
To live with heathens is lawful, to die with


9 Is


Ezek. xxxvi. 20, 23. Of. 2 Sam. xii. 14 ; Rom. ii.


»o [This play on the words is literally copied from the original —
" quae tunc me testatur Cbristianum, cum propter ea me detesta-
tur."]

" St. Paul, Gal. i. 10.

12 I Cor. X. 32, 33.

»3 I Cor. ix. 22.

M I Cor. v. 10.


70


ON IDOLATRY.


[chap. XV,


I


;them ' is not. Let us live with all ; ' let us be
glad with them, out of community of nature,
not of superstition. We are peers in soul,
not in discipline ; fellow-possessors of the
world, not of error. But if we have no right
of communion in matters of this kind with
strangers, how far more wicked to celebrate
them among brethren ! Who can maintain
or defend this ? The Holy Spirit upbraids
the Jews with their holy-days. "Your Sab-
baths, and new moons, and ceremonies,"
says He, "My soul hateth."^ gy us, to
whom Sabbaths are strange,-* and the new
moons and festivals formerly beloved by God,
the Saturnalia and New-year's and Midwin-
ter's festivals and Matronalia are frequented
— presents come and go — New-year's gifts —
games join their noise — banquets join their
din ! Oh better fidelity of the nations to their
own sect, which claims no solemnity of the
Christians for itself ! Not the Lord's day,
not Pentecost, even if they had known them,
would they have shared with us ; for they
would fear lest they should seem to be Chris-
tians. We are not apprehensive lest we
seem to be heathens ! If any indulgence is
to be granted to the flesh, you have it. I
will not say your own days,^ but more too ;
for to the heathens each festive day occurs
but once annually : you have a festive day
every eighth day.^ Call out the individual
solemnities of the nations, and set them out
into a row, they will not be able to make up
a Pentecost. 7

CHAP. XV. — CONCERNING FESTIVALS IN HONOUR
OF EMPERORS, VICTORIES, AND THE LIKE.
EXAMPLES OF THE THREE <^fJJJUr>REN AND
DANIEL.

But "let your works shine," saith He;^
but now all our shops and gates shine ! You
will now-a-days find more doors of heathens
without lamps and laurel-wreaths than of
Christians. What does the case seem to be
with regard to that species (of ceremony) also ?
If it is an idol's honour, without doubt an
idol's honour is idolatry. If it is for a man's
sake, let us again consider that all idolatry is
for man's sake ;' let us again consider that


I i.e., by sinning (Ochler), for " the wages of sin is death."
'There seems to be #play on the word "convivere" (whence
" convivium," etc.), as in Cic. de Sen. xiii.

3 Isa. i. 14, etc.

4 [This is noteworthy. In the earlier days sabbaths (Saturdays)
were not unobserved, but, it was a concession pro tempore to
Hebrew Christians.] '

5 i.e., perhaps your own birthdays. [.See cap. xvi. in/ra.'\
Oehler seems to think it means, "all other Christian festivals i)e-
side Sunday."

6[" An Easter Day in every week."— AV/i/t-.]

7 I.e., a space of fifty days, see Deut. xvi. 10 ; and comp. Hooker,
Ecc. Pol. iv. 13, 7, ed. Keble.

8 Matt. V. 16.

9 See chap. ix. p. 152, note 4.


all idolatry is a worship done to men, since it
is generally agreed even among their wor-
shippers that aforetime the gods themselves
of the nations were men ; and so it makes no
difference whether that superstitious homage
be rendered to men of a former age or of
this. Idolatry is condemned, not on account
of the persons which are set up for worship, -
but on account of those its observances, which^
pertain to demons. "The things which are
Caesar's are to be rendered to Ceesar." '° It
is enough that He set in apposition thereto,
"and to God the things which are God's."
What things, then, are Csesar's? Those, to
wit, about which the consultation was then
held, whether the poll-tax should be furnished
to Csesar or no. Therefore, too, the Lord
demanded that the money should be shown
Him, and inquired about the image, whose it
was ; and when He had heard it was Caesar's,
said, "Render to Cassar what are Caesar's,
and what are God's to God;" that is, the
image of Caesar, which is on the coin, to
Caesar, and the image of God, which is on
man," to God ; so as to render to Caesar in-
deed money, to God yourself. Otherwise,
what will be God's, if all things are Caesar's ?
" Then," do you say, " the lamps before my
doors, and the laurels on my posts are an
honour to God ? " They arc there of course,
not because they are an honour to God, but
to him who is honoured in God's stead by
ceremonial observances of that kind, so far
as is manifest, saving the religious perform-
ance, which is in secret appertaining to de-
mons. For we ought to be sure if there are
any whose notice it escapes through ignorance
of this world's literature, that there are
among the Romans even gods of entrances ;
Cardea (Hinge-goddess), called after hinges,
and Forculus (Door-god) after doors, and
Limentinus (Threshold-god) after the thresh-
old, and Janus himself (Gate-god) after the
gate: and of course we know that, though
names be empty and feigned, yet, when they
are drawn down into superstition, demons and
every unclean spirit seize them for themselves,
through the bond of consecration. Otherwise
demons have no name individually, but they
there find a name where they find also a
token. Among the Greeks likewise we read
of Apollo Thyraeus, i.e. of the door, and the
Antelii, or Anthelii, demons, as presiders
over entrances. These things, therefore, the
Holy Spirit foreseeing from the beginning,
fore-chanted, through the most ancient proph-
et Enoch, that even entrances would come


'° Matt. xxii. 21 ; Mark xii. 17 ; Luke xx. 25.

^^ See Gen. i. 26, 27, ix. 6 ; and comp. i Cor. xi. 7.


CHAP. XVII.]


ON IDOLATRY.


into superstitious use. For we see too that
other entrances' are adored in the baths.
But if there are beings which are adored in
entrances^ it is to them that both the lamps
and the laurels will pertain. To an idol you
will have done whatever you shall have done
to an entrance. In this place I call a witness
on the authority also of God ; because it is
not safe to suppress whatever may have been
shown to one, of course for the sake of all.
I know that a brother was severely chastised,
the same night, through a vision, because
on the sudden announcement of public re-
joicings his servants had wreathed his gates.
And yet himself had not wreathed, or com-
manded them to be wreathed ; for he had
gone iorthfrom home before, and on his re-
turn had reprehended the deed. So strictly
are we appraised with God in matters of this
kind, even with regard to the discipline of
our family.^ Therefore, as to what relates to
the honours due to kings or emperors, we
have a prescript sufficient, that it behoves us
to be in all obedience, according to the apos-
tle's precept, 3 " subject to magistrates, and
princes, and powers ;" '* but within the limits
of discipline, so long as we keep ourselves
separate from idolatry. For it is for this
reason, too, that that example of the three
brethren has forerun us, who, in other re-
spects obedient toward king Nebuchodonosor,
rejected with all constancy the honour to his
image, 5 proving that whatever is extolled be-
yond the measure of human honour, unto the
resemblance of divine sublimity, is idolatry.
So too, Daniel, in all other points submissive
to Darius, remained in his duty so long as it
was free from danger to his religion ; ^ for, to
avoid undergoing that danger, he feared the
royal lions no more than they the royal fires.
Let, therefore, them who have no light, light
their lamps daily ; let them over whom the
fires of hell are imminent, affix to their posts
laurels doomed presently to burn : to them
the testimonies of darkness and the omens of
their penalties are suitable. You are a light
of the world, 7 and a tree ever green. ^ If you
have renounced temples, make not your own
gate a temple. I have said too little. If
you have renounced stews, clothe not your


own house with the appearance of a new
brothel.


CHAP. XVI.


:ONCERNING PRIVATE FESTIVALS.


1 The word is the same as that for "the mouth" of a river,
etc. Hence Oehler supposes the " entrances " or " mouths ' here
referred to to be the mouths of fountains, where nymphs were
supposed to dwell. Nytiipha is supposed to be the same word as
Lympha. See Hor. Sat. i. 5, 97 ; and Macleane's note.

2 [He seems to refer to some Providential event, perhaps an-
nounced in a dream, not necessarily out of the course of common
occurrences.]

3 Rom. xui. I, etc. ; i Pet. ii, 13, 14.

4 Tit. iii. 1.

5 Dan. iii.

6 Dan. vi.

7 Matt. V. 14; Phil. ii. 13.

8 Ps. i. 1-3, xcii. 12-15.


Touching the ceremonies, however, of pri-
vate and social solemnities — as those of the
white toga, of espousals, of nuptials, of name-
givings — I should think no danger need be
guarded against from the breath of the idola-
try which is mixed up with them. For the-
causes are to be considered to which the cere-
mony is due. Those above-named I take to
be clean in themselves, because neither manly
garb, nor the marital ring or union, descends
from honours done to any idol. In short, I
find no dress cursed by God, except a woman's
dress on a man:^ for "cursed," saith He,
" is every man who clothes himself in woman's
attire." The toga, however, is a dress of
manly name as well as of manly use.^° God
no more prohibits nuptials to be cele-
brated than a name to be given. " But there
are sacrifices appropriated to these occa-
sions." Let me be invited, and let not the
title of the ceremony be " assistance at a sac-
rifice," and the discharge of my good offices
is at the service of my friends. Would that it
were " at their service " indeed, and that we
could escape seeing what is unlawful for us to
do. But since the evil one has so surrounded
the world with idolatry, it will be lawful for
us to be present at some ceremonies which
see us doing service to a tnan, not to an idol.
Clearly, if invited unto priestly function and
sacrifice, I will not go, for that is service pe-
culiar to an idol ; but neither will I furnish
advice, or expense, or any other good office
in a matter of that kind. If it is on account
of the sacrifice that I be invited, and stand
by, I shall be partaker of idolatry ; if any
other cause conjoins me to the sacrificer, I
shall be merely a spectator of the sacrifice."

CHAP. XVII. — THE CASES OF SERVANTS AND
OTHER OFFICIALS. WHAT OFFICES A CHRIS-
TIAN MAN MAY HOLD.

But what shall believing servants or chil-
dren" do? officials likewise, when attending
on their lords, or patrons, or superiors, when
sacrificing? Well, if any one shall have
handed the wine to a sacrificer, nay, if by any


9 Tertullian should have added, " and a man's on a woman.
See Deut. xxii. 5. Moreover, the word " cursed " is not used there,
but " abomination " is. ,,

10 Because it was called toga virilis — "the manly toga.

" [i Cor. viii. The law of the inspired apostle seems as rigor-
ous here and in i Cor. x. 27-29.] ^ , . ,,

"This is Oehler's reading; Regaltius and Fr. Junius would
read "liberti" = freedmen. I admit that in this instance I prefer
their reading: among other reasons it answers better to " patronis
= " patrons."


ON IDOLATRY.


[chap. XVIII


single word necessary or belonging to a sacri-
fice he shall have aided him, he will be held
to be a minister of idolatry. Mindful of this
rule, we can render service even " to magis-
trates and powers," after the example of the
patriarchs and the other forefathers,' who
obeyed idolatrous kings up to the confine of
idolatry. Hence arose, very lately, a dispute
whether a servant of God should take the ad-
ministration of any dignity or power, if he
be able, whether by some special grace, or by
adroitness, to keep himself intact from every
species of idolatry ; after the example that
both Joseph and Daniel, clean from idolatry,
administered both dignity and power in the
livery and purple of the prefecture of entire
Egypt or Babylonia. And so let us grant
--7 that it is possible for any one to succeed in
/ moving, in whatsoever office, under the mere
name of the oftice, neither sacrificing nor
lending his authority to sacrifices ; not farm-
ing out victims; not assigning to others the
care of temples; not looking after their trib-
utes ; not giving spectacles at his own or the
public charge, or presiding over the giving
them ; making proclamation or edict for no
solemnity ; not even taking oaths : moreover
(what comes under the head oi pmve?-), neither
sitting in judgment on any one's life or char-
acter, for you might bear with his judging
about 7noney ; neither condemning nor fore-
condemning;' binding no one, imprisoning or
torturing no one — if it is credible that all this
is possible.

CHAP. XVIII. — DRESS AS CONNECTED WITH
IDOLATRY.

But we must now treat of the garb only and
apparatus of office. There is a dress proper
to every one, as well for daily use as for office
and dignity. That famous purple, therefore,
and the gold as an ornament of the neck, were,
among the Egyptians and Babylonians, en-
signs of dignity, in the same way as bordered,
or striped, or palm-embroidered togas, and
the golden wreaths of provincial priests, are
now ; but not on the same terms. For they
used only to be conferred, under the name of
hmour^ on such as deserved the familiar
friendship of kings (whence, too, such used
to be styled the " purpled-men " ^ of kings,
just as among us,* some, from their white toga,
are called " candidates " s); but 7wt on the


understanding that that garb should be tied
to priesthoods also, or to any idol-ceremonies.
For if that were the case, of course men of
such holiness and constancy* would instantly
have refused the defiled dresses ; and it would
instantly have appeared that Daniel had been
no zealous slave to idols, nor worshipped Bel,
nor the dragon, which long after did appear.
That purple, therefore, was simple, and used
not at that time to be a mark of dignity ^ among
the barbarians, but of nobility.^ For as both
Joseph, who had been a slave, and Daniel,
who through 9 captivity had changed his state,
attained the freedom of the states of Babylon
and Egypt through the dress of barbaric no-
bility ; '° so among us believers also, if need so
be, the bordered toga will be proper to be
conceded to boys, and the stole to girls," as
ensigns of birth, not of power ; of race, not of
office ; of rank, not of superstition. But the
purple, or the other ensigns of dignities and
powers, dedicated from the beginning to idol-
atry engrafted on the dignity and the powers,
carry the spot of their own profanation ; since,
moreover, bordered and striped togas, and
broad-barred ones, are put even on idols them-
selves ; and fasces also, and rods, are borne
before them ; and deservedly, for demons are
the magistrates of this world : they bear the
fasces and the purples, the ensigns of one
college. What end, then, will you advance
if you use the garb indeed, but administer
not the functions of it? In things unclean,
none can appear clean. If you put on a tunic
defiled in itself, it perhaps may not be defiled
through you ; but you, through it, will be un-
able to be clean. Now by this time, you who
argue about " Joseph " and " Daniel," know
that things old and new, rude and polished,
begun and developed, slavish and free, are
not always comparable. For they, even by
their circumstances, were slaves ; but you,
the slave of none,'^' in so far as you are the
slave of Christ alone, '^ who has freed you like-
wise from the captivity of the world, will incur
the duty of acting after your Lord's pattern.
That Lord walked in humility and obscurity,
with no definite home : for " the Son of man,"
said He, *' hath not where to lay His head ; " '*
unadorned in dress, for else He had not said,


I Majores. Of course the word may be rendered simply "an-
cients ;" but I have kept the common meaning " forefathers."

a " The judge condemns, the legislator fore-condemns." — Ri-
GALTIUS (Oehler.)

3 Or, " purpu rates."

4 [Not 7is Christians, but us Roman citizens.]

5 Or, " white-men."


6 Or, "consistency."

7 i.e., (;>^t/rt/ character.

8 Or, " free " or " good " " birth.'
9 Or, "during."

Jfoi.e., the dress was the sie:n that they had obtained it.

" I have departed from Oehler's reading here, as I have not
succeeded in finding that the " stola " was a day's garment ; and,
for grammatical reasons, the reading of Gelenius and Pamelius
(which I have taken) seems best.

'2 See I Cor. ix. 19.

'3 St. Paul in his epistle glories in the title, " Paul, a slave," or
" bondman," " of Christ J[esus."

'4 Luke ix. 58 ; Matt. viii. 20.


CHAP. XX.]


ON IDOLATRY.


73


"Behold, they who are clad in soft raiment
are in kings' houses:"' in short, inglorious
in countenance and aspect, just as Isaiah [
withal had fore-announced. =* If, also, He ex-
ercised no right of power even over His own
followers, • to whom He discharged menial
ministry; 3 if, in short, though conscious of |
His own kingdom,* He shrank back from be- 1
ing made a king, ^ He in the fullest manner i
gave His own an example for turning coldly
from all the pride and garb, as well of dignity
as of power. For if they were to be used^ who
would rathar have used them than the Son of
God? What kind and what number oi fasces
would escort Him ? what kind of purple would
bloom from His shoulders ? what kind of gold
would beam from His head, had He not judged
, the glory of- the world to be alien both to
Himself and to His ? Therefore what He was
unwilling to accept. He has rejected ; what
He rejected, He has condemned ; what He
condemned. He has counted as part of the
devil's pomp. For He would not have con-
•demned things, except such as were not His ;
but things which are not God's, can be no
other's but the devil's. If you have forsworn
"the devil's pomp,"^ know that whatever
there you touch is idolatry, .^et even this
/ fact help to remind you that all the powers
and dignities of this world are not only alien
to, but enemies of, God ; that through them
punishments have been determined against
God's servants ; through them, too, penalties
prepared for the impious are ignored. But
"both your birth and your substance are
troublesome to you in resisting idolatry." ^
For avoiding it, remedies cannot be lacking ;
-since, even if they be lacking, there remains
that one by which you will be made a happier
magistrate, not in the earth, but in the
heavens.^ . ^( M f^--^%

CHAP. XIX. — CONCERNING MILITARY SERVICE.

In that last *section, decision may seem to
have been given likewise concerning military
service, which is between dignity and power. '
But now inquiry is made about this point,
whether a believer may turn himself unto
military service, and whether the military may
be admitted unto the faith, even the rank and


file, or each inferior grade, to whom there is
no necessity for taking part in sacrifices or
capital punishments. There is no agreement
between the divine and the human sacrament,"
the standard of Christ and the standard of the
devil, the camp of light and the camp of dark-
ness. One soul cannot be due to two masters^
— God and Caesar. And yet Moses carried a
rod," and Aaron wore a buckle," and John
(Baptist) is girt with leather, '^ and Joshua the
son of Nun leads a line of march ; and the
People warred : if it pleases you to sport with
the subject. But how will a Christian man
war, nay, how will he serve even in peace,
without a sword, which the Lord has taken
away?'* For albeit soldiers had come unto
John, and had received the formula of their
rule ; '^ albeit, likewise, a centurion had be-
lieved; '^ still iho. Lord afterward, in disarming
Peter, unbet+^ed every soldier. No dress is
lawful among us, if assigned to any unlawful
action.


CHAP. XX.-


:ONCKKNIN(i IDOLATRY IN WORDS.


1 Matt. xi. 8 ; Luke vii. 25.

2 Isa. liii. 2.

3 See John xiii. 1-17.
Jc


4 See John xviii. 36,
hn vi. 15.
baptism.


S John VI. 15.
''In'


7 i.e. From your birth and means, you will be expected to fill
offices which are in some way connected with idolatry.

^i.e. Martyrdom (La Cerda, quoted by Oehler). For the idea
of being "a magistrate in the heavens," [sitting on a throne] com-
pare such passages as Matt. xix. 28 ; Luke xxii. 28, 30 • i Cor. vi.
2, 3 ; Rev. ii. 26, 27, iii. 21.


9 Elucidation I


But, however, since the conduct according
to the divine rule is imperilled, not merely
by deeds, but likewise by words, (for, just as
it is written, " Behold the man and his
deeds ; " '^ so, " Out of thy own mouth shalt
thou be justified " '^), we ought to remember
that, even in luords, also the inroad of idolatry
must be foreguarded against, either from the
defect of custom or of timidity. The law
prohibits the gods of the nations from being
named, '9 not of course that we are not to pro-
nounce their names, the speaking of which
common intercourse extorts from us : for this
must very frequently be said, "You find him
in the temple of ^'Esculapius ; " and, " I live
in Isis Street;" and, "He has been made
priest of Jupiter ; " and much else after this
manner, since even on juen names of this kind
are bestowed. I do not honour Saturnus if I
call a man so, by his own name. I honour
him no more than I do Marcus, if I call a man
Marcus. But it says, " Make not mention of
the name of other gods, neither be it heard
from thy mouth." ^ The precept it gives is


10 *' Sacramentum" in Latin is, among other meanings, "a mili-
tary oath."

" Virgam." The vine switch, or rod, in the Roman army was
a mark of the centurion's (i.e., captain's) rank.

'2 To fasten the ephod ; hence the buckle worn by .soldiers here
referred to would probably be the belt buckle. Huckles were sonic-
times given as military rewards (White and Riddle).

'3 As soldiers with belts.

'4 Matt. xxvi. 52 ; 2 Cor. x. 4 ; St. John xviu. 36.

»3See Luke iii. 12, i-?.

•6 Matt. viii. <;, etc ; L.'.ke vii. i, etc.

17 Neither Oehler nor any editor seems to have discovered the
passage here referred to.

**Matt. xii. 37. — J T> I

»9 Ex. xxiii. 13 [St. Luke, nevertheless, names Castor and Pol-
lux, Acts xxviii. ii., on our author's principle.]

20 Ex. xxiii. 13.


74


ON IDOLATRY.


[chap. XXII.


this, that we do not call them ginls. For in
the first part of the law, too, "Thou shalt
not," saith He, "use the name of the Lord
thy God in a vain thing," ' that is, in an idol.=
Whoever, therefore, honours an idol with the
name of God, has fallen into idolatry. But
if I speak of them as gods, something must
be added to make it appear that / do not call
them gods. For even the Scripture names
"gods," but adds "their," viz. "of the na-
tions:" just as David does when he had
named "gods," where he says, "But the
I gods of the nations are demons." ^ But this
has been laid by me rather as a foundation
for ensuing observ^ations. However, it is a
defect of custom to say, " By Hercules, " So
help me the god of faith;"'' while to the
custom is added the ignorance of some, who
are ignorant that it is an oath by Hercules.
Further, what will an oath be, in the name of
gods whom you have forsworn, but a collusion
of faith with idolatry? For who does not
honour them in whose name he swears ?

CHAP. XXI. — OF SILENT ACQUIESCENCE IN
HEATHEN FORMULARIES.

But it is a mark of timidity, when some
other man binds you in the name of his gods,
by the making of an oath, or by some other
form of attestation, and you, for fear of dis-
/ covery,5 remain quiet. For you equally, by
remaining quiet, affirm their majesty, by
reason of which majesty you will seem to be
bound. What matters it, whether you affirm
the gods of the nations by calling them gods,
or by hearing them so called ? Whether you
swear by idols, or, when adjured by another,
acquiesce ? Why should we not recognize the
subtleties of Satan, who makes it his aim,
that, what he cannot efi'ect by our mouth, he
may effect by the mouth of his servants, in-
troducing idolatry into us through our ears ?
At all events, whoever the adjurer is, he binds
you to himself either in friendly or unfriendly
conjunction. If in unfriendly, you are now
challenged unto battle, and know that you
must fight. If in friendly, with how far greater
security will you transfer your engagement
unto the Lord, that you may dissolve the obli-
gation of him through whose means the Evil


I Ex. XX. 7.

3 Because Scripture calls idols " vanities " and " vain things."
See 2 Kings xvii. 15, Ps. xxiv. 4, Isa. lix. 4, Deut. xxxii. 21, etc.

' 3Ps. xcvi. 5. The I.XX. in whose version ed. Tisch. it is Ps.
' xcv. read fiaiM<>»'Ki, lil<e Tertullian. Our version has "idols."

4 Mehercule. Medius Fidius. I have given the rendering of
the latter, which seems preferred by Paley (Ov. Fast. vi. 213, note),
who considers it = vie dius (i.e., Deus) jlditis ju7>ct. Smith (Lat.
Did. s.v.') agrees with him, and explains it, me deus ftdius scrvet.
White and Riddk: (.r.r.) take the vtc (which appears to be short) as
a " demonstrative " particle or prefix, and explain. " By the God
of truth ! " " As true as heaven, ' " Most certainly."

5 i.e., for fear of being discovered to be a Christian (Oehler).


One was seeking to annex you to the honour
of idols, that is, to idolatry ! All sufferance
of that kind is idolatry. You honour those
to whom, when imposed as authorities, you
have rendered respect. I know that one
(whom the Lord pardon !), when it had been
said to him in public during a law-suit, " Ju-
piter be wroth with you," answered, " On the
contrary,with iw/. " What else would a heathen
have done who believed Jupiter to be a god?
For even had he not retorted the malediction
by Jupiter (or other such like), yet, by merely
returning a curse, he would have confirmed the
divinity of Jove, shewing himself irritated by
a malediction in Jove's name. For what is
there to be indignant at, (if cursed) in the name
of one whom you know to be nothing ? For
if you rave, you immediately affirm his ex-
istence, and the profession of your fear will
be an act of idolatry. How much more, while
you are returning the malediction in the name
of Jupiter himself, are you doing honour to
Jupiter in the same way as he who provoked
you ! But a believer ought to laugh in such
cases, not to rave ; nay, according to the pre-
cept,^ not to return a curse in the name of
God even, but clearly to bless in the name of
God, that you may both demolish idols and
preach God, and fulfil discipline. <^'

CHAP. XXII. — OF ACCEPTING BLESSING IN THE
NAME OF IDOLS.

Equally, one who has been initiated into
Christ will not endure to be blessed in the name
of the gods of the nations, so as not always to
reject the unclean benediction, and to cleanse
it out for himself by converting it Godward.
To be blessed in the name of the gods of the
nations is to be cursed in the name of God. If
I have given an alms, or shown any other
kindness, and the recipient pray that his gods,
or the Genius of the colony, may be pro-
pitious to me, my oblation or act will im-
mediately be an honour to idols, in whose
name he returns me the favour of blessing.
But why should he not know that I have done
it for God's sake ; that God may rather be
glorified, and demons may not be honoured
in that which I have done for the sake of God ?
If God sees that I have done it for His sake.
He equally sees that I have been unwilling
to sho7v that I did it for His sake, and have
in a manner made His precept ^ a sacrifice to
idols. Many say, " No one ought to divulge
himself;" but I think neither ought he to
deny himself. For whoever dissembles in any
cause whatever, by being held as a heathen.


6 See Matt. v. 44, i Pet. iii. 9, etc.

7 i.e., the precept which enjoins me


" do good and lend."


CHAP. XXIV.


ON IDOLATRY.


75


does deny; and, of course, all denial is idol-
y atry, just as all idolatry is denial, whether in
deeds or in words.'

CHAP. XXIII. — WRITTEN CONTRACTS IN THE
NAME OF IDOLS. TACIT CONSENT.

But there is a certain species of that class,
doubly sharpened in deed and word, and mis-
chievous on either side, although it flatter you,
as if it were free of danger in each; while it
does not seem to be a deed^ because it is not
laid hold of as a word. In borrowing money
from heathens under pledged ^ securities,
N Christia7is give a guarantee under oath, and
deny themselves to have dofie so. Of course, the
time of the prosecution, and the place of the
judgment seat, and the person of the presiding
judge, decide that they knew themselves to
have so do?ie. ^ Christ prescribes that there is to
be no swearing. " I wrote," says the debtor,
*' but I said nothing. It is the tongue, not
the written letter, which kills." Here I call
Nature and Conscience as my witnesses: Na-
ture, because even if the tongue in dictating
remains motionless and quiet, the hand can
write nothing which the soul has not dictated;
albeit even to the tongue itself the soul may
have dictated either something conceived by
itself, or else something delivered by another.
Now, lest it be said, "Another dictated," I
here appeal to Conscience whether, what an-
other dictated, the soul entertains,^ and trans-
mits unto the hand, whether with the concom-
itance or the inaction of the tongue. Enough,
that the Lord has said faults are committed in
the mind and the conscience. If concupiscence
or malice have ascended into a man's heart.
He saith it is held as a deed.s You therefore
have given a guarantee ; which clearly has "as-
cended into your heart," which you can
neither contend you were ignorant of nor un-
willing ; for when you gave the guarantee,
you knew that you did it; when you knew, of
course you were willing : you did it as well in


1 Elucidation III.

2 Or, " mortgaged."

3 This is, perhaps, the most obscure and difficult passage in the
entire treatise. I have followed Oehler's reading, and given what
appears to be his sense ; but the readings are widely different, and
it is doubtful whether any is correct. I can scarcely, however,
help thinking that the '^ se negant''' here, and the '' tamen non
tiesavV below, are to be connected with the "/?//<? autevt nee
negare " at the end of the former chapter ; and that the true ren-
dering is rather : " And [by so doing] deny themselves," i.e. deny
their Christian name and faith. "Doubtless a time of persecu-
tion," such as the present time is— or " of prosecution, which
would make very good sense—" and the place of the tribunal, and
the person of the presiding judge, require them to know them-
selves," i.e., to have no shuffling or disguise. 1 submit this ren-
dering with diffidence ; but it does seem to me to suit the context
better, and to harmonize better with the " Yet I have not denied,"
i.e., mv name and faith, which follows, and with the " denying
letters'" which are mentioned at the end of the chapter.— Tk.

4 Mr. Dodgson renders " conceiveth ;" and the word is cer-
tainly capable of that meaning.

5 See Matt. v. 28.


act as in thought ; nor can you by the lighter
charge exclude the heavier,*^ so as to say that it
is clearly rendered false, by giving a guarantee
I for what you do not actually perform. " Yet
I have not denied, because I have not sworn."
But you have s7vorn, since, even if you had
done no such thing, you would still be said to
swear, if you have even consented to so doing.
Silence of -voice is an unavailing plea in a aise
of writing ; and muteness of sound in a case
of letters. For Zacharias, when punished with
a temporary privation of voice^ holds colloquy
with his viindy and, passing by his bootless
tongue, with the help of his hands dictates
from his heart, and without his mouth pro-
nounces the name of his son.' Thus, in his
pen there speaks a hand clearer than every
sound, in his waxen tablet there is heard a
letter more vocal that every mouth. ^ In-
quire whether a man have spoken who is under-
stood to have spoken. 5 Pray we the Lord that
no necessity for that kind of contract may
ever encompass us; and if it should so fall out,
may He give our brethren the means of help-
ing us, or give us constancy to break off all such
necessity, lest those denying letters, the sub-
stitutes for our mouth, be brought forward
against us in the day of judgment, sealed with
the seals, not now of witnesses, but of angels !

CHAP. XXIV. — GENERAL CONCLUSION.

Amid these reefs and inlets, amid these
shallows and straits of idolatry. Faith, her
sails filled by the Spirit of God, navigates; 1/
safe if cautious, secure if intently watchful.
But to such as are washed overboard is a
deep whence is no out-swimming; to such as
are run aground is inextricable shipwreck; to
such as are engulphed is a whirlpool, where
there is no breathing — even in idolatry.
All waves thereof whatsoever suffocate; every
eddy thereof sucks down unto Hades. Let
no one say, " Who will so safely foreguard
himself? We shall have to go out of the
world ! " '° As if it were not as well worth
while to go out, as to stand in the world as
an idolater ! Nothing can be easier than
caution against idolatry, if the fear of it be
our leading fear; any " necessity " whatever


6 Oehler under<>tands " the lighter crime " or " charge " to be
"swearing;" the " heavier," to be "denying the Lord Christ."

7 See Luke i. 20, 22. 62, 63.

8 This is how Mr. Hodgson renders, and the rendering agrees
with Oehler's punctuation. [So obscure however, is Dodgson"s ren-
dering that I nave slightly changed the punctuation, to clarify it,
and subjoin Oehler's text.] But perhaps wc may read thus : " He
speaks in his pen ; he is heard in his waxen tablet : the hand is
clearer than every sound ; the letter is more vocal than every
mouth." [Oehler reads thus : " Cum manibus suis a corde dictat
et nomen filii sine ore pronuntiat: loquitur in stilo. auditur in cera
manus omni sono clarior, littera omni ore vocalior. ' I see no dif-
ficulty here.]

. 9 Elucidation IV.
JO I Cor. v. 10.


76


ELUCIDATIONS.


is too trifling compared to such a peril.
The reason why the Holy Spirit did, when
the apostles at that time were consulting,
relax the* bond and yoke for us,' was that
we might be free to devote ourselves to the
shunning of idolatry. This shall be our Law,
■ the more fully to be administered the more
ready it is to hand; (a Law) peculiar to Chris-
tians, by means whereof we are recognised
and examined by heathens. This Law must
be set before such as approach unto the Faith,
and inculcated on such as are entering 't;


» Acts XV. 1-31.


that, in approaching, they may deliberate;
observing it, may persevere; not observing it,
may renounce their name.' We will see to it,
if, after the type of the Ark, there shall be in
the Church raven, kite, dog, and serpent.
At all events, an idolater is not found in the
type of the Ark: no animal has been fashioned
to represent an idolater. Let not that be in
the Church which was not in the Ark. 3


2 i.e., cease to be Christians (Rigalt., referred to by Oehler).

3 [General references to Kaye (3d edition), which will be use-
ful to those consulting that author's TertuUian, for Elucidations of
the De Idololatria, are as follows: Fre/ace, p. xxiii. Then, pp.
56, 141, 206, 231, 300, 360, 343, 360 and 362.]


ELUCIDATIONS


(The Second Commandment, p. 64.)

Tertullian's teaching agrees with that of Clement of Alexandria* and with all the
Primitive Fathers. But compare the Trent Catechism, (chapter ii., quest. 17.) — "Nor let
any one suppose that this commandment prohibits the arts of painting, modelling or sculp-
ture, for^ in the Scriptures we are informed that God himself commanded images of
cherubim, and also of the brazen serpent, to be made, etc." So far, the comparison is
important, because while our author limits any inference from this instance as an exception,
this Catechism turns it into a mle: and so far, we are only looking at the matter with refer-
ence to Art. But, the Catechism, (questt. xxiii. xxiv.), goes on to teach that images of the
Saints, etc. ought to be made and honoured "as a holy practice." It affirms, also, that it
is a practice which has been attended with the greatest advantage to the faith/ id : which admits
of a doubt, especially when the honour thus mentioned is everywhere turned into worship,
precisely like that offered to the Brazen Serpent, when the People " burned incense to it,"
and often much more. But even this is not my point; for that Catechism, with what verity
need not be argued, affirms, also, that this doctrine ''''derives confrmation from the monu-
ments of the Apostolic age, the general Councils of the Church, and the writings of so many
jnost holy and learned Fathers, who are of otie accord upon the subject." Doubtless they
are " of one accord," but all the other jvay.


IL

(Military service, cap. xix., p. 73.)

This chapter must prepare us for a much more sweeping condemnation of the military
profession in the De Spectaculis and the De Corona ; but Neander's judgment seems to me
very just. The Corona, itself, is rather Montanistic than Montanist, in the opinion of some
critics, among whom Gibbon is not to count for much, for the reasons given by Kaye (p. 52),
and others hardly less obvious. Surely, if this ascetic opinion and some similar instances
were enough to mark a man as a heretic, what are we to say of the thousand crotchets
maintained by good Christians, in our day ?

4 See vol, II., p. 186, this series.


(


ELUCIDATIONS 'J^


III.

(Passive idolatry, cap. xxii., pp. 74, 75.)

Neander's opinion as to the freedom of Dc Idololatria from Montanistic taint, is mildly
questioned by Bp. Kaye, chiefly on the ground of the agreement of this chapter with the
extravagances of the Scorpiace, He thinks "the utmost pitch" of such extravagance is
reached in the positions here taken. But Neander's judgment seems to me preferable.
Lapsers usually give tokens of the bent of their minds, and unconsciously betray their incli-
nations before they themselves see whither they are tending. Thus they become victims of
their own plausible self-deceptions.

IV.

(Tacit consents and reservations, cap. xxiii., p. 75.)

It cannot be doubted that apart from the specific case which Tertullian is here maintain-
ing, his appeal to conscience is maintained by reason, by the Morals of the Fathers and by
Holy Scripture. Now compare with this the Morality which has been made dogmatic,
among Latins, by the elevation of Liguori to the dignities of a *' Saint " and a *' Doctor of
the Church." Even Cardinal Newman cannot accept it without reservations, so thoroughly
does it commit the soul to fraud and hyprocrisy. See Liguori, 0pp. Tom. 11. , pp. 34-44,
and Meyrick, Moral Theology of the Church of Rome, London, 1855. Republished, with an
Introduction, by the Editor of this Series, Baltimore, 1857. Also Newman, Apologia, p. 295
ct seqq.


Ill


THE SHOWS, OR DE SPECTACULIS,

[TRANSLATED BY THE REV. S. THELWALL.J


CHAP. I.

Ye Servants of God, about to draw near to
God, that you may make solemn consecration
of yourselves to Him,^ seek well to under-
stand the condition of faith, the reasons of
the Truth, the laws of Christian Discipline,
which forbid among other sins of the world,
the pleasures of the public shows. Ye who
have testified and confessed ^ that you have
done so already, review the subject, that there
may be no sinning whether through real or
wilful ignorance. For such is the power of
earthly pleasures, that, to retain the opportu-
nity of still partaking of them, it contrives to
prolong a wiUing ignorance, and bribes knowl-
edge into playing a dishonest part. To both
things, perhaps, some among you are allured
by the views of the heathens who in this mat-
ter are wont to press us with arguments, such
as these : (i) That the exquisite enjoyments
of ear and eye we have in things external are
not in the least opposed to religion in the |
mind and conscience ; and (2) That surely
no offence is offered to God, in any human
enjoyment, by any of our pleasures, which it
is not sinful to partake of in its own time and
place, with all due honour and reverence se-
cured to Him. But this is precisely what we
are ready to prove : That these things are not
consistent with true religion and true obedi-
ence to the true God. There are some who


1 [It is the opinion of Dr. Neander that this treatise proceeded
from our author before his lapse: but Bp. Kaye (p. xvi.) finds some
exaggerated expressions in it, concerning the military life which
savour of Montanism. Probably they do, but had he wntten the
tract as a professed Montanist, they would have been much less
ambiguous,in all probability. At all events, a work so colourless that
doctors can disagree about even its shading, must be regarded as
practically orthodox. Exaggerated expressions are but the char-
acteristics of the author's genius. We find the like in all writers of
strongly marked individuality. Neander dates this treatise circa
A.D. 197. That it was written at Carthage is the conviction of
Kave and Dr. Allix- see Kaye, p. 55.] . .

2 [He speaks of Catechumens, called elsewhere Novitioh. See
Bunsen, Hippol. III. Church and House-book, p. 5.]

3 [Here he addresses the Fideles or Commufiicants, as we call
them.]


imagine that Christians, a sort of people ever
ready to die, are trained into the abstinence
they practise, with no other object than that
of making it less difficult to despise life, the
fastenings to it being severed as it were.
They regard it as an art of quenching all de-
sire for that which, so far as they are con-
cerned, they have emptied of all that is de-
sirable ; and so it is thought to be rather a
thing of human planning and foresight, than
clearly laid down by divine command. It
were a grievous thing, forsooth, for Christians,
while continuing in the enjoyment of pleasures
so great, to die for God ! It is not as they
say ; though, if it were, even Christian obsti-
nacy might well give all submission to a plan
so suitable, to a rule so excellent.

CHAP. II.

Then, again, every one is ready with the
argument* that all things, as we teach, were
created by God, and given to man for his use,
and that they must be good, as coming all
from so good a source ; but that among them
are found the various constituent elements of
the public shows, such as the horse, the lion,
bodily strength, and musical voice. It can-
not, then, be thought that what exists by
God's own creative will is either foreign or
hostile to Him ; and if it is not opposed to
Him, it cannot be regarded as injurious to
His worshippers, as certainly it is not foreign
to them. Beyond all doubt, too, the very
buildings connected with the places of public
amusement, composed as they are of rocks,
stones, marbles, pillars, are things of God,
who has given these various things for the
earth's embellishment ; nay, the very scenes
are enacted under God's own heaven. How
skilful a pleader seems human wisdom to her-


4 [Kaye (p. 366), declare* that all the arguments urged in this
tract are comprised in two sentences of the Apology, cap. 38.]


So


THE SHOWS, OR DE SPECTACULIS.


[chap. III.


self, especially if she has the fear of losing
any of her delights — any of the sweet enjoy-
ments of worldly existence ! In fact, you will
find not a few whom the imperilling of their
pleasures rather than their life holds back
from us. For even the weakling has no
strong dread of death as a debt he knows is
due by him; while the wise man does not
look with contempt on pleasure, regarding it
as a precious gift — in fact, the one blessed-
ness of life, whether to philosopher or fool.
Now nobody denies what nobody is ignorant
of — for> Nature herself is teacher of it — that
God is the Maker of the universe, and that it
is good, and that it is man's by free gift of its
Maker. But having no intimate acquaintance
with the Highest, knowing Him only by natu-
ral revelation, and not as His "friends" —
afar off, and not as those who have been
brought nigh to Him — men cannot but be in
ignorance alike of what He enjoins and what
He forbids in regard to the administration of
His world. They must be ignorant, too, of
the hostile power which works against Him,
and perverts to wrong uses the things His
hand has formed * for you cannot know either
the will or the adversary of a God you do not
know. We must not, then, consider merely
by whom all things were made, but by whom
they have been perverted. We shall find
out for what use they were made at first, when
we find for what they were not. There is a
vast difference between the corrupted state
and that of primal purity, just because there
is a vast difference between the Creator and
the corrupter. Why, all sorts of evils, which
as indubitably evils even the heathens pro-
hibit, and against which they guard them-
selves, come from the works of God. Take,
for instance, murder, whether committed by
iron, by poison, or by magical enchantments.
Iron and herbs and demons are all equally
creatures of God. Has the Creator, withal,
provided these things for man's destruction ?
Nay, He puts His interdict on every sort of
man-killing by that one summary precept,
'*Thou shalt not kill." Moreover, who but
God, the Maker of the world, put in its gold,
brass, silver, ivory, wood, and all the other
materials used in the manufacture of idols ?
Yet has He done this that men may set up
a worship in opposition to Himself? On
the contrary, idolatry in His eyes is the crown-
ing sin. What is there offensive to God which
is not God's ? But in offending Him, it ceases
to be His ; and in ceasing to be His, it is in
His eyes an offending thing. Man himself,
guilty as he is of every iniquity, is not only a
work of God — he is His image, and yet both
in sojpi^l and body he has severed himself from


his Maker. For we did not get eyes to min-
ister to lust, and the tongue for speaking evil
with, and ears to be the receptacle of evil
speech, and the throat to serve the vice of
gluttony, and the belly to be gluttony's ally,
and the genitals for unchaste excesses, and
hands for deeds of violence, and the feet for
an erring life ; or was the soul placed in the
body that it might become a thought-manu-
factory of snares, and fraud, and injustice ?
I think not ; for if God, as the righteous ex-
actor of innocence, hates everything like ma-
lignity— if He hates utterly such plotting of
evil, it is clear beyond a doubt, that, of all
things that have come from His hand, He
has made none to lead to works which He
condemns, even though these same works
may be carried on by things of His making;
for, in fact, it is the one ground of condem-
nation, that the creature misuses the creation.
We, therefore, who in our knowledge of the
Lord have obtained some knowledge also of
His foe — who, in our discovery of the Creator,
have at the same time laid hands upon the
great corrupter, ought neither to wonder nor
to doubt that, as the prowess of the corrupt-
ing and God-opposing angel overthrew in the
beginning the virtue of man, the work and
image of God, the possessor of the world, so
he has entirely changed man's nature — cre-
ated, like his own, for perfect sinlessness — into
his own state of wicked enmity against his
Maker, that in the very thing whose gift to
man, but not to him, had grieved him, he
might make man guilty in God's eyes, and
set up his own supremacy.'

CHAP. III.

Fortified by tnis knowledge against heathen
views, let us rather turn to the unworthy rea-
sonings of our own people ; for the faith of
some, either too simple or too scrupulous,
demands direct authority from Scripture for
giving up the shows, and holds out that the
matter is a doubtful one, because such absti-
nence is not clearly and in words imposed
upon God's servants. Well, we never find
it expressed with the same precision, *' Thou
shalt not enter circus or theatre, thou shalt
not look on combat or show ; " as it is plainly
laid down, "Thou shalt not kill; thou shalt
not worship an idol ; thou shalt not commit
adultery or fraud."" But we find that that
first word of David bears on this very sort of
thing : " Blessed," he says, " is the man who
has not gone into the assembly of the impious.


* [For the dcmonology of this treatise, compare capp. lo, ?2, i^,.
2^, and see Kaye's full but condensed statement (pp. 201-204), in
his account 0/ the writings^ etc.]

a Ex. XX. 14.


CIIAl'. v.]


THE SHOWS, OR DE SPECTACULIS.


8l


nor stood in the way of sinners, nor sat in the
seat, of scorners."* Though he seems to
have predicted beforehand of that just
man, that he took no part in the meetings
and deHberations of the Jews, taking counsel
about the slaying of our Lord, yet divine
Scripture has ever far-reaching applications :
after the immediate sense has been exhausted,
in all directions it fortifies the practice of the
religious life, so that here also you have an
utterance which is not far from a plain inter-
dicting of the shows. If he called those few
Jews an assembly of the wicked, how much
more will he so designate so vast a gathering
of heathens ! Are the heathens less impious,
less sinners, less enemies of Christ, than the
Jews were then ? And see, too, how other
things agree. For at the shows they also
stand in the way. For they call the spaces
between the seats going round the amphi-
theatre, and the passages which separate the
people running down, ways. The place
in the curve where the matrons sit is called
a chair. Therefore, on the contrary, it
holds, unblessed is he who has entered
any council of wicked men, and has stood
in any way of sinners, and has sat in any
chair of scorners. We may understand a
thing as spoken generally, even when it re-
quires a certain special interpretation to be
given to it. ^or some things spoken with a
special reference contain in them general
truth. When God admonishes the Israelites
of their duty, or sharply reproves them. He
has surely a reference to all men ; when He
threatens destruction to Egypt and Ethiopia,
He surely pre-condemns every sinning nation
whatever. If, reasoning from species to gemis,
every nation that sins against them is an Egypt
and Ethiopia ; so also, reasoning from genus
to species, with reference to the origin of
shows, every show is an assembly of the
wicked.

CHAP. IV.

Lest any one think that we are dealing in
mere argumentative subtleties, I shall turn to
that highest authority of our " seal " itself.
When entering the water, we make profession
of the Christian faith in the words of its rule ;
we bear public testimony that we have re-
nounced the devil, his pomp, and his angels.
Well, is it not in connection with idolatry,
above all, that you have the devil with his
pomp and his angels ? from which, to speak
briefly — for I do not wish to dilate — you have
every unclean and wicked spirit. If, there-


I Pi?, i. 1. [Kaye's censure of this use of the text, (p. 366) seems
to me gratuitous.]


fore, it shall be made plain that the entire
apparatus of the shows is based upon idola-
try, beyond all doubt that will carry with it
the conclusion that our renunciatory testimony
in the laver of baptism has reference to the
shows, which, through their idolatry, have
been given over to the devil, and his pomp,
and his angels. We shall set forth, then,
their several origins, in what nursing-places
they have grown to manhood ; next the titles
of some of them, by what names they are
called ; then their apparatus, with what super-
stitions they are observed; ^then theif places,
to'what patrons they are deaicated;) then the
arts which minister to them, to what authors
they are traced. If any of these shall be found
to have had no connection with an idol-god,
it will be held as free at once from the taint
of idolatry, and as not coming within the
range of our baptismal abjuration.'

CHAP. V.

In the matter of their origins, as these are
somewhat obscure and but little known to
many among us, our invesfigations must go
back to a remote antiquity, and our author-
ities be none other than books of heathen
literature. Various authors are extant who
have published works on the subject. The
origin of the games as given by them is this.
Timaeus tells us that immigrants from Asia,
under the leadership of Tyrrhenus, who, in a
contest about his native kingdom, had suc-
cumbed to his brother,settled down in Etruria.
Well, among other superstitious observances
under the name of religion, they set up in
their new home public shows. The Romans,
at their own request, obtain from them skilled
performers — the proper seasons — the name
too, for it is said they are called Ludi, from
Lydi. And though Varro derives the name
of Ltidi from Ludus^ that is, from play, as
they called the Luperci also Ludii, because
they ran about making sport; still that sport-
ing of young men belongs, in his view, to
festal days and temples, and objects of re-
ligious veneration. However, it is of little
consequence the origin of the name, when it
is certain that the thing springs from idolatry.
The Liberalia, under the general designation
of Ludi, clearly declared the glory of Father
Bacchus; for to Bacchus these festivities were
first consecrated by grateful peasants, in re-
turn for the boon he conferred on them, as
they say, making known the pleasures of wine.


2 [Neander argues with great force that in referring to Scripture
and not at all to the " New Prophecy," our author shows his or-
thodoxy. We may add " that highest authority " to which he ap-
peals in this chapter.]


82


THE SHOWS, OR DE SPECTACULIS.


[chap. VIII.


Then the Consualia were called Ludi^ and at
first were in honour of Neptune, for Neptune
has the name of Consus also. Thereafter
Romulus dedicated the Equina to Mars,
though they claim the Consualia too for Rom-
ulus, on the ground that he consecrated them
to Consus, the god, as they will have it, of
counsel ; of the counsel, forsooth, in which
he planned the rape of the Sabine virgins for
wives to his soldiers. An excellent counsel
truly ; and still I suppose reckoned just and
righteous by the Romans themselves, I may
not say by God. This goes also to taint the
origin: you cannot surely hold that to be good
which has sprung from sin, from shameless-
ness, from violence, from hatred, from a
fratricidal founder, from a son of Mars. Even
now, at the first turning-post in the circus,
there is a subterranean altar to this same
Consus, with an inscription to this effect:
"Consus, great in counsel, Mars, in battle,
mighty tutelar deities." The priests of the
state sacrifice at it on the nones of July ; the
priest of Romulus and the Vestals on the
twelfth before the Kalends of September.
In addition to thi^, Romulus instituted games
in honor of Jupiter Feretrius on the Tarpeian
Hill, according to the statement Piso has
handed down to us, called both Tarpeian and
Capitoline. After him Numa Pompilius in-
stituted games to Mars and Robigo (for they
have also invented a goddess of rust); then
Tullus Hostilius ; then Ancus Martius; and
various others in succession did the like. As
to the idols in whose honour these games were
established, ample information is to be found
in the pages of Suetonius Tranquillus. But
we need say no more to prove the accusation
of idolatrous origin.

CHAP. VI.

To the testimony of antiquity is added that
of later games instituted in their turn, and
betraying their origin from the titles which
they bear even at the present day, in which
it is imprinted as on their very face, for what
idol and for what religious object games,
whether of the one kind or the other, were
designed. You have festivals bearing the
name of the great Mother ' and Apollo of Ceres
too, and Neptune, and Jupiter Latiaris, and
Flora, all celebrated for a common end; the
others have their religious origin in the birth-
days and solemnities of kings, in public suc-
cesses in municipal holidays. There are also
testamentary exhibitions, in which funeral
honours are rendered to the memories of pri-
vate .persons ; and this according to an insti-


[Cybele.]


tution of ancient times. For from the first
the " Ludi " were regarded as of two sorts,
sacred and funereal, that is in honour of the
heathen deities and of the dead. But in the
matter of idolatry, it makes no difference with
us under what name or title it is practised,
while it has to do with the wicked spirits whom
we abjure. If it is lawful to offer homage
to the dead, it will be just as lawful to offer
it to their gods: you have the same origin in
both cases; there is the same idolatry; there
is on our part the same solemn renunciation
of all idolatry.

CHAP. VII.

The two kinds of public games, then, have
one origin; and they have common names,
as owning the same parentage. So, too, as
they are equally tainted with the sin of idol-
atry, their foundress, they must needs be like
each other in their pomp. But the more am-
bitious preliminary display of the circus games
to which the name procession specially
belongs, is in itself the proof to whom
the whole thing appertains, in the many
images the long line of statues, the chariots
of all sorts, the thrones, the crowns, the
dresses. What high religious rites besides,
what sacrifices precede, come between, and
follow. How many guilds, how many priest-
hoods, how many offices are set astir, is known
to the inhabitants of the great city in which
the demon convention has its headquarters.
If these things are done in humbler style in
the provinces, in accordance with their inferior
means, still all circtis games must be counted
as belonging to that from which they are de-
rived; the fountain from which they spring
defiles them. The tiny streamlet from its
very spring-head, the little twig from its very
budding, contains in it the essential nature of
its origin. It may be grand or mean, no
matter, any circus procession whatever is
offensive to God. Though there be few im-
ages to grace it, there is idolatry in one;
though there be no more than a single sacred
car, it is a chariot of Jupiter : anything of
idolatry whatever, whether meanly arrayed
or modestly rich and gorgeous, taints it in its
origin.

CHAP. VIII.

To follow out my plan in regard to places:
the circus is chiefly consecrated to the Sun,
whose temple stands in the middle of it, and
whose image shines forth from its temple
summit; for they have not thought it pro-
per to pay sacred honours underneath a roof
to an object they have itself in open space.


'CHAP. X.]


THE SHOWS, OR DR SPECTACULIS.


83


Those who assert that the first spectacle was

exhibited by Circe, and in honour of the Sun
her father, as they will have it, maintain also
the name of circus wag derived from her.
Plainly, then, the enchantress did this in the
name of the parties whose priestess she was
— I mean the demons and spirits of evil.
What an aggregation of idolatries you see,
accordingly, in the decoration of the place !
Every ornament of the circus is a temple by
itself. The eggs are regarded as sacred to
the Castors, by men who are not ashamed to
profess faith in their production from the egg
of a swan, which was no other than Jupiter
himself. The Dolphins vomit forth in honour
of Neptune. Images of Sessia, so called as
the goddess of sowing; of Messia, so called as
the goddess of reaping; of Tutulina, so called
as the fruit-protecting deity — load the pillars.
In front of these you have three altars to
these three gods — Great, Mighty, Victorious.
They reckon these of Samo-Thrace. The
huge Obelisk, as Hermeteles affirms, is set
up in public to the Sun; its inscription, like
its origin, belongs to Egyptian superstition.
•Cheerless were the demon-gathering without
their Mater Magna; and so she presides there
over the Euripus. Consus, as we have men-
tioned, lies hidden under ground at the Mur-
cian Goals. These two sprang from an idol.
For they will have it that Murcia is the god-
dess of love; and to her, at that spot, they
have consecrated a temple. See, Christian,
how many impure names have taken posses-
sion of the circus ! You have nothing to do
-with a sacred place which is tenanted by such
multitudes of diabolic spirits. And speaking
of places, this is the suitable occasion for some
remarks in anticipation of a point that some
will raise. What, then, you say; shall I be
in danger of pollution if I go to the circus
when the games are not being celebrated ?
There is no law forbidding the mere places to
us. Fornotonly the places for show-gather-
ings, but even the temples, may be entered
without any peril of his religion by the servant
of God, if he has only some honest reason
for it, unconnected with their proper business
and ofificial duties. Why, even the streets,
and the market-place, and the baths, and the
taverns, and our very dwelling-places, are not
altogether free from idols. Satan and his
angels have filled the whole world. It is not
by merely being in the world, however, that
we lapse from God, but by touching and taint-
ing ourselves with the world's sins. I shall
break with my Maker, that is, by going to the
Capitol or the temple of Serapis to sacrifice
or adore, as I shall also do by going as a
spectator to the circus and the theatre. The


places in themselves do not contaminate, but
what is done in them; from this even the
places themselves, we maintain, become de-
filed. The polluted things pollute us. It is
on this account that we set before you to whom
places of the kind are dedicated, that we
may prove the things which are done in them
to belong to the idol-patrons to whom the very
places are sacred.'

CHAP. IX.

Now as to the kind of performances peculiar
to the circus exhibitions. In former day?
equestrianism was practised in a simple way
on horseback, and certainly its ordinary use
had nothing sinful in it ; but when it was
dragged into the games, it passed from the
service of God into the employment of de-
mons. Accordingly this kind of circus per-
formances is regarded as sacred to Castor and
Pollux, to whom, Stesichorus tells us, horses
were given by Mercury. And Neptune, too,
is an equestrian deity, by the Greeks called
Hippius. In regard to the team, they have
consecrated the chariot ancj four to the sun ;
the chariot and pair to the moon. But, as the
poet has it, " Erichthonius first dared to yoke
four horses to the chariot, and to ride upon
its wheels with victorious swiftness." Erich-
thonius, the son of Vulcan and Minerva, fruit
of unworthy passion upon earth, is a demon-
monster, nay, the devil himself, and no mere
snake. But if Trochilus the Argive is maker
of the first chariot, he dedicated that work of
his to Juno. If Romulus first exhibited the
four-horse chariot at Rome, he too, I think,
has a place given him among idols, at least if
he and Quirinus are the same. But as char-
iots had such inventors, the charioteers were
naturally dressed, too, in the colours of idola-
try ; for at first these were only two, namely
white and red, — the former sacred to the
winter with its glistening snows, the latter sa-
cred to the summer with its ruddy sun : but
afterwards, in the progress of luxury as well
as of superstition, red was dedicated by some
to Mars, and white by others to the Zephyrs,
while green was given to Mother Earth, or
spring, and azure to the sky and sea, or au-
tumn. But as idolatry of every kind is con-
demned by God, that form of it surely shares
the condemnation which is offered to the ele-
ments of nature.

CHAP. X.

Let us pass on now to theatrical exhibitions,
which we have already shown have a common


I [Very admirable reflections on this chapter may be found in
Kaye, pp. 362-3.]


84


THE SHOWS, OR DE SPECTACULIS.


[chap. xk.


origin with the circus, and bear like idolatrous
designations — even as from the first they have
borne the name of " Ludi," and equally min-
ister to idols. They resemble each other also
in their pomp, having the same procession to
the scene of their display from temples and
altars, and that mournful profusion'of incense
and blood, with music of pipes and trumpets,
all under the direction of the soothsayer and
the undertaker, those two foul masters of
funeral rites and sacrifices. So as we went
on from the origin of the " Ludi " to the circus
games, we shall now direct our course thence
to those of the theatre, beginning with the
place of exhibition. At first the theatre was
properly a temple of Venus ; and, to speak
briefly, it was owing to this that stage perform-
ances were allowed to escape censure, and
got a footing in the world. For ofttimes the
censors, in the interests of morality, put down
above all the rising theatres, foreseeing, as
they did, that there was great danger of their
leading to a general profligacy ; so that already,
from this accordance of their own people with
us, there is a witness to the heathen, and in
the anticipatory judgment of human knowl-
edge even a confirmation of our views. Ac-
cordingly Pompey the Great, less only than
his theatre, when he had erected that citadel
of all impurities, fearing some time or other
censorian condemnation of his memory, su-
perposed on it a temple of Venus ; and sum-
moning by public proclamation the people to
its consecration, he called it not a theatre,
but a temple, " under which," said he, "we
have placed tiers of seats for viewing the
shows." So he threw a veil over a structure
on which condemnation had been often passed,
and which is ever to be held in reprobation,
by pretending that it was a sacred place ; and
by means of superstition he blinded the eyes
of a virtuous discipline. But Venus and Bac-
chus are close allies. These two evil spirits
are in sworn confederacy with each other, as
the patrons of drunkenness and lust. So the
theatre of Venus is as well the house of Bac-
chus: for they properly gave the name of Lib-
eralia also to other theatrical amusements —
which besides being consecrated to Bacchus
(as were the Dionysia of the Greeks), were
instituted by him ; and, without doubt, the
performances of the theatre have the common
patronage of these two deities. That im-
modesty of gesture and attire which so spe-
cially and peculiarly characterizes the stage
are consecrated to them — the one deity wan-
ton by her sex, the other by his drapery ;
while its services of voice, and song, and lute,
and pipe, belong to Apollos, and Muses, and
Minervas, and Mercuries. You will hate, O


Christian, the things whose authors must be
the objects of your utter detestation. So we
would now make a remark about the arts of
the theatre, about tl^e things also whose au-
thors in the names we execrate. We know
that the names of the dead are nothing, as
are their images ; but we know well enough,
too, who, when images are set up, under these
names carry on their wicked work, and exult
in the homage rendered to them, and pretend
to be divine — none other than spirits accursed,
than devils. We see, therefore, that the arts
also are consecrated to the service of the be-
ings who dwell in the names of their founders ;
and that things cannot be held free from the
taint of idolatry whose inventors have got a
place among the gods for their discoveries.
Nay, as regards the arts, we ought to have
gone further back, and barred all further ar-
gument by the position that the demons, pre-
determining in their own interests from the
first, among other evils of idolatry, the pollu-
tions of the public shows, with the object of
drawing man away from his Lord and binding
him to their own service, carried out their pur-
pose by bestowing on him the artistic gifts
which the shows require. For none but them-
selves would have made provision and prepara-
tion for the objects they had in view ; nor
would they have given the arts to the world by
any but those in whose names, and images,
and histories they set up for their own ends
the artifice of consecration.

CHAP. XI.

In fulfilment of our plan, let us now go on
to consider the coipbats. Their origin is akin
to that of the games (ludi). Hence they are
kept as either sacred or funereal, as they have
been instituted in honour of the idol-gods of
the nations or of the dead. Thus, too, they
are called Olympian in honour of Jupiter,
known at Rome as the Capitoline ; Nemean,
in honour of Hercules ; Isthmian, in honour
of Neptune ; the rest viflrfuarii, as belonging
to the dead. What wonder, then, if idolatry
pollutes the combat-parade with profane
crowns, with sacerdotal chiefs, with attendants
belonging to the various colleges, last of all
with the blood of its sacrifices ? To add a
completing word about the " place " — in the
common place for the college of the arts sa-
cred to the Muses, and Apollo, and Minerva,
and also for that of the arts dedicated to Mars,
they with contest and sound of trumpet emu-
late the circus in tlie arena, which is a real
temple — I mean of the god whose festivals it
celebrates. The gymnastic arts also origi-
nated with their Castors, and Herculeses, and
1 Mercuries.


CHAP. XIV.]


THE SHOWS, OR DE SPECTACULIS.


85


CHAP. XII.

It remains for us to examine the '* specta-
cle " most noted of all, and in highest favour.
It is called a dutiful service {munus), from its
being an office, for it bears the name of ''^offi-
ciutti'' as well as ^'' mmius.'' The ancients
thought that in this solemnity they rendered
offices to the dead ; at a later period, with a
cruelty more refined, they somewhat modified
its character. For formerly, in the belief that
the souls of the departed were appeased by
human blood, they were in the habit of buying
captives or slaves of wicked disposition, and
immolating them in their funeral obsequies.
Afterwards they thought good to throw the
veil of pleasure over their iniquity.* Those,
therefore, whom they had provided for the
combat, and then trained in arms as best they
could, only that they might learn to die, they,
on the funeral day, killed at the places of
sepulture. They alleviated death by murders.
Such is the origin of the " Munus." But by
degrees their refinement came up to their
cruelty ; for these human wild beasts could
not find pleasure exquisite enough, save in
the spectacle of men torn to pieces by wild
beasts. Offerings to propitiate the dead then
were regarded as belonging to the class of
funeral sacrifices ; and these are idolatry : for
idolatry, in fact, is a sort of homage to the
departed ; the one as well as the other is a
service to dead men. Moreover, demons have
abode in the images of the dead. To refer
also to the matter of names, though this sort
of exhibition has passed from honours of the
dead to honours of the living, I mean, to
qusestorships and magistracies — to priestly
offices of different kinds ; yet, since idolatry
still cleaves to the dignity's name, whatever
is done in its name partakes of its impurity.
The same remark will apply to the procession
of the " Munus," as we look at that in the
pomp which is connected with these honours
themselves; for the purple robes, the fasces,
the fillets the crowns, the proclamations too,
and edicts, the sacred feasts of the day before,
are not without the pomp of the devil, without
invitation of demons. What need, then, of
dwelling on the place of horrors, which is too
much even for the tongue of the perjurer ? For
the amphitheatre =" is consecrated to names
more numerous and more dire^ than is the
Capitol itself, temple of all demons as it is.
There are as many unclean spirits there as it


1 [The authority of Tertullian, in this matter, is accepted by the
critics, as of historic importance.]

2 [Though this was probably written at Carthage, his reference
to the Flavian theatre in this place is plain from the immediate
comparison with the Capitol.]

3 [To the mfernal deities and first of all to Pluto. See vol. I.
note 6, p. 131, this Series.]


holds men. To conclude with a single remark
about the arts which have a place in it, we
know that its two sorts of amusement have for
their patrons Mars and Diana.

CHAP. XIII.

We have, I think, faithfully carried out our
plan of showing in how many different ways
the sin of idolatry clings to the shows, in re-
spect of their origins, their titles, their equip-
ments, their places of celebration, their arts;
and we may hold it as a thing beyond all doubt,
that for us who have twice* renounced all
idols, they are utterly unsuitable. *' Not that
an idol is anything," s as the apostle says, but
that the homage they render is to demons,
who are the real occupants of these conse-
crated images, whether of dead men or (as
they think) of gods. On this account, there-
fore, because they have a common source —
for their dead and their deities are one — we
abstain from both idolatries. Nor do we dis-
like the temples less than the monuments: we
have nothing to do with either altar, we adore
neither image; we do not offer sacrifices to
the gods, and we make no funeral oblations
to the departed; nay, we do not partake of
what is offered either in the one case or the
other, for we cannot partake of God's feast
and the feast of devils. ** If, then, we keep
throat and belly free from such defilements,
how much more do we withhold our nobler
parts, our ears and eyes, from the idolatrous
and funereal enjoyments, which are not passed
through the body, but are digested in the very
spirit and soul, whose purity, much more than
that of our bodily organs, God has a right to
claim from us.

CHAP. XIV.

Having sufficiently established the charge
of idolatry, which alone ought to be reason
enough for our giving up the shows, let us
now ex abundanti look at the subject in an-
other way, for the sake of those especially
who keep themselves comfortable in the
thought that the abstinence we urge is not in
so many words enjoined, as if in the condem-
nation of the lusts of the world there was not
involved a sufficient declaration against all
these amusements. For as there is a lust of
money, or rank, or eating, or impure enjoy-
ment, or glory, so there is also a lust of pleas-
ure. But the show is just a sort of pleasure.
I think, then, that under the general designa-
tion of lusts, pleasures are included; in like
manner, under the general idea of pleasures,


4[Bun5en^ Hippol. vol. III. pp. 70-22.']

5 I Cor. viii. 4.

6 I Cor. X. 21.


86


THE SHOWS, OR DE SPECTACULIS.


[chap. XVII.


you have as a specific class the "shows." But
we have spoken already of how it is with the
places of exhibition, that they are not pollut-
ing in themselves, but owing to the things
that are done in them from which they im-
bibe impurity, and then spirt it again on
others.

CHAP. XV.

Having done enough, then, as we have said,
in regard to that principal argument, that
there is in them all the taint of idolatry — hav-
ing sufficiently dealt with that, let us now
contrast the other characteristics of the show
with the things of God. God has enjoined us
to deal calmly, gently, quietly, and peacefully
with the Holy Spirit, because these things
are alone in keeping with the goodness of His
nature, with His tenderness and sensitiveness,
and not to vex Him with rage, ill-nature,
anger, or grief. Well, how shall this be made
to accord with the shows ? For the show al-
ways leads to spiritual agitation, since where
there is pleasure, there is keenness of feeling
giving pleasure its zest; and where there is
keenness of feeling, there is rivalry giving in
turn its zest to that. Then, too, where you
have rivalry, you have rage, bitterness, wrath,
and grief, with all bad things which flow from
them — the whole entirely out of keeping with
the religion of Christ. For even suppose one
should enjoy the shows in a moderate way, as
befits his rank, age or nature, still he is not
undisturbed in mind, without some unuttered
movings of the inner man. No one partakes
of pleasures such as these without their strong
excitements; no one comes under their ex-
citements without their natural lapses. These
lapses, again, create passionate desire. If
there is no desire, there is no pleasure, and
he is chargeable with trifling who goes where
nothing is gotten; in my view, even that is
foreign to us. Moreover, a man pronounces
his own condemnation in the very act of taking
his place among those with whom, by his dis-
inclination to be like them, he confesses he
has no sympathy. It is not enough that we
do no such things ourselves, unless we break
all connection also with those who do. " If
thou sawest a thief," says the Scripture,
" thou consentedst with him." ' Would that
we did not even inhabit the same world with
these wicked men ! But though that wish
cannot be realized, yet even now we are
separate from them in what is of the world;
for the world is God's, but the worldly is the
devil's.


» Ps. xlix. i8. [This chapter bears on modern theatres.]


CHAP. XVI.

Since, then, all passionate excitement is
forbidden us, we are debarred from every
kind of spectacle, and especially from the
circus, where such excitement presides as in
its proper element. See the people coming
to it already under strong emotion, already
tumultuous, already passion-blind, already
agitated about their bets. The praetor is too
slow for them: their eyes are ever rolling as
though along with the lots in his urn ; then
they hang all eager on the signal ; there is
the united shout of a common madness.
Observe how " out of themselves " they are
by their foolish speeches. " He has thrown
it ! " they exclaim ; and they announce each
one to his neighbour what all have seen. I
have clearest evidence of their blindness ;
they do not see what is really thrown. They
think it a " signal cloth," but it is the like-
ness of the devil cast headlong from on high.
And the result accordingly is, that they fly
into rages, and passions, and discords, and
all that they who are consecrated to peace
ought never to indulge in. Then there are
curses and reproaches, with no cause of ha-
tred ; there are cries of applause, with noth-
ing to merit them. What are the partakers
in all this — not their own masters — to obtain
of it for themselves ? unless, it may be, that
which makes them not their own : they are
saddened by another's sorrow, they are glad-
dened by another's joy. Whatever they
desire on the one hand, or detest on the
other, is entirely foreign to themselves. Sa
love with them is a useless thing, and, hatred
is unjust. Or is a causeless love perhaps
more legitimate than a causeless hatred ?
God certainly forbids us to hate even with a
reason for our hating ; for He commands us
to love our enemies. God forbids us to curse,
though there be some ground for doing so,
in commanding that those who curse us we
are to bless. But what is more merciless than
the circus, where people do not spare even
their rulers and fellow-citizens ? If any of
its madnesses are becoming elsewhere in the
saints of God, they will be seemly in the cir-
cus too; but if they are nowhere right, so
neither are they there.

CHAP. XVII.

Are we not, in like manner, enjoined to
put away from us all immodesty? On this
ground, again, we are excluded from the
theatre, which is immodesty's own peculiar
abode, where nothing is in repute but what
elsewhere is disreputable. So the best path
to the highest favour of its god is the vileness


CHAP. XIX.]


THE SHOWS, OR DE SPECTACULIS.


87


which the Atellan ' gesticulates, which the
buffoon in woman's clothes exhibits, destroy-
ing all natural modesty, so that they blush
more readily at home than at the play, which
finally is done from his childhood on the per-
son of the pantomime, that he may become an
actor. The very harlots, too, victims of the
public lust, are brought upon the stage, their
misery increased as being there in the pres-
ence of their own sex, from whom alone they
are wont to hide themselves: they are paraded
publicly before every age and every rank —
their abode, their gains, their praises, are set
forth, and that even in the hearing of those
who should not hear such things. I say noth-
ing about other matters, which it were good
to hide away in their own darkness and their
own gloomy caves, lest they should stain the
light of day. Let the Senate, let all ranks,
blush for very shame ! Why, even these miser-
able women, who by their own gestures de-
stroy their modesty, dreading the light of day,
and the people's gaze, know something of
shame at least once a year. But if we ought
to abominate all that is immodest, on what
ground is it right to hear what we must not
speak ? For all licentiousness of speech, nay,
every idle word, is condemned by God.
Why, in the same way, is it right to look on
what it is disgraceful to do ? How is it that
the things which defile a man in going out of
his mouth, are not regarded as doing so when
they go in at his eyes and ears — when eyes
and ears are the immediate attendants on the
spirit — and that can never be pure whose serv-
ants-in-waiting are impure ? You have the
theatre forbidden, then, in the forbidding of
immodesty. If, again, we despise the teach-
ing of secular literature as being foolishness
in God's eyes, our duty is plain enough in
regard to those spectacles, which from this
source derive the tragic or comic play. If
tragedies and comedies are the bloody and
wanton, the impious and licentious inventors
of crimes and lusts, it is not good even that
there should be any calling to remembrance
the atrocious or the vile. What you reject in
deed, you are not to bid welcome to in word.

CHAP. XVIII.

But if you argue that the racecourse is
mentioned in Scripture, I grant it at once.
But you will not refuse to admit that the
things which are done there are not for you
to look upon: the blows, and kicks, and cuffs,
and all the recklessness of hand, and every-


I [The ludi Atellani were so called from Atella, in Campania,
where a vast amphitheatre delighted the inhabitants. Juvenal,
Sat. vi. 71. The like disgrace our times.]


thing like that disfiguration of the human
countenance, which is nothing less than the
disfiguration of God's own image. You will
never give your approval to those foolish
racing and throwing feats, and yet more fool-
ish leapings; you will never find pleasure in
injurious or useless exhibitions of strength;
certainly you will not regard with approval
those efforts after an artificial body which
aim at surpassing the Creator's work; and
you will have the very opposite of compla-
cency in the athletes Greece, in the inactivity
of peace, feeds up. And the wrestler's art
is a devil's thing. The devil wrestled with,
and crushed to death, the first human beings.
Its very attitude has power in it of the serpent
kind, firm to hold — tortures to clasp — slippery
to glide away. You have no need of crowns;
why do you strive to get pleasures from
crowns ?

CHAP. XIX.

We shall now see how the Scriptures con-
demn the amphitheatre. If we can maintain
that it is right to indulge in the cruel, and
the impious, and the fierce, let us go there.
If we are what we are said to be, let us regale
ourselves there with human blood. It is
good, no doubt, to have the guilty punished.
Who but the criminal himself will deny that ?
And yet the innocent can find no pleasure in
another's sufferings: he rather mourns that
a brother has sinned so heinously as to need a
punishment so dreadful. But who is my
guarantee that it is always the guilty who are
adjudged to the wild beasts, or to some other
doom, and that the guiltless never suffer from
the revenge of the judge, or the weakness of
the defence, or the pressure of the rack ?
How much better, then, is it for me to remain
ignorant of the punishment inflicted on the
wicked, lest I am obliged to "know also of the
good coming to untimely ends — if I may speak
of goodness in the case at all ! At any rate,
gladiators not chargeable with crime are
offered in sale for the games, that they may be-
come the victims of the public pleasure. Even
in the case of those who are judicially con-
demned to the amphitheatre, what a mon-
strous thing it is, that, in undergoing their
punishment, they, from some less serious
delinquency, advance to the criminality of
manslayers ! But I mean these remarks for
heathen. As to Christians, I shall not insult
them by adding another word as to the aver-
sion with which they should regard this sort
of exhibition; though no one is more able
than myself to set forth fully the whole sub-
ject, unless it be one who is still in the habit .


88


THE SHOWS, OR DE SPECTACULIS.


[chap. XXII.


of going to the shows. I would rather withal
be incomplete than set memory a-working.'

CHAP. XX.

How vain, then — nay, how desperate — is
the reasoning of persons, who, just because
they decline to lose a pleasure, hold out that
we cannot point to the specific words or the
very place where this abstinence is men-
tioned, and where the servants of God are
directly forbidden to have anything to do
with such assemblies ! I heard lately a novel
defence of himself by a certain play-lover.
"The sun," said he, "nay, God Himself,
looks down from heaven on the show, and no
pollution is contracted." Yes, and the sun,
too, pours down his rays into the common
sewer without being defiled. As for God,
would that all crimes were hid from His eye,
that we might all escape judgment ! But He
looks on robberies too ; He looks on false-
hoods, adulteries, frauds, idolatries, and
these same shows ; and precisely on that
account 7ve will not look on them, lest the All-
seeing see us. You are, putting on the same
level, O man, the criminal and the judge ;
the criminal who is a criminal because he is
seen, and the Judge who is a Judge because
He sees. Are we set, then, on playing the
madman outside the circus boundaries ? Out-
side the gates of the theatre are we bent on
lewdness, outside the course on arrogance,
and outside the amphitheatre on cruelty, be-
cause outside the porticoes, the tiers and the
curtains, too, God has eyes? Never and
nowhere is that free from blame which God
ever condemns ; never and nowhere is it right
to do what you may not do at all times and
in all places. It is the freedom of the truth
from change of opinion and varying judgments
which constitutes its perfection, and gives it
its claims to full mastery, unchanging rever-
ence, and faithful obedience. That which is
really good or really evil cannot be ought else.
But in all things the truth of God is immu-
table.

CHAP. XXI.

The heathen, who have not a full revelation
of the truth, for they are not taught of God,
hold a thing evil and good as it suits self-will
and passion, making that which is good in one
place evil in another, and that which is evil in
one place in another good. So it strangely
happens, that the same man who can scarcely
in public lift up his tunic, even when neces-
sity of nature presses him, takes it off in the


' [See Kaye, p. ii. This expression is thought to confirm the
probability of Tertullian's original Gentilism.]


circus, as if bent on exposing himself before
everybody; the father who carefully protects
and guards his virgin daughter's ears from
every polluting word, takes her to the theatre
himself, exposing her to all its vile words and
attitudes; he, again, who in the streets lays
hands on or covers with reproaches the brawl-
ing pugilist, in the arena gives all encourage-
ment to combats of a much more serious
kind ; and he who looks with horror on the
corpse of one who has died under the common
law of nature, in the amphitheatre gazes
down with most patient eyes on bodies all
mangled and torn and smeared with their own
blood; nay, the very man who comes to the
show, because he thinks murderers ought to
suffer for their crime, drives the unwilling
gladiator to the murderous deed with rods
and scourges; and one who demands the lion
for every manslayer of deeper dye, will have
the staff for the savage swordsman, and re-
wards him with the cap of liberty. Yes and
he must have the poor victim back again,
that he may get a sight of his face — with
zest inspecting near at hand the man whom
he wished torn in pieces at safe distance from
him: so much the more cruel he if that was
not his wish.


CHAP. XXII.

What wonder is there in it ? Such incon-
sistencies as these are just such as we might
expect from men, who confuse and change
the nature of good and evil in their incon-
stancy of feeling and fickleness in judgment.
Why, the authors and managers of the spec-
tacles, in that very respect with reference to
which they highly laud the charioteers, and
actors, and wrestlers, and those most loving
gladiators, to whom men prostitute their
souls, women too their bodies, slight and
trample on them, though for their sakes they
are guilty of the deeds they reprobate; nay,
they doom them to ignominy and the loss of
their rights as citizens, excluding them from
the Curia, and the rostra, from senatorial and
equestrian rank, and from all other honours
as well as certain distinctions. What perver-
sity ! They have pleasure in those whom yet
they punish; they put all slights on those to
whom, at the same time, they award their
approbation; they magnify the art and brand
the artist. What an outrageous thing it is,
to blacken a man on account of the very
things which make him meritorious in their
eyes ! Nay, what a confession that the things
are evil, when their authors, even in highest
favour, are not without a mark of disgrace
upon them !


x.w.]


THE SHOWS, OR DE SPECTACULIS.


89


CHAP. XXIII.

Seeing, then, man's own reflections, even
in spite of the sweetness of pleasure, lead him
to think that people such as these should be
condemned to a hapless lot of infamy, losing
all the advantages connected with the posses-
sion of the dignities of life, how much more
does the divine righteousness inflict punish-
ment on those who give themselves to these
arts ! Will God have any pleasure in the
charioteer who disquiets so many souls, rouses
up so many furious passions, and creates so
many various moods, either crowned like a
priest or wearing the colours of a pimp, —
-decked out by the devil that he may be whirled
away in his chariot, as though with the object
of taking off Elijah ? Will He be pleased with
him who applies the razor to himself, and
completely changes his features; who, with
no respect for his face, is not content with
making it as like as possible to Saturn and
Isis and Bacchus, but gives it quietly over to
contumelious blows, as if in mockery of our
Lord ? The devil, forsooth, makes it part,
too, of his teaching, that the cheek is to be
meekly offered to the smiter. In the same
way, with their high shoes, he has made the
tragic actors taller, because " none can add a
cubit to his stature." ^ His desire is to make
Christ a liar. And in regard to the wearing
of masks, I ask is that according to the mind
of God, who forbids the making of every like-
ness, and especially then the likeness of man
who is His own image ? The Author of truth
hates all the false; He regards as adultery all
that is unreal. Condemning, therefore, as
He does hypocrisy in every form. He never
will approve any putting on of voice, or sex,
or age; He never will approve pretended
loves, and wraths, and groans, and tears.
Then, too, as in His law it is declared that
the man is cursed who attires himself in female
garments,^ what must be His judgment of the
pantomime, who is even brought up to play the
woman ! And will the boxer go unpunished ?
I suppose he received these ccestus-scars, and
the thick skin of his fists, and these growths
upon his ears, at his creation ! God, too, gave
him eyes for no other end than that they
might be knocked out in fighting ! I say
nothing of him who, to save himself, thrusts
another in the lion's way, that he may not be
too little of a murderer when he puts to death
that very same man on the arena.

CHAP. XXIV.

In how many other ways shall we yet further


Matt. vi. 27.
■ Deut. xxii.


show that nothing which is peculiar to the
shows has God's approval, or without that ap-
proval is becoming in God's servants ? If we
have succeeded in making it plain that they
were instituted entirely for the devil's sake,
and have been got up entirely with the devil's
things (for all that is not God's, or is not
pleasing in His eyes, belongs to His wicked
rival), this simply means that in them you
have that pomp of the devil which in the
"seal" of our faith we abjure. We should
have no connection with the things which we
abjure, whether in deed or word, whether by
looking on them or looking forward to them;
but do we not abjure and rescind that baptis-
mal pledge, when we cease to bear its testi-
mony ? Does it then remain for us to apply
to the heathen themselves. Let them tell
us, then, whether it is right in Christians to
frequent the show. Why, the rejection of
these amusements is the chief sign to them
that a man has adopted the Christian faith.
If any one, then, puts away the faith's dis-
tinctive badge, he is plainly guilty of denying
it. What hope can you possibly retain in re-
gard to a man w^ho does that ? When you go
over to the enemy's camp, you throw down
your arms, desert the standards and the oath
of allegiance to your chief: you cast in your
lot for life or death with your new friends.

CHAP. XXV.

Seated where there is nothing of God, will
one be thinking of his Maker ? Will there be
peace in his soul when there is eager strife
there for a charioteer ? Wrought up into a
frenzied excitement, will he learn to be
modest? Nay, in the whole thing he will
meet with no greater temptation than that gay
attiring of the men and women. The very
intermingling of emotions, the very agree-
ments and disagreements with each other in
the bestowment of their favours, wliere you
have such close communion, blow up the
sparks of passion. And then there is scarce
any other object in going to the show, but to
see and to be seen. When a tragic actor is
declaiming, will one be giving thought to pro-
phetic appeals ? Amid the measures of the
effeminate player, will he call up to himself
a psalm ? And when the athletes are hard at
struggle, will he be ready to proclaim that
there must be no striking again ? And with
his eye fixed on the bites of bears, and the
sponge-nets of the net-fighters, can he be
moved by compassion ? May God avert from
His people any such passionate eagerness after
a cruel enjoyment ! For how monstrous it is
to go from God's church to the devil's — from


90


THE SHOWS, OR DE SPECTACULIS.


[chap, xxix^


the sky to the stye,' as they say; to raise your
hands to God, and then to weary them in the
applause of an actor; out of the mouth, from
which you uttered Amen over the Holy Thing,
to give witness in a gladiator's favour; to cry
"forever" to any one else but God and
Christ !

CHAP. XXVI.

Why may not those who go into the temp-
tations of the show become accessible also to
evil spirits ? We have the case of the woman
— the Lord Himself is witness — who went to
the theatre, and came back possessed. In
the outcasting,'' accordingly, when the unclean
creature was upbraided with having dared to
attack a believer, he firmly replied, ^ " And in
truth I did it most righteously, for I found
her in my domain." Another case, too, is
well known, in which a woman had been hear-
ing a tragedian, and on the very night she saw
in her sleep a linen cloth — the actor's name
being mentioned at the same time with strong
disapproval — and five days after that woman
was no more. How many other undoubted
proofs we have had in the case of persons
who. by keeping company with the devil in
the shows, have fallen from the Lord ! For
no one can serve two masters.'* What fellow-
ship has light with darkness, life with death ?s

CHAP, xxvii.

We ought to detest these heathen meetings
and assemblies, if on no other account than
that there God's name is blasphemed — that
there the cry " To the lions ! " is daily raised
against us* — that from thence persecuting
decrees are wont to emanate, and temptations
are sent forth. What will you do if you are
caught in that heaving tide of impious judg-
ments ? Not that there any harm is likely to
come to you from men: nobody knows that
you are a Christian; but think how it fares
with you in heaven. For at the very time the
devil is working havoc in the church, do you
doubt that the angels are looking down from
above, and marking every man, who speaks
and who listens to the blaspheming word, who
lends his tongue and who lends his ears to
the service of Satan against God ? Shall you
not then shun those tiers where the enemies


I [Dc Caelo in Cacnuin : (sic) OeA/rr.l
a[Th« " •


[The exorcism. For the exorcism in Baptism, see Bunsen,
Hippol. iii. 19.]

3 [Sec Neander's explanation in Kaye, p. xxiii. But, let us ob-
serve the entire simplicity with which our author narrates a sort of
incident known to the apostles. Acts, xvi. 16.]

4 Matt. vi. 24.

5 a Cor. iv. 14.

6 [Observe— " daily raised." On this precarious condition of
the Christians, in their daily life, see the calm statement of Kaye,

pp. 110, HI.]


of Christ assemble, that seat of all that is
pestilential, and the very superincumbent at-
mosphere all impure with wicked cries ? Grant
that you have there things that are pleasant,
things both agreeable and innocent in them-
selves; even some things that are excellent.
Nobody dilutes poison with gall and hellebore:
the accursed thing is put into condiments well
seasoned and of sweetest taste. So, too, the
devil puts into the deadly draught which he
prepares, things of God most pleasant and
most acceptable. Everything there, then, that
is either brave, noble, loud-sounding, melo-
dious, or exquisite in taste, hold it but as the
honey drop of a poisoned cake; nor make so
much of your taste for its pleasures, as of the
danger you run from its attractions.

CHAP. XXVIII.

With such dainties as these let the devil's
guests be feasted. The places and the times,
the inviter too, are theirs. Our banquets,
our nuptial joys, are yet to come. We cannot
sit down in fellowship with them, as neither
can they with us. Things in this matter go
by their turns. Now they have gladness and
we are troubled. " The world," says Jesus,
" shall rejoice; ye shall be sorrowful." ^ Let
us mourn, then, while the heathen are merry,
that in the day of their sorrow we may rejoice;
lest, sharing now in their gladness, we share
then also in their grief. Thou art too dainty.
Christian, if thou wouldst have pleasure in
this life as well as in the next; nay, a fool
thou art, if thou thinkest this life's pleasures
to be really pleasures. The philosophers,
for instance, give the name of pleasure to
quietness and repose; in that they have their
bliss; in that they find entertainment: they
even glory in it. You long for the goal, and
the stage, and the dust, and the place of
combat ! I would have you answer me this
question: Can we not live without pleasure,
who cannot but with pleasure die ? For what
is our wish but the apostle's, to leave the
world, and be taken up into the fellowship of
our Lord ? ^ You have your joys where you
have your longings.

CHAP. XXIX.

Even as things are, if your thought is to
spend this period of existence in enjoyments,
how are you so ungrateful as to reckon in-
sufficient, as not thankfully to recognize the
many and exquisite pleasures God has be- i
stowed upon you ? For what more delightful


7 John xvi. 20.
8phil. i. 23,


CHAP. XXX.]


THE SHOWS, OR DE SPECTACULIS.


91


than to have God the Father and our Lord at
peace with us, than revelation of the truth,
than confession of our errors, than pardon of
the innumerable sins of our past life? What
greater pleasure than distaste of pleasure
itself, contempt of all that the world can give,
true liberty, a pure conscience, a contented
life, and freedom from all fear of death ? What
nobler than to tread under foot the gods of
the nations — to exorcise evil spirits ' — to per-
form cures — to seek divine revealings — to live
to God ? These are the pleasures, these the
spectacles that befit Christian men — holy,
everlasting, free. Count of these as your
circus games, fix your eyes on the courses of
the world, the gliding seasons, reckon up the
periods of time, long for the goal of the final
consummation, defend the societies of the
churches, be startled at God's signal, be
roused up at the angel's trump, glory in the
palms of martyrdom. If the literature of the
stage delight you, we have literature in abun-
dance of our own — plenty of verses, sentences,
songs, proverbs; and these not fabulous, but
true; not tricks of art, but plain realities.
Would you have also fightings and wrestlings ?
Well, of these there is no lacking, and they
are not of slight account. Behold unchastity
overcome by chastity, perfidy slain by faith-
fulness, cruelty stricken by compassion, im-
pudence thrown into the shade by modesty:
these are the contests we have among us, and
in these we win our crowns. Would you have
something of blood too ? You have Christ's.

CHAP. XXX.

But what a spectacle ^s that fast-approaching
advent^ of our Lord, now owned by all, now
highly exalted, now a triumphant One ! What
that exultation of the angelic hosts ! What
the glory of the rising saints! What the
kingdom of the just thereafter ! What the
city New Jerusalem ! ^ Yes, and there are
other sights: that last day of judgment, with
its everlasting issues; that day unlooked for
by the nations, the theme of their derision,
when the world hoary with age, and all its
many products, shall be consumed in one
great flame ! How vast a spectacle then bursts
upon the eye ! What there excites my ad-
miration ? what my derision? Which sight


1 [See cap. 26 supra. On this claim to such powers still re-
maining in the church. See Kaye, p. 89.]

2 [Kaye, p. 20. He doubtless looked for a speedy appearance
of the Lord : and note the apparent expectation of a New Jerusa-
lem, on earth, before the Consummation and Judgment.]

3 [This N^eiv Jerusalem gives Bp. Kaye (p. 55) "decisive
proof" of Montanism, especially as compared with the Third Book
against Marcion. I cannot see it, here.]


gives me joy ? which rouses me to exultation >

— as I see so many illustrious monarchs, whose
reception into the heavens was publicly an-
nounced, groaning now in the lowest darkness
with great Jove himself, and those, too, who
bore witness of their exultation; governors of
provinces, too, who persecuted the Christian
name, in fires more fierce than those with
which in the days of their pride they raged
against the followers of Christ. What world's
wise men besides, the very philosophers, in
fact, who taught their followers that God had no
concern in ought that is sublunary, and were
wont to assure them that either they had no
souls, or that they would never return to the
bodies which at death they had left, now cov-
ered with shame before the poor deluded ones,
as one fire consumes them ! Poets also, trem-
bling not before the judgment-seat of Rhada-
manthus or Minos, but of the unexpected
Christ ! I shall have a better opportunity then
of hearing the tragedians, louder-voiced in
their own calamity; of viewing the play-actors,
much more "dissolute" in the dissolving
flame; of looking upon the charioteer, all
glowing in his chariot of fire; of beholding
the wrestlers, not in their gymnasia, but toss-
ing in the fiery billows; unless even then I
shall not care to attend to such ministers of
sin, in my eager wish rather to fix a gaze in-
satiable on those whose fury vented itself
against the Lord. "This," I shall say,
" this is that carpenter's or hireling's son, that
Sabbath-breaker, that Samaritan and devil-
possessed ! This is He whom you purchased
from Judas ! This is He whom you struck
with reed and fist, whom you contemptuously
spat upon, to whom you gave gall and vinegar
to drink ! This is He whom His disciples se-
cretly stole away, that it might be said He
had risen again, or the gardener abstracted,
that his lettuces might come to no harm from
the crowds of visitants ! " What quaestor or
priest in his munificence will bestow on you
the favour of seeing and exulting in such things
as these ? And yet even now we in a measure
have them by faith in the picturings of imagi-
nation. But what are the things which eye
has not seen, ear has not heard, and which
have not so much as dimly dawned upon the
human heart ? Whatever they are, they are
nobler, I believe, than circus, and both thea-
tres,* and every race-course.


4 Viz.. the theatre and amphitheatre. [This concluding chapter,
which Gibbon delights to censure, because its fer\id rhetoric so
fearfully depicts the punishments of Christ's enemies, " appears to
Dr. Neander to contain a beautiful specimen of lively faith and
Christian confidence." See Kaye, p. xxix.'\


IV.


THE CHAPLET, OR DE CORONA.


CHAP. I.

Very lately it happened thus: while the
bounty of our most excellent emperors ' was
dispensed in the camp, the soldiers, laurel-
crowned, were approaching. One of them,
more a soldier of God, more stedfast than the
rest of his brethren, who had imagined that
they could serve two masters, his head alone
uncovered, the useless crown in his hand —
already even by that peculiarity known to
every one as a Christian — was nobly conspicu-
ous. Accordingly, all began to mark him
out, jeering him at a distance, gnashing on
him near at hand. The murmur is wafted to
the tribune, when the person had just left the
ranks. The tribune at once puts the question
to him. Why are you so different in your
attire ? He declared that he had no liberty
to wear the crown with the rest. Being
urgently asked for his reasons, he answered,
I am a Christian. O soldier ! boasting thy-
self in God. Then the case was considered
and voted on; the matter was remitted to a
higher tribunal; the offender was conducted
to the prefects. At once he put away the
heavy cloak, his disburdening commenced;
he loosed from his foot the military shoe, be-
ginning to stand upon holy ground ;3 he gave
up the sword, which was not necessary either
for the protection of our Lord; from his hand
likewise dropped the laurel crown; and
now, purple-clad with the hope of his own
blood, shod with the preparation of the
gospel, girt with the sharper word of God,
completely equipped in the apostles' armour,
and crowned more worthily with the white


1 LK-aye, apparently accepting the jud,s;ment of Dr. Neander,
assigns this treatise to a.u. 204. The bounty here spoken of,
then, must be that dispensed in honour of the victories over the
Parthians, under Severus.]

2 " Emperors." The Emperor Severus associated his two sons
with him in the possession of the imperial power ; Caracalla in the
year 198, Geta in 208. — '1'k.

3 [A touch of our author's genius, inspired by the Phrygian cr.-
thusiam for martyrdom. The ground on which a martyr treads
begins to be holy, even before the sacrifice, and in loosing his shoe
the victim consecrates the spot and at the same time pays it hom-
age.]


crown of martyrdom, he awaits in prison
the largess of Christ. Thereafter adverse
judgments began to be passed upon his
conduct — whether on the part of Christians
I do not know, for those of the heathen are
not different — as if he were headstrong and
rash, and too eager to die, because, in being
taken to task about a mere matter of dress,
he brought trouble on the bearers of the
Name,"* — he, forsooth, alone brave among so
many soldier-brethren, he alone a Christian.
It is plain that as they have rejected the proph-
ecies of the Holy Spirit, s they are also pur-
posing the refusal of martyrdom. So they
murmur that a peace so good and long is
endangered for them. Nor do I doubt that
some are already turning their back on the
Scriptures, are making ready their luggage,
are equipped for flight from city to city; for
that is all of the gospel they care to remember.
I know, too, their pastors are lions in peace,
deer in the fight. As to the questions asked
for extorting confessions from us, we shall
teach elsewhere. Now, as they put forth also
the objection — But where are we forbidden to
be crowned ? — I shall take this point up, as
more suitable to be treated of here, being
the essence, in fact, of the present contention.
So that, on the one hand, the inquirers wiio
are ignorant, but anxious, may be instructed;
and on the other, those may be refuted who
try to vindicate the sin, especially the laurel-
crowned Christians themselves, to whom it is
merely a question of debate, as if it might be
regarded as either no trespass at all, or at
least a doubtful one, because it may be made
the subject of investigation. That it is neither
sinless nor doubtful, I shall now, however,
show.


4 [The name of Christ: and the Antiochian name of Chri.stians.]

5 [Ciibbon will have it that the r>e Corona was written while
Tertullian was orthodox, but this reference to the .Montanisi notion
of " New Prophecy " seems to justify the decision of critics against
Gibbfjn, who, as kaye suggests (p. 53) was an.xious to make Chris-
tianity itself responsible for military insubordination and for of-
fences against Imperial Law.]


94


THE CHAPLET, OR DE CORONA.


[chap. III.


CHAP. II.

I affirm that not one of the Faithful has
ever a crown upon his head, except at a time
of trial. That is the case with all, from cate-
chumens to confessors and martyrs,' or (as the
case may be) deniers. Consider, then, whence
the custom about which we are now chiefly
inquiring got its authority. But when the
question is raised why it is observed, it is
meanwhile evident that it is observed. There-
fore that can neither be regarded as no offence,
or an uncertain one, which is perpetrated
against a practice which is capable of defence,
on the ground even of its repute, and is suffi-
ciently ratified by the support of general ac-
ceptance. It is undoubted, so that we ought
to inquire into the reason of the thing; but
without prejudice to the practice, not for the
purpose of overthrowing it, but rather of build-
ing it up, that you may all the more carefully
observe it, when you are also satisfied as to
its reason. But what sort of procedure is it,
for one to be bringing into debate a practice,
when he has fallen from it, and to be seeking
the explanation of his having ever had it,
when he has left it off? Since, although he
may wish to seem on this account desirous to
investigate it, that he may show that he has
not done wrong in giving it up, it is evident
that he nevertheless transgressed previously
in its presumptuous observance. If he has
•done no wrong to-day in accepting the crown,
he offended before in refusing it. This treat-
ise, therefore, will not be for those who are
not in a proper condition for inquiry, but for
those who, with the real desire of getting in-
struction, bring forward, not a question for
debate, but a request for advice. For it is
from this desire that a true inquiry always
proceeds; and I praise the faith which has
believed in the duty of complying with the
rule, before it has learned the reason of it.
An easy thing it is at once to demand where
it is written that we should not be crowned.
But is it written that we should be crowned ?
Indeed, in urgently demanding the warrant of
Scripture in a different side from their own,
men prejudge that the support of Scripture
ought no less to appear on their part. For if
it shall be said that it is lawful to be crowned
on this ground, that Scripture does not forbid
it, it will as validly be retorted that just on
this ground is the crown unlawful, because
the Scripture does not enjoin it. What shall
discipline do ? Shall it accept both things, as
if neither were forbidden ? Or shall it refuse
"both, as if neither were enjoined ? But " the


I [Kaye (p. 231) notes this as a rare instance of classing Cate-
chumens zxnon% "the Faithful."]


thing which is not forbidden is freely per-
mitted." I should rather say" that what has
not been freely allowed is forbidden.

CHAP. III.

And how long shall we draw the saw to and
fro through this line, when we have an ancient
practice, which by anticipation has made for us
the state, i.e. , of the question ? If no passage
of Scripture has prescribed it, assuredly cus-
tom, which without doubt flowed from tradi-
tion, has confirmed it. For how can anything
come into use, if it has not first been handed
down ? Even in pleading tradition, written
authority, you say, must be demanded. Let
us inquire, therefore, whether tradition, un-
less it be written, should not be admitted.
Certainly we shall say that it ought not to be
admitted, if no cases of other practices which,
without any written instrument, we maintain
on the ground of tradition alone, and the
countenance thereafter of custom, affords us
any precedent. To deal with this matter
briefly, I shall begin with baptism. ^ When
we are going to enter the water, but a little
before, in the presence of the congregation
and under the hand of the president, we sol-
emnly profess that we disown the devil, and
his pomp, and his angels. Hereupon we are
thrice immersed, making a somewhat ampler
pledge than the Lord has appointed in the
Gospel. Then, when we are taken up (as
new-born children), ^ we taste first of all a
mixture of milk and honey, and from that
day we refrain from the daily bath for a
whole week. We take also, in congregations
before daybreak, and from the hand of none
but the presidents, the sacrament of the
Eucharist, which the Lord both commanded
to be eaten at meal-times, and enjoined to be
taken by all alike. ^ As often as the anniver-
sary comes round, we make offerings for the
dead as birthday honours. We count fasting
or kneeling in worship on the Lord's day to
be unlawful. We rejoice in the same privilege
also from Easter to Whitsunday. We feel
pained should any wine or bread, even
though our own, be cast upon the ground.
At every forward step and movement, at every
going in and out, when we put on oilr clothes
and shoes, when we bathe, when weiiisit at
table, when we.light the lamps, on couch, on


2 [This is said not absolutely but;.*in contrast with extreme li-
cense ; but it shows the Supremad^' of Scripture. Compare De
Monogntn, cap. 4.I

3 [Elucidation I, and see Bunsen's Church and House Book,
pp. iQr-24.]

4 [There is here an 'allusion to the Roman form of recognizing
a lawful child. The fajtfter, taking up the new-bom infant, gave
him adoption into the family, and recognized him as a legitimate
son and heir.]

5 [Men and women, rich and poor.] «.


■CHAP, v.]


THE CHAPLET, OR DE CORONA.


95


seat, in all the ordinary actions of daily life,
we trace upon the forehead the sign.'

CHAP. IV.

If, for these and other such rules, you insist
upon having positive Scripture injunction,
you will find none. Tradition will be held
forth to you as the originator of them, custom
as their strengthener, and faith as their ob-
server. That reason will support tradition,
and custom, and faith, you will either your-
self perceive, or learn from some one who
has. Meanwhile you will believe that there
is some reason to which submission is due. I
add still one case more, as it will be proper
to show you how it was among the ancients
also. Among the Jews, so usual is it for their
women to have the head veiled, that they
may thereby be recognised. I ask in this in-
stance for the law. I put the apostle aside.
If Rebecca at once drew down her veil, when
in the distance she saw her betrothed, this
modesty of a mere private individual could
not have made a law, or it will have made it
only for those who have the reason which she
had. Let virgins alone be veiled, and this
when they are coming to be married, and not
till they have recognised their destined hus-
band. If Susanna also, who was subjected
to unveiling on her trial, ^ furnishes an argu-
ment for the veiling of women, I can say here
also, the veil was a voluntary thing. She had
come accused, ashamed of the disgrace she
had brought on herself, properly concealing
her beauty, even because now she feared to
please. But I should not suppose that, when
it was her aim to please, she took walks with
a veil on in her husband's avenue. Grant,
now, that she was always veiled. In this
particular case, too, or, in fact, in that of any
other, I demand the dress-law. If I nowhere
find a law, it follows that tradition has given
the fashion in question to custom, to find sub-
sequently (its authorization in) the apostle's
sanction, from the true interpretation of rea-
son. This instances, therefore, will make it
sufficiently plain that you can vindicate the
keeping of even unwritten tradition established
by custom; the proper witness for tradition
when demonstrated by long-continued observ-
ance.^ But even in civil matters custom is
accepted as law, when positive legal enact-
ment is wanting; and it is the same thing
whether it depends on writing or on reason,
since reason is, in fact, the basis of law. But,
(you say), if reason is the ground of law, all


• i.e., of the Cross.

- Vulgate,Dan. xiii. 32. [See Apocrypha, Hist. o/Susanna,\'. 32.I

3 [Observe it must (i.) be based on Apostolic grounds; (2.)

must not be a novelty, but derived from a time " to which the

memory of men runneth not contrary."]


will now henceforth have to be counted law,
whoever brings it forward, which shall have
reason as its ground.* Or do you think that
every believer is entitled to originate and es-
tablish a law, if only it be such as is agreeable
to God, as is helpful to discipline, as promotes
salvation, when the Lord says, " But why do
you not even of your own selves judge what
is right?" 5 And not merely in regard to a
judicial sentence, but in regard to every de-
cision in matters we are called on to consider,
the apostle also says, ** If of anything you
are ignorant, God shall reveal it unto you;"<^
he himself, too, being accustomed to afford
counsel though he had not the command of
the Lord, and to dictate of himself ^ as possess-
ing the Spirit of God who guides into all truth.
Therefofe his advice has, by the warrant of
divine reason, become equivalent to nothing
less than a divine command. Earnestly now
inquire of this teacher,^ keeping intact your
regard for tradition, from whomsoever it origi-
nally sprang; nor have regard to the author,
but to the authority, and especially that of
custom itself, which on this very account we
should revere, that we may not want an in-
terpreter; so that if reason too is God's gift,
you may then learn, not whether custom has
to be followed by you, but why.

CHAP. V.

The argument for Christian practices be-
comes all the stronger, when also nature,
which is the first rule of all, supports them.
Well, she is the first who lays it down that a
crown does not become the head. But I think
ours is the God of nature, who fashioned
man; and, that he might desire, (appreciate,
become partaker of) the pleasures afforded by
His creatures, endowed him with certain
senses, (acting) through members, which, so
to speak, are their peculiar instruments. The
sense of hearing he has planted in the ears;
that of sight, lighted up in the eyes; that of
taste, shut up in the mouth; that of smell,
wafted into the nose; that of touch, fixed in
the tips of the fingers. By means of these
organs of the outer man doing duty to the
inner man, the enjoyments of the divine gifts
are conveyed by the senses to the soul.'
What, then, in flowers affords you enjoyment ?


4 [I slightly amend the translation to bring out the force of an
objection to which our author gives a Montanistic reply.]

5 Luke xii. 27.

6 Phil. iii. 15.

7 [See luminous remarks in Kaye, pp. 371-373.]

8 [This teacher, i.e., ri^ht reason, under the guidance of the
Holy Ghost. He is here foisting in a plea for the " New Prophecy,"
apparently, and this is one of the most decided instances in the
Treatise.]

9 Kaye [p. 187,] has some valuable remarks on this testimony
to the senses in Christian Philosophy, and compares Cicero, I.
Tusc. cap. XX. or xlvi.]


96


THE CHAPLET, OR DE CORONA.


[chap. VII,


I


For it is the flowers of the field which are the
peculiar, at least the chief, material of
crowns. Either smell, you say, or colour, or
both together. What will be the senses of
colour and smell? Those of seeing and smell-
ing, I suppose. What members have had
these senses allotted to them ? The eyes and
the nose, if I am not mistaken. With sight
and smell, then, make use of flowers, for
these are the senses by which they are meant
to be. en joyed; use them by means of the
eyes and nose, which are the members to
which these senses belong. You have got
the thing from God, the mode of it from the
world; but an extraordinary mode does not
prevent the use of the thing in the common
way. Let flowers, then, both when fastened
into each other and tied together in thread
and rush, be what they are when free, when
loose — things to be looked at and smelt.
You count it a crown, let us say, when you
have a bunch of them bound together in a
series, that you may carry many at one time,
that you may enjoy them all at once. Well,
lay them in your bosom if they are so singu-
larly pure, and strew them on your couch if
they are so exquisitely soft, and consign
them to your cup if they are so perfectly harm-
less. Have the pleasure of them in as many
ways as they appeal to your senses. But
what taste for a flower, what sense for anything
belonging to a crown but its band, have you
in the head, which is able neither to distin-
guish colour, nor to inhale sweet perfumes,
nor to appreciate softness? It is as much
against nature to long after a flower with the
head, as it is to crave food with the ear, or
sound with the nostril. But everything which
is against nature deserves to be branded as
monstrous among all men; but with us it is to
be condemned also as sacrilege against God,
the Lord and Creator of nature.

CHAP. VI.

Demanding then a law of God, you have
that common one prevailing all over the world,
engraven on the natural tables to which the
apostle too is wont to appeal, as when in
respect of the woman's veil he says, " Does
not even Nature teach you ?" ' — as when to
the Romans, affirming that the heathen do by
nature those things which the law requires, ''
he suggests both natural law qnd a law-reveal-
ing nature. Yes, and also in the first chapter
of the epistle he authenticates nature, when
he asserts that males and females changed
among themselves the natural use of the


1 1 Cor. xi.

aRom. ii. :


creature into that which is unnatural, ^ by way
of penal retribution for their error. We first
of all indeed know God Himself by the teach-
ing of Nature, calling Him God of gods,
taking for granted that He is good, and in-
voking Him as Judge. Is it a question with
you whether for the enjoyment of His creat-
ures. Nature should be our guide, that we may
not be carried away in the direction in which
the rival of God has corrupted, along with man
himself, the entire creation which had been
made over to our race for certain uses, whence
the apostle says that it too unwillingly became
subject to vanity, completely bereft of its
original character, first by vain, then by base,
unrighteous, and ungodly uses ? It is thus,
accordingly, in the pleasures of the shows,
that the creature is dishonoured by those who
by nature indeed perceive that all the ma-
terials of which shows are got up belong to
God, but lack the knowledge to perceive as
well that they have all been changed by the
devil. But with this topic we have, for the
sake of our own play-lovers, sufficiently dealt,.
and that, too, in a work in Greek.-*

CHAP. VII.

Let these dealers in crowns then recognize
in the meantime the authority of Nature, on
the ground of a common sense as human
beings, and the certifications of their peculiar
religion, as, according to the last chapter,
worshippers of the God of nature; and,
as it were, thus over and above what is
required, let them consider those other
reasons too which forbid us wearing crowns,
especially on the head, and indeed crowns
of every sort. For we are obliged to
turn from the rule of Nature, which we
share with mankind in general, that we
may maintain the whole peculiarity of our
Christian discipline, in relation also to other
kinds of crowns which seem to have been pro-
vided for different uses, as being composed
of different substances, lest, because they do
not consist of flowers, the use of which nature
has indicated (as it does in the case of this
military laurel one itself), they may be thought
not to come under the prohibition of our sect,
since they have escaped any objections pf
nature. I see, then, that we must go into the
matter both with more research, and more
fully, frorn its beginnings on through its suc-
cessive stages of growth to its more erratic de-
velopments. For this we need to*turn to
heathen literature, for things belonging to the
heathen must be proved from their own


3 Rom. i. 26.

4 [Plays were regarded &s pomps renounced in Baptism.]


I


CHAP. VIII.]


THE CHAPLET, OR DE CORONA.


97


documents. The little of this I have acquired,
will, I believe, be enough. If there really
was a Pandora, whom Hesiod mentions as the
first of women, hers was the first head the
graces crowned, for she received gifts from
all the gods whence she got her name Pandora.
But Moses, a prophet, not a poet-shepherd,
shows us the first woman Eve having her loins
more naturally girt about with leaves than her
temples with flowers. Pandora, then, is a
myth. And so we have to blush for the
origin of the crown, even on the ground of the
falsehood connected with it; and, as will
soon appear, on the ground no less of its re-
alities. For it is an undoubted fact that cer-
tain persons either originated the thing, or
shed lustre on it. Pherecydes relates that
Saturn was the first who wore a crown; Diod-
orus, that Jupiter' after conquering the
Titans, was honoured with this gift by the rest
of the gods. To Priapus also the same author
assigns fillets; and to Ariadne a garland of
gold and of Indian gems, the gift of Vulcan,
afterwards of Bacchus, and subsequently
turned into a constellation. Callimachus has
put a vine crown upon Juno. So too at Argos,
her statue, vine-wreathed, with a lion's skin
placed beneath her feet, exhibits the step-
mother exulting over the spoils of her two
step-sons. Hercules displays upon his head
sometimes poplar, sometimes wild-olive,
sometimes parsley. You have the tragedy of
Cerberus; you have Pindar; and besides Cal-
limachus, who mentions that Apollo, too, when
he had killed the Delphic serpent, as a sup-
pliant, put on a laurel garland; for among
the ancients suppliants were wont to be
crowned. Harpocration argues that Bacchus,
the same as Osiris among the Egyptians, was
designedly crowned with ivy, because it is the
nature of ivy to protect the brain against
drowsiness. But that in another way also
Bacchus was the originator of the laurel crown,
(the crown) in which he celebrated his triumph
over the Indians, even the rabble acknowledge,
when they call the days dedicated to him the
"great crown." If you open, again, the
writings of the Egyptian Leo, you learn that
Isis was the first who discovered and wore
ears of corn upon her head — a thing more
suited to the belly. Those who want addi-
tional information will find an ample expo-
sition of the subject in Claudius Saturninus, a
writer of distinguished talent who treats this
questioft also, for he has a book on crowns, so
explaining their beginnings as well as causes,
and kinds, and rites, that you find all that is
charming in the flower, all that is beautiful in
the leafy branch, and every sod or vine-shoot
has been dedicated to some head or other;
7


making it abundantly clear how foreign to
us we should judge the custom of the crowned
head, introduced as it was by, and thereafter
constantly managed for the honour of, those
whom the world has believed to be gods. If
the devil, a liar from the beginning, is even
in this matter working for his false system of
godhead (idolatry), he had himself also with-
out doubt provided for his god-lie being car-
ried out. What sort of thing, then, must that
be counted among the people of the true God,
which was brought in by the nations in honour
of the devil's candidates, and was set apart
from the beginning to no other than these; and
which even then received its consecration to
idolatry by idols and in idols yet alive ? Not
as if an idol were anything, but since the
things which others offer up to idols belong
to demons. But if the things which others
offer to them belong to demons how much
more what idols offered to themselves, when
they were in life ! The demons themselves,
doubtless, had made provision for themselves
by means of those whom they had possessed,
while in a state of desire and craving, before
provision had been actually made.

CHAP. VIII.

Hold fast in the meantime this persuasion,
while I examine a question which comes in our
way. For I already hear it is said, that many
other things as well as crowns have been invent-
ed by those whom the world believes to be
gods, and that they are notwithstanding to be
met with both in our present usages and in
those of early saints, and in the service of God,
and in Christ Himself, who did His work as
man by no other than these ordinary instru-
mentalities of human life. Well, let it be so;
nor shall I inquire any further back into the or-
igin of this things. Let Mercury have been
the first who taught the knowledge of letters;
I will own that they are requisite both for the
business and commerce of life, and for per-
forming our devotion to God. Nay, if he also
first strung the chord to give forth melody, I
will not deny, when listening to David, that
this invention has been in use with the saints,
and has ministered to God. Let ^sculapius
have been the first who sought and discovered
cures: Esaias ' mentions that he ordered Hez-
ekiah medicine when he was sick. Paul, too,
knows that a little wine does the stomach
good.' Let Minerva have been the first who
built a ship: I shall see Jonah and the apostles
sailing. Nay, there is more than this: for
even Christ, we shall find, has ordinary rai-


' Isa. xxxviii. 21.
2 I Tim. V. 23.


98


THE CHAPLET, OR DE CORONA.


[chap. X.


ment; Paul, too, has his cloak.* If at
once, of every article of furniture and
each household vessel, you name some
god of the world as the originator, well,
I must recognise Christ, both as He re-
clines on a couch, and when He presents a
basin for the feet of His disciples, and when
He pours water into it from a ewer, and when
He is girt about with a linen towel ' — a garment
specially sacred to Osiris. It is thus in general
I reply upon the point, admitting indeed that
we use along with others these articles, but
challenging that this be judged in the light of
the distinction between things agreeable and
things opposed to reason, because the promis-
cuous employment of them is deceptive, con-
cealing the corruption of the creature, by which
it has been made subject to vanity. For
we affirm that those things only are proper to
be used, whether by ourselves or by those who
lived before us, and alone befit the service of
God and Christ Himself, which to meet the ne-
cessities of human life supply what is simply
useful and affords real assistance and hon-
ourable comfort, so that they may be well be-
lieved to have come from God's own inspira-
tion, who first of all no doubt provided for,
and taught and ministered to the enjoyment,
I should suppose, of His own man. As for
the things which are out of this class, they
are not fit to be used among us, especially
those which on that account indeed are not
to be found either with the world, or in the
ways of Christ.

CHAP. IX.

In short, what patriarch, what prophet, what
Levite, or priest, or ruler, or at a later pe-
riod what apostle, or preacher of the gospel,
or bishop, do you ever find the wearer of a
crown ?3 I think not even the temple of God
itself was crowned; as neither was the ark of
the testament, nor the tabernacle of witness,
nor the altar, nor the candlestick crowned;
though certainly, both on that first solemnity
of the dedication, and in that second rejoicing
for the restoration, crowning would have been
most suitable if it were worthy of God. But
if these things were figures of us (for we are
temples of God, and altars, and lights, and
sacred vessels), this too they in figure set
forth, that the people of God ought not to be
crowned. The reality must al\vays correspond
with the image. If, perhaps, you object that
Christ Himself was crowned, to that you will


' 2 Tim. iv. 13. [This is a useful comment as showing what
this ^atA6vi7 was. Our author translates it by /o-ww/rt. Ofwhich
more when we reach the De Pallio.'\

= John xiii. 1-5.

3 [But see Eusebius, Hist. B. v., cap. 24, whose story is exam-
ined oy Lardner, Cred., vol. iv., p. 448.]


get the brief reply: Be you too crowned, as
He was; you have full permission. Yet even
that crown of insolent ungodliness was not of
any decree of the Jewish people. It was a
device of the Roman soldiers, taken from the
practice of the world, — a practice which the
people of God never allowed either on the
occasion of public rejoicing or to gratify in-
nate luxury: so they returned from the Baby-
lonish captivity with timbrels, and flutes, and
psalteries, more suitably than with crowns;
and after eating and drinking, uncrowned, they
rose up to play. Neither would the account
of the rejoicing nor the exposure of the luxury
have been silent touching the honour or dis-
honour of the crown. Thus too Isaiah, as he
says, "With timbrels, and psalteries, and
flutes they drink wine, " * would have added
" with crowns," if this practice had ever had
place in the things of God.

CHAP. X.

So, when you allege that the ornaments of
the heathen deities are found no less with
God, with the object of claiming among these
for general use the head-crown, you already
lay it down for yourself, that we must not
have among us, as a thing whose use we are
to share with others, what is not to be found
in the service of God. Well, what is so un-
worthy of God indeed as that which is worthy
of an idol ? But what is so worthy of an idol
as that which is also worthy of a dead man ?
For it is the privilege of the dead also to be
thus crowned, as they too straightway become
idols, both by their dress and the service of
deification, which (deification) is with us a
second idolatry. Wanting, then, .the sense,
it will be theirs to use the thing for which
the sense is wanting, just as if in full posses-
sion of the sense they wished to abuse it.
When there ceases to be any reality in the
use, there is no distinction between using
and abusing. Who can abuse a thing, when
the precipient nature with which he wishes to
carry out his purpose is not his to use it ?
The apostle, moreover, forbids us to abuse,
while he would more naturally have taught us
not to use, unless on the ground that, where
there is no sense for things, there is no wrong
use of them. But the whole affair is meaning-
less, and is, in fact, a dead work so far as con-
cerns the idols; though, without doubt, a liv-
ing one as respects the demons s to whom the
religious rite belongs. *' The idols of the
heathen," says David, "are silver and gold."
"They have eyes, and see not; a nose, and


4 Isa. V. 12.

5 [Compare Dc Idololatria, cap. xv., p. 70, suf>ra.'\


CHAP. XI.]


THE CHAPLET, OR DE CORONA.


99


smell not; hands, and they will not handle." '
By means of these organs, indeed, we are to
enjoy flowers; but if he declares that those
who make idols will be like them, they already
are so who use anything after the style of idol
adornings. "To the pure all things are
pure: so, likewise, all things to the impure
are impure;"' but nothing is more impure
than idols. The substances are themselves
as creatures of God without impurity, and in
this their native state are free to the use of
all; but the ministries to which in their use
they are devoted, makes all the difference; for
I, too, kill a cock for myself, just as Socrates
did for ^sculapius; and if the smell of some
place or other offends me, I buria the Arabian
product myself, but not with the same cere-
mony, nor in the same dress, nor with the
same pomp, with which it is done to idols. ^
If the creature is defiled by a mere word, as
the apostle teaches, " But if any one say. This
is offered in sacrifice to idols, you must not
touch it,"'^ much more when it is polluted by
the dress, and rites, and pomp of what is
offered to the gods. Thus the crown also is
made out to be an offering to idols; s for with
this ceremony, and dress, and pomp, it is
presented in sacrifice to idols, its originators,
to whom its use is specially given over, and
chiefly on this account, that what has no place
among the things of God may not be admitted
into use with us as with others. Wherefore
the apostle exclaims, " Flee idolatry:" ^ cer-
tainly idolatry whole and entire he means.
Reflect on what a thicket it is, and how many
thorns lie hid in it. Nothing must be given
to an idol, and so nothing must be taken from
one. If it is inconsistent with faith to recline
in an idol temple, what is it to appear in an
idol dress? What communion have Christ
and Belial? Therefore flee from it; for he
enjoins us to keep at a distance from idolatry
— to have no close dealings with it of any
kind. Even an earthly serpent sucks in men
at some distance with its breath. Going still
further, John says, " My little children, keep
yourselves from idols," ^ — not now from idol-
atry, as if from the service of it, but from
idols — that is, from any resemblance to them;
for it is an unworthy thing that you, the image
of the living God, should become the likeness
of an idol and a dead man. Thus far we


» Ps. cxv. 4-8.

2 Tit. i. 15.

3 [He seems to know no use for incense except for burials and
for fumigation.]

4 I Cor. X. 28.

5 [Kaye (p. 362) defends our author against Barbeyrac's ani-
madversions, by the maxim, " put yourself in his place " i.e. among
the abominations of Paganism.]

6 I Cor. x. 14.

7 I John V. 21.


assert, that this attire belongs to idols, both
from the history of its origin, and from its use
by false religion; on this ground, besides, that
while it is not mentioned as connected with
the worship of God, it is more and more given
over to those in whose antiquities, as well as
festivals and services, it is found. In a word,
the very doors, the very victims and altars, the
very servants and priests, are crowned. You
have, in Claudius, the crowns of all the vari-
ous colleges of priests. We have added also
that distinction between things altogether
different from each other — things, namely,
agreeable, and things contrary to reason — in
answer to those who, because there happens
to be the use of some things in common,
maintain the right of participation in all
things. With reference to this part of the
subject, therefore, it now remains that the
special grounds for wearing crowns should be
examined, that while we show these to be
foreign, nay, even opposed to our Christian
discipline, we may demonstrate that none of
them have any plea of reason to support it,
on the basis of which this article of dress
might be vindicated as one in whose use we
can participate, as even some others may
whose instances are cast up to us.

CHAP. XI.

To begin with the real ground of the mili-
tary crown, I think we must first inquire
whether warfare is proper at all for Christians.
What sense is there in discussing the merely
accidental, when that on which it rests is to
be condemned ? Do we believe it lawful for
a human oath ^ to be superadded to one di-
vine, for a man to come under promise to an-
other master after Christ, and to abjure
father, mother, and all nearest kinsfolk, whom
even the law has commanded ua to honour
and love next to God Himself, to whom the
gospel, too, holding them only of less account
than Christ, has in like manner rendered
honour ? Shall it be held lawful to make an
occupation of the sword, when the Lord pro-
claims that he who uses the sword shall perish
by the sword ? And shall the son of peace
take part in the battle when it does not be-
come him even to sue at law ? And shall he
apply the chain, and the prison, and the tor-
ture, and the punishment, who is not the
avenger even of his own wrongs ? Shall he,
forsooth, either keep watch-service for others
more than for Christ, or shall he do it on the
Lord's day, when he does not even do it for
Christ Himself? And shall he keep guard


8 [He plays on this word Sacravientum. Is the military sacra-
tnent to be added to the Lord's ?]


lOO


THE CHAPLET, OR DE CORONA.


[chap. XII.


before the temples which he has renounced ?
And shall he take a meal where the apostle
has forbidden him ?' And shall he diligently
protect by night those whom in the day-time
he has put to flight by his exorcisms, leaning
and resting. on the spear the while with
which Christ's side was pierced? Shall he
carry a flag,' too, hostile to Christ? And
shall he ask a watchword from the emperor
who has already received one from God ?
Shall he be disturbed in death by the trumpet
of the trumpeter, who expects to be aroused
by the angel's trump ? And shall the Christian
be burned according to camp rule, when he
was not permitted to burn incense to an idol,
when to him Christ remitted the punishment
of fire ? Then how many other offences there
are involved in the performances of camp
offices, which we must hold to involve a trans-
gression of God's law, you may see by a slight
survey. The very carrying of the name over
from the camp of light to the camp of dark-
ness is a violation of it. Of course, if faith
comes later, and finds any preoccupied with
military service, their case is different, as in
the instance of those whom John used to re-
ceive for baptism, and of those most faith-
ful centurions, I mean the centurion whom
Christ approves, and the centurion whom
Peter instructs; yet, at the same time, when
a man has become a believer, and faith has
been sealed, there must be either an immediate
abandonment of it, which has been the course
with many; or all sorts of quibbling will have
to be resorted to in order to avoid offending
God, and that is not allowed even outside of
military service; 3 or, last of all, for God the
fate must be endured which a citizen-faith has
been no less ready to accept. Neither does
military service hold out escape from punish-
ment of sins, or exemption from martyrdom.
Nowhere does the Christian change his char-
acter. There is one gospel, and the same
Jesus, who will one day deny every one who
denies, and acknowledge every one who ac-
knowledges God, — who will save, too, the life
which has been lost for His sake; but, on the
other hand, destroy that which for gain has
been saved to His dishonour. With Him the
faithful citizen is a soldier, just as the faithful


* 1 Cor. viii. lo.

= [ Vexillum. Such words as these prepared for the Labarum.']
3 " Outside of the military service. ' By substituting ex mili-
tia for the corresponding words extra militiam^ as has been pro-
posed by Rigaltius, the sentence acquires a meaning such that
desertion from the army is suggested as one of the methods by
which a soldier who has become a Christian may continue faithful
to Jesus. But the words extra militiam are a genuine part of
the te.xt. There is no good ground, therefore, for the statement
of Gibbon : " Tertullian (de Corona Militis, c. xi.) suggests to
them the expedient of deserting ; a counsel which, if it had been
generally known, was not very proper to conciliate the favour of the
emperors toward the Christian sect."— Tk.


soldier is a citizen.* A state of faith admits
no plea of necessity; they are under no ne-
cessity to sin, whose one necessity is, that
they do not sin. For if one is pressed to the
offering of sacrifice and the sheer denial of
Christ by the necessity of torture or of pun-
ishment, yet discipline does not connive even
at that necessity; because there is a higher
necessity to dread denying and to undergo
martyrdom, than to escape from suffering, and
to render the homage required. In fact, an
excuse of this sort overturns the entire es-
sence of our sacrament, removing even the
obstacle to voluntary sins; for it will be possi-
ble also to maintain that inclination is a ne-
cessity, as involving in it, forsooth, a sort of
compulsion. I have, in fact, disposed of this
very allegation of necessity with reference to
the pleas by which crowns connected with offi-
cial position are vindicated, in support of
which it is in common use, since for this very
reason offices must be either refused, that we
may not fall into acts of sin, or martyrdoms
endured that we may get quit of offices.
Touching this primary aspect of the question,
as to the unlawfulness even of a military life
itself, I shall not add more, that the secondary
question may be restored to its place. In-
deed, if, putting my strength to the question,
I banish from us the military life, I should
now to no purpose issue a challenge on the
matter of the military crown. Suppose, then,
that the military service is lawful, as far as
the plea for the crown is concerned. s

CHAP. XII.

But I first say a word also about the crown'-
itself. This laurel one is sacred to Apollo
or Bacchus — to the former as the god of
archery, to the latter as the god of triumphs.
In like manner Claudius teaches, when he
tells us that soldiers are wont too to be
wreathed in myrtle. For the myrtle belongs
to Venus, the mother of the J€^>neadae, the
mistress also of the god of war, who through
Ilia and the Romuli is Roman. But I do not
believe that Venus is Roman as well as Mars,
because of the vexation the concubine gave
her.^ When military service again is crowned
with olive, the idolatry has respect to Mi-
nerva, who is equally the goddess of arms —
but got a crown of the tree referred to, be-
cause of the peace she made with Neptune.
In these respects, the superstition of the mili-
tary garland will be everywhere defiled and
all-defiling. And it is further defiled, I


4 " The faithful," etc. : i.e., the kind of occupation which any
one has cannot be pleaded by him as a rea.son for not doing all
that Christ has enjoined upon His people.— Tk.

5 fHe was not yet quite a Montanist.]
^i.e. Ilia.


CHAP. XIII.]


THE CHAPLET, OR DE CORONA.


OI


should think, also in the grounds of it. Lo !
the yearly public pronouncing of vows, what
does that bear on its face to be ? It takes
place first in the part of the camp where the
general's tent is, and then in the temples.
In addition to the places, observe the words
also: " We vow that you, O Jupiter, will then
have an ox with gold-decorated horns."
What does the utterance mean ? Without a
doubt the denial (of Christ). Albeit the Chris-
tian says nothing in these places with the
mouth, he makes his response by having the
crown on his head. The laurel is likewise
commanded (to be used) at the distribution of
the largess. So you see idolatry is not with-
out its gain, selling, as it does, Christ for
pieces of gold, as Judas did for pieces of
silver. Will it be " Ye cannot serve God and
mammon," ^ to devote your energies to mam-
mon, and to depart from God ? Will it be
" Render unto Caesar the things which are
Caesar's, and unto God the things which are
God's," ^ not only not to render the human
being to God, but even to take the denarius
from Caesar? Is the laurel of the triumph
made of leaves, or of corpses? Is it adorned
with ribbons, or with tombs ? Is it bedewed
with ointments, or with the tears of wives and
mothers? It may be of some Christians too;^
for Christ is also among the barbarians. -* Has
not he who has carried (a crown for) this cause
on his head, fought even against himself?
Another sort of service belongs to the royal
guards. And indeed crowns are called (Cas-
trenses), as belonging to the camp; Mimificcc
likewise, from the Caesarean functions they
perform. But even then you are still the sol-
cfier and the servant of another; and if of two
masters, of God and Caesar: but assuredly
then not of Caesar, when you owe yourself to
God, as having higher claims, I should think,
even in matters in which both have an interest.

CHAP. XIII.

For state reasons, the various orders of the
citizens also are crowned with laurel crowns;
but the magistrates besides with golden ones,
as at Athens, and at Rome. Even to those are
preferred the Etruscan. This appellation is
given to the crowns which, distinguished by
their gems and oak leaves of gold, they put
on, with mantles having an embroidery of
palm branches, to conduct the chariots con-
taining the images of the gods to the circus.


^ Matt. vi. 24.

2 Matt. xxii. 21.

3 [Such considerations may account for our author's abandon-
ment of what he says in the Apology ; which compare in capp.
xlii. and xxxix.]

4 [Et apud barbaros enim Christus. See Kaye's argument, p 87.]


There are also provincial crowns of gold,
needing now the larger heads of images in-
stead of those of men. But your orders, and
your magistracies, and your very place of meet-
ing, the church, are Christ's. You belong to
Him, for you have been enrolled in the books
of life.^ There the blood of the Lord serves
for your purple robe, and your broad stripe
is His own cross; there the axe is already laid
to the trunk of the tree;^ there is the branch
out of the root of Jesse. ^ Never mind the
state horses with their crown. Your Lord,
when, according to the Scripture, He would
enter Jerusalem in triumph, had not even an
ass of His own. These (put their trust) in
chariots, and these in horses; but we will seek
our help in the name of the Lord our God.'
From so much as a dwelling in that Babylon
of John's Revelation '° we are called away;
much more then from its pomp. The rabble,
too, are crowned, at one time because of some
great rejoicing for the success of the emperors;
at another, on account of some custom be-
longing to municipal festivals. For luxury
strives to make her own every occasion of pub-
lic gladness. But as for you, you are a foreign-
er in this world, a citizen of Jerusalem, the city
above. Our citizenship, the apostle says, is
in heaven." You have your own registers,
your own calendar; you have nothing to do
with the joys of the world; nay, you are called
to the very opposite, for " the world shall re-
joice, but ye shall mourn." " And I think the
Lord affirms, that those who mourn are happy,
not those who are crowned. Marriage, too,
decks the bridegroom with its crown; and
therefore we will not have heathen brides, lest
they seduce us even to the idolatry with which
among them marriage is initiated. You have
the law from the patriarchs indeed; you have
the apostle enjoining people to marry in the
Lord. '3 You have a crowning also on the
making of a freeman; but you have .been al-
ready ransomed by Christ, and that at a great
price. How shall the world manumit the ser-
vant of another ? Though it seems to be lib-
erty, yet it will come to be found bondage.
In the world everything is nominal, and
nothing real. For even then, as ransomed by
Christ, you were under no bondage to man;
and now, though man has given you liberty,
you are the servant of Christ. If you think
freedom of the world to be real, so that you
even seal it with a crown, you have returned


6 Phil. iv. 3.

7 Matt. iii. 10.

8 Isa. xi. I.

9 Ps. XX. 7.

1° Rev. xviii. 4.
" Phil. iii. 20.
'2 John xvi. 20.
'3 I Cor. vii. 39.


[He understands this of Rome.]


I02


THE CHAPLET, OR DE CORONA.


[chap. XV.


I


to the slavery of man, imagining it to be free-
dom; you have lost the freedom of Christ,
fancying it is slavery. Will there be any dis-
pute as to the cause of crown-wearing,, which
contests in the games in their turn supply,
and which, both as sacred to the gods and in
honour of the dead, their own reason at once
condemns ? It only remains, that the Olym-
pian Jupiter, and the Nemean Hercules, and
the wretched little Archemorus, and the hap-
less Antinous, should be crowned in a Chris-
tian, that he himself may become a spectacle
disgusting to behold. We have recounted, as
I think, all the various causes of the wearing
of the crown, and there is not one which has
any place with us: all are foreign to us, un-
holy, unlawful, having been abjured already
once for all in the solemn declaration of the
sacrament. For they were of the pomp of
the devil and his angels, offices of the world,'
honours, festivals, popularity huntings, false
vows, exhibitions of human servility, empty
praises, base glories, and in them all idolatry,
even in respect of the origin of the crowns
alone, with which they are all wreathed.
Claudius will tell us in his preface, indeed,
that in the poems of Homer the heaven also
is crowned with constellations, and that no
doubt by God, no doubt for man; therefore
man himself, too, should be crowned by God.
But the world crowns brothels, and baths, and
bakehouses, and prisons, and schools, and the
very amphitheatres, and the chambers where
the clothes are stripped from dead gladiators,
and the very biers of the dead. How sacred
and holy, how venerable and pure is this ar-
ticle of dress, determine not from the heaven
of poetry alone, but from the traffickings of
the whole world. But indeed a Christian will
not even dishonour his own gate with laurel
crowns, if so be he knows how many gods the
devil has attached to doors; Janus so-called
from gate, Limentinus from threshold, Forcus
and Carna from leaves and hinges; among
the Greeks, too, the Thyrsean Apollo, and
the evil spirits, the Antelii.

CHAP. XIV.

Much less may the Christian put the service
of idolatry on his own head — nay, I might
have said, upon Christ, since Christ is the
Head of the Christian man — (for his head) is
as free as even Christ is, under no obligation
to wear a covernig, not to say a band. But
even the head which is bound to have the veil,
I mean woman's, as already taken possession
of by this very thing, is not open also to a


band. She has the burden of her own humility
to bear. If she ought not to appear with her
head uncovered on account of the angels, ="
much more with a crown on it will she offend
those (elders) who perhaps are then wearing
crowns above. ^ For what is a crown on the
head of a woman, but beauty made seductive,
but mark of utter wantonness, — a notable
casting away of modesty, a setting temptation
on fire ? Therefore a woman, taking counsel
from the apostles' foresight,-* will not too
elaborately adorn herself, that she may not
either be crowned with any exquisite arrange-
ment of her hair. What sort of garland, how-
ever, I pray you, did He who is the Head of
the man and the glory of the woman, Christ
Jesus, the Husband of the church, submit to
in behalf of both sexes ? Of thorns, I think,
and thistles, — a figure of the sins which the
soil of the flesh brought forth for us, but which
the power of the cross removed, blunting,
in its endurance by the head of our Lord,
death's every sting. Yes, and besides the
figure, there is contumely with ready lip, and
dishonour, and infamy, and the ferocity in-
volved in the cruel things which then dis-
figured and lacerated the temples of the Lord,
that you may now be crowned with laurel,
and myrtle, and olive, and any famous branch,
and which is of more use, with hundred-leaved
roses too, culled from the garden of Midas,
and with both kinds of lily, and with violets
of all sorts, perhaps also with gems and gold,
so as even to rival that crown of Christ which
He afterwards obtained. For it was after the
gall He tasted the honeycomb, s and He was
not greeted as King of Glory in heavenly
places till He had been condemned to the
cross as King of the Jews, having first been
made by the Father for a time a little less
than the angels, and so crowned with glory
and honour. If for these things, you owe
your own head to Him, repay it if you can,
such as He presented His for yours; or be
not crowned with flowers at all, if you cannot
be with thorns, because you may not be with
flowers.

CHAP. XV.

Keep for God His own property untainted;
He will crown it if He choose. Nay, then.
He does even choose. He calls us to it. To
him who conquers He says, " I will give a
crown of life."^ Be you, too, faithful unto


I [A suggestive interpretation of the baptismal vow, of which
see Punsen, HippoL, Vol. III., p. 20.]


2 I Cor. xi. 10. [Does he here play on the use of the word
angels in the Revelation ? He seems to make it = elders.']

3 Rev. iv. 4.

4 X Tim. ii. 9 ; i Pet. iii. 3.

5 [A very striking collocation of Matt, xxvii. 34, and Luke xxiv.

42-]

6 Rev. ii. 10 ; Jas. i. 12.


ELUCIDATIONS.


lO


death, and fight you, too, the good fight,
whose crown the apostle ' feels so justly con-
fident has been laid up for him. The angel '
also, as he goes forth on a white horse, con-
quering and to conquer, receives a crown of
victory; and another ^ is adorned with an en-
circling rainbow (as it were in its fair colours)
— a celestial meadow. In like manner, the
elders sit crowned around, crowned too with
a crown of gold, and the Son of Man Himself
flashes out above the clouds. If such are the
appearances in the vision of the seer, of what
sort will be the realities in the actual mani-
festation ? Look at those crowns. Inhale
those odours. Why condemn you to a little
chaplet, or a twisted headband, the brow which
has been destined for a diadem ? For Christ
Jesus has made us even kings to God and His
Father. What have you in common with the
flower which is to die ? You have a flower in
the Branch of Jesse, upon which the grace of


1 2 Tim. iv.

2 Rev. vi. 2

3 Rev. X. I.


the Divine Spirit in all its fulness rested — a
flower undefiled, unfading, everlasting, by
choosing which the good soldier, too, has got
promotion in the heavenly ranks. Blush, ye
fellow-soldiers of his, henceforth not to be
condemned even by him, but by some soldier
of Mithras, who, at his initiation in the gloomy
cavern, in the camp, it may well be said, of
darkness, when at the sword's point a crown
is presented to him, as though in mimicry of
martyrdom, and thereupon put upon his head,
is admonished to resist and cast it off, and,
if you like, transfer it to his shoulder, saying
that Mithras is his crown. And thenceforth
he is never crowned; and he has that for a
mark to show who he is, if anywhere he be
subjected to trial in respect of his religion;
and he is at once believed to be a soldier of
Mithras if he throws the crown away — if he
say that in his god he has his crown. Let us
take note of the devices of the devil, who is
wont to ape some of God's things with no other
design than, by the faithfulness of his serv-
ants, to put us to shame, and to condemn us.


ELUCIDATIONS.

I.

(Usages, p. 94.)

FIere a reference to Bunsen's Hippolytus, vol. III., so often referred to in the former
volume, will be useful. A slight metaphrase will bring out the sense, perhaps, of this most
interesting portrait of early Christian usages.

In baptism, we use trine immersion, in honour of the trinal Name, after renouncing the
devil and his angels and the pomps and vanities of his kingdom.' But this trinal rite is a
ceremonial amplification of what is actually commanded. It was heretofore tolerated in
some places that communicants should take each one his portion, with his own hand, but
now we suffer none to receive this sacrament except at the hand of the minister. By our
Lord's own precept and example, it may be received at the hour of ordinary meals, and alike
by all the faithful whether men or women, yet we usually do this in our gatherings before
daybreak. Offerings are made in honour of our departed friends, on the anniversaries of
their deaths, which we esteem their true birthdays, as they are bom to a better life. We
kneel at other times, but on the Lord's day, and from the Paschal P'east to Pentecost we stand
in prayer, nor do we count it lawful to fast on Sundays. We are concerned if even a par-
ticle of the wine or bread, made ours, in the Lord's Supper, falls to the ground, by our care-
lessness. In all the ordinary occasions of life we furrow our foreheads with the sign of the
Cross, in which we glory none the less because it is regarded as our shame by the heathen in
presence of whom it is a profession of our faith.


See Kaye, pp. 408-415.


I04 ELUCIDATIONS.


He owns there is no Scripture for any of these usages, in which there was an a??iplifying of
the precepts of Christ. Let us note there was yet no superstitious usage even of this sign
of the Cross. It was an act by which, in suffering " shame for Jesus' name," they forti-
fied themselves against betraying the Master. It took the place, be it remembered, of
m/iumerad/e heathtn practices, and was a protest against them. It meant — "God forbid
that I should glory, save in the Cross." I express no personal opinion as to this ob-
servance, but give the explanation which the early Christians would have given. Tertul-
lian touched with Montanism, but not yet withdrawn from Catholic Communion, pleads the
common cause of believers.

II.

(Traditions, cap. iv., p. 95.)

The traditions here argued for respect things in their nature indifferent. And as our
author asserts the long continuance of such usages to be their chief justification, it is evi-
dent that he supposed them common from the Sub-apostolic age. There is nothing here to
justify amplificatiofis and traditions which, subsequently, came in like a flood to change prin-
ciples of the Faith once delivered to the Saints. Even in his little plea for Montanistic
revelations of some possible novelties, he pre-supposes that reason must be subject to Scrip-
ture and Apostolic Law. In a word, his own principle of " Prescription " must be honoured
even in things indifferent: if novel they are not Catholic.


m


V.


TO scapula;

[TRANSLATED BY THE REV. S. THELWALL.]


CHAP. I.

We are not in any great perturbation or
alarm about the persecutions we suffer from
the ignorance of men; for we have attached
ourselves to this sect, fully accepting the terms
of its covenant, so that, as men whose very
lives are not their own, we engage in these
conflicts, our desire being to obtain God's
promised rewards, and our dread lest the woes
with which He threatens an unchristian life
should overtake us. Hence we shrink not
from the grapple with your utmost rage, com-
ing even forth of our own accord to the con-
test; and condemnation gives us more pleas-
are than acquittal. We have sent, therefore,
this tract to you in no alarm about ourselves,
but in much concern for you and for all
our enemies, to say nothing of our friends.
For our religion commands us to love even
our enemies, and to pray for those who perse-
cute us, aiming at. a perfection all its own,
and seeking in its disciples something of a
higher type than the commonplace good-
ness of the world. For all love those who
love them; it is peculiar to Christians alone
to love those that hate them. Therefore,
mourning over your ignorance, and compas-
sionating human error, and looking on to
that future of which every day shows threaten-
ing signs, necessity is laid on us to come forth
in this way also, that we may set before you
the truths you will not listen to openly.

CHAP. II.

We are worshippers of one God, of whose
existence and character Nature teaches all
men; at whose lightnings and thunders you
tremble, whose benefits minister to your hap-
piness. You think that others, too, are gods,
whom we know to be devils. However, it is
a fundamental human right, a privilege of
nature, that every man should worship ac-


' [See Elucidation I. Written late in our author's life, this
tract contains no trace of Montanism, and shows that his heart was
with the common cause of all Christians. Who can give up such
an Ephraim without recalling the words of inspired love for the
erring?— Jer. xxxi. 20; Hos. xi. 8.]


cording to his own convictions: one man's
religion neither harms nor helps another man.
It is assuredly no part of religion to compel
religion — to which free-will and not .force
should lead us — the sacrificial victims even
being required of a willing mind. You will
render no real service to your gods by com-
pelling us to sacrifice. For they can have
no desire of offerings from the unwilling,
unless they are animated by a spirit of con-
tention, which is a thing altogether undivine.
Accordingly the true God bestows His bless-
ings alike on wicked men and on His own elect;
upon which account He has appointed an
eternal judgment, when both thankful and
unthankful will have to stand before His bar.
Yet you have never detected us — sacrilegious
wretches though you reckon us to be — in any
theft, far less in any sacrilege. But the rob-
bers of your temples, all of them swear by
your gods, and worship them; they are not
Christians, and yet it is they who are found
guilty of sacrilegious deeds. We have not
time to unfold in how many other ways your
gods are mocked and 'despised by their own
votaries. So, too, treason is falsely laid to
our charge, though no one has ever been able
to find followers of Albinus, or Niger, or
Cassius, among Christians; while the very
men who had sworn by the genii of the em-
perors, who had offered and vowed sacrifices
for their safety, who had often pronounced
condemnation on Christ's disciples, are till
this day found traitors to the imperial throne.
A Christian is enemy to none, least of all to
the Emperor of Rome, whom he knows to be
appointed by his God, and so cannot but love
and honour; and whose well-being moreover,
he must needs desire, with that of the empire
over which he reigns so long as the world shall
stand — for so long as that shall Rome con-
tinue.' To the emperor, therefore, we render


= [Kaye points out our author's inconsistencies on this matter.
If Caractacus ever made the speech ascribed to him (Bede, or
Gibbon, cap. Ixxi.) it would confirm the opinion of those who make
him a convert to Christ : *' Quando cadet Roma, cadet et muftdus."
Elucidation II.]


io6


TO SCAPULA.


[chap. IV.


such reverential homage as is lawful for us
and good for him; regarding him as the
human being next to God who from God
has received all his power, and is less than
God alone. And this will be according to
his own desires. For thus — as less only
than the true God — he is greater than all
besides. Thus he is greater than the very
gods themselves, even they, too, being sub-
ject to him. We therefore sacrifice for the
emperor's safety, but to our God and his, and
after the manner God has enjoined, in simple
prayer. For God, Creator of the universe,
has no need of odours or of blood. These
things are the. food of devils.'' But we not
only reject those wicked spirits: we overcome
them; we daily hold them up to contempt;
we exorcise them from their victims, as mul-
titudes can testify. So all the more we pray
for the imperial well-being, as those who seek
it at the hands of Him who is able to bestow
it. And one would think it must be abundantly
clear to you that the religious system under
whose rules we act is one inculcating a divine
patience; since, though our numbers are so
great — constituting all but the majority in
every city — we conduct ourselves so quietly
and modestly; I might perhaps say, known
rather as individuals than as organized com-
munities, and remarkable only for the refor-
mation of our former vices. For far be it from
us to take it ill that we have laid on us the very
things we wish, or in any way plot the ven-
geance at our own hands, which we expect to
come from God.

CHAP. III.

However, as we hav» already remarked, it
cannot but distress us that no state shall bear
unpunished the guilt of shedding Christian
blood; as you see, indeed, in what took place
during the presidency of Hilarian, for when
there had been some agitation about places of
sepulture for our dead, and the cry arose,
" No arecE — no burial-grounds for the Chris-
tians," it came that their own areay" their
threshing-floors, were awanting, for they gath-
ered in no harvests. As to the rains of the
bygone year, it is abundantly plain of what
they were intended to remind men — of the
deluge, no doubt, which in ancient times over-
took human unbelief and wickedness; and as
to the fires which lately hung all night over
the walls of Carthage, they who saw them
know what they threatened; and what the
preceding thunders pealed, they who were


' [(Jn this sort of Demonolofry see Kaye, pp. 203-207, with his
useful reference^ See De Spectacults, p. 80, supra."}
2 [An obvious play on the ambiguity of this word.]


hardened by them can tell. All these things
are signs of God's impending wrath, which
we must needs publish and proclaim in every
possible way; and in the meanwhile we must
pray it may be only local. Sure are they to
experience it one day in its universal and final
form, who interpret otherwise these samples of
it. That sun, too, in the metropolis of Utica,^
with light all but extinguished, was a portent
which could not have occurred from an or-
dinary eclipse, situated as the lord of day was
in his height and house. You have the astrol-
ogers, consult them about it. We can point
you also to the deaths of some provincial
rulers, who in their last hours had painful
memories of their sin in persecuting the fol-
lowers of Christ.-^ Vigellius Saturninus, who
first here used the sword against us, lost his
eyesight. Claudius Lucius Herminianus in
Cappadocia, enraged that his wife had become
a Christian, had treated the Christians with
great cruelty: well, left alone in his palace,
suffering under a contagious malady, he boiled
out in living worms, and was heard exclaiming,
"Let nobody know of it, lest the Christians
rejoice, and Christian wives take encourage-
ment." Afterwards he came to see his error
in having tempted so many from their sted-
fastness by the tortures he inflicted, and died
almost a Christian himself. In that doom
which overtook Byzantium, ^ Caecilius Capella
could not help crying out, "Christians, re-
joice ! " Yes, and the persecotors who seem
to themselves to have acted with impunity
shall not escape the day of judgment. For
you we sincerely wish it may prove to have
been a warning only, that, immediately after
you had condemned Mavilus of Adrumetum
to the wild beasts, you were overtaken by
those troubles, and that even now for the
same reason you are called to a blood-reckon-
ing. But do not forget the future.

CHAP. IV.

We who are without fear ourselves are not
seeking to frighten you, but we would save
all men if possible by warning them not to
fight with God. 5 You may perform the duties
of your charge, and yet remember the claims
of humanity; if on no other ground than that
you are liable to punishment yourself, (you
ought to do so). For is not your commission
simply to condemn those who confess their
guilt, and to give over to the torture those


3 [Notes of the time when this was written. See Kaye, p. 57.]

ij) very naturally;
but we may reserve remarks on such instances till we come to Lac-


4 [Christians remembered Herod (Acts, xii. 2j) very naturally;


tantius. But see Kaye (p. 102) who speaks unfavourably of them.]
5 [Our author uses the Greek (^17 Beoft.axflv) but not textually
of Acts V. 39.]


CHAP, v.]


TO SCAPULA.


107


who deny ? You see, then, how you trespass
yourselves against your instructions to wring
from the confessing a denial. It is, in fact,
an acknowledgment of our innocence that you
refuse to condemn us at once when we con-
fess. In doing your utmost to extirpate us,
if that is your object, it is innocence you as-
sail. But how many rulers, men more resolute
and more cruel than you are, have contrived
to get quit of such causes altogether, — as
Cincius Severus, who himself suggested the
remedy at Thysdris, pointing out how the
Christians should answer that they might se-
cure an acquittal; as Vespronius Candidus,
who dismissed from his bar a Christian, on
the ground that to satisfy his fellow-citizens
would break the peace of the community; as
Asper, who, in the case of a man who gave
up his faith under slight infliction of the tor-
ture, did not compel the offering of sacrifice,
having owned before, among the advocates
and assessors of court, that he was annoyed
at having had to meddle with such a case.
Pudens, too, at once dismissed a Christian
who was brought before him, perceiving from
the indictment that it was a case of vexatious
accusation; tearing the document in pieces,
he refused so much as to hear him without
the presence of his accuser, as not being con-
sistent with the imperial commands. All this
might be officially brought under your notice,
and by the very advocates, who are themselves
also under obligations to us, although in court
they give their voice as it suits them. The
clerk of one of them who was liable to be thrown
upon the ground by an evil spirit, was set free
from his affliction; as was also the relative of
another, and the little boy of a third. How
many men of rank (to say nothing of common
people) have been delivered from devils, and
healed of diseases ! Even Severus himself,
the father of Antonine, was graciously mind-
ful of the Christians; for he sought out the
Christian Proculus, surnamed Torpacion, the
steward of Euhodias, and in gratitude for his
having once cured him by anointing, he kept
him in his palace till the day of his death.'
Antonine, too, brought up as he was on Chris-
tian milk, was intimately acquainted with this
man. Both women and men of highest rank,
whom Severus knew well to be Christians,
were not merely permitted by him to remain
uninjured; but he even bore distinguished
testimony in their favour, and gave them
publicly back to us from the hands of a raging
populace. Marcus Aurelius also, in his ex-
pedition to Germany, by the prayers his
Christian soldiers offered to God, got rain in


I [Another note of time.


See Kaye, as before.]


that well-known thirst.' When, indeed, have

not droughts been put away by our kneelings
and our fastings ? At times like these, more-
over, the people crying to " the God of gods,
the alone Omnipotent," under the name of
Jupiter, have borne witness to our God. Then
we never deny the deposit placed in our hands;
we never pollute the marriage bed; we deal
faithfully with our wards; we give aid to the
needy; we render to none evil for evil. As for
those who falsely pretend to belong to us, and
whom we, too, repudiate, let them answer for
themselves. In a word, who has complaint
to make against us on other grounds? To
what else does the Christian devote himself,
save the affairs of his own community, which
during all the long period of its existence no
one has ever proved guilty of the incest or the
cruelty charged against it ? It is for freedom
from crime so singular, for a probity so great,
for righteousness, for purity, for faithfulness,
for truth, for the living God, that we are con-
signed to the flames; for this is a punishment
you are not wont to inflict either on the sacri-
legious, or on undoubted public enemies, or
on the treason-tainted, of whom you have so
many. Nay, even now our people are endur-
ing persecution from the governors of Legio
and Mauritania; but it is only with the sword,
as from the first it was ordained that we should
suffer. But the greater our conflicts, the
greater our rewards.

CHAP. V.

Your cruelty is our glory. Only see you to
it, that in having such things as these to en-
dure, we do not feel ourselves constrained to
rush forth to the combat, if only to prove that
we have no dread of them, but on the contrary,
even invite their infliction. When Arrius
Antoninus was driving things hard in Asia,
the whole Christians of the province, in one
united band, presented themselves before his
judgment-seat; on which, ordering a few to
be led forth to execution, he said to the rest,
" O miserable men, if you wish to die, you
have precipices or halters." If we should
take it into our heads to do the same thing
here, what will you make of so many thou-
sands, of such a multitude of men and women,
persons of every sex and every age and every
rank, when they present themselves before
you ? How many fires, how many swords will
be required ? What will be the anguish of
Carthage itself, which you will have to deci-
mate,^ as each one recognises there his rela-


2 [Compare Vol. I., p. 187, this Scries.]

3 [Compare De Fuga^ cap. xii. It is incredible that our author
could exaggerate in speaking to the chief magistrate of Car-
thage.]


io8


ELUCIDATIONS.


lives and companions, as he sees there it may-
be men of your own order, and noble ladies,
and all the leading persons of the city, and
either kinsmen or friends of those of your own
circle ? Spare thyself, if not us poor Christians !
Spare Carthage, if not thyself ! Spare the
province, which the indication of your purpose
has subjected to the threats and extortions at
once of the soldiers and of private enemies.

JVe have no master but God. He :s before
you, and cannot be hidden from you, but to
Him you can do no injury. But those whom
you regard as masters are only men, and one


day they themselves must die. Yet still this
community will be undying, for be assured
that just in the time of its seeming overthrow
it is built up into greater power. For all who
witness the noble patience of its martyrs, as
struck with misgivings, are inflamed with de-
sire to examine into the matter in question;'
and as soon as they come to know the truth,
they straightway enrol themselves its disciples.


» fMosheim's strange oversight, in neglecting ♦o include such
considerations, in accounting for the growth of the church, is
justly censured by Kaye, p. 124.]


ELUCIDATIONS.


(Scapula, cap. i., p. 105.)

Scapula was Proconsul of Carthage, and though its date is conjectural (a.d. 217), this
work gives valuable mdices of its time and circumstances. It was composed after the death
of Severus, to whom there is an allusion in chapter iv., after the destruction of Byzantium
(a.d. 196), to which there is a reference in chapter iii.; and Dr. Allix suggests, after the
dark day of Utica (a.d. 210) which he supposes to be referred to in the same chapter.
Cincius Severus, who is mentioned in chapter iv., was put to death by Severus, a.d. 198.

II.

(Caractacus, cap. ii., note 2, p. 105.)

Mr. Lewin {St. Paul, ii. 397), building on the fascinating theory of Archdeacon Williams,
thinks St. Paul's Claudia {Qu. Gladys 2^ may very well have been the daughter of Caradoc,
with whose noble character we are made acquainted by Tacitus. (Annals xii. 36.) And
Archdeacon Williams gives us very strong reason to believe he was a Christian. He may
very well have lived to behold the Coliseum completed. What more natural then, in view
of the cruelty against Christians there exercised, for the expressions with which he is credited ?
In this case his words contain an eloquent ambiguity, which Christians would appreciate, and
which may have been in our author's mind when he says — " quousque saeculum stabit."
To those who looked for the Second Advent, daily, this did not mean what the heathen might
suppose.

Bede's version of the speech (See Du Cange, II., 407.,) is this: *' Quandiu stabit Colyseus
— stabit et Roma: Quando cadet Colysevs — cadet et Roma: Quando cadet Roma — cadiCt et
mundus."


^


VI.

AD NATIONES;

[TRANSLATED BY DR. HOLMES.]


CHAP. I.' THE HATRED FELT BY THE HEATHEN

AGAINST THE CHRISTIANS IS UNJUST, BECAUSE
BASED ON CULPABLE IGNORANCE.

One proof of that ignorance of yours, which
condemns 3 whilst it excuses'* your injustice,
is at once apparent in the fact, that all who
once shared in your ignorance and hatred (of
the Christian religion), as soon as they have
come to know it, leave off their hatred when
they cease to be ignorant; nay more, they
actually themselves become what they had
hated, and take to hating what they had once
been. Day after day, indeed, you groan over
the increasing number of the Christians. Your
constant cry is, that the state is beset (by us);
that Christians are in your fields, in your
camps, in your islands. You grieve over it
as a calamity, that each sex, every age — in
short, every rank — is passing over from you
to us; yet you do not even after this set your
minds upon reflecting whether there be not
here some latent good. You do not allow
yourselves in suspicions which may prove too
true, 5 nor do you like ventures which may be
too near the mark.^ This is the only instance
in which human curiosity grows torpid. You
love to be ignorant of what other men rejoice
to have discovered ; you would rather not know
it, because you now cherish your hatred as if
you were aware that, (with the knowledge,)
your hatred would certainly come to an end.
Still,7 if there shall be no just ground for
hatred, it will surely be found to be the best


1 [As a recapitulation I insert this here to close this class of
argument for the reasons following.] This treatise resembles The
Apology, both in its general purport as a vindication of Christianity
against heathen prejudice, and in many of its expressions and
statements. So great is the resemblance that this shorter work
has been thought by some to have been a first draft of the longer
and perfect one. Tertullian, however, here addresses his expos-
tulations to the general public, while in The Apology it is the
rulers and magistrates of the empire whom he seeks to influence.
[Dr. Allix conjectures the date of this treatise to be about A.u. 217.
See Kaye, p. 50.]

2 Compare The Apology, c. i.

3Revincit. " Condemnat" is Tertullian's word in The Apol-

4 Defendit. " Excusat " in Apol.

5 Non licet rectius suspicari.

6 Non lubet propius experiri.

7 At quin.


course to cease from the past injustice.
Should, however, a cause have really existed,
there will be no diminution of the hatred, which
will indeed accumulate so much the more in
the consciousness of its justice; unless it be,
forsooth,^ that you are ashamed to cast off
your faults, 9 or sorry to free yourselves from
blame. '° I know very well with what answer
you usually meet the argument from our rapid
increase." That indeed must not, you say, be
hastily accounted a good thing which converts
a great number of persons, and gains them
over to its side. I am aware how the mind is
apt to take to evil courses. How many there
are which forsake virtuous living ! How many
seek refuge in the opposite ! Many, no
doubt;" nay, very many, as the last days ap-
proach.'^ But such a comparison as this fails
in fairness of application; for all are agreed in
thinking thus of the evil-doer, so that not even
the guilty themselves, who take the wrong side,
and turn away from the pursuit of good to
perverse ways, are bold enough to defend evil
as good.'-* Base things excite their fear, im-
pious ones their shame. In short, they are
eager for concealment, they shrink from pub-
licity, they tremble when caught; when ac-
cused, they deny; even when tortured, they
do not readily or invariably confess (their
crime); at all events, 's they grieve when they
are condemned. They reproach themselves
for their past life; their change from inno-
cence to an evil disposition they even attribute
to fate. They cannot say that it is not a
wrong thing, therefore they will not admit it
to be their own act. As for the Christians,
however, in what does their case resemble
this? No one is ashamed; no one is sorry,
except for his former (sins).'*^ If he is pointed


8 Nisi si.

9 Emendari pudet.
10 Excusari piget.

" Redundantia: nostrae.

" Bona fide.

'3 Pro extremitatibus temjDorum.

»4 Or perhaps, " to maintain evil in preference to good."

»5 Certe.

»6 Pristinorum. In the corresponding passage {Apol. i.) the
phrase is, " nisi plane retro non fuisse," i.e., *' except that he was
not a Christian long ago."


no


AD NATIONES.


[book I.


I


at (for his religion), he glories in it; if dragged
to trial, he does not resist; if accused, he
makes no defence. When questioned, he
confesses; when condemned, he rejoices.
What sort of evil is this, in which the nature
of evil comes to a standstill ? *

CHAP. II. =" THE HEATHEN PERVERTED JUDG-
MENT IN THE TRIAL OF CHRISTIANS. THEY
WOULD BE MORE CONSISTENT IF THEY DIS-
PENSED WITH ALL FORM OF TRIAL. TERTUL-
LIAN URGES THIS WITH MUCH INDIGNATION.

In this case you actually ^ conduct trials
contrary to the usual form of judicial process
against criminals; for when culprits are
brought up for trial, should they deny the
charge, you press them for a confession by
tortures. When Christians, however, confess
without compulsion, you aply the torture to in-
duce them to deny. What great perverseness
is this, when you stand out against confession,
and change the use of the torture, compelling
the man who frankly acknowledges the charge^
to evade it, and him who is unwilling, to deny
it ? You, who preside for the purpose of ex-
torting truth, demand falsehood from us alone,
that we may declare ourselves not to be what
we are. I suppose you do not want us to be
bad men, and therefore you earnestly wish to
exclude us from that character. To be sure,^
you put others on the rack and the gibbet, to
get them to deny what they have the repu-
tation of being. Now, when they deny (the
charge against them), you do not believe them;
but on our denial, you instantly believe us.
If you feel sure that we are the most injurious
of men, why, even in processes against us, are
we dealt with by you differently from other
offenders ? I do not mean that you make no
account of "^ either an accusation or a denial
(for your practice is not hastily to condemn
men without an indictment and a defence);
but, to take an instance in the trial of a mur-
derer, the case is not at once ended, or the
inquiry satisfied, on a man's confessing him-
self the murderer. However complete his
confession, 7 you do not readily believe him;
but over and above this, you inquire into ac-
cessory circumstances — how often had he com-
mitted murder; with what weapons, in what
place, with what plunder, accomplices, a7id
abettors after the fact' (was the crime perpe-


I Cessat.

aComp. c. ii. of The Apology,

3 Ipsi. '

4 Gratis reum.

5 Sane.

6 Neqne spatium commodctis.

7 Quanquam confessis.

8 Receptoribus, " concealers" of the crime.


trated) — to the end that nothing whatever re-
specting the criminal might escape detection,
and that every means should be at hand for
arriving at a true verdict. In our case, on
the contrary,' whom you believe to be guilty
of more atrocious and numerous crimes, you
frame your indictments '° in briefer and lighter
terms. I suppose you do not care to load
with accusations men whom you earnestly wish
to get rid of, or else you do not think it nec-
essary to inquire into matters which are known
to you already. It is, however, all the more
perverse that you compel us to deny charges
about which you have the clearest evidence.
But, indeed," how much more consistent were
it with your hatred of us to dispense with all
forms of judicial process, and to strive with
all your might not to urge us to say " No,"
and so have to acquit the objects of your
hatred; but to confess all and singular the
crimes laid to our charge, that your resent-
ments might be the better glutted with an ac-
cumulation of our punishments, when it be-
comes known how many of those feasts each
one of us may have celebrated, and how many
incests we may have committed under cover
of the night ! What am I saying ? Since your
researches for rooting out our society must
needs be made on a wide scale, you ought to
extend your inquiry against our friends and
companions. Let our infanticides and the
dressers (of our horrible repasts) be brought
out, — ay, and the very dogs which minister
to our (incestuous) nuptials;" then the busi-
ness (of our trial) would be without a fault.
Even to the crowds which throng the spectacles
a zest would be given; for with how much
greater eagerness would they resort to the
theatre, when one had to fight in the lists who
haci devoured a hundred babies ! For since
such horrid and monstrous crimes are reported
of us, they ought, of course, to be brought to
light, lest they should seem to be incredible,
and the public detestation of us should begin
to cool. For most persons are slow to believe
such things, '3 feeling a horrible disgust at sup-
posing that our nature could have an appetite


9 Potto.

lo Eloj^ia.

" Immo.

»2 We have for once departed from Oehler's text, and preferred
Rigault's : " Perducerentur in/antarii et coci, ipsi canes pronubi,
emendata esset res." The sense is evident from The Apology, c.
vii. : " It is said that we are guilty of most horrible crimes; that
in the celebration of our sacrament we put a child to death, which
we afterward devour, and at the end of our banquet revel in incest ;
that we employ dogs as ministers of our impure delights, to over-
throw the candles, and thus to provide darkness, and remove all
shame which might interfere with these impious lusts" (Cheval-
lier's translation). These calumnies were very common, and are
noticed by Justin Martyr, Minucius Felix, Eusebius, Athenagoras,
and (Jrigen, who attributes their origin to the Jews. Oehler reads
in/antario'^ after the Agobardine codex and editio prhiceps, and
quotes Martial (Epigr. iv. 88), where the word occurs in the sense
of an inordinate love of children.

'3 Nam et pleriquc fidem talium tempcrant.


CHAP. IV.]


AD NATIONES.


1 1 1


for the food of wild beasts, when it has pre-
cluded these from all concubinage with the
race of man,

CHAP. III.^ THE GREAT OFFENCE IN THE

CHRISTIANS LIES IN THEIR VERY NAME.
THE NAME VINDICATED.

Since, therefore, you who are in other cases
most scrupulous and persevering in investigat-
ing charges of far less serious import, relin-
quish your care in cases like ours, which are
so horrible, and of such surpassing sin that
impiety is too mild a word for them, by de-
clining to hear confession, which should al-
ways be an important process for those who
conduct judicial proceedings; and failing to
make a full inquiry, which should be gone
into by such as sue for a condemnation, it be-
comes evident that the crime laid to our charge
consists not of any sinful conduct, but lies
wholly in our naine. If, indeed,^ any real
crimes were clearly adducible against us, their
very names would condemn us, if found ap-
plicable,^ so that distinct sentences would be
pronounced against us in this wise: Let that
murderer, or that incestuous criminal, or
whatever it be that we are charged with, be
led to execution, be crucified, or be thrown
to the beasts. Your sentences, however,-* im-
port only that one has confessed himself a
Christian. No name of a crime stands against
us, but only the crime of a name. Now this
in very deed is neither more nor less than s the
entire odium which is felt against us. The
name is the cause: some mysterious force in-
tensified by your ignorance assails it, so that
you do not wish to know for certain that which
for certain you are sure you know nothing of;
and therefore, further, you do not believe
things which are not submitted to proof, and,
lest they should be easily refuted,^ you refuse
to make inquiry, so that the odious name is
punished under the presumption of (real)
crimes. In order, therefore, that the issue
may be withdrawn from the offensive name,
we are compelled to deny it; then upon our
denial we are acquitted, with an entire absolu-
tion 7 for the past: we are no longer murderers,
no longer incestuous, because we have lost
that name.^ But since this point is dealt with
in a place of its own,' do you tell us plainly
why you are pursuing this name even to ex-
tirpation ? What crime, what offence, what


1 Comp. The Apology^ cc. i. and ii.

2 Adeo si.

3 Si accommodarent. '
4Porro.

5 Haec ratio est.

6 Reprobentur.

7 Impunitate.

8 i.e., the name " Christians."

9 By the " suo loco," Tertullian refers to The Apology.


fault is there in a name ? For you are barred
by the rule '° which puts it out of your power
to allege crimes (of any man), which no legal
action moots, no indictment specifies, no sen-
tence enumerates. In any case which is sub-
mitted to the judge," inquired into against the
defendant, responded to by him or denied,
and cited from the bench, I acknowledge a
legal charge. Concerning, then, the merit of
a name, whatever offence names may be
charged with, whatever impeachment words
may be amenable to, I for my part " think, that
not even a complaint is due to a word or a
name, unless indeed it has a barbarous sound,
or smacks of ill-luck, or is immodest, or is
indecorous for the speaker, or unpleasant to
the hearer. These crimes in (mere) words and
names are just like barbarous words and
phrases, which have their fault, and their sole-
cism, and their absurdity of figure. The
name Christiati, however, so far as its meaning
goes, bears the sense of anointing. Even
when by a faulty pronunciation you call us
" Chrestians " (for you are not certain about
even the sound of this noted name), you in
fact lisp out the sense of pleasantness and
goodness. '3 You are therefore vilifying'* in
harmless men even the harmless name we bear,
which is not inconvenient for the tongue, nor
harsh to the ear, nor injurious to a single be-
ing, nor rude for our country, being a good
Greek word, as many others also are, and
pleasant in sound and sense. Surely, surely,'^
names are not things which deserve punish-
ment by the sword, or the cross, or the beasts.

CHAP. IV. '^ — THE TRUTH HATED IN THE CHRIS-
TIANS; SO IN MEASURE WAS IT, OF OLD, IN


SOCRATES.
TIANS.


THE VIRTUES OF THE CHRIS-


But the sect, you say, is punished in the
name of its founder. Now in the first place
it is, no doubt a fair and usual custom that a
sect should be marked out by the name of its
founder, since philosophers are called Pytha-
goreans and Platonists after their masters; in
the same way physicians are called after Era-
sistratus, and grammarians after Aristarchus.
If, therefore, a sect has a bad character be-
cause its founder was bad, it is punished '^ as
the traditional bearer'^ of a bad name. But
this would be indulging in a rash assumption.


i'^ Praescribitur vobis.
" Praesidi.
" Ego.

'3 XpijoTTo? means both ^^ pleasant ^' and " good ;'^ and the
heathen founded thi^ word with the sacred name XpiO'rot.
'4 Detinetis.
'5 Et utique.

i6 See The Apology, c. iii.
'7 Plectitur.
i8 Tradux.


112


AD NATIONES.


[book I.


The first step was to find out what the founder |
was, that his sect might be understood, instead
of hindering' inquiry into the founder's char-
acter from the sect. But in our case," by
being necessarily ignorant of the sect, through
your ignorance of its founder, or else by not
taking a fair survey of the founder, because
you make no inquiry into his sect, you fasten
merely on the name, just as if you vilified in
it both sect and founder, whom you know
nothing of whatever. And yet you openly
allow your philosophers the right of attaching
themselves to any school, and bearing its
founder's name as their own; and nobody
stirs up any hatred against them, although
both in public and in private they bark out^
their bitterest eloquence against your customs,
rites, ceremonies, and manner of life, with so
much contempt for the laws, and so little re-
spect for persons, that they even flaunt their
licentious words'* against the emperors them-
selves with impunity. And yet it is the truth,
which is so troublesome to the world, that
these philosophers affect, but which Christians
possess: they therefore who have it in posses-
sion afford the greater displeasure, because he
who affects a thing plays with it; he who pos-
sesses it maintains it. For example, ^ Socrates
was condemned on that side (of his wisdom) in
which he came nearest in his search to the
truth, by destroying your gods. Although
the name of Christian was not at that time in
the world, yet truth was always suffering con-
demnation. Now you will not deny that he
was a wise man, to whom your own Pythian
(god) had borne witness. Socrates, he said,
was the wisest of men. Truth overbore Apollo,
and made him pronounce even against himself;
since he acknowledged that he was no god,
when he affirmed that that was the wisest man
who was denying the gods. However,^ on
your principle he was the less wise because he
denied the gods, although, in truth, he was
all the wiser by reason of this denial. It is
just in the same way that you are in the habit
of saying of us: " Lucius Titius is a good
man, only he is a Christian;" while another
says; "I wonder that so worthy ^ a man as
Caius Seius has become a Christian.^" Ac-
cording to 9 the blindness of their folly men
praise what they know, (and) blame what they
are ignorant of; and that which they know,
they vitiate by that which they do not know.


It occurs to none (to consider) whether a man
is not good and wise because he is a Christian,
or therefore a Christian because he is wise and
good, although it is more usual in human con-
duct to determine obscurities by what is mani-
fest, than to prejudice what is manifest by
what is obscure. Some persons wonder that
those whom they had known to be unsteady,
worthless, or wicked before they bore this '°
name, have been suddenly converted to vir-
tuous courses; and yet they better know how
to wonder (at the change) than to attain to it;
others are so obstinate in their strife as to do
battle with their own best interests, which they
have it in their power to secure by intercourse "
with that hated name. I know more than one "
husband, formerly anxious about their wives'
conduct, and unable to bear even mice to
creep into their bed-room without a groan of
suspicion, who have, upon discovering the
cause of their new assiduity, and their un-
wonted attention to the duties of home,'^ of-
fered the entire loan of their wives to others,^
disclaimed all jealousy, (and) preferred to
be the husbands of she-wolves than of Chris-
tian women: they could commit themselves to
a perverse abuse of nature, but they could not
permit their wives to be reformed for the
better ! A father disinherited his son, with
whom he had ceased to find fault. A master
sent his slave to bridewell, '^ whom he had even
found to be indispensable to him. As soon as
they discovered them to be Christians, they
wished they were criminals again; for our dis-
cipline carries its own evidence in itself, nor are
we betrayed by anything else than our own
goodness, just as bad men also become conspic-
uous '^ by their own evil. Else how is it that we
alone are, contrary to the lessons of nature,
branded as very evil because of our good ?
For what mark do we exhibit except the prime
wisdom, '7 which teaches us not to worship the
frivolous works of the human hand; the tem-
perance, by which we abstain from other
men's goods; the chastity, which we pollute
not even with a look; the compassion, which
prompts us to help the needy; the truth itself,
which makes us give offence; and liberty, for
which we have even learned to die ? Whoever
wishes to understand who the Christians are,
must needs employ these marks for their dis-
covery.


» Retinere.

2 At nunc.

3 Elatrcnt.

4 Libertatem suam, " their liberty of speech.

5 Denique.

6 Porro.

7 Gravem, " earnest."

8 Conip. The Apology , c. iii.

9 Pro.


10 i.e., the Christian.

" De commercio.

" Unum atque alium. The sense being />iurai, we have so
given it all through.

'3 Captivitatis (as if theirs was a self-inflicted captivity at home).

14 Omnem uxorem patientiam obtulisse (comp. Apology., middle
of c. xxxix.).

'5 In erga.stulum.

"5 Radiant.

17 He means the religion of Christ, which he in b. ii. c. ii. con-
trasts with " the mere wisdom " of the philosophers.


CHAP. VI.]


AD NATIONES.


113


CHAP. V.' THE INCONSISTENT LIFE OF ANY

FALSE CHRISTIAN NO MORE CONDEMNS TRUE
DISCIPLES OF CHRIST, THAN A PASSING CLOUD
OBSCURES A SUMMER SKY.

As to your saying of us that we are a most
shameful set, and utterly steeped in luxury,
avarice, and depravity, we will not deny that
this is true of some. It is,' however, a suf-
ficient testimonial for our name, that this
cannot be said of all, not even of the greater
part of us. It must happen even in the
healthiest and purest body, that a mole should
grow, or a wart arise on it, or freckles disfig-
ure it. Not even the sky itself is clear with
so perfect^ a serenity as not to be flecked
with some filmy cloud. ^ A slight spot on the
face, because it is obvious in so conspicuous
a part, only serves to show purity of the entire
complexion. The goodness of the larger por-
tion is well attested by the slender flaw. But
although you prove that some of our people
are evil, you do not hereby prove that they
are Christians. Search and see whether there
is any sect to which (a partial shortcoming) is
imputed as a general stain. '^ You are accus-
tomed in conversation yourselves to say, in dis-
paragement of us,*' Why is so-and-so deceitful,
when the Christians are so self-denying ? why
merciless, when they are so merciful ? " You
thus bear your testimony to the fact that this
is not the character of Christians, when you
ask, in the way of a retort, ^ how men who are
reputed to be Christians can be of such and
such a disposition. There is a good deal of
difference between an imputation and a name,*^
between an opinion and the truth. For names
were appointed for the express purpose of
setting their proper limits between mere des-
ignation and actual condition. ^ How many
indeed are said to be philosophers, who for all
that do not fulfil the law of philosophy ? All
bear the name in respect of their profession;
but they hold the designation without the
. excellence of the profession, and they disgrace
the real thing under the shallow pretence of its
name. Men are not straightway of such and
such a character, because they are said to be
so; but when they are not, it is vain to say so
of them: they only deceive people who attach
reality to a name, when it is its consistency
with fact which decides the condition implied
in the name.® And yet persons of this doubtful


1 Compare The Apology\ cc. ii. xliv. xlvi.

2 Colata, " filtered" [or " strained"— ^//(i/tj.]

i Ut non alicujus nubiculae flocculo resignetur. This picturesque
language defies translation.

4 Malitiae.

5 Dum retorquetis.

6 Inter crimen et nomen.

7 Inter dici et esse.

8 Status nominis.

8


stamp do not assemble with us, neither do
they belong to our communion: by their delin-
quency they become yours once more,' since
we should be unwilling to mix even with them
whom your violence and cruelty compelled to
recant. Yet we should, of course, be more
ready to have included amongst us those who
have unwillingly forsaken our discipline than
wilful apostates. However, you have no right
to call them Christians, to whom the Chris-
tians themselves deny that name, and who
have not learned to deny themselves.

CHAP. VI. '^^ THE INNOCENCE OF THE CHRIS-
TIANS NOT COMPROMISED BY THE INIQUITOUS
LAWS WHICH WERE MADE AGAINST THEM.

Whenever these statements and answers of
ours, which truth suggests of its own accord,
press and restrain your conscience, which is
the witness of its own ignorance, you betake
yourselves in hot haste to that poor altar of
refuge," the authority of the laws, because
these, of course, would never punish the
offensive " sect, if their deserts had not been
fully considered by those who made the laws.
Then what is it which has prevented a like
consideration on the part of those who put the
laws in force, when, in the case of all other
crimes which are similarly forbidden and pun-
ished by the laws, the penalty is not inflicted '^
until it is sought by regular process ? ^*- Take,'s
for instance, the case of a murderer or an
adulterer. An examination is ordered touch-
ing the particulars '^ of the crime, even though
it is patent to all what its nature '' is. What-
ever wrong has been done by the Christian
ought to be brought to light. No law forbids
inquiry to be made; on the contrary, inquiry
is made in the interest of the laws.'^ For
how are you to keep the law by precautions
against that which the law forbids, if you
neutralize the carefulness of the precaution
by your failing to perceive '' what it is you
have to keep? No law must keep to itself''
the knowledge of its own righteousness," but
(it owes it) to those from whom it claims obe-
dience. The law, however, becomes an object
of suspicion when it declines to approve itself.
Naturally enough,** then, are the laws against


9 Denuo.

'° Compare The Apology^ c. iv.
" Ad arulam quandani.
'2 Istam.

«3Cessat, " loiters."
M Rcquiratur.
'5 Lege.
'6 Ordo.
»7 Genus.

'8 Literally, " holding the inquiry makes for the laws."
'9 Per defect ionem agnoscendi.
=oSibi debet.

21 Justitiae suae.

22 Merito.


114


AD NATIONES.


[book I.


the Christians supposed to be just and deserv-
ing of respect and observance, just as long as
men remain ignorant of their aim and purport;
but when this is perceived, their extreme in-
justice is discovered, and they are deservedly
rejected with abhorrence,' along with (their
instruments of torture) — the swords, the
crosses, and the lions. An unjust law secures
no respect. In my opinion, however, there
is a suspicion among you that some of these
laws are unjust, since not a day passes with-
out your modifying their severity and iniquity
by fresh deliberations and decisions.

CHAP. VII. » THE CHRISTIANS DEFAMED. A

SARCASTIC DESCRIPTION OF FAME; ITS DE-
CEPTION AND ATROCIOUS SLANDERS OF THE
CHRISTIANS LENGTHILY DESCRIBED.

Whence comes it to pass, you will say to
us, that such a character could have been at-
tributed to you, as to have justified the law-
makers perhaps by its imputation ? Let me
ask on my side, what voucher they had then,
or you now, for the truth of the imputation ?
(You answer,) Fame. Well, now, is not this —

" Fama malum, quo non aliud velocius uUum ? " 3

Now, why a plague^*- if it be always true?
It never ceases from lying; nor even at the
moment when it reports the truth is it so free
from the wish to lie, as not to interweave the
false with the true, by processes of addition,
diminution, or confusion of various facts. In-
deed,s such is its condition, that it can only
continue to exist while it lies. For it lives
only just so long as it fails to prove anything.
As soon as it proves itself true, it falls; and,
as if its office of reporting news were at an
end, it quits its post: thenceforward the thing
is held to be a fact, and it passes under that
name. No one, then, says, to take an in-
stance, "The report is that this happened at
Rome," or, "The rumour goes that he has
got a province; " but, " He has got a prov-
ince," and, "This happened at Rome." No-
body mentions a rumour except at an uncer-
tainty, because nobody can be sure of a
rumour, but only of certain knowledge; and
none but a fool believes a rumour, because no
wise man puts faith in an uncertainty. In
however wide a circuit^ a report has been cir-
culated, it must needs have originated some


» Despuuntur.

2 Comp. The Apology, cc. vii, viii.

ZyEneid, iv. 174.

" Fame, than which never plapue that i
Its way more swiftly wins,"— Coningtc
4" A plague ' = malum.
5 Quid ? quod " Yea more."
f> Ambitione.


time or other from one mouth; afterwards it
creeps on somehow to ears and tongues which
pass it on ^ and so obscures the humble error
in which it began, that no one considers
whether the mouth which first set it a-going
disseminated a falsehood, — a circumstance
which often happens either from a temper of
rivalry, or a suspicious turn, or even the pleas-
ure of feigning news. It is, however, well
that time reveals all things, as your own say-
ings and proverbs testify; yea, as nature her-
self attests, which has so ordered it that noth-
ing lies hid, not even that which fame has not
reported. See, now, what a witness^ you have
suborned against us: it has not been able up
to this time to prove the report it set in mo-
tion, although it has had so long a time to
recommend it to our acceptance. This name
of ours took its rise in the reign of Augustus;
under Tiberius it was taught with all clearness
and publicity; 9 under Nero it was ruthlessly
condemned, '° and you may weigh its worth
and character even from the person of its per-
secutor. If that prince was a pious man,
then the Christians are impious; if he was just,
if he was pure, then the Christians are unjust
and impure; if he was not a public enemy, we
are enemies of our country: what sort of
men we are, our persecutor himself shows,
since he of course punished what produced
hostility to himself." Now, although every
other institution which existed under Nero
has been destroyed, yet this of ours has firmly
remained — righteous, it would seem, as being
unlike the author (of its persecution). Two
hundred and fifty years, then, have not yet
passed since our life began. During the in-
terval there have been so many criminals; so
many crosses have obtained immortality; " so
many infants have been slain; so many loaves
steeped in blood; so many extinctions of
candles; '^ so many dissolute marriages. And
up to the present time it is mere report which
fights against the Christians. No doubt it
has a strong support in the wickedness of the
human mind, and utters its falsehoods with
more success among cruel and savage men.
For the more inclined you are to malicious-
ness, the more ready are you to believe evil;
in short, men more easily believe the evil that
is false, than the good which is true. Now,
if injustice has left any place within you for
the exercise of prudence in investigating the
truth of reports, justice of course demanded


7 Traduces.

8 I'rodijiiam. The word is " indicem " in The Apology.

9 Disciplina ejus illuxit.
»o Damnatio invaluit.

" ^mula sibi.

12 Divinitatem consecutae.

*3 See above, c. ii. note.


CHAP. VII.]


AD NATIONES.


"5


that you should examine by whom the report
could have been spread among the multitude,
and thus circulated through the world. For it
could not have been by the Christians them-
selves, I suppose, since by the very constitu-
tion and law of all mysteries the obligation of
silence is imposed. How much more would
this be the case in such (mysteries as are as-
cribed to us), which, if divulged, could not
fail to bring down instant punishment from
the prompt resentment of men ! Since, there-
fore, the Christians are not their own betray-
ers, it follows that it must be strangers. Now
I ask, how could strangers obtain knowledge
of us, when even true and lawful mysteries
exclude every stranger from witnessing them,
unless illicit ones are less exclusive? Well,
then, it is more in keeping with the character
of strangers both to be ignorant (of the true
state of a case), and to invent (a false ac-
count). Our domestic servants (perhaps) lis-
tened, and peeped through crevices and holes,
and stealthily got information of our ways.
What, then, shall we say when our servants
betray them to you ? ^ It is better, (to be
sure,)^ for us all not to be betrayed by any;
but still, if our practices be so atrocious, how
much more proper is it when a righteous indig-
nation bursts asunder even all ties of domestic
fidelity ? How was it possible for it to endure
what horrified the mind and affrighted the eye ?
This is also a wonderful thing, both that he
who was so overcome with impatient excite-
ment as to turn informer,^ did not likewise
desire to prove (what he reported), and that
he who heard the informer's story did not care
to see for himself, since no doubt the reward-*
is equal both for the informer who proves
what he reports, and for the hearer who con-
vinces himself of the credibility s of what he
hears. But then you say that (this is pre-
cisely what has taken place) : first came the
rumour, then the exhibition of the proof; first
the hearsay, then the inspection; and after
this, fame received its commission. Now
this, I must say,^ surpasses all admiration,
that that was once for all detected and di-
vulged which is being for ever repeated, un-
less, forsooth, we have by this time ceased
from the reiteration of such things 7 (as are
alleged of us). But we are called still by
the same (offensive) name, and we are sup-
posed to be still engaged in the same prac-


1 i.e., What is the value of such evidence ?

2 We have inserted this phrase as the sentence is strongly ironi-
cal.

3 Deferre, an infinitive of purpose, of which construction of
our author Oehler gives examples.

4 Fructus.

5 Si etiam sibi credat.
6Quidem.

7 Talia factitare.


tices, and we multiply from day to day;
the more^ we are, to the more become we
objects of hatred. Hatred increases as the
material for it increases. Now, seeing that
the multitude of offenders is ever advanc-
ing, how is it that the crowd of informers
does not keep equal pace therewith ? To
the best of my belief, even our manner of
life' has become better known; you know the
very days of our assemblies; therefore we are
both besieged, and attacked, and kept prison-
ers actually in our secret congregations. Yet
who ever came upon a half-consumed corpse
(amongst us) ? Who has detected the traces
of a bite in our blood-steeped loaf ? Who has
discovered, by a sudden light invading our
darkness, any marks of impurity, I will not
say of incest, (in our feasts) ? If we save our-
selves by a bribe '° from being dragged out be-
fore the public gaze with such a character,
how is it that we are still oppressed ? We
have it indeed in our own power not to be
thus apprehended at all; for who either sells
or buys information about a crime, if the
crime itself has no existence ? But why need
I disparagingly refer to " strange spies and
informers, when you allege against us such
charges as we certainly do not ourselves di-
vulge with very much noise — either as soon as
you hear of them, if we previously show them
to you, or after you have yourselves dis-
covered them, if they are for the time con-
cealed from you ? For no doubt," when any
desire initiation in the mysteries, their cus-
tom is first to go to the master or father of
the sacred rites. Then he will say (to the
applicant). You must bring an infant, as a
guarantee for our rites, to be sacrificed, as
well as some bread to be broken and dipped
in his blood; you also want candles, and dogs
tied together to upset them, and bits of meat
to rouse the dogs. Moreover, a mother too,
or a sister, is necessary for you. What, how-
ever, is to be said if you have neither ? I sup-
pose in that case you could not be a genuine
Christian. Now, do let me ask you. Will such
things, when reported by strangers, bear to
be spread about (as charges against us) ? It
is impossible for such persons to understand
proceedings in which they take no part.*^ The
first step of the process is perpetrated with
artifice; our feasts and our marriages are
invented and detailed '* by ignorant persons,


8 We read "quo," and not " quod," because.

9 Conversatio.

'" This refers to a calumny which the heathen frequently spread
about the Christians.

" Detrectem or simply "treat of," " refer to," like the simple
verb " tractare ".

«2 The irony of all this passage is evident.

'3 Diversum opus.

»4 Subjiciuntur "are stealthily narrated."


ii6


AD NATIONES.


[book I.


who had never before heard about Christian
mysteries. And though they afterwards can-
not help acquiring some knowledge of them,
it is even then as having to be administered
by others whom they bring on the scene.'
Besides, how absurd is it that the profane
know mysteries which the priest knows not !
They keep them all to themselves, then,'
and take them for granted ; and so these trage-
dies, (worse than those) of Thyestes or CEdi-
pus, do not at all come forth to light, nor find
their way 3 to the public. Even more vora-
cious bites take nothing away from the credit -^
of such as are initiated, whether servants or
masters. If, however, none of these allega-
tions can be proved to be true, how incalculable
must be esteemed the grandeur (of that relig-
ion) which is manifestly not overbalanced even
by the burden of these vast atrocities ! O ye
heathen, who have and deserve our pity,^ be-
hold, we set before you the promise which our
sacred system offers. It guarantees eternal life
to such as follow and observe it; on the other
hand, it threatens with the eternal punishment
of an unending fire those who are profane and
hostile; while to both classes alike is preached
a resurrection from the dead. We are not
now concerned ^ about the doctrine of these
(verities), which are discussed in their proper
place. 7 Meanwhile, however, believe them,
even as we do ourselves, for I want to know
whether you are ready to reach them, as we
do, through such crimes. Come, whosoever
you are, plunge your sword into an infant; or
if that is another's office, then simply gaze at
the breathing creature^ dying before it has
lived; at any rate, catch its fresh » blood in
which to steep your bread; then feed yourself
without stint; and whilst this is going on, re-
cline. Carefully distinguish the places where
your mother or your sister may have made
their bed; mark them well, in order that, when
the shades of night have fallen upon them,
putting of course to the test the care of every
one of you, you may not make the awkward
mistake of alighting on somebody else:"° you


I Tnducunt.

= It is difficult to see what this " tacent igitur" means without
referring to the similar passage in The Apology (end of c. viii.).
which supphes a link wanted in the context. " At all events,
says he, " they know this afterward, and yet submit to it, and al-
low it. They /ear to be punished^ while, if they proclaimed the
truth, they would deserve universal approbation. Tertullian here
states what the enemies of the Chri.stians used to allege against
them. After discovering the alleged atrocities of their secret as-
semblies, they kept their knowledge forsooth to themselves, being
afraid of the consequences of a disclosure, «tc.

3 We have for convenience treated "protrahunt" {q.d. " nor
do they report them ") as a neuter verb.

4 Even worse than Thyestean atrocities would be believed of
them.

3 Miserse atque miserandz.

6 Viderimus.

7 See below, in c. xix.

8 Animam.

9 Rudem, " hardly formed."
10 Extraneam.


would have to make an atonement, if you
failed of the incest. When you have effected
all this, eternal life will be in store for you.
I want you to tell me whether you think eter-
nal life worth such a price. No, indeed,"
you do not believe it: even if you did believe
it, I maintain that you would be unwilling to
give (the fee); or if willing, would be unable.
But why should others be able if you are un-
able ? Why should you be able if others are
unable ? What would you wish impunity (and)
eternity to stand you in ? " Do you suppose
that these (blessings) can be bought by us at
any price ? Have Christians teeth of a differ-
ent sort from others ? Have they more ample
jaws ? '3 Are they of different nerve for incest-
uous lust ? I trow not. It is enough for us
to differ from you in condition '■♦ by truth alone.

CHAP. VIII. 'S THE CALUMNY AGAINST THE

CHRISTIANS ILLUSTRATED IN THE DISCOVERY
OF PSAMMETICHUS. REFUTATION OF THE
STORY.

We are indeed said to be the " third race "
of men. What, a dog-faced race ? '^ Or broad-
ly shadow-footed ? '^ Or some subterranean '^
Antipodes? If you attach any meaning to
these names, pray tell us what are the first
and the second race, that so we may know
something of this "third." Psammetichus
thought that he had hit upon the ingenious
discovery of the primeval man. He is said to
have removed certain new-born infants from
all human intercourse, and to have entrusted
them to a nurse, whom he had previously de-
prived of her tongue, in order that, being
completely exiled from all sound of the human
voice, they might form their speech without
hearing it; and thus, deriving it from them-
selves alone, might indicate what that first
nation was whose speech was dictated by na-
ture. Their first utterance was Bekkos, a
word which means ''''bread'' in the language of
Phrygia: the Phrygians, therefore, are sup-
posed to be the first of the human race.'^ But
it will not be out of place if we make one obser-
vation,with a view to show how your faith aban-
dons itself more to vanities than to verities.


" Immo idcirco.

" Quanto ronstare.

'3" An alii ordines dentium Christianorum, et alii specus fauci-
um ? " (literally, " Have Christians other sets of teeth, and other
caverns of jaws ? ") This seems to refer to voracious animals like the
shark, whose terrible teeth, lying in several rows, and greediness
to swallow anything, however incongruous, that comes in its way,
are well-known facts in natural history.

M Positione.

'S Compare The Apology y c. viii.

'^Cynopa:. This class would furnish the unnatural ^^ teeth,''''
and "j'aTvs," just referred to.

'7 Sciapodes with broad feet producing a large shade ; suited
for the " incestuous lust " above mentioned.

'8 Literally, " which come up from under ground."

•9 Tertullian got this story from Herodotus, ii. 2.


CHAP. IX.]


AD NATIONES.


Can it be, then, at all credible that the nurse
retained her life, after the loss of so important
a member, the very organ of the breath of
life,' — cut out, too, from the very root, with
her throat = mutilated, which cannot be
wounded even on the outside without danger,
and the putrid gore flowing back to the chest,
and deprived for so long a time of her food ?
Come, even suppose that by the remedies of
a Philomela she retained her life, in the way
supposed by wisest persons, who account for
the dumbness not by cutting out the tongue,
but from the blush of shame; if on such a
supposition she lived, she would still be able
to blurt out some dull sound. And a shrill
inarticulate noise from opening the mouth
only, without any modulation of the lips, might
be forced from the mere throat, though there
were no tongue to help. This, it is probable,
the infants readily imitated, and the more so
because it was the only sound; only they did
it a little more neatly, as they had tongues ;3
and then they attached to it a definite signifi-
cation. Granted, then, that the Phrygians
were the earliest race, it does not follow that
the Christians are the third. For how many
other nations come regularly after the Phry-
gians ? Take care, however, lest those whom
you call the third race should obtain the first
rank, since there is no nation indeed which is
not Christian. Whatever nation, therefore,
was the first, is nevertheless Christian now.-*
It is ridiculous folly which makes you say we
are the latest race, and then specifically call
us the third. But it is in respect of our re-
ligion,s not of our nation, that we are supposed
to be the third; the series being the Romans,
the Jews, and the Christians after them.
Where, then, are the Greeks ? or if they are
reckoned amongst the Romans in regard to
their superstition (since it was from Greece
that Rome borrowed even her gods), where at
least are the Egyptians, since these have, so
far as I know, a mysterious religion peculiar to
themselves ? Now, if they who belong to the
third race are so monstrous, what must they
be supposed to be who preceded them in the
first and the second place ?

CHAP. IX. ^ — THE CHRISTIANS ARE NOT THE
CAUSE OF PUBLIC CALAMITIES: THERE WERE
SUCH TROUBLES BEFORE CHRISTIANITY.

But why should I be astonished at your vain
imputations ? Under the same»natural form,


I Ipsius animse organo.
- Faucibus.

3 Utpote linguatuli.

4 This is one of the passages which incidentally show how widely
spread was Christianity.

5De Superstitione.

6 Comp. The Apology, cc.xl.xli. [And Augustine, Civ. Dei. Hi.]


malice and folly have always been associated
in one body and growth, and have ever opposed
us under the one instigator of error. ^ Indeed,
I feel no astonishment; and therefore, as it is
necessary for my subject, I will enumerate
some instances, that you may feel the astonish-
ment by the enumeration of the folly into
which you fall, when you insist on our being
the causes of every public calamity or injury.
If the Tiber has overflowed its banks, if the
Nile has remained in its bed, if the sky has
been still, or the earth been in commotion, if
death ^ has made its devastations, or famine
its afflictions, your cry immediately is, ** This
is the faults of the Christians ! " As if they
who fear the true God could have to fear a
light thing, or at least anything else (than an
earthquake or famine, or such visitations).'" I
suppose it is as despisers of your gods that
we call down on us these strokes of theirs.
As we have remarked already," three hundred
years have not yet passed in our existence;
but what vast scourges before that time fell
on all the world, on its various cities and prov-
inces! what terrible wars, both foreign and
domestic ! what pestilences, famines, confla-
grations, yawnings, and quakings of the earth
has history recorded ! " Where were the Chris-
tians, then, when the Roman state furnished
so many chronicles of its disasters ? Where
were the Christians when the islands Hiera,
Anaphe, and Delos, and Rhodes, and Cea
were desolated with multitudes of men ? or,
again, when the land mentioned by Plato as
larger than Asia or Africa was sunk in the
Atlantic Sea ? or when fire from heaven over-
whelmed Volsinii, and flames from their own
mountain consumed Pompeii ? when the sea of
Corinth was eagulphed b^' an earthquake?
when the whole world was destroyed by the
deluge ? Where t/ien were (I will not say the
Christians, who despise your gods, but) your
gods themselves, who are proved to be of later
origin than that great ruin by the very places
and cities in which they were born, sojourned,
and were buried, and even those which they
founded ? For else they would not have re-
mained to the present day, unless they had
been more recent than that catastrophe. If
you do not care to peruse and reflect upon
these testimonies of history, the record of
which affects you differently from us,'^ in order


7 By the " manceps errori>" he means the devil.

8 Libitina.

9 Christianorum meritum, which with '* sit " may be also, " Let
the Christians have their due " In 7'Ae Apology the cry is, Chris-
tianos ad ieonem."

'o We insert this after Oehler. Tertullian's words are, " Quasi
modicum habeant aut aliud metuere qui Deum verum."
»» See above, c. vii.
" Speculum digessit.
>3 Aliter vobis renuntiata.


ii8


AD NATIONES.


[book


especially that you may not have to tax your
gods with extreme injustice, since they injure
even their worshippers on account of their de-
spisers, do you not then prove yourselves to
be also in the wrong, when you hold them to
be gods, who make no distinction between
the deserts of yourselves and profane persons ?
If, however, as it is now and then very vainly
said, you incur the chastisement of your gods
because you are too slack in our extirpation,
you then have settled the question ' of their
weakness and insignificance; for they would
not be angry with you for loitering over our
punishment, if they could do anything them-
selves,— although you admit the same thing
indeed in another way, whenever by inflicting
punishment on us you seem to be avenging
them. If one interest is maintained by an-
other party, that which defends is the greater
of the two. What a shame, then, must it be
for gods to be defended by a human being !

CHAP. X.' — THE CHRISTIANS ARE NOT THE
ONLY CONTEMNERS OF THE GODS. CON-
TEMPT OF THEM OFTEN DISPLAYED BY
HEATHEN OFFICIAL PERSONS. HOMER MADE
THE GODS CONTEMPTIBLE.

Pour out now all your venom; fling against
this name of ours all your shafts of calumny:
I shall stay no longer to refute them; but they
shall by and by be blunted, when we come to
explain our entire discipline. ^ I shall content
myself now indeed with plucking these shafts
out of our own body, and hurling them back
on yourselves. The same wounds which you
have inflicted on us by your charges I shall
show to be imprinted on yourselves, that you
may fall by your own swords and javelins.*
Now, first, when *you dirtci: n^rainst us the
general charge of divorcing ourselves irom the
institutions of our forefathers, consider again
and again whether you are not yourselves
open to that accusation in common with us.
For when I look through your life and cus-
toms, lo, what do I discover but the old order
of things corrupted, nay, destroyed by you ?
Of the laws I have already said, that you are
daily supplanting them with novel decrees and
statutes. As to everything else in your man-
ner of life, how great are the changes you have
made from your ancestors — in your style, your
dress, your equipage, your very food, and
even in your speech; for the old-fashioned you
banish, as if it were offensive to you ! Every-
where, in your public pursuits and private
duties, antiquity is repealed; all the authority


of your forefathers your own authority has
superseded. To be sure,s you are for ever
praising old customs; but this is only to your
greater discredit, for you nevertheless persis-
tently reject them. How great must your per-
verseness have been, to have bestowed appro-
bation on your ancestors' institutions, which
were too inefficient to be lasting, all the while
that you were rejecting the very objects of your
approbation ! But even that very heir-loom ^ of
your forefathers, which you seem to guard and
defend with greatest fidelity, in which you
actually ' find your strongest grounds for im-
peaching us as violators of the law, and from
which your hatred of the Christian name de-
rives all its life — I mean the worship of the
gods — I shall prove to be undergoing ruin and
contempt from yourselves no less than ^ (from
us), — unless it be that there is no reason for
our being regarded as despisers of the gods
like yourselves, on the ground that nobody
despises what he knows has absolutely no ex-
istence. What certainly exists can be de-
spised. That which is nothing, suffers nothing.
From those, therefore, to whom it is an existing
thing, 9 must necessarily proceed the suffering
which affects it. All the heavier, then, is the
accusation which burdens you who believe that
there are gods and (at the same time) despise
them, who worship and also reject them, who
honour and also assail them. One may also
gather the same conclusion from this consid-
eration, above all: since you worship various
gods, some one and some another, you of
course despise those which you do not worship.
A preference for the one is not possible with-
out slighting the other, and no choice can be
made without a rejection. He who selects
some one out of many, has already slighted
the other which he does not select. But it is
impossible that so many and so great gods can
be worshipped by all. Then you must have
exercised your contempt (in this matter) even
at the beginning, since indeed you were not
then afraid of so ordering things, that all the
gods could not become objects of worship to
all. For those very wise and prudent ances-
tors of yours, whose institutions you know not
how to repeal, especially in respect of your
gods, are themselves found to have been im-
pious. I am much mistaken, if they did not
sometimes decree that no general should dedi-
cate a temple, which he may have vowed in
battle, before the senate gave its sanction; as
in the case of *Marcus .^milius, who had made


1 Absolutum est.

2 Comp. TAe Apology^ cc. xii. xiii. xiv. xv.

3 See The Apology (passim), especially cc. xvi.-xxiv. xxx.-
xxxvi. and xxxix.

4 Admentationibus.


5 Plane.

6 Traditum.
7Vel.

8 Perinde a vobis.

9 Quibiis est.


CHAP. X.]


AD NATIONES.


119


a vow to the god Alburnus. Now is it not
confessedly the greatest impiety, nay, the
greatest insult, to place the honour of the
Deity at the will and pleasure of human judg-
ment, so that there cannot be a god except
the senate permit him ? Many times have the"
censors destroyed ' (a god) without consulting
the people. Father Bacchus, with all his
ritual, was certainly by the consuls, on the
seate's authority, cast not only out of the city,
but out of all Italy; whilst Varro informs us
that Serapis also, and Isis, and Arpocrates,
and Anubis, were excluded from the Capitol,
and that their altars which the senate had
thrown down were only restored by the popu-
lar violence. The Consul Gabinius, however,
on the first day of the ensuing January, al-
though he gave a tardy consent to some sacri-
fices, in deference to the crowd which assem-
bled, because he had failed to decide about
Serapis and Isis, yet held the judgment of the
senate to be more potent than the clamour of
the multitude, and forbade the altars to be
built. Here, then, you have amongst your
own forefathers, if not the name, at all events
the procedure,- of the Christians, which de-
spises the gods. If, however, you were even
innocent of the charge of treason against them
in the honour you pay them, I still find that
you have made a consistent advance in super-
stition as well as impiety. For how much
more irreligious are you found to be ! There
are your household gods, the Lares and the
Penates, which you possess ^ by a family con-
secration:'^ you even tread them profanely
under foot, you and your domestics, by hawk-
ing and pawning them for your wants or your
whims. Such insolent sacrilege might be ex-
cusable, if it were not practised against your
humbler deities; as it is, the case is only the
more insolent. There is, however, some con-
solation for your private household gods under
these affronts, that you treat your public
deities with still greater indignity and inso-
lence. First of all, you advertise them for
auction, submit them to public sale, knock
them down to the highest bidder, when you
every five years bring them to the hammer
among your revenues. For this purpose you
frequent the temple of Serapis or the Capitol,
hold your sales there, ^ conclude your con-
tracts,^ as if they were markets, with the well-
known 7 voice of the crier, (and) the self-same
levy^ of the quaestor. Now lands become


I Adsolaverunt, '* thrown to the s:round ;" " floored."
^Sectam. [Rather — "A Christian secession."]
sPerhibetis.

4 Domestica consecratione, i.e., " for family worship,"

5 Addicitur.

6 Conducitur.

7 Eadem.

8 Exactione, " as excise duty for the treasury."


cheaper when burdened with tribute, and men
by the capitation tax diminish in value (these
are the well-known marks of slavery). But
the gods, the more tribute they pay, become
more holy; or rather,' the more holy they are,
the more tribute do they pay. Their majesty
is converted into an article of traffic; men
drive a business with their religion; the sanc-
tity of the gods is beggared with sales and
contracts. You make merchandise of the
ground of your temples, of the approach to
your altars, of your offerings, '° of your sacri-
fices." You sell the whole divinity (of your
gods). You will not permit their gratuitous
worship. The auctioneers necessitate more
repairs" than the priests. It was not enough
that you had insolently made a profit of your
gods, if we would test the amount of your con-
tempt; and you are not content to have with-
held honour from them, you must also depre-
ciate the little you do render to them by some
indignity or other. What, indeed, do you do
by way of honouring your gods, which you do
not equally offer to your dead ? You build
temples for the gods, you erect temples also
to the dead; you build altars for the gods, you
build them also for the dead; you inscribe the
same superscription over both; you sketch
out the same lineaments for their statues — as
best suits their genius, or profession, or age;
you make an old man of Saturn, a beardless
youth of Apollo; you form a virgin from
Diana; in Mars you consecrate a soldier, a
blacksmith in Vulcan. No wonder, therefore,
if you slay the same victims and burn the same
odours for your dead as you do for your gods.
What excuse can be found for that insolence
which classes the dead of whatever sort '^ as
equal with the gods ? Even to your princes
there are assigned the services of priests and
sacred ceremonies, and chariots,'* and cars,
and the honours of the solisternia and the
lectistenda^ holidays and games. Rightly
enough, '5 since heaven is open to them; still
it is none the less contumelious to the gods:
in the first place, because it could not possibly
be decent that other beings should be num-
bered with them, even if it has been given to
them to become divine after their birth; in
the second place, because the witness who be-
held the man caught up into heaven'^ would
not forswear himself so freely and palpably
before the people, if it were not for the con-


>o " In money," stipibus.

»» " Victims.''

" Plus refigitur.

»3Utut mortuos.

M Tensae.

»S Plane.

»6 Rigaltius has the name Proculus in his text ; but Tertullian
refers not merely to that cas** but to a usual functionary, necessary
in all cases of deification.


I20


AD NATIONES.


[book I.


tempt felt about the objects sworn to both by
himself and those' who allow the perjury.
For these feel of themselves, that what is
sworn to is nothing; and more than that, they
go So far as to fee the witness, because he had
the courage to publicly despise the avengers
of perjury. Now, as to that, who among you
is pure of the charge of perjury? By this
time, indeed, there is an end to all danger in
swearing by the gods, since the oath by Caesar
carries with it more influential scruples, which
very circumstance indeed tends to the deg-
radation of your gods; for those who perjure
themselves when swearing by Caesar are more
readily punished than those who violate an
oath to a Jupiter. But, of the two kindred
feelings of contempt and derision, contempt
is the more honourable, having a certain glory
in its arrogance; for it sometimes proceeds
from confidence, or the security of conscious-
ness, or a natural loftiness of mind. Derision,
however, is a more wanton feeling, and so far
it points more directly " to a carping insolence.
Now only consider what great deriders of your
gods you show yourselves to be ! I say
nothing of your indulgence of this feeling
during your sacrificial acts, how you offer for
your victims the poorest and most emaciated
creatures; or else of the sound and healthy
animals only the portions which are useless
for food, such as the heads and hoofs, or the
plucked feathers and hair, and whatever at
home you would have thrown away. I pass
over whatever may seem to the taste ^ of the
vulgar and profane to have constituted the re-
ligion * of your forefathers; but then the most
learned and serious classes (for seriousness
and wisdom to some extent ^ profess^ to be
derived from learning) are always, in fact, the
most irreverent towards your gods; and if
their learning ever halts, it is only to make
up for the remissness by a more shameful in-
vention of follies and falsehoods about their
gods. I will begin with that enthusiastic fond-
ness which you show for him from whom every
depraved writer gets his dreams, to whom you
ascribe as much honour as you derogate from
your gods, by magnifying him who has made
such sport of them. I mean Homer by this
description. He it is, in my opinion, who
has treated the majesty of the Divine Being
on the low level of human condition, imbuing
the gods with the falls ^ and the passions of
men; who has pitted them against each other


' Oehler reads " ei " (of course for " ii ") ; Rigalt. reads " ii."

2 Denotatior ad.

3 Guise, " Depraved taste.''

4 Prope religionem convenire, " to have approximated to."
s Quatenas.

6 Credunt, one would expect "creduntur" (" are supposed "),
which is actually read by Gothofredus.

7 Or, " circumstances " (casibus).


with varying success, like pairs of gladiators:
he wounds Venus with an arrow from a human
hand; he keeps Mars a prisoner in chains for
thirteen months, with the prospect of perish-
ing;^ he parades' Jupiter as suffering a like
indignity from a crowd of celestial (rebels;)
or he draws from him tears for Sarpedon; or
he represents him wantoning with Juno in the
most disgraceful way, advocating his incestu-
ous passion for her by a description and enu-
meration of his various amours. Since then,
which of the poets has not, on the authority
of their great prince, calumniated the gods,
by either betraying truth or feigning false-
hood ? Have the dramatists also, whether in
tragedy or comedy, refrained from making
the gods the authors '° of the calamities and
retributions (of their plays) ? I say nothing
of your philosophers, whom a certain inspira-
tion of truth itself elevates against the gods,
and secures from all fear in their proud se-
verity and stern discipline. Take, for exam-
ple," Socrates. In contempt of your gods, he
swears by an oak, and a dog, and a goat.
Now, although he was condemned to die for
this very reason, the Athenians afterwards re-
pented of that condemnation, and even put to
death his accusers. By this conduct of theirs
the testimony of Socrates is replaced at its
full value, and I am enabled to meet you with
this retort, that in his case you have approba-
tion bestowed on that which is now-a-days
reprobated in us. But besides this instance
there is Diogenes, who, I know not to what
extent, made sport of Hercules; whilst Varro,
that Diogenes of the Roman cut,'Mntroduces
to our view some three hundred Joves, or, as
they ought to be called, Jupiters,'^ (and all)
without heads. Your other wanton wits ^ like-
wise minister to your pleasures by disgracing
the gods. Examine carefully the sacrilegious 's
beauties of your Lentuli and Hostii; now, is
it the players or your gods who become the
objects of your mirth in their tricks and jokes ?
Then, again, with what pleasure do you take
up the literature of the stage, which describes
all the foul conduct of the gods ! Their maj-
esty is defiled in your presence in some un-
chaste body. The mask of some deity, at
your will,'* covers some infamous paltry head.
The Sun mourns for the death of his son by
a lightning-flash amid your rude rejoicing.


I


8 Fortasse periturum.

9Traducit, perhaps "degrades."

10 Ut dei prajfarentur. Oehler explains the verb " praefari " to
mean " auctorem esse et tanquam caput."

" Denique.

"Stili.

'3Tertullian gives the comic plural '•'■ Jufipiteres''

'4lngenia.

'5 Because appropriating to themselves the admiration which was
due to the gods.

'*5 Cujuslibet dei.


CHAP. XII.]


AD NATIONES.


121


Cybele sighs for a shepherd who disdains her,
without raising a blush on your cheek; and
you quietly endure songs which celebrate ' the
gallantries of Jove. You are, of course, pos-
sessed of a more religious spirit in the show
of your gladiators, when your gods dance,
with equal zest, over the spilling of human
blood, (and) over those filthy penalties which
are at once their proof and plot for executing
your criminals, or else (when) your criminals
are punished personating the gods them-
selves.^ We have often witnessed in a muti-
lated criminal your god of Pessinum, Attis;
a wretch burnt alive has personated Hercules.
We have laughed at the sport of your mid-day
game of the gods, when Father Pluto, Jove's
own brother, drags away, hammer in hand,
the remains of the gladiators; when Mercury,
with his winged cap and heated wand, tests
with his cautery whether the bodies were really
lifeless, or only feigning death. Who now
can investigate every particular of this sort,
although so destructive of the honour of the
Divine Being, and so humiliating to His maj-
esty ? They all, indeed, have their origin ^
in a contempt (of the gods), on the part both
of those who practise '^ these personations, as
well as of those s who are susceptible of being
so represented.^ I hardly know, therefore,
whether your gods have more reason to com-
plain of yourselves or of us. After despising
them on the one hand, you flatter them on
the other; if you fail in any duty towards
them, you appease them with a fee;^ in short,
you allow yourselves to act towards them in
any way you please. We, however, live in a
consistent and entire aversion to them.


CHAP. XI. 7 — THE ABSURD CAVIL OF THE ASS S
HEAD DISPOSED OF.

In this matter we are (said to be) guilty not


1 Sustinetis modulari.

2 It is best to add the original of this almost unintelligible pas-
sage : " Plane religiosiores estis in gladiatorum cavea, ubi super
sanguinem humanum, super inquinamenta pcEnarum proinde sal-
tant dei vestri ar^imenta et historias nocentihus erogandis, aut
in ipsis deis nocentes puniuntur.'''' Some little light may be de-
rived from the parallel passage of the Apolop/ (c. xv.), which is
expressed somewhat less obscurely. Instead ofthe words in italics,
TertuUian there substitutes these : "Argumenta et historias noxiis
ministrantes, nisi quod et ipsos deos vestros ssepe noxii induunt "
— " whilst furnishing the proofs and the plots for (executing)
criminals, only that the said criminals often act the part of your
gods themselves." Oehler refers, in illustration of the last clause,
to the instance of the notorious robber I^ureolus, who personated
Prometheus; others, again, personated Laureolus himself: some
criminals had to play the part of Orpheus ; others of Mutius Scse-
vola. It will be observed that these executions were with infa-
mous perverseness set off with scenic show, wherein the criminal
enacted some violent death in yielding up his own life. The indig-
nant irony of the whole passage, led off by the " plane religiosi-
ores estis, is evident.

3 Censentur.

4 Factitant.

5 i.e., the gods themselves.

6 Redimitis.

7 Comp. The Apology^ c. xvi.


merely of forsaking the religion of the com-
munity, but of introducing a monstrous su-
perstition; for some among you have dreamed
that our god is an ass's head, — an absurdity
which Cornelius Tacitus first suggested. In
the fourth book of his histories,^ where he is
treating of the Jewish war, he begins his de-
scription with the origin of that nation, and
gives his own views respecting both the origin
and the name of their religion. He relates
that the Jews, in their migration in the
desert, when suffering for want of water,
escaped by following for guides some wild
asses, which they supposed to be going in
quest of water after pasture, and that on this
account the image of one of these animals was
worshipped by the Jews. From this, I sup-
pose, it was presumed that we, too, from our
close connection with the Jewish religion, have
ours consecrated under the same emblematic
form. The same Cornelius Tacitus, however,
— who, to say the truth, is most loquacious in
falsehood — forgetting his later statement, re-
lates how Pompey the Great, after conquering
the Jews and capturing Jerusalem, entered
the temple, but found nothing in the shape of
an image, though he examined the place care-
fully. Where, then, should their God have
been found ? Nowhere else, of course than in
so memorable a temple which was carefully
shut to all but the priests, and into which there
could be no fear of a stranger entering. But
what apology must I here offer for what I am
going to say, when I have no other object at
the moment than to make a passing remark or
two in a general way which shall be equally
applicable to yourselves ? 5" Suppose that our
God, then, be an asinine person, will you at
all events deny that you possess the same char-
acteristics with ourselves in that matter ? (Not
their heads only, but) entire asses, are, to be
sure, objects of adoration to you, along
with their tutelar Epona; and all herds, and
cattle, and beasts you consecrate, and their
stables into the bargain ! This, perhaps, is
your grievance against us, that, when sur-
rounded by cattle-worshippers of every kind
we are simply devoted to asses!

CHAP. XII. '° THE CHARGE OF WORSHIPPING A

CROSS. THE HEATHENS THEMSELVES MADE
MUCH OF CROSSES IN SACRED THINGS; NAY,
THEIR VERY IDOLS WERE FORMED ON A
CRUCIAL FRAME.

As for him who affirms that we are " the


8 In The Apology (c. xvi.) the reference is to " the fifth book."
This is correct. Book v. c. 3, is meant.

9 In vobis, for " in vos " ex pari transferendorum.
10 Comp. The Apology, c. xvi.


122


AD NATIONES.


[book I.


priesthood of a cross," ' we shall claim him='
as our co-religionist. 3 A cross is, in its ma-
terial, a sign of wood; amongst yourselves also
the object of worship is a wooden figure.
Only, whilst with you the figure is a human
one, with us the wood is its own figure. Never
mind * for the present what is the shape,
provided the material is the same: the form,
too, is of no importance,^ if so be it be the
actual body of a god. If, however, there
arises a question of difference on this point,
what, (let me ask,) is the difference between
the Athenian Pallas, or the Pharian Ceres,
and wood formed into a cross,^ when each is
represented by a rough stock, without form,
and by the merest rudiment of a statue ' of un-
formed wood ? Every piece of timber ^ which
is fi.xed in the ground in an erect position is
a part of a cross, and indeed the greater por-
tion of its mass. But an entire cross is at-
tributed to us, with its transverse beam,^ of
course, and its projecting seat. Now you
have the less to excuse you, for you dedicate
to religion only a mutilated imperfect piece
of wood, while others consecrate to the sacred
purpose a complete structure. The truth,
however, after all is, that your religion is a//
cross, as I shall show. You are indeed un-
aware that your gods in their origin have pro-
ceeded from this hated cross. '° Now, every
image, whether carved out of wood or stone,
or molten in metal, or produced out of any
other richer material, must needs have had
plastic hands engaged in its formation. Well,
then, this modeller," before he did anything
else," hit upon the form of a wooden cross,
because even our own body assumes as its
natural position the latent and concealed out-
line of a cross. Since the head rises upwards,
and the back takes a straight direction, and
the shoulders project laterally, if you simply
place a man with his arms and hands out-
stretched, you will make the general outline
of a cross. Starting, then, from this rudimental
form and prop, '^ as it were, he applies a cover-
ing of clay, and so gradually completes the
limbs, and forms the body, and covers the
cross within with the shape which he meant
to impress upon the clay; then from this de-
sign, with the help of compasses and leaden


^ Cruci* antistites.
aErit.

3 Consacraneus.

4 Viderint.

5 Viderit.
^Stipite crucis.

7 Solo staticulo. The use of wood in the construction of an idol
is mentioned afterward.

8 Omne robur.

9AQtemna. See our A nii-Marctpn, p. 156. £d. Edinburgh,
patibulo.


*a In pntno.

X3 Statumini.


moulds, he has got all ready for his image
which is to be brought out into marble, or
clay, or whatever the material be of which he
has determined to make his god. (This, then,
is the process:) after the cross-shaped frame,
the clay; after the clay, the god. In a well-
understood routine, the cross passes into a god
through the clayey medium. The cross then
you consecrate, and from it the consecrated
(deity) begins to derive his origin. '+ By way
of example, let us take the case of a tree which
grows up into a system of branches and foliage,
and is a reproduction of its own kind, whether
it springs from the kernel of an olive, or the
stone of a peach, or a grain of pepper which
has been duly tempered under ground. Now,
if you transplant it, or take a cutting off its
branches for another plant, to what will you
attribute what is produced by the propagation ?
Will it not be to the grain, or the stone, or
the kernel ? Because, as the third stage is
attributable to the second, and the second in
like manner to the first, so the third will have
to be referred to the first, through the second
as the mean. We need not stay any longer
in the discussion of this point, since by a nat-
ural law every kind of produce throughout
nature refers back its growth to its original
source; and just as the product is comprised
in its primal cause, so does that cause agree
in character with the thing produced. Since,
then, in the production of your gods, you
worship the cross which originates them, here
will be the original kernel and grain, from
which are propagated the wooden materials
of your idolatrous images. Examples are not
far to seek. Your victories you celebrate with
religious ceremony's as deities; and they are
the more august in proportion to the joy they
bring you. The frames on which you hang up
your trophies must be crosses: these are, as it
were, the very core of your pageants.'^ Thus,
in your victories, the religion of your camp
makes even crosses objects of worship; your
standards it adores, your standards are the
sanction of its oaths; your standards it prefers
before Jupiter himself. But all that parade '^
of images, and that display of pure gold, are
(as so many) necklaces of the crosses. In
like manner also, in the banners and ensigns,
which your soldiers guard with no less sacred
care, you have the streamers (and) vestments
of your crosses. You are ashamed, I suppose,
to worship unadorned and simple crosses.


'4Comp. The Apologi', c. xii. : " Every image of a god has been
first constructed on a cross and stake, and plastered with cement.
The body of your god is first dedicated upon a gibbet."

'5 Veneramini.

>6Tropaeum, for " tropaeorum." We have given the sense
rather than the words of this awkward sentence.

17 Suggestus.


CHAP. XV.]


AD NATIONES.


123


CHAP. XIII.' THE CHARGE OF WORSHIPPING

THE SUN MET BY A RETORT.

Others, with greater regard to good man-
ners, it must be confessed, suppose that the
sun is the god of the Christians, because it is
a well-known fact that we pray towards the
east, or because we make Sunday a day of
festivity. What then ? Do you do less than
this ? Do not many among you, with an
affectation of sometimes worshipping the
heavenly bodies likewise, move your lips in
the direction of the sunrise? It is you, at
all events, who have even admitted the sun
into the calendar of the week; and you have
selected its day,^' in preference to the pre-
ceding day 3 as the most suitable in the
week 4 for either an entire abstinence from
the bath, or for its postponement until the
evening, or for taking rest and for banqueting.
By resorting to these customs, you deliber-
ately deviate from your own religious rites to
those of strangers. For the Jewish feasts are
the Sabbath and "the Purification," s and
Jewish also are the ceremonies of the lamps, "^
and the fasts of unleavened bread, and the
" littoral prayers," ^ all which institutions and
practices are of course foreign from your gods.
Wherefore, that I may return from this di-
gression, you who reproach us with the sun
and Sunday should consider your proximity
to us. We are not far off from your Saturn
and your days of rest.

CHAP. XIV. ^ THE VILE CALUMNY ABOUT

ONOCOETES RETORTED ON THE HEATHEN BY
TERTULLIAN.

Report has introduced a new calumny re-
specting our God. Not so long ago, a most
abandoned wretch in that city of yours, ' a
man who had deserted indeed his own religion
— a Jew, in fact, who had only lost his skin,
flayed of course by wild beasts,'" against which
he enters the lists for hire day after day with
a sound body, and so in a condition to lose
his skin" — carried about in public a caricature
of us with this label: Onocoetes." This (figure)


1 Comp. The Apology, c. xvi.

2 Sunday.

3 Saturday.

4 Ex diebus.

5 On the " Coena pura," see our Anti-Marcion, p. 386, note 4.

6 See Lev. xxiv. 2; also 2 Chron. xiii. 11. Witsius {^gyptiaca,
ii. 16. 17) compares the Jewish with the Egyptian " ritus lucerna-
rum. '

7 Tertullian, in his tract de Jej'un. xvi., speaks of the Jews
praying (after the loss of their temple, and in their dispersion) in
the open air, " per omne litus."

s Comp. The Apology ^ c. xvi.
9 In ista civitate, Rome.

1° This is explained in the passage of The Applogy (xvi.): " He
had for money exposed himself with criminals to fight with wild
beasts."

'• Decutiendus, from a jocular word, " decutire."
»2 This curious word is compounded^ of ovos, an ass, and
KotaaBax, which Hesychius explains by UpaaOai, to act as a priest.


had ass's ears, and was dressed in a toga with
a book, having a hoof on one of his feet. And
the crowd believed this infamous Jew. For
what other set of men is the seed-plot " of all
the calumny against us ? Throughout the city,
therefore, Onoco^es is all the talk. As, how-
ever, it is less then " a nine days' wonder," ^
and so destitute of all authority from time,
and weak enough from the character of its
author, I shall gratify myself by using it sim-
ply in the way of a retort. Let us then see
whether you are not here also found in our
company. Now it matters not what their
form may be, when our concern is about de-
formed images. You have amongst you gods
with a dog's head, and a lion's head, with the
horns of a cow, and a ram, and a goat, goat-
shaped or serpent-shaped, and winged in foot,
head, and back. Why therefore brand our one
God so conspicuously ? Many an Ofiococtcs is
found amongst yourselves.

CHAP. XV. '5 THE CHARGE OF INFANTICIDE

RETORTED ON THE HEATHEN.

Since we are on a par in respect of the
gods, it follows that there is no difference
between us on the point of sacrifice, or even
of worship,'^ if I may be allowed to make good
our comparison from another sort of evidence.
We begin our religious service, or initiate our
mysteries, with slaying an infant. As for
you, since your own transactions in human
blood and infanticide have faded from your
memory, you shall be duly reminded of them
in the proper place; we now postpone most of
the instances, that we may not seem to be
everywhere '7 handling the selfsame topics.
Meanwhile, as I have said, the comparison
between us does not fail in another point of
view. For if we are infanticides in one sense,
you also can hardly be deemed such in any
other sense; because, although you are for-
bidden by the laws to slay new-born infants,
it so happens that no laws are evaded with
more impunity or greater safety, with the
deliberate knowledge of the public, and the
suffrages'^ of this entire age.'' Yet there is no
great difference between us, only you do not
kill your infants in the way of a sacred rite,
nor (as a service) to God. But then you
make away with them in a more cruel manner.


The word therefore means, " asinarius sacerdos," " an ass of a
priest." Calumnious enough; but suited to the vile occasion, and
illustrative of the ribald opposition which Christianity had to en-
counter.

13 We take Rigaltius' reading, " seminarium."

'4 Tanquam hesternum.

"5 Comp. The Apology, c. ix.

16 Sacri.

17 He refers in this passage to his Apology., especially c. ix.
«8 Tabellis.

'9 Unius actatis. This Oehler explains by " per unam jam totam
hanc aetatem."


124


AD NATIONES.


[book I.


because you expose them to the cold and
hunger, and to wild beasts, or else you get rid
of them by the slower death of drowning. If,
however, there does occur any dissimilarity
between us in this matter,' you must not over-
look the fact that it is your own dear children -
-whose life you quench; and this will supple-
ment, nay, abundantly aggravate, on your
side of the question, whatever is defective in
us on other grounds. Well, but we are said
to sup off our impious sacrifice ! Whilst we
postpone to a more suitable place ^whatever
resemblance even to this practice is discover-
able amongst yourselves, we are not far re-
moved from you in voracity. If in the one
case there is unchastity, and in ours cruelty,
we are still on the same footing (if I may so
far admit our guilt*) in nature, where cruelty
is always found in concord with unchastity.
But, after all, what do you less than we; or
rather, what do you not do in excess of us ?
I wonder whether it be a small matter to you ^
to pant for human entrails, because you de-
vour full-grown men alive ? Is it, forsooth,
only a trifle to lick up human blood, when
you draw out ^ the blood which was destined
to live? Is it a light thing in your view to
feed on an infant, when you consume one
wholly before it is come to the birth ? ^

CHAP. XVI. ^ (HHER CHARGES REPELLED BY

THE SAME METHOD. THE STORY OF THE
NOBLE ROMAN YOUTH AND HIS PARENTS.

I am now come to the hour for extinguish-
ing the lamps, and for using the dogs, and
practising the deeds of darkness. And on
this point I am afraid I must succumb to you;
for what similar accusation shall I have to
bring against you ? But you should at once
commend the cleverness with which we make
our incest look modest, in that we have de-
vised a spurious night,^ to avoid polluting the
real light and darkness, and have even
thought it right to dispense with earthly lights,
and to play tricks also with our conscience.
For whatever we do ourselves, we suspect in
others when we choose (to be suspicious). As
for your incestuous deeds, on the contrary, '°
men enjoy them at full liberty, in the face of
day, or in the natural night, or before high
Heaven; and in proportion to their successful
issue is your own ignorance of the result,


» Genere.

= Pignora, scil. amoris.

3 See Apology, c. ix.

4 Si forte.

5 Parum scilicet ?

6 Elicitis.

7 Infaotem totum praecocum.
SComp. The Apology, c. ix.
9 Adulteram noctem.

10 Ceterum.


since you publicly indulge in your incestuous
intercourse in the full cognizance of broad
day-light. (No ignorance, however, conceals
our conduct from our eyes,) for in the very
darkness we are able to recognise our own
misdeeds. The Persians, you know very well,"
according to Ctesias, live quite promiscuously
with their mothers, in full knowledge of the
fact, and without any horror; whilst of the
Macedonians it is well known that they con-
stantly do the same thing, and with perfect
approbation: for once, when the blinded"
CEdipus came upon their stage, they greeted
him with laughter and derisive cheers. The
actor, taking off his mask in great alarm, said,
" Gentlemen, have I displeased you ? " " Cer-
tainly not," replied the Macedonians, "you
have played your part well enough; but either
the author was very silly, if he invented (this
mutilation as an atonement for the incest), or
else CEdipus was a great fool for his pains if
he really so punished himself; " and then they
shouted out one to the other, "H/Lo^we «f t/>
fj.7]Ttpa. But how insignificant, (say you,) is
the stain which one or two nations can make
on the whole world ! As for us, we of course
have infected the very sun, polluted the en-
tire ocean ! Quote, then, one nation which is
free from the passions which allure the whole
race of men to incest ! If there is a single
nation which knows nothing of concubinage
through the necessity of age and sex — to say
nothing of lust and licentiousness — that nation
will be a stranger to incest. If any nature
can be found so peculiarly removed from the
human state as to be liable neither to igno-
rance, nor error, nor misfortune, that alone
may be adduced with any consistency as an
answer to the Christians. Reflect, therefore,
on the licentiousness which floats about
amongst men's passions '^ as if they were the
winds, and consider whether there be any
communities which the full and strong tides
of passion fail to waft to the commission of this
great sin. In the first place, when you expose
your infants to the mercy of others, or leave
them for adoption to better parents than
yourselves, do you forget what an opportunity
for incest is furnished, how wide a scope is
opened for its accidental commission ? Un-
doubtedly, such of you as are more serious
from a principle of self-restraint and clireful
reflection, abstain from lusts which could pro-
duce results of such a kind, in whatever place
you may happen to be, at home or abroad,
so that no indiscriminate diffusion of seed, or
licentious reception thereof, will produce chil-


" Plane.

»» Trucidatus f)culos.

•3 Errores.


xvir.]


AD NATIONES.


12


dren to you unawares, such as their very par-
ents, or else other children, might encounter
in inadvertent incest, for no restraint from
age is regarded in (the importunities of) lust.
All acts of adultery, all cases of fornication,
all the licentiousness of public brothels,
whether committed at home or perpetrated
out of doors,' serve to produce confusions of
blood and complications of natural relation-
ship,' and thence to conduce to incest; from
which consummation your players and buf-
^foons draw the materials of their exhibitions.
(It was from such a source, too, that so fia-
I grant a tragedy recently burst upon the public
las that which the prefect Fuscianus had judi-
pcially to decide. A boy of noble birth, who,
! by the unintentional neglect of his attendants, ^
i had strolled too far from home, was decoyed
, by some passers-by, and carried off. The
I paltry Greek 4 who had the care of him, or
• somebody else,^ in true Greek fashion, had
gone into the house and captured him. Hav-
ing been taken away into Asia, he is brought,
when arrived at full age, back to Rome, and
exposed for sale. His own father buys him
unawares, and treats him as a Greek. ^ After-
wards, as was his wont, the youth is sent by
. his master into the fields, chained as a slave. ^
fpyl Thither the tutqjr .and the nurse had already
^f been banished for punishm.ent. * The whole
1 case is represented to them; they relate each
i\ other's misfortunes: they, on the one hand,
( how they had lost their ward when he was a
boy; he, on the other hand, that he had been
lost from his boyhood. But they agreed in
the main, that he was a native of Rome of a
noble family; perhaps he further gave sure
proofs of his identity. Accordingly, as God
willed it for the purpose of fastening a stain
upon that age, a presentiment about the time
excites him, the periods exactly suit his age,
even his eyes help to recall^ his features, some
peculiar marks on his body are enumerated.
Hrs master and mistress, who are now no
other than his own father and mother, anx-
iously urge a protracted inquiry. The slave-
dealer is examined, the unhappy truth is all
discovered. When their wickedness becomes
manifest, the parents find a remedy for their
despair by hanging themselves; to their son,
who survives the miserable calamity, their
property is awarded by the prefect, not as an
inheritance, but as the wages of infamy and
incest. That one case was a sufficient ex-


1 Sive stativo vel ambulatorio titulo.

2 Compagines generis.

3 Comitum.

4 Grseculus.

5 " Aliquis " is nere understood.

^Utitur Graeco, i.e., cinaedo, " for purposes of lust.

7 Or, " is sent into the country, and put into prison.

8 Aliquid recordantur.


ample for public exposure' of the sins of this
sort which are secretly perpetrated among
you. Nothing happens among men in soli-
tary isolation. But, as it seems to me, it is
only in a solitary case that such a charge can
be drawn out against us, even in the mysteries
of our religion. You ply us evermore with
this charge; '° yet there are like delinquencies
to be traced amongst you, even in your ordi-
nary course of life."

CHAP. XVII." THE CHRISTIAN REFUSAL TO

SWEAR BY THE GENIUS OF C^SAR. FLIP-
PANCY AND IRREVERENCE RETORTED ON THE
HEATHEN.

As to your charges of obstinacy and pre-
sumption, whatever you allege against us,
even in these respects, there are not wanting
points in which you will bear a comparison
with us. Our first step in this contumacious
conduct concerns that which is ranked by you
immediately after "^ the worship due to God,
that is, the worship due to the majesty of the
Caesars, in respect of which we are charged
with being irreligious towards them, since we
neither propititate their images nor swear by
their genius. We are called enemies of the
people. Well, be it so; yet at the same time
(it must not be forgotten, that) the emperors
find enemies amongst you heathen, and are
constantly getting surnames to signalize their
triumphs — one becoming Parthicus,^^ and
another Medicus and Gerifianicus.^^ On this
head '^ the Roman people must see to it who
they are amongst whom '^ there still remain
nations which are unsubdued and foreign to
their rule. But, at all events, you are of us,'^
and yet you conspire against us. (In reply,
we need only state) a well-known fact,'' that
we acknowledge the fealty of Romans to the
emperors. No conspiracy has ever broken
out from our body: no Caesar's blood has ever
fixed a stain upon us, in the senate or even in
the palace; no assumption of the purple has
ever in any of the provinces been affected by
us. The Syrias still exhale the odours of their
corpses; still do the Gauls'^ fail to wash away
(their blood) in the waters of their Rhone.
Your allegations of our insanity " I omit, be-


9 Publicse eruptionis.
>o Intentatis.

" Vestris non sacramentis, with a hyphen, ' your non-mys-
teries."
'= Comp. The Apology^ c. xx.w.
'3 Secunda.

M Severus, in a.d. io8.
'5 These titles were borne by Caracalla.
'6 Or, " topic " — ht)C loco.

»7 i.e., whether among the Christians or the heathen.
•8 A cavil of the heathen.
»9 Sane.
2oGallise.
-» Vesaniae.


126


AD NATIONES.


[book I.


cause they do not compromise the Roman
name. But I will grapple with ' the charge of
sacrilegious vanity, and remind you of" the
irreverence of your own lower classes, and the
scandalous lampoons ' of which the statues are
so cognizant, and the sneers which are some-
times uttered at the public games,* and the
curses with which the circus resounds. If not
in arms, you are in tongue at all events always
rebellious. But I suppose it is quite another
affair to refuse to swear by the genius of
Cresar? For it is fairly open to doubt as to
who are perjurers on this point, when you do
not swear honestly s even by your gods. Well,
we do not call the emperor God; for on this
point satinam facimtts,^ as the saying is.
But the truth is, that you who call Caesar God
both mock him, by calling him what he is not,
and curse him, because he does not want to
be what you call him. For he prefers living
to being made a god.'

CHAP. XVIII. ^ CHRISTIANS CHARGED WITH

AN OBSTINATE CONTEMPT OF DEATH. IN-
STANCES OF THE SAME ARE FOUND AMONGST
THE HEATHEN.

The rest of your charge of obstinacy against
us you sum up in this indictment, that we
boldly refuse neither your swords, nor your
crosses, nor your wild beasts, nor fire, nor tor-
tures, such is our obduracy and contempt of
death. But (you are inconsistent in your
charges); for in former times amongst your
own ancestors all these terrors have come in
men's intrepidity' not only to be despised,
but even to be held in great praise. How
many swords there were, and what brave men
were willing to suffer by them, it were irksome
to enumerate." (If we take the torture) of
the cross, of which so many instances have
occurred, exquisite in cruelty, your own Regu-
lus readily initiated the suffering which up to
his day was without a precedent; " a queen of
Eg>'pt used wild beasts of her own (to accom-
plish her death);" the Carthaginian woman,
who in the last extremity of her country was
more courageous than her husband Asdrubal,'^


' Conveniam.

2 Recognoscam.

3 Festivos libello*.

4 A concilio.

5 Ex fide.

^ Literally, " we make faces."

"Comp. The A/>oio^,c. xxxiii., p. 37, jw/rn, and Minucitis
Felix, Octavit4s, c. xxiii. [Vol. IV. this Series.]
8 Comp., The Apology, c. 50 [p. 54, in/ra!\
9 A virtute didiccrunt.

"3 With the "piKet prosequi" to govern the preceding oblique
clause, it is unnecessary to suppose (with Oehler) the omission
here of some verb like " erogavit."
" Novitatem . . , dedicavit.

'- I'ertuUian refers to Cleopatra's death also in his tract ad
Mart. c. iv. [See this Vol. in/rn.'\

"3 This case is again referred to in this treatise (p. 138), and in
aJ Mil'* c, iv, [See this Volume, in/ra.'\


only followed the example, set long before by
Dido herself, of going through fire to her
death. Then, again, a woman of Athens de-
fied the tyrant, exhausted his tortures, and at
last, lest her person and sex might succumb
through weakness, she bit off her tongue and
spat out of her mouth the only possible instru-
ment of a confession which was now out of
herpower.'-* But in your own instance you
account such deeds glorious, in ours obstinate.
Annihilate now the glory of your ancestors, in
order that you may thereby annihilate us also.
Be content from henceforth to repeal the
praises of your forefathers, in order that you-
may not have to accord commendation to us
for the same (sufferings). Perhaps (you will
say) the character of a more robust age may
have rendered the spirits of antiquity more
enduring. Now, however, (we enjoy) the
blessing of quietness and peace; so that the
minds and dispositions of men (should be)
more tolerant even towards strangers. Well,
you rejoin, be it so: you may compare jw/r-
sclves \s\'C^ the ancients; 7*:'^ must needs pur-
sue with hatred all that we find in you offen-
sive to ourselves^ because it does not obtain
currency '5 among us. Answer me, then, on
each particular case by itself. I am not seek-
ing for examples on a uniform scale. '^ Since,
forsooth, the sword through their contempt
of death produced stories of heroism amongst
your ancestors, it is not, of course, '^ from
love of life that you go to the trainers sword
in hand and offer yourselves as gladiators,'^
(nor) through fear of death do you enrol your
names in the army.*' Since an ordinary*
woman makes her death famous by wild beasts,
it cannot but be of your own pure accord that
you encounter wild beasts day after day in the
midst of peaceful times. Although no longer
any Regulus among you has raised a cross
as the instrument of his own crucifixion, yet
a contempt of the fire has even now displayed
itself,*' since one of yourselves very lately has
offered for a wager "" to go to any place which
may be fixed upon and put on the burning
shirt. '3 If a woman once defiantly danced be-
neath the scourge, the same feat has been
very recently performed again by one of your
own (circus-) hunters '* as he traversed the


14 Eradicatae confessionis. [See p. 55, sn/ra.}

'3 Non invenitur.

*6 Eadem voce.

»7 Utiqiie. The ironical tone of Tertullian's answer is evident.

'8 Gladio ad lanistas auctoratis.

19 We follow Oehler in giving the clause this negatiife turn; he
renders it: " Tretet nicht aus Furcht vor dem Tode ins Kriegs-
heer ein."

=" Alicui.

2' Jam evasit.

22 Auctoravit.

23 Vestiendum incendiale tunica.

24 Inter venatorios : " venatores circi " (Oehler).


CHAP. XX.]


AD NATIONES.


12


appointed course, not to mention the famous
sufferings of the Spartans.'

CHAP. XIX.^* IF CHRISTIANS AND THE

HEATHEN THUS RESEMBLE EACH OTHER,
THERE IS GREAT DIFFERENCE IN THE
GROUNDS AND NATURE OF THEIR APPAR-
ENTLY SIMILAR CONDUCT.

Here end, I suppose, your tremendous
charges of obstinacy against the Christians.
Now, since we are amenable to them in com-
mon with yourselves, it only remains that we
compare the grounds which the respective
•parties have for being personally derided. All
our obstinacy, however, is with you a fore-
gone conclusion, 3 based on our strong convic-
tions; for we take for granted'^ a resurrection
of the dead. Hope in this resurrection
amounts to s a contempt of death. Ridicule,
therefore, as much as you like the excessive
stupidity of such minds as die that they may
live; but then, in order that you may be able
to laugh more merrily, and deride us with
greater boldness, you must take your sponge,
or perhaps your tongue, and wipe away those
records of yours every now and then cropping
out,^ which assert in not dissimilar terms that
souls will return to bodies. But how much
more worthy of acceptance is our belief which
maintains that they will return to the same
bodies! And how much more ridiculous is
your inherited conceit,^ that the human spirit
is to reappear in a dog, or a mule, or a pea-
cock ! Again, we affirm that a judgment has
been ordained by God according to the merits
of every man. This you ascribe to Minos
and Rhadamanthus, while at the same time
you reject Aristides, who was a juster judge
than either. By the award of the judgment,
we say that the wicked will have to spend an
eternity in endless fire, the pious and innocent
in a region of bliss. In your view likewise
an unalterable condition is ascribed to the re-
spective destinations of Pyriphlegethon^ and
Elysium. Now they are not merely your
composers of myth and poetry who write
songs of this strain; but your philosophers
also speak with all confidence of the return
of souls to their former state,^ and of the two-
fold award " of a final judgment.


1 " Doubtless the stripes which the Spartans endured with
such firmness, aggravated by the presence of their nearest relatives,
who encouraged them, conferred honour upon their family." —
Apology, c. 50. [See p. 55, supra^

2 Compare The Apology, cc. xlvu. xlvui. xhx. [This Vol.,
siipra^

3 Przestruitur.

4 Prsesumimus.

5 Est.

^ Interim.

7 Traditum.

8 The heathen hell, Tartartis or Orcus.

9 Reciprocatione.
^o Distributione.


CHAP. XX. — TRUTH AND REALITY PERTAIN TO
CHRISTIANS ALONE. THE HEATHEN COUN-
SELLED TO EXAMINE AND EMBRACE IT.

How long therefore, O most unjust heathen,
will you refuse to acknowledge us, and (what
is more) to execrate your own (worthies),
since between us no distinction has place, be-
cause we are one and the same ? Since you
do not (of course) hate what you yourselves
are, give us rather your right hands in fellow-
ship, unite your salutations," mingle your
embraces, sanguinary with the sanguinary, in-
cestuous with the incestuous, conspirators
with conspirators, obstinate and vain with
those of the selfsame qualities. In company
with each other, we have been traitors to the
majesty of the god§; and together do we pro-
voke their indignation. You too have your
*' third race; " " not indeed third in the way
of religious rite,'^ ^^t a third race in sex, and,
made up as it is of male and female in one,
it is more fitted to men and women (for offices
of lust)." Well, then, do we offend you by
the very fact of our approximation and agree-
ment ? Being on a par is apt to Turnish un-
consciously the materials for rivalry. Thus
"a potter envies a potter, and a smith a
smith." '•* But we must now discontinue this
imaginary confession. 's Our conscience has
returned to the truth, and to the consistency
of truth. For all those points which you
allege '^ (against us) will be really found in
ourselves alone; and we alone can rebut them,
against whom they are adduced, by getting
you to listen '^ to the other side of the ques-
tion, whence that full knowledge is learnt
which both inspires counsel and directs the
judgment. Now it is in fact your own maxim,
that no one should determine a cause without
hearing both sides of it; and it is only in our
own case that you neglect (the equitable prin-
ciple). You indulge to the full '^ that fault of
human nature, that those things which you
do not disallow in yourselves you condemn in
others, or you boldly charge '^ against others
those things the guilt of which =° you retain a
lasting consciousness of =' in yourselves. The
course of life in which you will choose to
occupy yourselves is different from ours:
whilst chaste in the eyes of others, you are


" Compingite oscula.

12 Eunuchs (Rigalt.).

13 As the Christians were held to be; coming after (i) the
heathen, (2) the Jews. See above, c. viii., and Scorpiace, c. x.

M An oft-quoted proverb in ancient writers. It occurs in Hesiod
{Opp. et Dies) 25.

15 Literally, "cease henceforth, O, simulated confession."

16 Omnia ista.

17 This seems to be the force of the "agnitione," which Oehler
renders 'auditione."

18 Satisfacitis.
»9 Jactetis.

«> Quorum reatum.
2' Memineritis.


128


AD NATIONES.


[hook I.


unchaste towards your own selves; whilst vig-
orous against vice out of doors, you succumb
to it at home. This is the injustice (which
we have to suffer), that, knowing truth, we
are condemned by those who know it not;
free from guilt, we are judged by those who
are implicated in it. Remove the mote, or
rather the beam, out of your own eye, that
you may be able to extract the mote from the
eyes of others. Amend your own lives first,
that you may be able to punish the Christians.
Only so far as you shall have effected your
own reformation, will you refuse to inflict
punishment on them — nay, so far will you
liave become Christians yourselves; and as
you shall have become Christians, so far will
you have compassed your own amendment of
life. Learn what that is which you accuse in


us, and you will accuse no longer; search out
what that is which you do not accuse in your-
selves, and you will become self-accusers.
From these very few and humble remarks, so
far as we have been able to open out the sub-
ject to you, you will plainly get some insight
into (your own) error, and some discovery of
our truth. Condemn that truth if you have
the heart,' but only after you have examined
it; and approve the error still, if you are so
minded, =* only first explore it. But if your
prescribed rule is to love error and hate truth,
why, (let me ask,) do you not probe to a full
discovery the objects both of your love and
your hatred ?


1 Si potestis.

2 Si putatis.


AD NATIONES.

Book II.'


CHAP. I. THE HEATHEN GODS FROM HEATHEN

AUTHORITIES. VARRO HAS WRITTEN A WORK
ON THE SUBJECT. HIS THREEFOLD CLASSI-
FICATION. THE CHANGEABLE CHARACTER
OF THAT WHICH OUGHT TO BE FIXED AND
CERTAIN.

Our defence requires that we should at this
point discuss with you the character of your
gods, O ye heathen, fit objects of our pity,^
appeahng even to your own conscience to de-
termine whether they be truly gods, as you
would have it supposed, or falsely, as you are
unwilling to have proved. ^ Now this is the ma-
terial part of human error, owing to the wiles
of its author, that it is never free from the igno-
rance of error,-* whence your guilt is all the
greater. Your eyes are open, yet they see
not; your ears are unstopped, yet they hear
not; though your heart beats, it is yet dull,
nor does your mind understand s that of which
it is cognizant.^ If indeed the enormous per-
verseness (of your worship) could ^ be broken
up^ by a single demurrer, we should have our
objection ready to hand in the declaration ^
that, as we know all those gods of yours to
have been instituted by men, all belief in the
true Deity is by this very circumstance brought
to nought; '° because, of course, nothing which
some time or other had a beginning can rightly
seem to be divine. But the fact is," there are
many things by which tenderness of conscience


1 In this part of his work the author reviews the heathen
mythology, and exposes the absurdity of the polytheistic worship
in the various classes of the gods, according to the distribution of
Varro.

2 Miserandse.

3 Literally, " unwilling to know."

4 i.e., it does not know that it is error.

5 Nescit.

6 Agnoscit.

7 Liceret.

8 Discuti, or, in the logical sense, " be tested.'

9 Nunciatio (legally, this is " an information lodged against a
wrong.")

10 Exfcidere, " falls through."
»* Bed enim .

9


is hardened into the callousness of wilful error.
Truth is beleaguered with the vast force (of
the enemy), and yet how secure she is in her
own inherent strength! And naturally enough "
when from her very adversaries she gains to
her side whomsoever she will, as her friends
and protectors, and prostrates the entire host
of her assailants. It is therefore against these
things that our contest lies — against the in-
stitutions of our ancestors, against the author-
ity of tradition, '3 the laws of our governors,
and the reasonings of the wise; against antiqui-
ty, custom, submission;'-* against precedents,
prodigies, miracles, — all which things have
had their part in consolidating that spurious 's
system of your gods. Wishing, then, to fol-
low step by step your own commentaries which
you have drawn out of your theology of every
sort (because the authority of learned men
goes further with you in matters of this kind
than the testimony of facts), I have taken and
abridged the works of Varro; '^ for he in his
treatise Concerning Divine Things, collected
out of ancient digests, has shown himself a
serviceable guide '^ for us. Now, if I inquire
of him who were the subtle inventors '^ of the
gods, he points to either the philosophers, the
peoples, or the poets. For he has made a
threefold distinction in classifying the gods:
one being the physical class, of which the
philosophers treat; another the mythic class,
which is the constant burden of'^ tlie poets;
the third, the gentile class, which the nations
have adopted each one for itself. When,
therefore, the philosophers have ingeniously
composed their physical (theology) out of their


"Quidni?
'3 Receptorum.

14 Necessitatem, answering to the " leges dominantium."
'5 Adulterinam.

i6 St. Augustine, in hh lie Civit. Dei, makes similar use of
Varro's work on the heathen gods. Liber Divinaruvt.
'7 Scopum, perhaps "mark."
»8 Insmuatores.
»9 Volutetur.


AD NATIONES.


[book II.


own conjectures, when the poets have drawn
their mythical from fables, and the (several)
nations have forged their gentile (polytheism)
according to their own will, where in the world
must truth be placed ? In the conjectures ?
Well, but these are only a doubtful conception.
In the fables ? But they are at best an absurd
story. In the popular accounts ? ' This sort
of opinion,' however, is only promiscuous ^ and
municipal. Now all things with the philoso-
phers are uncertain, because of their variation;
with the poets all is worthless, because im-
moral ; with the nations all is irregular and con-
fused,because dependent on their mere choice.
The nature of God, however, if it be the true
one with which you are concerned, is of so
definite a character as not to be derived from
uncertain speculations,* nor contaminated with
worthless fables, nor determined by promiscu-
ous conceits. It ought indeed to be regarded, as
it really is, as certain, entire,universal, because
it is in truth the property of all. Now, what
god shall I believe ? One that has been gauged
by vague suspicion? One that history s has
divulged ? One that a community has in-
vented ? It would be a far worthier thing if
I believed no god, than one which is open to
doubt, or full of shame, or the object of ar-
bitrary selection.*^

CHAP. II. — PHILOSOPHERS HAD NOT SUCCEEDED
IN DISCOVERING GOD. THE UNCERTAINTY
AND CONFUSION OF THEIR SPECULATIONS.

But the authority of the physical philoso-
phers is maintained among you'' as the special
property* of wisdom. You 7nean of course,
that pure and simple wisdom of the philoso-
phers which attests its own weakness mainly
l)y that variety of opinion which proceeds from
an ignorance of the truth. Now what wise man
is so devoid of truth, as not to know that God
is the Father and Lord of wisdom itself and
truth ? Besides, there is that divine oracle
uttered by Solomon: *' The fear of the Lord,"
says he," is the beginning of wisdom." » But*°
fear has its origin in knowledge; for how will
a man fear that of which he knows nothing?
Therefore he who shall have the fear of God,
even if he be ignorant of all things else, if he
has attained to the knowledge and truth of


» Adoptionibus.
s Adoptatio.

3 Passiva, " a jumble."

4 Argumentationibus.

5 Historia. This word seems to refer to the class of mythica^l
divinity above mentioned. It therefore means *' fable " or "ab-
surd story " (see above).

6 Adoptivum.

7 Patrocinatur.
B Maadpium.
9 Prov. IX. \o \ Ps. cxi. i
« Porro.


God," will possess full and perfect wisdom. /
This, however, is what philosophy has not^'
clearly realized. For although, in their in-
quisitive disposition to search into all kinds
of learning, the philosophers may seem to have
investigated the sacred Scriptures themselves
for their antiquity, and to have derived thence
some of their opinions; yet because they
have interpolated these deductiofis they prove
that they have either despised them wholly or
have not fully believed them, for in other
cases also the simplicity of truth is shaken " by
the over-scrupulousness of an irregular belief, '^
and that they therefore changed them, as their
desire of glory grew, into products of their own
mind. The consequence of this is, that even
that which they had discovered degenerated
into uncertainty, and there arose from one or
two drops of truth a perfect flood of argumen-
tation. For after they had simply '* found God,
they did not expound Him as they found Him,
but rather disputed about His quality, and
His nature, and even about His alDode. The
Platonists, indeed, (held) Him to care about
wordly things, both as the disposer and judge
thereof. The Epicureans regarded Him as
apathetic '^ and inert, and (so to say) a non-
entity.** The Stoics believed Him to be out-
side of the world; the Platonists, within the
world. The God whom they had so imper-
fectly admitted, they could neither know nor
fear; and therefore they could not be wise, since
they wandered away indeed from " the begin-
ning of wisdom," that is, " the fear of God."
Proofs are not wanting that among the philoso-
phers there was not only an ignorance, but
actual doubt, about the divinity. Diogenes,
when asked what was taking place in heaven,
answered by saying, " I have never been up
there." Again, whether there were any gods,
he replied, " I do not know; only there ought
to be gods. "'7 When Croesus inquired of
Thales of Miletus what he thought of the gods,
the latter having taken some time'^to consider,
answered by the word "Nothing." Even
Socrates denied with an air of certainty '' those
gods of yours. ^^ Yet he with a like certainty
requested that a cock should be sacrificed to
^sculapius. And therefore when philosophy,
in Its practice of defining about God, is de-
tected in such uncertainty and inconsistency.


IK


" Deum omnium notititam et veritatem adsecutus, i.e., " fol-
lowing the God of all as knowledge and truth."
12 Nutat.
>3 Passiva: fidei.
'4 Solummodo.
•5 Otiosum.
»6" A nobody."
»7 Nisi ut sint expedire.
»8 Aliquot commeatus.
'9 Quasi cert us.
=" Istos deos.


CHAP. III.]


AD NATIONES.


I"^I


what "fear" could it possibly have had of
Him whom it was not competent' clearly to
determine ? We have been ta«ght to believe
of the world that it is god.' For such the
physical class of theologizers conclude it to
be, since they have handed down such views
about the gods that Dionysius the Stoic divides
them into three kinds. The first, he supposes,
includes those gods which are most obvious,
as the Sun, Moon, atid Stars; the next, those
which are not apparent, as Neptune; the re-
maining one, those which are said to have
passed from the human state to the divine,
as Hercules ^w^Amphiaraus. In like manner,
Arcesilaus makes a threefold form of the
divinity — the Olympian, the Astral, the Tita-
nian — sprung from Coelus and Terra; from
which through Saturn and Ops came Neptune,
Jupiter, and Orcus, and their entire progeny.
Xenocrates, of the Academy, makes a two-
fold division — the Olympian and the Titanian,
which descend from Coelus and Terra. Most
of the Egyptians believe that there are four
gods — the Sun and the Moon, the Heaven
and the Earth. Along with all the supernal
fire Democritus conjectures that the gods
arose. Zeno, too, will have it that their na-
ture resembles it. Whence Varro also makes
fire to be the soul of the world, that in the
world fire governs all things, just as the soul
does in ourselves. But all this is most absurd.
For he says, Whilst it is in us, we have ex-
istence; but as soon as it has left us, we die.
Therefore, when fire quits the world in light-
ning, the world comes to its end.

CHAP. III. THE PHYSICAL PHILOSOPHERS MAIN-
TAINED THE DIVINITY OF THE ELEMENTS;
THE ABSURDITY OF THE TENET EXPOSED.

From these developments of opinion, we
see that your 3 physical class of philosophers
are driven to the necessity of contending that
the elements are gods, since it alleges that
other gods are sprung from them; for it is
only from gods that gods could be born. Now,
although we shall have to examine these other
gods more fully in the proper place, in the
mythic section of the poets, yet, inasmuch as
we must meanwhile treat of them in their con-
nection with the present class,* we shall prob-
ably even from their present class, ^ when
once we turn to the gods themselves, succeed
in showing that they can by no means appear
to be gods who are said to be sprung from


1 Non tenebat.

2 De mundo deo didicimus.

3 Istud.

4 Ad prsesentem speciem, iht physical class.

5 Or, classification.


the elements; so that we have at once a pre-
sumption* that the elements are not gods,
since they which are born of the elements are
not gods. In like manner, whilst we show
that the elements are not gods, we shall, ac-
cording to the law of natural relationship,"
get a presumptive argument that they cannot
rightly be maintained to be gods whose parents
(in this case the elements) are not gods. It
is a settled point ^ that a god is born of a god,
and that what lacks divinity ' is born of what
is not divine. Now, so far as '° the world of
which your philosophers treat " (for I apply
this term to the universe in the most compre-
hensive sense ") contains the elements, min-
istering to them as its component parts (for
whatever its own condition may be, the same
of course will be that of its elements and con-
stituent portions), it must needs have been
formed either by some being, according to
the enlightened view'^ of Plato, or else by
none, according to the harsh opinion '■» of
Epicurus; and since it was formed, by having
a beginning, it must also have an end. That,
therefore, which at one time before its begin-
ning had no existence, and will by and by
after its end cease to have an existence, cannot
of course, by any possibility, seem to be a
god, wanting as it does that essential character
of divinity, eternity, which is reckoned to be '^
without beginning, and wi^out end. If,
however, it '* is in no wise formed, and there-
fore ought to be accounted divine — since, as
divine, it is subject neither to a beginning
nor an end of itself — how is it that some as-
sign generation to the elements, which they
hold to be gods, when the Stoics deny that
anything can be born of a god ? Likewise,
how is it that they wish those beings, whom
they suppose to be born of the elements, to
be regarded as gods, when they deny that a
god can be born ? Now, what must hold good
of the universe '7 will have to be predicated of
the elements, I mean of heaven, and of earth,
and of the stars, and of fire, which Varro has
vainly proposed that you should believe '^ to
be gods, and the parents of gods, contrary to
that generation and nativity which he had de-
clared to be impossible in a god. Now this
same Varro had shown that the earth and the


6 Ut jam hinc praejudicatum sit.

7 Ad illam agnatorum speciem.

8 Scitum.

9 Non-deum.

10 " Quod," with a subj. mood.
" Mundus iste.
»2 Summaliter.
13 Humanitas,
«4 Duritia.
IS Censetur.
i^i.e., "iste mundus."
■7 Mundi, i.e., the universe; see above.

i8 The best reading is " vobis credi; " this is one of Tertullian's
'yfwrt/ infinitives."


AD NATIONES.


[book II.


stars were animated.' But if this be the case,
they must needs be also mortal, according to
the condition' of animated nature; for al-
though the soul is evidently immortal, this
attribute is limited to it alone: it is not ex-
tended to that with which it is associated, that
is, the body. Nobody, however, will deny
that the elements have body, since we both
touch them and are touched by them, and we
see certain bodies fall down from them. If,
therefore, they are animated, laying aside the
principle 3 of a soul, as befits their condition
as bodies, they are mortal — of course not im-
mortal. And yet whence is it that the ele-
ments appear to Varro to be animated ? Be-
cause, forsooth, the elements have motion.
And then, in order to anticipate what may be
objected on the other side, that many things
else have motion — as wheels, as carriages, as
several other machines — he volunteers the
statement that he believes only such things to
be animated as move of themselves, without
any apparent mover or impeller from without,
like the apparent mover of the wheel, or pro-
peller of the carriage, or director of the ma-
chine. If, then, they are not animated, they
have no motion of themselves. Now, when
he thus alleges a power which is not apparent,
he points to what it was his duty to seek after,
even the creator and controller of the motion;
for it does not at once follow that, because
we do not see a thing, we believe that it does
not exist. Rather, it is necessary the more
profoundly to investigate what one does not
see, in order the better to understand the
character of that which is apparent. Besides,
if (you admit) only the existence of those
things which appear and are supposed to exist
simply because they appear, how is it that
you also admit them to be gods which do not
appear ? If, moreover, those things seem to
have existence which have none, why may
they not have existence also which do not
seem to have it ? Such, for instance, as the
Mover* of the heavenly beings. Granted,
then, that things are animated because they
move of themselves, and that they move of
themselves when they are not moved by an-
other: still it does not follow that they must
straightway be gods, because they are ani-
mated, nor even because they move of them-
selves; else what is to prevent all animals
whatever being accounted gods, moving as
they do of themselves? This, to be sure, is
allowed to the Egyptians, but their supersti-
tious vanity has another basis. s


CHAP. IV. WRONG DERIVATION OF THE WORD

0eos. THE NAME INDICATIVE OF THE
TRUE DEITY. GOD WITHOUT SHAPE AND
IMMATERIAL. ANECDOTE OF THALES.

Some affirm that the gods {i.e. deoi) were so
called because the verbs dieiv and aeiadat signify
to run and to be moved.^ This term, then, is
not indicative of any majesty, for it is derived
from rmming and motion, not from any do-
minion ^ of godhead. But inasmuch as the
Supreme God whom we worship is also desig-
nated Qt6q, without however the appearance of
any course or motion in Him, because He is
not visible to any one, it is clear that that
word must have had some other derivation,
and that the property of divinity, innate in
Himself, must have been discovered. Dis-
missing, then, that ingenious interpretation,
it is more likely that the gods were' not called
foot from running and motion, but that the term
was borrowed from the designation of the true
God; so that you gave the name Otoi to the
gods, whom you had in like manner forged
for yourselves. Now, that this is the case, a
plain proof is afforded in the fact that you
actually give the common appellation foot to
all those gods of yours, in whom there is no
attribute of course or motion indicated. When,
therefore, you call them both foot and immove-
able with equal readiness, there is a devia-
tion as well from the meaning of the word
as from the idea^ of godhead, which is set
aside ^ if measured by the notion of course and
motion. But if that sacred name be peculiarly
significant of deity, and be simply true and
not of a forced interpretation '° in the case of
the true God, but transferred in a borrowed
sense " to those other objects which you choose
to call gods, then you ought to show to us "
that there is also a community of character
between them, so that their common designa-
tion may rightly depend on their union of es-
sence. But the true God, on the sole ground
that He is not an object of sense, is incapable
of being compared with those false deities
which are cognizable to sight and sense (to
sense indeed is sufficient); for this amounts
to a clear statement of the difference between
an obscure proof and a manifest one. Now,
since the elements are obvious to all, (and)
since God, on the contrary, is visible to none,
how will it be in your power from that part


1 Compare Augustine, de Civil. Dei, vii. 6, 23, 24, :

2 Formam.

3 Ratione.

4 Motatorem.

5 Alia sane vanitate.


6 This seems to mean : " because 6itiv has also the sense of
atUv9ai (motion as well as projiression)."

7 " Dominatione " is Oehler s reading, but he approves of " de-
nominatione'' (Rigault's reading); this would signify " designation
of godhead.''

» Opinione.

9 Rescinditur.
'° Interprelatorium.
" Reprehensum.
" Docete.


CHAP, v.]


AD NATIONES.


^33


which you have not seen to pass to a decision
on the objects which you see ? Since, there-
fore, you have not to combine them in your
perception or your reason, why do you com-
bine them in name with the purpose of com-
bining them also in power ? For see how even
Zeno separates the matter of the world from
God: he says that the latter has percolated
through the former, like honey through the
comb. God, therefore, and Matter are two
words (and) two things. Proportioned to the
difference of the words is the diversity of the
things; the condition also of matter follows
its designation. Now if matter is not God,
because its very appellation teaches us so,
how can those things which are inherent in
matter — that is, the elements — be regarded
as gods, since the component members cannot
possibly be heterogeneous from the body?
But what concern have I with physiological
conceits? It were better for one's mind to
ascend above the state of the world, not to
stoop down to uncertain speculations. Plato's
form for the world was round. Its square,
angular shape, such as others. had conceived
it to be, he rounded off, I suppose, with com-
passes, from his labouring to have it believed
to be simply without a beginning.^ Epicurus,
however, who had said, " What is above us is
nothing to us," wished notwithstanding to
have a peep at the sky, and found the sun to
be a foot in diameter. Thus far you must
confess ^ men were niggardly in even celestial
objects. In process of time their ambitious
conceptions advanced, and so the sun too en-
larged its disk. 3 Accordingly, the Peripatetics
marked it out as a larger world.* Now, pray
tell me, what wisdom is there in this hanker-
ing after conjectural speculations ? What
proof is afforded to us, notwithstanding the
strong confidence of its assertions, by the
useless affectation of a scrupulous curiosity, ^
which is tricked out with an artful show of
language? It therefore served Thales of
Miletus quite right, when, star-gazing as he
walked with all the eyes he had, he had the
mortification of falling^ into a well, and was
unmercifully twitted by an Egyptian, who said
to him, "Is it because you found nothing on
earth to look at, that you think you ought to
confine your gaze to the sky?" His fall,
therefore, is a figurative picture of the phi-
losophers; of those, I mean, 7 who persist in


J Sine capite.
= Scilicet.
3 Aciem.

4Majorem orbem. Another reading has " majorera orbe,"
f.d. " as larger than the world."
5 Morositatis.
6. Cecidit turpiter.
7 Scilicet.


applying^ their studies to a vain purpose, since
they indulge a stupid curiosity on natural ob-
jects, which they ought rather (intelligently
to direct) to their Creator and Governor.

CHAP. V. — THE PHYSICAL THEORY CONTINUED.
FURTHER REASONS ADVANCED AGAINST THE
DIVINITY OF THE ELEMENTS.

Why, then, do we not resort to that far
more reasonable ' opinion, which has clear
proof of being derived from men's common
sense and unsophisticated deduction ? '° Even
Varro bears it in mind, when he says that the
elements are supposed to be divine, because
nothing whatever is capable, without their
concurrence," of being produced, nourished,
or applied to the sustenance" of man's life
and of the earth, since not even our bodies
and souls could have sufficed in themselves
without the modification '^ of the elements.
By this it is that the world is made generally
habitable, — a result which is harmoniously se-
cured '•* by the distribution into zones, 's except
where human residence has been rendered
impracticable by intensity of cold or heat.
On this account, men have accounted as gods
— the sun, because it imparts from itself the
light of day, ripens the fruit with its warmth,
and measures the year with its stated periods;
the moon, which is at once the solace of the
night and the controller of the months by its
governance; the stars also, certain indicatiops
as. they are of those seasons which are to be
obsei*ved in the tillage of our fields; lastly,
the very heaven also under which, and the
earth over which, as well as the intermediate
space within which, all things conspire to-
gether for the good of man. Nor is it from
their beneficent influences only that a faith
in their divinity has been deemed compatible
with the elements, but from their opposite
qualities also, such as usually happen from
what one might call '^ their wrath and anger —
as thunder, and hail, and drought, and pesti-
lential winds, floods also, and openings of the
ground, and earthquakes: these are all fairly
enough '^ accounted gods, whether their nature
becomes the object of reverence as being
favourable, or of fear because terrible — the
sovereign dispenser,'^ in fact,'' both of help
and of hurt. But in the practical conduct of


8 Habituros.

8 Humaniorera.
10 Conjectura.
" Suflfragio.
12 Sationem.
•3 Temperamento.
14 Foederata.

'5 Circulorum conditionibus.
i6 Tanquara.
i6 Jure.
i8 Domina.
»2 Scilicet.


134


AD NATIONES.


[book II.


social life, this is the way in which men act
and feel: they do not show gratitude or find
fault with the very things from which the
succour or the injury proceeds, so much
as with them by whose strength and power
the operation of the things is effected. For
even in your amusements you do not award
the crown as a prize to the flute or the harp,
but to the musician who manages the said flute
or harp by the power of his delightful skill.'
In like manner, when one is in ill-health, you
do not bestow your acknowledgments on the
flannel wraps, ^^ or the medicines, or the poul-
tices, but on the doctors by whose care and
prudence the remedies become effectual. So,
again, in untoward events, they who are
wounded with the sword do not charge the
injury on the sword or the spear, but on the
enemy or the robber; whilst those whom a
falling house covers do not blame the tiles or
the stones, but the oldness of the building; as
again shipwrecked sailors impute their calam-
ity not to the rocks and waves, but to the
tempest. And rightly too; for it is certain
that everything which happens must be as-
cribed not to the instrument with which, but to
the agent by whom, it takes place; inasmuch
as he is the prime cause of the occurrence, ^
who appoints both the event itself and that by
whose instrumentality it comes to pass (as
there are in all things these three particular
elements — the fact itself, its instrument, and
its cause), because he himself who wills the
occurrence of a thing comes into notice '* prior
to the thing which he wills, or the instrument
by which it occurs. On all other occasions,
therefore, your conduct is right enough, be-
cause you consider the author; but in physical
phenomena your rule is opposed to that natural
principle which prompts you to a wise judg-
ment in all other cases, removing out of sight
as you do the supreme position of the author,
and considering rather the things that happen,
than him by whom they happen. Thus it
comes to pass that you suppose the power and
the dominion to belong to the elements, which
are but the slaves and functionaries. Now
do we not, in thus tracing out an artificer and
master within, expose the artful structure of
their slavery 5 out of the appointed functions
of those elements to which you ascribe (the
attributes) of power?** But gods are not


I Vi suavitatis.
' Lanis.

3 Caput facti.

4 Invenitur.

5 Servitutis artem. "Artem " Oehler explains by " artificiose
institutum."

6 We subjoin Oehler's text of this obscure sentence : " Non in
ista investi^atione alicujus artificis intus et domini servitutis ar-
tem ostendimus elementorum certis ex operis " (for " operibus,"
not unusual in Tertullian) "eorum quas facis potestatis?


siaves; therefore whatever things are servile
in character are not gods. Otherwise ^ they
should prove to us that, according to the
ordinary course of things, liberty is promoted
by irregular licence, * despotism by liberty,
and that by despotism divine power is meant.
For if all the (heavenly bodies) overhead forget
not' to fulfil their courses in certain orbits, in
regular seasons, at proper distances, and at
equal irntervals — appointed in the way of a law
for the revolutions of time, and for directing
the guidance thereof — can it fail to result"*
from the very observance of their conditions
and the fidelity of their operations, that you will
be convinced both by the recurrence of their
orbital courses and the accuracy of their muta-
tions, when you bear in mind how ceaseless is
their recurrence, that a governing power pre-
sides over them, to which the entire manage-
ment of the world " is obedient, reaching even to
the utility and injury of the human race ? P'or
you cannot pretend that these (phenomena)
act and care for themselves alone, without
contributing anything to the advantage of
mankind, when. you maintain that the elements
are divine for no other reason than that you
experience from them either benefit or injury
to yourself. For if they benefit themselves
only, you are under no obligation to them.

CHAP. VI. THE CHANGES OF THE HEAVENLY

BODIES, PROOF THAT THEY ARE NOT DIVINE.
TRANSITION FROM THE PHYSICAL TO THE
MYTHIC CLASS OF GODS.

Come now, do you allow that the Divine
Being not only has nothing servile in His
course, but exists in unimpaired integrity, and
ought not to be diminished, or suspended, or
destroyed? Well, then, all His blessedness"
would disappear, if He were ever subject to
change. Look, however, at the stellar bodies;
they both undergo change, and give clear evi-
dence of the fact. The moon tells us how
great has been its loss, as it recovers its full
form; '3 its greater losses you are already ac-
customed to measure in a mirror of water; 's so
that I need not any longer believe in anywise
what magians have asserted. The sun, too,
is frequently put to the trial of an eclipse.
Explain as best you may the modes of these
celestial casualties, it is impossible 's for God


7 Aut.

8 De licentia passivitatis libertas approbetur.

9 Meminerunt.
'oNum non.

»» Universa negotiatio mundialis.

l'2 Felicitas.

'3 These are the moon's monthly changes.

'5 Tertullian refers to the Magian method of watching eclipses^
the evonrpoy^atntia.

'6 Instead of "non valet," there is the reading " non volet,"
" God would not consent," etc.


CHAP. VII.]


AD NATIONES.


135


either to become less or to cease to exist.
Vain, therefore, are ' those supports of human
learning, which, by their artful method of
weaving conjectures, belie both wisdom and
truth. Besides, = it so happens, indeed, ac-
cording to your natural way of thinking, that
he who has spoken the best is supposed to
have spoken most truly, instead of him who
has spoken the truth being held to have spoken
the best. Now the man who shall carefully
look into things, will surely allow it to be a
greater probability that those ^ elements which
we have been discussing are under some rule
and direction, than that they have a motion
of their own, and that being under govern-
ment they cannot be gods. If, however, one
is in error in this matter, it is better to err
simply than speculatively, like your physical
philosophers. But, at the same time,'^ if you
consider the character of the mythic school,
(and compare it with the physical^) the error
which we have already seen frail men s mak-
ing in the latter is really the more respectable
one, since it ascribes a divine nature to those
things which it supposes to be superhuman in
their sensibility, whether in respect of their
position, their power, their magnitude, or
their divinity. For that which you suppose
to be higher than man, you believe to be very
near to God.

CHAP. VII. — THE GODS OF THE MYTHIC CLASS.
THE POETS A VERY POOR AUTHORITY IN SUCH
MATTERS. HOMER AND THE MYTHIC POETS.
WHY IRRELIGIOUS.

But to pass to the mythic class of gods,
which we attributed to the poets,^ I hardly
know whether I must only seek to put them
on a par with our own human mediocrity, or
whether they must be affirmed to be gods,
with proofs of divinity, like the African Mop-
sus and the Boeotian Amphiaraus. I must
now indeed but slightly touch on this class,
of which a fuller view will be taken in the
proper place. ^ Meanwhile, that these were
only human beings, is clear from the fact that
you do not consistently call them gods, but
heroes. Why then discuss the point? Al-
though divine honours had to be ascribed to
dead men, it was not to them as such, of
course. Look at your own practice, when
with similar excess of presumption you sully
heaven with the sepulchres of your kings: is


1 Viderint igitur " Let them look to themselves," " never mind
them."

2 Alias.

3 Ista.
4Sedenim.

5 Mortalitas.


6 See above, c. i. [Note ip, p. 129.]

7 See The Aj>ology, especially cc. xxii. and


it not such as are illustrious for justice, vir-
tue, piety, and every excellence of this sort,
that you honour with the blessedness of dei-
fication, contented even to incur contempt if
you forswear yourselves® for such characters?
And, on the other hand, do you not deprive
the impious and disgraceful of even the old
prizes of human glory, tear up' their decrees
and titles, pull down their statues, and deface '°
their images on the current coin ? Will He,
however, who beholds all things, who ap-
proves, nay, rewards the good, prostitute be-
fore all men " the attribute of His own inex-
haustible grace and mercy ? And shall men
be allowed an especial amount of care and
righteousness, that they may be wise " in se-
lecting and multiplying '^ their deities ? Shall
attendants on kings and princes be more pure
than those who wait on the Supreme God ? '*
You turn your back in horror, indeed, on
outcasts and exiles, on the poor and weak,
on the obscurely born and the low-lived; '5
but yet you honour, even by legal sanctions,'*
unchaste ipen, adulterers, robbers, and par-
ricides. Must we regard it as a subject of
ridicule or indignation, that such characters^
are believed to be gods who are not fit to be
men ?j Then, again, in this mythic class of
yours which the poets celebrate, how uncer-
tain is your conduct as to purity of conscience
and the maintenance thereof ! For whenever
we hold up to execration the wretched, dis-
graceful and atrocious (examples) of your
gods, you defend them as mere fables, on
the pretence of poetic licence; whenever we
volunteer a silent contempt '' of this said '^
poetic licence, then you are not only troubled
with no horror of it, but you go so far as '' to
show it respect, and to hold it as one of the
indispensable (fine) arts; nay,=° you carry out
the studies of your higher classes" by its
means, as the very foundation == of your litera-
ture. Plato was of opinion that poets ought
to be banished, as calumniators of the gods;
(he would even have) Homer himself expelled
from his republic, although, as you are aware, ^^
he was the crowned head of them all. But


8 Pejerantes.

9 I^ncinatis.
10 Repercutitis.
" Vulgo.

»2 Sapere. The infinitive o[ purpose is frequent in our author.
"3 Distribuendis.

M An allusion to Antinous, who is also referred to in The Apol-
0'^', xiii. [" Court-page. " See, p. 29, 5"«/ra.]

15 Inhoneste institutos.

16 By the "legibus" Tertullian refers to the divine honours or-
dered to be paid, by decrees of the Senate, to deceased emperors.
Comp. Suetonius, Octav. 88 ; and Pliny, Faneg. 11 (Oehlcr),

17 Ultro siletur.
iSEjusmodi.
*9lnsuper.

K> Denique.
21 Ingenuitatis.
"3 Initiatricem.
23 Sane.


136


AD NATIONES.


[book II.


while you admit and retain them thus, why
should you not believe them when they dis-
close such things respecting your gods ? And
if you do believe your poets, how is it that
you worship such gods (as they describe) ?
If you worship them simply because you do
not believe the poets, why do you bestow
praise on such lying authors, without any fear
of giving offence to those whose calumniators
you honour ? A regard for truth * is not, of
course, to be expected of poets. But when
you say that they only make men into gods
after their death, do you not admit that before
death the saidgods were merely human ? Now
what is there strange in the fact, that they who
were once men are subject to the dishonour*
of human casualties, or crimes, or fables ?
Do you not, in fact, put faith in your poets,
when it is in accordance with their rhapsodies ^
that you have arranged in some instances
your very rituals ? How is it that the priestess
of Ceres is ravished, if it is not because Ceres
suffered a similar outrage ? Why are the chil-
dren of others sacrificed to Saturn,* if it is not
because he spared not his own ? Why is a male
mutilated in honour of the Idaean goddess
Cybele, unless it be that the (unhappy) youth
who was too disdainful of her advances was
castrated, owing to her vexation at his daring
to cross her love?^ Why was not Hercules
*' a dainty dish " to the good ladies of Lanu-
vium, if it was not for the primeval offence
which women gave to him ? The poets, no
doubt, are liars. Yet it is not because of their
telling us that^ your gods did such things when
they were human beings, nor because they
predicated divine scandals ^ of a divine state,
since it seemed to you more credible that
gods should exist, though not of such a char-
acter, than that there should be such charac-
ters, although not gods.

CHAP. VIII. THE GODS OF THE DIFFERENT

NATIONS. VARRO'S GENTILE CLASS. THEIR
INFERIORITY. A GOOD DEAL OF THIS PER-
VERSE THEOLOGY TAKEN FROM SCRIPTURE.
SERAPIS A PERVERSION OF JOSEPH.

There remains the gentile class of gods
amongst the several nations:^ these were
adopted out of mere caprice, not from the
knowledge of the truth; and our information
about them comes from the private notions of


I Fides,
3 Polluuntur.
3 Relationibus.

4Coinp. T/te A/>olop\ix. [See, p. 25, .Sw/rrt.]
SComp. Minucius Felix, Octaf. xxi. ; Amobius, adz>. Nat. v.
6, 7: Augustine, Civ. Dei, \i. 7.

° This is the force of the subjunctiT'e verb.

7 By divine scandals, he means such as exceed in their atroc-
ity even human scandals.

8 See above, c. i. [p. 129.]


different races. God, I imagine, is every-
where known, everywhere present, powerful
everywhere — an object whom all ought to
worship, all ought to serve. Since, then, it
happens that even they, whom all the world
worships in common, fail in the evidence of
their true divinity, how much more must this
befall those whom their very votaries « have
not succeeded in discovering ! For what use-
ful authority could possibly precede a theology
of so defective a character as to .be wholly
unknown to fame ? How many have either
seen or heard of the Syrian Atargatis, the
African Coelestis, the Moorish Varsutina, the
Arabian Obodas and Dusaris, or the Norican
Belenus, or those whom Varro mentions —
Deluentinus of Casinum, Visidianus of Nar-
nia, Numiternus of Atina, or Ancharia of
Asculum ? And who have any clear notions '"
of Nortia of Vulsinii ? " There is no difference
in the worth of even their names, apart from
the human surnames which distinguish them.
I laugh often enough at the little coteries of
gods " in each municipality, which have their
honours confined within their own city walls.
To what lengths this licence of adopting gods
has been pushed, the superstitious practices
of the Egyptians show us; for they worship
even their native '^ animals, such as cats, croco-
diles, and their snake. It is therefore a small
matter that they have also deified a man — him,
I mean, whom not Egypt only, or Greece, but
the whole world worships, and the Africans
swear by; about whose state also all that helps
our conjectures and imparts to our knowledge
the semblance of truth is stated in our own
(sacred) literature. For that Serapis of yours
was originally one of our own saints called
Joseph."* The youngest of his brethren, but
superior to them in intellect, he was from
envy sold into Egypt, and became a slave in
the family of Pharaoh king of the country. 's
Importuned by the unchaste queen, when he
refused to comply with her desire, she turned
upon him and reported him to tiie king, by
whom he is put into prison. There he dis-
plays the power of his divine inspiration, by
interpreting aright the dreams of some (fellow-
prisoners). Meanwhile the king, too, has
some terrible dreams. Joseph being brought


9 Municipes. •' Their local worshippers or subjects."

*o Perceperint.

"Literally, "Have men heard of any Nortia belonging to the
Vulsinensians ? "

12 Deos decuriones, in allusion to the small provincial senates
which in the later times spread over the Roman colonies and vtu-
nicipia.

'3 Privatas.

»4 Compare Suidas, s. v._ Sapairi?; Rufinus, Hist. Eccl. ii. 23.
As Serapis was Joseph in disguise, so was Joseph a type of Christ,
according to the ancient Christians, who were fond of subordinat-
ing heathen myths to Christian theology.

'S TertuUian is not the only writer who has made mistakes in
citing from memory Scripture narratives. Comp. Amobius.


CHAP. IX.]


AD NATIONES.


2>7


before him, according to his summons, was
able to expound them. Having narrated the
proofs of true interpretation which he had
given in the prison, he opens out his dream to
the king: those seven fat-fleshed and well-
favoured kine signified as many years of
plenty; in like manner, the seven lean- fleshed
animals predicted the scarcity of the seven
following years. He accordingly recom-
mends precautions to be taken against the
future famine from the previous plenty. The
king believed him. The issue of all that hap-
pened showed how wise he was, how invariably
holy, and now how necessary. So Pharaoh
set him over all Egypt, that he might secure
the provision of corn for it, and thenceforth
administer its government. They called him
Serapis, from the turban ' which adorned his
head. The peck-like ^ shape of this turban
marks the memory of his corn-provisioning;
whilst evidence is given that the care of the
supplies was all on his head,^ by the very ears
of corn which embellish the border of the
head-dress. For the same reason, also, they
made the sacred figure of a dog,^ which they
regard (as a sentry) in Hades, and put it
under his right hand, because the care of the
Egyptians was concentrated s under his hand.
And they put at his side Pharia,^ whose name
shows her to have been the king's daughter.
For in addition to all the rest of his kind gifts
and rewards, Pharaoh had given him his own
daughter in marriage. Since, however, they
had begun to worship both wild animals and
human beings, they combined both figures
under one form Anubis, in which there may
rather be seen clear proofs of its own character
and condition enshrined ^ by a nation at war
with itself, refractory ^ to its kings, despised
among foreigners, with even the appetite of a
slave and the filthy nature of a dog.

CHAP. IX. THE POWER OF ROME. ROMANIZED
ASPECT OF ALL THE HEATHEN MYTHOLOGY.
VARRO'S THREEFOLD DISTRIBUTION CRITI-
CISED. ROMAN HEROES (^NEAS INCLUDED,)
UNFAVOURABLY REVIEWED.

Such are the more obvious or more remark-
able points which we had to mention in connec-
tion with Varro's threefold distribution of the
gods, in order that a sufficient answer might
seem to be given touching the physical, the
poetic, and the gentile classes. Since, how-


' Sug,?estu.

2 Modialis.

3 Super caput esse, i.e., was entrusted to him.

4 Canem dicaverunt.

5 Compressa.

6 Isis; comp. The Apology, xvi. [See p. 31, sjipraJ]

7 Consecrasse. .
* Recontrans.


ever, it is no longer to the philosohers, nor the
poets, nor the nations that we owe the sub-
stitution of all (heathen worship for the true
religion) although they transmitted the super-
stition, but to the dominant Romans, who
received the tradition and gave it wide author-
ity, another phase of the widespread error of
man must now be encountered by us; nay,
another forest must be felled by our asc,
which has obscured the childhood of the de-
generate worships with germs of superstitions
gathered from all quarters. Well, but even the
gods of the Romans have received from (the
same) Varro a threefold classification into the
certain, the imcerfai?i, and the select. What
absurdity ! What need had they of uncertain
gods, when they possessed certain ones ?
Unless, forsooth, they wished to commit
themselves to " such folly as the Athenians
did; for at Athens there was an altar with
this inscription: " To the unknown gods." "
Does, then, a man worship that which he
knows nothing of? Then, again, as they had
certain gods, they ought to have been con-
tented with them, without requiring select
ones. In this want they are even found to
be irreligious ! For if gods are selected as
onions are," then such as are not chosen are
declared to be worthless. Now we on our
part allow that the Romans had two sets of
gods, coitimo7i and proper; in other words,
those which they had in common with other
nations, and those which they themselves de-
vised. And were not these called the public
and the. foreig?i^^ gods? Their altars tell us
so; there is (a specimen) of the foreign gods
at the fane of Carna, of the public gods in the
Palatium. Now, since their common gods
are comprehended in both the physical and
the mythic classes, we have already said
enough concerning them. I should like to
speak of their particular kinds of deity. We
ought then to admire the Romans for that third
set of the gods of their efiemics,^* because no
other nation ever discovered for itself so large
a mass of superstition. Their other deities
we arrange in two classes: those which have
become gods from human beings, and those
which have had their origin in some other
way. Now, since there is advanced the same
colourable pretext for the deification of the
dead, that their lives were meritorious, we
are compelled to urge the same reply agairrst
them, that no one of them was worth so much


9 Vitii pueritatem.

1° Recipere (with a dative).

" Ignotis Deis. Comp. Acts .wii. 23.

12 Ut bulbi. This is the passage which Augustine quotes (dg
Civit. Dei, vii. i) as " too facetious."

»3 Adventicii, "coming from abroad."

M Touching these gods of the vanquished nations, compare The
Apology, XXV.; below, c. xvii.; Minucius Felix, Octav. xxv.


38


AD NATIONES.


[book IK


pains. Their fond " father ^•I':neas, in whom
they believed, was never glorious, and was
felled with a stone' — a vulgar weapon, to pelt
a dog withal, inflicting a wound no less ig-
noble ! But this ^neas turns out^ a traitor
to his country; yes, quite as much as Antenor.
And if they will not believe this to be true of
him, he at' any rate deserted his companions
when his country was in flames, and must be
held inferior to that woman of Carthage,* who,
when her husband Hasdrubal supplicated the
enemy with the mild pusillanimity of our
^]neas, refused to accompany him, but hurry-
ing her children along with her, disdained to
take her beautiful self and father's noble
hearts into exile, but plunged into the flames
of the burning Carthage, as if rushing into
the embraces of her (dear but) ruined coun-
try. Is he " pious ^neas " for (rescuing) his
young only son and decrepid old father, but
deserting Priam and Astyanax? But the
Romans ought rather to detest him; for in
defence of their princes and their royaP
house, they surrender ^ even children and
wives, and every dearest pledge.^ They deify
the son of Venus, and this with the full knowl-
edge and consent of her husband Y\\\cdiV\, and
without opposition from even Juno. Now, if
sons have seats in heaven owing to their piety
to their parents, why are not those noble
youths' of Argos rather accounted gods, be-
cause they, to save their mother from guilt in
the performance of some sacred rites, with a
devotion more than human, yoked themselves
to her car and dragged her to the temple ?
Why not make a goddess, for her exceeding
piety, of that daughter'" who from her own
breasts nourished her father who was famish-
ing in prison ? What other glorious achieve-
ment can be related of ^>neas, but that he
was nowhere seen in the fight on the field of
Laurentum? Following his bent, perhaps
he fled a second time as a fugitive from the
battle." In like manner, Romulus posthu-
mously becomes a god. Was it because he
founded the city ? Then why not others also,
who have built cities, counting even " women ?
To be sure, Romulus slew his brother in the


I DiliKcntcm.

s See Homer, //. v, 300.

3 Invenitiir.

4 Referred to also above, i. 18.

5 The obscure *' forma m et patrern'Ms by Oehler rendered
" pulchritudinem et generis nobilitatem."

6 The word is "eorum" (possessive of " principum "). not
"suae."

7 Dejerant ad versus.

SWhat Tertullian himself thinks on this point, see his de
Corona, xi.

9Cleobis and Biton; see Herodotus i, 31.
'oSee Valerius Maximus, v. 4, 1.

" We need not stay to point out the unfairness of this state-
ment, in contrast with the exploits of /Kneas against Turnus, as
detailed in the last books of the yEneid.
12 Usque ia.


bargain, and trickishly ravished some foreign
virgins. Therefore of course he becomes a
god, and therefore a Quirinus ("god of the
spear "), because then their fathers had to
use the spear '^ on his account. What did
Sterculus do to merit deification ? If he
worked hard to enrich the fields stcrcoribus^^'^
(with manure,) Augias had more dung than
he to bestow on them. If Faunus, the son of
Picus, used to do violence to law and right,
because struck with madness, it was more fit
that he should be doctored than deified. 's If
the daughter of Faunus so excelled in chastit)'',
that she would hold no conversation with
men, it was perhaps from rudeness, or a con-
sciousness of deformity, or shame for her
father's insanity. How much worthier of di-
vine honour than this *' good goddess " "^ was
Penelope, who, although dwelling among so
many suitors of the vilest character, preserved
with delicate tact the purity which they as-
sailed ! There is Sanctus, too,'^ who for his
hospitality had a temple consecrated to him
by king Plotius; and even Ulysses had it in
his power to have bestowed one more god
upon you in the person of the most refined
Alcinous.

CHAP. X. A DISGRACEFUL FEATURE OF THE

ROMAN MYTHOLOGY. IT HONOURS SUCH IN-
FAMOUS CHARACTERS AS LARENTINA.

I hasten to even more abominable cases.
Your writers have not been ashamed to publish
that of Larentina. She was a.hired prostitute^
whether as the nurse of Romulus, and there-
fore called Litpa, because she was a prostitute,,
or as the mistress of Hercules, now deceased,
that is to say, now deified. They '^relate that
his temple-warder '^ happened to be playing at
dice in the temple alone; and in order to rep-
resent a partner for himself in the game, in
the absence of an actual one, he began to play
with one hand for Hercules and the other for
himself. (The condition was,) that if he won
the stakes from Hercules, he should with them
procure a supper and a prostitute; if Hercules,
however, proved the winner, I mean his other
hand, then he svouid provide the same for
Hercules. The hand of Hercules won. That
achievement might well have been added to
his twelve labours! The temple-warden buys
a supper for the hero, and hires Larentina to
play the whore. The fire which dissolved the


"3 We have thus rendered " quiritatem est," to preser\'e as far
as one could the pun on the deified hero of the Quirites.

'4 We insert the Latin, to show the pun on Sterculus: see The
Apology, c. XXV. [See p. 40, supra.']

'5 Curaria quam consecrari.

'6 Bona Dea, i.e., the daughter of Faunus just mentioned.

17 See Livy, viii. 20, xxxii. i; Ovid, Fasti, vi. 213, etc. Com-
pare also Augustine, dc Ci7). Dei, xviii. 19. [Tom, vii. p. 576.]

18 Compare Augustine, de Ciz'. Dei, vi. 7. [Tom. vii. p. 184.]
«9yEditum ejus.


CHAP. XI.]


AD NATIONES.


139


body of even a Hercules ' enjoyed the supper,
and the altar consumed everything. Larentina
sleeps alone in the temple; and she a woman
from the brothel, boasts that in her dreams she
had submitted herself to the pleasure of Her-
cules;^ and she might possibly have experi-
enced this, as it passed through her mind, in
her sleep. In the morning, on going out of
the temple very early, she is solicited by a
young man — " a third Hercules," so to speak. 3
He invites her home. She complies, remem-
bering that Hercules had told her that it would
be for her advantage. He then, to be sure,
obtains permission that they should be united
in lawful wedlock (for none was allowed to
have intercourse with the concubine of a god
without being punished for it); the husband
makes her his heir. By and by, just before
her death, she bequeathed to the Roman
people the rather large estate which she had
obtained through Hercules. After this she
sought deification for her daughters too, whom
indeed the divine Larentina ought to have
appointed her heirs also. The gods, of the
Romans received an accession in her dignity.
For she alone of all the wives of Hercules was
dear to him, because she alone was rich; and
she was even far more fortunate than Ceres,
who contributed to the pleasure of the (king
of the) dead.* After so many examples and
eminent names among you, who might not
have been declared divine ? Who, in fact, ever
raised a question as to his divinity against
Antinous ?5 Was even Ganymede more grate-
ful and dear than he to (the supreme god) who
loved him ? According to you, heaven is open to
the dead. You prepare ^ a way from Hades to
the stars. Prostitutes mount it in all direc-
tions, so that you must not suppose that you
are conferring a great distinction upon your
kings.

CHAP. XI. THE ROMANS PROVIDED GODS FOR

BIRTH, NAY, EVEN BEFORE BIRTH, TO DEATH.
MUCH INDELICACY IN THIS SYSTEM.

And you are not content to assert the di-
vinity of such as were once known to you, whom
you heard and handled, and whose portraits
have been painted, and actions recounted, and
memory retained amongst you; but men insist
upon consecrating with a heavenly life ^ I know


I That is, when he mounted the pyre.

2Herculi functam. " Fungi alicui" means to satisfy, or yield
to.

3 The well-known Greek saying, 'AAAos oCto? 'Hpa»cA^s.

4 Pluto ; Proserpine, the daughter of Ceres, is meant. Oehler
once preferred to read, " Hebe, qua: mortuo placuit," i.e., " than
Hebe, who gratified Hercules after death."

5 TertuUian often refers indignantly to this atrocious case.

6 Subigitis.

7 Efflagitant coelo et sanciunt, (i.e., " they insist on deifying.")


not what incorporeal, inanimate shadows, and
the mere names of things — dividing man's
entire existence amongst separate powers even
from his conception in the womb: so that
there is a god Consevius,^ to preside over con-
cubital generation; and Fluviona,9to preserve
the (growth of the) infant in the womb; after
these come Vitumnus and Sentinus,'° through
whom the babe begins to have life and its
earliest sensation; then Diespiter," by whose
office the child accomplishes its birth. But
when women begin their parturition, Candelif-
era also comes in aid, since childbearing re-
quires the light of the candle; and other god-
desses there are " who get their names from the
parts they bear in the stages of travail. There
were two Carmentas likewise, according to the
general view: to one of them, called Postverta,
belonged the function of assisting the birth of
the introverted child; while the other, Prosa,'^
executed the like office for the rightly born.
The god Farinus was so called from (his in-
spiring) the first utterance; while others be-
lieved in Locutius from his gift of speech.
Cunina'* is present as the protector of the
child's deep slumber, and supplies to it re-
freshing rest. To lift them (when fallen)'^
there is Levana, and along with her Rumina.'^
It is a wonderful oversight that no gods were
appointed for cleaning up the filth of chil-
dren. Then, to preside over their first pap
and earliest drinkyou have Potina and Edula;'^
to teach the child to stand erect is the work of
Statina,'^ whilst Adeona helps him to come to
dear Mamma, and Abeonato toddle off again;
then there is Domiduca,'^ (to bring home the
bride;) and the goddess Mens, to influence
the mind to either good or evil.=^ They have
likewise Volumnus and Voleta,=' to control the
will; Paventina, (the goddess) of fear; Venilia,
of hope;" Volupia, of pleasure; ^^ Prsestitia,
of beauty. ^-^ Then, again, they give his name
to Peragenor,='s from his teaching men to go
through their work; to Consus, from his sug-


8 Comp. Augustine, de Civ. Dei, vi. 9.

9 A name of Juno, in reference to her office to mothers, " quia
eam sanguinis fluorem in conceptu retinere putabant." Comp.
August, de Civ. Dei, iii. 2.

10 Comp. August, de Civ. Dei, vii. 2, 3.
'I Comp. August, de Civ. Dei, iv. 11.

12 Such as Lucina, Partula, Nona, Decima, Alemona.

13 Or, Prorsa.

'4 " Quae infantes in cunis (in their cradle) tuetur." Comp.
August, de Civ. Dei, iv. 11.

'5 Educatrix ; Augustine says : " Ipse level de terra et vocetur
dea Levana " \de Civ. Dei, iv. 11).

16 From the old word ruvta, a teat.

'7 Comp. August, de Civ. Dei, iv. 9, 11, 36.

'8 See also TertuUian s ^/^'.^ «//««, xxxix.; and Augustine's de
Civ. Dei, iv. 21, where the god has the masculine name of
Statilinus.

'9 See Augustine, de Civ. Dei, vi. 9 and vii. 3.

^ Ibid. iv. 21, vii. 3.

^^ Ibid, iv. 21.

'^ Ibid. iv. II, vii. 22.

^Ibid. iv. II. [N.B. — Augustine's borrowing from our author.]

24 Amobius, adv. Nationes.W. 3.

-5 Augustine, de Civ. Dei. [iv. 1 1 and 16] mentions A^enoria.


I40


AD NATIONES.


[book II.


gesting to them counsel. Juventa is their
guide on assuming the manly gown, and
"bearded Fortune " when they come to full
manhood.' If I must touch on their nuptial
duties, there is Afferenda whose appointed
function is to see to the offering of the dower;
but fie on you ! you have your Mutunus'and
Tutunus and Pertunda^ and Subigus and the
goddess Prema and likewise Perfica.'* O spare
yourselves, ye impudent gods ! No one is
present at the secret struggles of married life.
Those very few persons who have a wish that
way, go away and blush for very shame in the
midst of their joy.

CHAP. XII. 5 — THE ORIGINAL DEITIES WERE
HUMAN — WITH SOME VERY QUESTIONABLE
CHARACTERISTICS. SATURN OR TIME WAS
HUMAN. INCONSISTENCIES OF OPINION ABOUT
HIM.

Now, how much further need I go in re-
counting your gods — because I want to des-
cant on the character of such as you have
adopted ? It is quite uncertain whether I
shall laugh at your absurdity, or upbraid you
for your blindness. For how many, and in-
deed what, gods shall I bring forward ? Shall
it be the greater ones, or the lesser ? The old
ones, or the novel ? The male, or the female ?
The unmarried, or such as are joined in wed-
lock? The clever, or the unskilful? The
rustic or the town ones ? The national or the
foreign ? For the truth is,^ there are so many
families, so many nations, which require a
catalogue ^ (of gods), that they cannot possibly
be examined, or distinguished, or described.
But the more diffuse the subject is, the more
restriction must we impose on it. As, there-
fore, in this review we keep before us but one
object — that of proving that all these gods
were once human beings (not, indeed, to in-
struct you in the fact,^ for your conduct shows
that you have forgotten it) — let us adopt our
compendious summary from the most natural
method' of conducting the examination, even
by considering the origin of their race. For
the origin characterizes all that comes after
it. Now this origin of your gods dates, '° I
suppose, from Saturn. And when Varro men-


• On Fortunn Bnrhatn, see Augustine, de Civ. Dei, iv. it
where he also names Consus and Juventa. '

2 TertuUian, in A/>ol. xxv. sarcastically says, *' Sterculus, and
Mutunus, and Larentina, have raised the empire to its present
height."

3 Amobius, adi'. Nntiones, iv. 7, 11 ; Aujrust. de Civ. Dei, vi. g

4 For these three gods, see Augustine, de Civ. Dei. vi. g ; and
Amobius, adv. Nat tones, iv. 7.

3 Agrees with The Apology, c. x.

6 Bona fide.

7 Censum.

8 There is here an omitted clause, supplied in The Apology,
•" but rather to recall it to your memory."^

9 Ab ipsa ratione.
'° Signatur.


tions Jupiter, Juno, and Minerva, as the most
ancient of the gods, it ought not to have es-
caped our notice, that every father is more
ancient than his sons, and that Saturn there-
fore must precede Jupiter, even as Coelus does
Saturn, for Saturn was sprung from Coelus and
Terra. I pass by, however, the origin of
Coelus and Terra. They led in some unac-
countable way" single lives, and had no chil-
dren. Of course they required a long time
for vigorous growth to attain to such a stature."
By and by, as soon as the voice of Coelus
began to break, '3 and the breasts of Terra to
become firm,'^ they contract marriage with one
another. I suppose either Heaven's came
down to his spouse, or Earth went up to meet
her lord. Be that as it may. Earth conceived
seed of Heaven, and when her year was ful-
filled brought forth Saturn in a wonderful
manner. Which of his parents did he resem-
ble ? Well, then, even after parentage began,"*
it is certain '7 that they had no child previous
to Saturn, and only one daughter afterwards
— Ops; thenceforth they ceased to procreate.
The truth is, Saturn castrated Coelus as he
was sleeping. We read this name Coelus as
of the masculine gender. And for the matter
of that, how could he be a father unless he
were a male ? But with what instrument was
the castration effected? He had a scythe.
What, so early as that ? For Vulcan was not
yet an artificer in iron. The widowed Terra,
however, although still quite young, was in no
hurry '^ to marry another. Indeed, there was
no second Coelus for her. What but Ocean
offers her an embrace? But he savours of
brackishness, and she has been accustomed to
fresh water. '9 And so Saturn is the sole male
child of Coelus and Terra. When grown to
puberty, he marries his own sister. No laws
as yet prohibited incest, nor punished parri-
cide. Then, when male children were born
to him, he would devour them; better himself
(should take them) than the wolves, (for to
these would they become a prey) if he exposed
them. He was, no doubt, afraid that one of
them might learn the lesson of his father's
scythe. When Jupiter was born in course of
time, he was removed out of the way:*' (the
father) swallowed a stone instead of the son,
as was pretended. This artifice secured his
safety for a time; but at length the son, whom


" Undeunde.
>2Tantam proceritatem.

'3 Insolescere, i.e., at the commencement of puberty.
'4 Lapilliscere, i.e., to indicate maturity.
'5 The nominative "ccelum " is used.

«6 It is not very clear what is the force of " sed et pepererit,"
as read by Oehler; we have given the clause an impersonal turn.
17 " Certe " is sometime " certo ' in our author.
»8 Distulit.

»9 That is, to rain and cloud.
» Abalienato.


CHAP. XII.]


AD NATIONES.


141


he had not devoured, and who had grown up
in secret, fell upon him, and deprived him of
his kingdom. Such, then, is the patriarch of
the gods whom Heaven ' and Earth produced
for you, with the poets officiating as midwives.
Now some persons with a refined =" imagination
are of opinion that, by this allegorical fable of
Saturn, there is a physiological representation
of Time: (they think) that it is because all
things are destroyed by Time, that Ccelus and
Terra were themselves parents without having
; any of their own, and that the (fatal) scythe
was used, and that (Saturn) devoured his own
offspring, because he,^ in fact, absorbs within
himself all things which have issued from him.
They call in also the witness of his name; for
they say that he is called Kp(5vof in Greek,
meaning the same thing as xp^vo^-'* His Latin
name also they derive from seed-sowing;^ for
they suppose him to have been the actual
procreator — that the seed, in fact, was dropt
down from heaven to earth by his means.
They unite him with Ops, because seeds pro-
duce the affluent treasure (Ope^n) of actual life,
and because they develope with labour (Opus).
Now I wish that you would explain this meta-
phorical^ statement. It was either Saturn or
rTime. If it was Time, how could it be Saturn ?
If he, how could it be Time ? For you cannot
possibly reckon both these corporeal subjects 7
as co-existing in one person. What, however,
was there to prevent your worshipping Time
f under its proper quality? Why not make a
human person, or even a mythic man, an
object of your adoration, but each in its proper
nature not in the character of Time ? What
is the meaning of that conceit of your mental
ingenuity, if it be not to colour the foulest
matters with the feigned appearance of reason-
able proofs?^ Neither, on the one hand, do
you mean Saturn to be Time, because you say
he is a human being; nor, on the other hand,
whilst portraying him as Time, do you on that
account mean that he was ever human. No
doubt, in the accounts of remote antiquity
your god Saturn is plainly described as living
on earth in human guise. Anything whatever
may obviously be pictured as incorporeal which
never had an existence; there is simply no
room for such fiction, where there is reality.
Since, therefore, there is clear evidence that
Saturn once existed, it is in vain that you
change his character. He whom you will not


1 The word is " coelum " here.

2 Eleganter.

3 i.e., as representing r/w^.

4 So Augustine, i^f Civ. Dez\ iv. lo; Arnobius, adv. Nationes,
iii. 29 ; Cicero, de Nat. Deor. ii. 25.

5 As if from " sero," satum.

6 Translatio.

7 Utrumque corporale.

8 Mentitis argumentationibus.


deny to have once been man, is not at your
disposal to be treated anyhow, nor can it be
maintained that he is either divine or Time.
In every page of your literature the origin'
of Saturn is conspicuous. We read of him in
Cassius Severus and in the Corneliuses, Nepos
and Tacitus, '° and, amongst the Greeks also,
in Diodorus, and all other compilers of ancient
annals." No more faithful records of him are
to be traced than in Italy itself. For, after
(traversing) many countries, and (enjoying)
the hospitality of Athens, he settlea in Italy,
or, as it was called, CEnotria, having met with
a kind welcome from Janus, or Janes,'- as the
Salii call him. The hill on which he settled
had the name Saturnius, whilst the city which
he founded '3 still bears the name Saturnia; in
short, the whole of Italy once had the same
designation. Such is the testimony derived
from that country which is now the mistress
of the world : whatever doubt prevails about
the origin of Saturn, his actions tell us plainly
that he was a human being. Since, therefore,
Saturn was human, he came undoubtedly from
a human stock; and more, because he was a
man, he, of course, came not of Ccelus and
Terra. Some people, however, found it easy
enough to call him, whose parents were un-
known, the son of those gods from whom all
may in a sense seem to be derived. For who
is there that does not speak under a feeling of
reverence of the heaven and the earth as his
own father and mother? Or, in accordance
with a custom amongst men, which induces
them to say of any who are unknown or sud-
denly apparent, that "they came from the
sky?" Hence it happened that, because a
stranger appeared suddenly everywhere, it
became the custom to call him a heaven-born
man,''* — just as we also commonly call earth-
born all those whose descent is unknown. I
say nothing of the fact that such was the state
of antiquity, when men's eyes and minds were
so habitually rude, that they were excited by
the appearance of every newcomer as if it
were that of a god: much more would this be
the case with a king, and that the primeval
one. I will linger some time longer over the
case of Saturn, because by fully discussing
his primordial history I shall beforehand fur-
nish a compendious answer for all other cases;
and I do not wish to omit the more convincing
testimony of your sacred literature, the credit
of which ought to be the greater in proportion
to its antiquity. Now earlier than all litera-


9 Census.

10 See his Histories, v. 2, 4.
" Antiquitatem canos, "hoary antiquity."
12 Jano sive Jane.

n Depalaverat, " marked out with stakes."
i4Ccjelitem.


142


AD NATIONES.


[book II.


ture was the Sibyl; that Sibyl, I mean, who
was the true prophetess of truth, from whom
you borrow their title for the priests of your
demons. She in senarian verse expounds the
descent of Saturn and his exploits in words to
this effect: *' In the tenth generation of men,
after the flood had ovenvhelmed the former
race, reigned Saturn, and Titan, and Japetus,
the bravest of the sons of Terra and Coelus."
Whatever credit, therefore, is attached to your
older writers and literature, and much more
to those who were the simplest as belonging
to that age,' it becomes sufficiently certain
that Saturn and his family = were human be-
ings. We have in our possession, then, a
brief principle which amounts to a prescriptive
rule about their origin serving for all other
cases, to prevent our going wrong in individual
instances. The particular character ^ of a
posterity is shown by the original founders of
the race — mortal beings (come) from mortals,
earthly ones from earthly; step after step
comes in due relation ^ — marriage, conception,
birth — country, settlements, kingdoms, all
give the clearest proofs. s They, therefore,
who cannot deny the birth of men, must also
admit their death; they who allow their mor-
tality must not suppose them to be gods.

CHAP. XIII. ^ — THE GODS HUMAN AT FIRST. WHO
HAD THE AUTHORITY TO MAKE THEM DI-
VINE? JUPITER NOT ONLY HUMAN, BUT IM-
MORAL.

Manifest cases, indeed, like these have a
force peculiarly their own. Men like Varro
and his fellow-dreamers admit into the ranks
of the divinity those whom they cannot assert
to have been in their primitive condition any-
thing but men; (and this they do) by affirming
that they became gods after their death.
Here, then, I take my stand. If your gods
were elected ' to this dignity and deity,^ just
as you recruit the ranks of your senate, you
cannot help conceding, in your wisdom, that
there must be some one supreme sovereign
who has the power of selecting, and is a kind
of Caesar; and nobody is able to confer ^ on
others a thing over which he has not absolute
control. Besides, if they were able to make
gods of themselves after their death, pray tell
me why they chose to be in an inferior condi-
tion at first ? Or, again, if there is no one


1 Magis proximis quoniam illius eetatis.

2 Prosapia.

3 Qualitas. [n. b. Our author's use of Prascriptio.']

4 Comparantur.

5 Monumenta liquent.

6Comp. The Apology, c. xi. [p. 27. Supra.'\
7AllectL

8 This is not so terse as Tertullian's " nomen et nuraen.'

9 Praestare.


who made them gods, how can they be said
to have been made such, if they could only
have been made by some one else ? There is
therefore no ground afforded you for denying
that there is a certain wholesale distributor '"
of divinity. Let us accordingly examine the
reasons for despatching mortal beings to
heaven. I suppose you will produce a pair
of them. Whoever, then, is the awarder (of
the divine honours), exercises his function,
either that he may have some supports, or de-
fences, or it may be even ornaments to his
own dignity; or from the pressing claims of
the meritorious, that he may reward all the
deserving. No other cause is it permitted
us to conjecture. Now there is no one who,
when bestowing a gift on another, does not act
with a view to his own interest or the other's.
This conduct, however, cannot be worthy of
the Divine Being, inasmuch as His power is
so great that He can make gods outright;
whilst His bringing man into such request,
on the pretence that he requires the aid and
support of certain, even dead persons, is a
strange conceit, since He was able from the
very first to create for Himself immortal be-
ings. He who has compared human things
with divine will require no further arguments
on these points. And yet the latter opinion
ought to be discussed, that God conferred
divine honours in consideration of meritorious
claims. Well, then, if the award was made
on such grounds, if heaven was opened to
men of the primitive age because of their
deserts, we must reflect that after that time
no one was worthy of such honour; except it
be, that there is now no longer such a place
for any one to attain to. Let us grant that
anciently men may have deserved heaven by
reason of their great merits. Then let us
consider, whether there really was such merit.
Let the man who alleges that it did exist de-
clare his own view of merit. Since the actions
of men done in the very infancy of time " are
a valid claim for their deification, you con-
sistently admitted to the honour the brother
and sister who were stained with the sin of
incest — Ops and Saturn. Your Jupiter too,
stolen in his infancy, was unworthy of both
the home and the nutriment accorded to
human beings; and, as he deserved for so bad
a child, he had to live in Crete." After-
wards, when full-grown, he dethrones his own
father, who, whatever his parental character
may have been, was most prosperous in his
reign, king as he was of the golden age.
Under him, a stranger to toil and want.


"3 Mancipem.

"In cunabulis temporal itatis.

»= The ill-fame of the Cretans is noted by St. Paul, Tit.


CHAP. XIV.]


AD NATIONES.


H3


peace maintained its joyous and gentle sway;

under him —

*' Nulli subigebant arva coloni; " ^

" No swains would bring the fields beneath their sway;" '

and without the importunity of any one the
earth would bear all crops spontaneously. ^
But he hated a father who had been guilty of
incest, and had once mutilated his^ grand-
father. And yet, behold, he himself marries
his own sister; so that I should suppose the
old adage was made for him: Toil 7rar/jo? rd
Traidiov — "Father's own child." There was
"not a pin to choose" between the father's
piety and the son's. If the laws had been
just even at that early time,s Jupiter ought to
have been " sewed up in both sacks." ^ After
this corroboration of his lust with incestuous
gratification, why should he hesitate to indulge
himself lavishly in the lighter excesses of
adultery and debauchery ? Ever since '^ poetry
sported thus with his character, in some such
Avay as is usual when a runaway slave ^ is posted
up in public, we have been in the habit of
gossiping without restraint ^ of his tricks'" in
our chat with passers-by;" sometimes sketch-
ing him out in the form of the very money
which was the fee of his debauchery — as when
(he personated) a bull, or rather paid the
money's worth of one,'^ and showered (gold)
into the maiden's chamber, or rather forced
his way in with abribe;'^ sometimes (figuring
him) in the very likenesses of the parts which
were acted'-* — as the eagle which ravished
(the beautiful youth), '^ and the swan which
sang (the enchanting song).'^ Well now, are
not such fables as these made up of the most
disgusting intrigues and the worst of scandals ?
or would not the morals and tempers of men
be likely to become wanton from such exam-
ples ? In what manner demons, the offspring
of evil angels who have been long engaged in
their mission, have laboured to turn men'?
aside from the faith to unbelief and to such
fables, we must not in this place speak of to
any extent. As indeed the general body '^ (of
your gods), which took their cue'' from their


^ Virgil, Georg. i. 125.
= Sewell.

3 Ipsa.

4 Jupiter's, of course.

5 The law which prescribed the penalty of the paracide, that he
be seiued up in a sack with an ape, a serpent, and a cock, and be
thrown into the sea.

6 In duos cuUeos dividi.

7 De quo.

8 De fugitive.

9 Abusui nundinare.

^° The " operam ejus '' =.ingenia et artificia (Oehler).

*i Percontationi alienae.

^2 In the case of Europa.

^3 In the case of Daniie.

^4 Similitudines actuuin ipsas.

^5 In the case of Ganymede.

16 In the case of Leda.

17 Quos.
13 Plebs.
'9 Morata.


kings, and princes, and instructors, =^ was not
of the self-same nature, it was in some other
way*' that similarity of character was exacted
by their authority. But how much the worst
of them was he who (ought to have been, but)
was not, the best of them ? By a title peculiar
to him, you are indeed in the habit of calling
Jupiter "the Best," " whilst in Virgil he is
" ^quus Jupiter." ^ All therefore were like
him — incestuous towards their own kith and
kin, unchaste to strangers, impious, unjust !
Now he whom mythic story left untainted
with no conspicuous infamy, was not worthy
to be made a god.

CHAP. XIV. GODS, THOSE WHICH WERE CON-
FESSEDLY ELEVATED TO THE DIVINE CON-
DITION, WHAT PRE-EMINENT RIGHT HAD
THEY TO SUCH HONOUR ? HERCULES AN IN-
FERIOR CHARACTER.

But since they will have it that those who
have been admitted from the human state to
the honours of deification should be kept
separate from others, and that the distinction
which Dionysius the Stoic drew should be
made between the native and the factitious ^
gods, I will add a few words concerning this
last class also. I will take Hercules himself
for raising the gist of a reply ^^ ^to the ques-
tion) whether he deserved heaven and divine
honours ? For, as men choose to have it,
these honours are awarded to him for his
merits. If it was for his valour in destroying
wild beasts with intrepidity, what was there
in that so very memorable ? Do not criminals
condemned to the games, though they are
even consigned to the contest of the vile arena,
despatch several of these animals at one time,
and that with more earnest zeal ? If it was
for his world-wide travels, how often has the
same thing been accomplished by the rich at
their pleasant leisure, or by philosophers in
their slave-like poverty ? =* Is it forgotten that
the cynic Asclepiades on a single sorry cow,=^
riding on her back, and sometimes nourished
at her udder, sur\''eyed ^^ the whole world with
a personal inspection ? Even if Hercules
visited the infernal regions, who does not
know that the way to Hades is open to all ?
If you have deified him on account of his
much carnage and many battles, a much
greater number of victories was gained by the


=0 Proseminatoribus.

21 Alibi.

22 Optimum.

23 There would seem to be a 'jest here ; "aequus" is not only
jxtst but equal, i.e., "on a par with " others — in evil, of course,
as well as good.

24 Inter natives et factos. See above, c. ii., p. 131.

25 Summa responsionis.

26 Famulatoria mendicitas.

27 Vaccula.

=3 Subegisse oculis, " reduced to his own eyesight."


144


AD NATIONES.


[book II.


illustrious Pompey, the conqueror of the
pirates who had not spared Ostia itself in
their ravages; and (as to carnage), how many
thousands, let me ask, were cooped up in one
corner of the citadel ' of Carthage, and slain
by Scipio? Wherefore Scipio has a better
claim to be considered a fit candidate for dei-
fication' than Hercules. You must be still
more careful to add to the claims of (our)
Hercules his debaucheries with concubines
and wives, and the swathes ^ of Omphale,
and his base desertion of the Argonauts be-
cause he had lost his beautiful boy.-* To this
mark of baseness add for his glorification like-
wise his attacks of madness, adore the arrows
which slew his sons and wife. This was the
man who, after deeming himself worthy of a
funeral pile in the anguish of his remorse for
his parricides, s deserved rather to die the un-
honoured death which awaited him, arrayed
in the poisoned robe which his wife sent him
on account of his lascivious attachment (to an-
other). You, however, raised him from the
pyre to the sky, with the same facility with
which (you have distinguished in like manner)
another hero ^ also, who was destroyed by the
violence of a fire from the gods. He having
devised some few experiments, was said to
have restored the dead to life by his cures.
He was tiie son of Apollo, half human, al-
though the grandson of Jupiter, and great-
grandson of Saturn (or rather of spurious ori-
gin, because his parentage was uncertain, as
Socrates of Argos has related; he was exposed
also, and found in a worse tutelage than even
Jove's, suckled even at the dugs of a dog);
nobody can deny that he deserved the end
which befell him when he perished by a stroke
of lightning. In this transaction, however,
your most excellent Jupiter is once more
found in the wrong — impious to his grandson,
envious of his artistic skill. Pindar, indeed,
has not concealed his true desert; according
to him, he was punished for his avarice and
love of gain, influenced by which he would
bring the living to their death, rather than the
dead to life, by the perverted use of his medi-
cal art which he put up for sale.' It is said


» Byrsa:.

3 \lagis obtinendus diviniuti deputatur.

3 Fascias.

4Hylas.

5 Rather murders of children and other kindred.

^ >EscuIapius.

7 Tertullian does not correctly quote Pindar (/>///. iii. 54-59),
who notices the skilful hero's love of reward, but certainly ascribes
to him the merit of curing rather than killinR : _ AAAo »ce>6«i #col
ao^ia. hihfra.i. irpanty Kal KaKtlvov ayavopi fiiaSiu xpvo'oi iv x*P<^'^^
<l>avtit avifi tK Bavdrov KOfiiaai rf&rj aAwKora' \tp<Ti. o' apa Kpoviiav
pi'v^aif 6i atK^oiv afnTi>odv oripvutv KaOiktv uKc'tuf, aiOmv 6i
Kcpavi/b? ivi<rKt.ti.\\i(v /utopoi- — " Even wisdom has been bound by
love of gain, and gold shining in the hand by a magnificent re-
ward induced even him to restore from death a man already
seized by it ; and then the son of Saturn, hurling with his hands a
bolt through both, speedily took awav the breath of their breasts,
and the flashing bolt inflicted death (Dawson Turner).


that his mother was killed by the same stroke,
and it was only right that she, who had be-
stowed so dangerous a beast on the world, ^
should escape to heaven by the same ladder.
And yet the Athenians will not be at a loss
how to sacrifice to gods of such a fashion, for
they pay divine honours to ^sculapius and
his mother amongst their dead (worthies). As
if, too, they had not ready to hand^ their own
Theseus to worship, so highly deserving a
god's distinction! Well, why not? Did he
not on a foreign shore abandon the preserver
of his life,'° with the same indifference, nay
heartlessness," with which he became the
cause of his father's death ?

CHAP. XV. THE CONSTELLATIONS AND THE

GENII VERY INDIFFERENT GODS. THE ROMAN
MONOPOLY OF GODS UNSATISFACTORY. OTHER
NATIONS REQUIRE DEITIES QUITE AS MUCH.

It would be tedious to take a survey of all
those, too, whom you have buried amongst
the constellations, and audaciously minister
to as gods." I suppose your Castors, and
Perseus, and Erigona,'^ have just the same
claims for the honours of the sky as Jupiter's
own big boy ^^ had. But why should we won-
der? You have transferred to heaven even
dogs, and scorpions, and crabs. I postpone
all remarks 's concerning those whom you wor-
ship in your oracles. That this worship exists,
is attested by him who pronounces the oracle."*
Why; you will have your gods to be spectators
even of sadness, '^ as is Viduus, who makes a
widcnu of the soul, by parting it from the body,
and whom you have condemned, by not per-
mitting him to be enclosed within your city-
walls; there is Caeculus also, to deprive the
eyes of their perception; and Orbana, to be-
reave seed of its vital power; moreover, there
is the goddess of death herself. To pass
hastily by all others,'^ you account as gods the
sites of places or of the city; such are Father
Janus (there being, moreover, the archer-
goddess'' Jana""), and Septimontius of the
seven hills.

Men sacrifice" to the same Gc7iiiy whilst


8 Tertullian does not follow the legend which is usually re-
ceived. He wishes to see no good in the object of his hatred, and
so takes the worst view, and certainly improves upon it. The
" bestia " is out of reason. [He doubtless followed some copy now
lost.

9 Quasi non et ipsi.
»o Ariadne.

i< Amentia.
»2 Deis ministratis.
'3 The constellation Virgo.
'4 Jovis exoletus, Ganymede, or Aquarius.
IS He makes a similar postponement above, in c. vii., to The
Apology, cc. xxii. xxiii.
'6 Divini.

17 Et tristitiac arbitros.
'8 Transvolem.
'9 Diva arquis.

=0 Perhaps another form of Diana.
21 Faciunt •- piiovvi


CHAP. XVII.]


AD NATIONES.


H5


they have altars or temples in the same places;
but to others besides, when they dwell in a
strange place, or live in rented houses.' I
say nothing about Ascensus, who gets his
name for his climbmg propensity, and Clivi-
cola, from her sloping (haunts) ; I pass silently
by the deities called Forculus from doors, and
Cardea from hinges, and Limentinus the god
of thresholds, and whatever others are wor-
shipped by your neighbours as tutelar deities
of their street doors. ^ There is nothing strange
in this, since men have their respective gods
in their brothels, their kitchens, and even in
their prison. Heaven, therefore, is crowded
with innumerable gods of its own, both these
and others belonging to the Romans, which
have distributed amongst them the functions
of one's whole life, in such a way that there
is no want of the other ^ gods. Although, it
is true,-* the gods which we have enumerated
are reckoned as Roman peculiarly, and as not
easily recognised abroad; yet how do all those
functions and circumstances, over which men
have willed their gods to preside, come about, ^
in every part of the human race, and in every
nation, where their guarantees^ are not only
without an official recognition, but even any
recognition at all ?

CHAP. XVI. INVENTORS OF USEFUL ARTS UN-
WORTHY OF DEIFICATION. THEY WOULD
BE THE FIRST TO ACKNOWLEDGE A CREATOR.
THE ARTS CHANGEABLE FROM TIME TO TIME,
AND SOME BECOME OBSOLETE.

Well, but 7 certain men have discovered
fruits and sundry necessaries of life, (and
hence are worthy of deification).^ Now let
me ask, when you call these persons "dis-
coverers," do you not confess that what they
discovered was already in existence ? Why
then do you not prefer to honour the Author,
from whom the gifts really come, instead of
converting the Author into mere discoverers ?
Previously he who made the discovery, the in-
ventor himself no doubt expressed his grati-
tude to the Author; no doubt, too, he felt
that He was God, to whom really belonged
the religious ser\'ice,9 as the Creator (of the
gift), by whom also both he who discovered
and that which was discovered were alike


1 This seems to be the meaning of an almost unintelligible sen-
tence, which we subjoin : " Geniis eisdem illi faciunt qui in isdem
locis aras vel aedes habent ; praiterea aliis qui in alieno loco aut
mercedibus habitant." Oehler, who makes this text, supposes
that in each clause the name of some god has dropped out.

2 Numinum janitoruni.

3 Ceteris.
4lmmo cum.

5 Proveniunt.

6 Praedes.

7 Sedenim.

8 We msert this clause at Oehler's suggestion.

9 Ministerium.

10


created. The green fig of Africa nobody at
Rome had heard of when Cato introduced it
to the Senate, in order that he might show
how near was that province of the enemy'"
whose subjugation he was constantly urg-
ing. The cherry was first made common in
Italy by Cn. Pompey, who imported it from
Pontus. I might possibly have thought the
earliest introducers of apples amongst the
Romans deserving of the public honour" of
deification. This, however, would be as fool-
ish a ground for making gods as even the in-
vention of the useful arts. And yet if the
skilful men " of our own time be compared
with these, how much more suitable would
deification be to the later generation than to
the former ! For, tell me, have not all the
extant inventions superseded antiquity, '^
whilst daily experience goes on adding to the
new stock ? Those, therefore, whom you re-
gard as divine because of their arts, you are
really injuring by your very arts, and chal-
lenging (their divinity) by means of rival at-
tainments, which cannot be surpassed. ''^

CHAP. XVII. *S — CONCLUSION. THE ROMANS OWE
NOT THEIR IMPERIAL POWER TO THEIR GODS.
THE GREAT GOD ALONE DISPENSES KINGDOMS.
HE IS THE GOD OF THE CHRISTIANS.

In conclusion, without denying all those
whom antiquity willed mid posterity has be-
lieved to be gods, to be the guardians of your
religion, there yet remains for our considera-
tion that very large assumption of the Roman
superstitions which we have to meet in oppo-
sition to you, O heathen, viz. that the Romans
have become the lords and masters of the
whole world, because by their religious offices
they have merited this dominion to such an
extent that they are within a very little of ex-
celling even their own gods in power. One
cannot wonder that Sterculus, and Mutunus,
and Larentina, have severally ^^ advanced this
empire to its height ! The Roman people
has been by its gods alone ordained to such
dominion. For I could not imagine that any
foreign ^^^j would have preferred doing more
for a strange nation than for their own people,
and so by such conduct become the deserters
and neglecters, nay, the betrayers of the native
land wherein they were born and bred, and
ennobled and buried. Thus not even Jupiter


10 The incident, which was closely connected with the third
Punic war, is described pleasantly by Pliny, Hist. Nat. xv. 20.
" Praeconium.

12 Artifices.

13 " Antiquitas " is here opposed to " novitas,' ' and therefore
means " the arts of old times.

'4 In aemulis. " In, " in our author, often marks the instrument.
'S Compare The Apology, xxv. xxvi., pp. 39, 40.
16 The verb is in the singular number.


146


AD NATIONES.


[book II.


I


could suffer his own Crete to he subdued hy
the Roman fasces, forgetting that cave of Ida,
and the brazen cymbals of the Corybantes,
and the most pleasant odour of the goat which
nursed him on that dear spot. Would he not
have made that tomb of his superior to the
whole Capitol, so that that land should most
widely rule which covered the ashes of Jupiter ?
Would Juno, too^ be willing that the Punic
city, for the love of which she even neglected
Samos, should be destroyed, and that, too,
by the fires of the sons of ^neas ? Although
I am well aware that

" Hie illius arma,
Hie currus fuit, hoc regnum dea gentibus esse,
Si qua fata sinant, jam tunc tenditque fovetque." ^

Here were her arms, her chariot here,

Here goddess-like, to fix one day

The seat of universal sway.

Might fate be wrung to yield assent.

E'en then her schemes, her cares were bent." =

Still the unhappy (queen of gods) had no
power against the fates ! And yet the Romans
did not accord as much honour to the fates,
although they gave them Carthage, as they
did to Larentina. But surely those gods of
yours have not the power of conferring em-
pire. For when Jupiter reigned in Crete, and
Saturn in Italy, and Isis in Egypt, it was even
as men that they reigned, to whom also were
assigned many to assist them.^ Thus he who
serves also makes masters, and the bond-slave '*
of Admetuss aggrandizes with empire the
citizens of Rome, although he destroyed his
own liberal votary Croesus by deceiving him
with ambiguous oracles. ** Being a god, why
was he afraid boldly to foretell to him the
truth that he must lose his kingdom. Surely
those who were aggrandized with the power
of wielding empire might always have been
able to keep an eye, as it were,^ on their own
cities. If they were strong enough to confer
empire on the Romans, why did not Minerva
defend Athens from Xerxes? Or why did
not Apollo rescue Delphi out of the hand of
Pyrrhus ? They who lost their own cities pre-
serve the city of Rome, since (forsooth) the
religiousness^ of Rome has merited the pro-
tection ! But is it not rather the fact that this
excessive devotion' has been devised since
the empire has attained its glory by the in-


» /Eneid, i. 16-20.

2 Conins:ton.

3 Operati plerique.

4 Dediticius.

5 Apollo ; comp. The Apology^ c. xiv., p. 30.
^Sjyicrodot. i. 50.

7 Wnti tueri.
S Reliiriositas.
9 Superstitio.


crease of its power ? No doubt sacred rites
were introduced by Numa, but then your pro-
ceedings were not marred by a religion of idols
and temples. Piety was simple, '° and wor-
ship humble; altars were artlessly reared,"
and the vessels (thereof) plain, and the in-
cense from them scant, and the god himself
nowhere. Men therefore were not religious
before they achieved greatness, (nor great)
because they were religious. But how can
the Romans possibly seem to have acquired
their empire by an excessive religiousness and
very profound respect for the gods, when
that empire was rather increased after the
gods had been slighted ? " Now, if I am not
mistaken, every kingdom or empire is acquired
and enlarged by wars, whilst they and their
gods also are injured by conquerors. For
the same ruin affects both city-walls and tem-
ples; similar is the carnage both of civilians
and of priests; identical the plunder of profane
things and of sacred. To the Romans belong as
many sacrileges as trophies; and then as many
triumphs over gods as over nations. Still
remaining are their captive idols amongst
them; and certainly, if they can only see their
conquerors, they do not give them their love.
Since, however, they have no perception, they
are injured with impunity; and since they are
injured with impunity, they are worshipped to
no purpose. The nation, therefore, which
has grown to its powerful height by victory
after victory, cannot seem to have developed
owing to the merits of its religion — whether
they have injured the religion by augmenting
their power, or augmented their power by in-
juring the religion. All nations have pos-
sessed empire, each in its proper time, as the
Assyrians, the Medes, the Persians, the
Egyptians; empire is even now also in the
possession of some, and yet they that have
lost their power used not to behave '^ without
attention to religious services and the worship
of the gods, even after these had become un-
propitious to them,'-* until at last almost univer-
sal dominion has accrued to the Romans. It
is the fortune of the times that has thus con-
stantly shaken kingdoms with revolution. 's
Inquire who has ordained these changes in
the times. It is the same (great Being) who
dispenses kingdoms,'^ and has now put the
supremacy of them into the hands of the Ro-


'" Frugi.

«' Temeraria.

" Laesis.

'3 Morabantur. We have taken this word as if from " mores"
(character). Tertullian often uses the participle " moratus " in
this sense.

'4 Et depropitiorum,

'5 Volutavit.

'6 Compare The Ajf>ology\ c. xxvi.


I


CHAP. XVII.]


AD NATIONES.


147


mans, very much as if' the tribute of many
nations were after its exaction amassed in one
(vast) coffer. What He has determined con-


' We have treated this " tanquam " and its clause as something
more than a mere simile. It is, in fact, an intej^ral element of the
supremacy which the entire sentence describes as conferred on the
Romans by the Almighty.


cerning it, they know who are the nearest to
Him.^


2 That is, the Christians, who are well aware of God's pur-
poses as declared in prophecy. St. Paul tells the Thessalonians
what the order of the great events subsequent to the Roman
power was to be : the destruction of that power was to be followed
by the development and reign of Antichrist ; and then the end of
the world would come.


APPENDIX.

A FRAGMENT CONCERNING THE EXECRABLE GODS OF THE

HEATHEN.


So great blindness has fallen on the Roman
race, that they call their enemy Lord, and
preach the filcher of blessings as being their
very giver, and to him they give thanks. They
call those (deities), then, by human names,
not by their own, for their own names they
know not. That they are daemons ' they under-
stand: but they read histories of the old kings,
and then, though they see that their charac-
ter^ was mortal, they honour them with a dei-
fic name.

As -f ?r him whom they call Jupiter, and think
to be the highest god, when he was born
the years (that had elapsed) from the founda-
tion of the world 3 to him ^ were some three
thousand. He is born in Greece, from Sat-
urnus and Ops; and, for fear he should be
killed by his father (or else, if it is lawful to
say so, should be begotten s anew), is by the
advice of his mother carried down into Crete,
and reared in a cave of Ida; is concealed
(from his father's search) by (the aid of)
Cretans — born men!^ — rattling their arms;
sucks a she-goat's dugs; flays her; clothes
himself in her hide; and (thus) uses his own
nurse's hide, after killing her, to be sure, with
his own hand ! but he sewed thereon three
golden tassels worth the price of an hundred
oxen each, as their author Homer ? relates.


^ Daemons. Gr. Saifjiwv, which some hold to = Sa-qfjuav, " know-
ing," " skilful," in which case it would come to be used of any
superhunian intelligence ; others, again, derive from Saiui, " to
divide, distribute," in which case it would mean a distributor of
destinies ; which latter derivation and meaning Liddell and Scott
incline to.
, 2 Actum : or " career."

3Mundi.

4 i.e., till his time.

5 Pareretur. As the word seems to be used here with reference
to his father, this, although not by any means a usual meaning,
would seem to be the sense. [As in the equivalent Greek.]

6 A Cretibus, hominibus natis. The force seems to be in the
absurdity of supposing that, isi, there should be human beings
(hominibus) dorn, (as Jupiter is said to have been " born,") already
existing at the time of the " birth " of " the highest god ; " 2nMy,
that these should have had the power to do him so essential service
as to conceal him from the search of his own father, likewise a
mighty deity, by the simple expedient of rattling their arms.

7 See Horn. II. ii. 446-9 ; but Homer says there were 100 such
tassels.


if it is fair to believe it. This Jupiter, in
adult age, waged war several years with his
father; overcame him; made a parricidal raid
on his home; violated his virgin sisters;^ se-
lected one of them in marriage; drave' his
father by dint of arms. The remaining scenes,
moreover, of that act have been recorded.
Of other folks' wives, or else of violated vir-
gins, he begat him sons; defiled freeborn
boys; oppressed peoples lawlessly with des-
potic and kingly sway. The father, whom
they erringly suppose to have been me origi-
nal god, was i_gnorant that this (son of his)
was lying concealed in Crete; the son, again,
whom they believe the mightier god, knows
not that the father whom himself had ban-
ished is lurking in Italy. If he was in
heaven, when would he not see what was doing
in Italy? For the Italian land is " not in a
corner."'" And yet, had he been a god,
nothing ought to have escaped him. But
that he whom the Italians call Saturnus did
lurk there, is clearly evidenced on the face of
it, from the fact that from his lurking" the
Hesperian " tongue is to this day called
Latin, '3 as likewise their author Virgil relates.**
(Jupiter,) then, is said to have been born on
earth, while (Saturnus his father) fears lest
he be driven by him from his kingdom, and
seeks to kill him as being his own rival, and
knows not that he has been stealthily carried
off, and is in hiding; and afterwards the son-
god pursues his father, immortal seeks to slay
immortal (is it credible ? '5), and is disap-
pointed by an interval of sea, and is ignorant


SOehler's "virgin/V" must mean "virgin^.'

9 So Scott: " He drave my cows last Eastern's night." — Lay
of Last Minstrel.
10 See Acts xxvi. 26.
" Latitatio.

12 i.e., Western : here = Italian, as being west of Greece.

13 Latina.

MSee Virg. }^n. viii. 319-323 : see also Ov. Fast. i. 23A-238.

'5 Oehler does not mark this as a question. If we follow him,
we may render, " this can find belief. ' Above, it seemed neces-
sary to introduce the parenthetical words to make some sense. The
Latin is throughout very clumsy and incoherent.


1=^0


A FRAGMENT.


of (his quarry's) flight; and while all this is
going on between two gods on earth, heaven
is deserted. No one dispensed the rains,
no one thundered, no one governed all this
mass of world.' For they cannot even say
that their action and wars took place in
heaven; for all this was going on on Mount
Olympus in Greece. Well, but heaven is not
cafled Olympus, for heaven is heaven.

These, then, are the actions of theirs,
whichwe will treat of first — nativity, lurking,
ignorance, parricide, adulteries, obscenities —
things committed not by a god, but by most
impure and truculent human beings; beings
who, had they been living in these days,
would have lain under the impeachment of all
laws — laws which are far more just and strict
than their actions. *' He drave his father by
dint of arms." The Falcidian and Sem-
pronian law would bind the parricide in a
sack with beasts. " He violated his sisters."
The Papinian law would punish the outrage
with all penalties, limb by limb. " He in-
vaded others' wedlock." The Julian law
would visit its adulterous violator capitally.
*' He defiled freeborn boys." The Cornelian
law would condemn the crime of transgressing
the sexual bond with novel severities, sacri-
legiously guilty as it is of a novel union. =
This being is shown to have had no divinity
either, for he was a human being; his father's
flight escaped him. To this human being,
of such a character, to so wicked a king, so
obscene and so cruel, God's honour has been
assigned by men. Now, to be sure, if oti earth
he were born and grew up through the ad-


«0rbi9.

a Lex Cornelia transgressi foederis ammissum novis exemplis novi
coitus sacrilegum damnaret. After consulting Dr. Holmes, I have
rendered, but nf)t without hesitation, as above. " Foedus" seems
to have been terhnically used, especially in later Latin, of the
marriage compact : but what "lex Cornelia" is meant I have
•ought vainly to discover, and whether " lex Cornelia transgressi
foederis " ought not to go together I am not sure. For " awmis-
»um " (= admissum) Migne'sed. reads" amissum," a very different
word. For "sacrilegus" with a genitive, see de Res. Cam, c.
xlU. med.


vancing stages of life's periods, and in it
committed all these evils, and yet is no more
in it, what is thought ^ (of him) but that he is
dead ? Or else does foolish error think wings
were born him in his old age, whence to fly
heavenward ? Why, even this may possibly
find credit among men bereft of sense,* if in-
deed they believe, (as they do,) that he turned
into a swan, to beget the Castors; s an eagle,
to contaminate Ganymede; a bull, to violate
Europa; gold, to violate Danae; a horse, to be-
get Pirithoiis; a goat, to beget Egyppa^ from
a she-goat; a Satyr, to embrace Antiope.
Beholding these adulteries, to which sinners
are prone, they therefore easily believe that
sanctions of misdeed and of every filthiness
are borrowed from their feijgned god. Do
they perceive how void of amendment are the
rest of his career's acts which can find credit,-
which are indeed true, and which, they say,
he did without self-transformation ? Of
Semele, he begets Liber; ^ of Latona, Apollo
and Diana; of Maia, Mercury; of Alcmena,
Hercules. But the rest of his corruptions,
which they themselves confess, I am unwill-
ing to record, lest turpitude, once buried, be
again called to men's ears. But of these few
(offsprings of his) I have made mention; off-
springs whom in their error they believe to be
themselves, too, gods — born, to wit, of an in-
cestuous father; adulterous births, suppositi-
tious births. And the living,^ eternal God, of
sempiternal divinity, prescient of futurity,
immeasurable,' they have dissipated (into
nothing, by associating Him) with crimes so
unspeakable.

3 Quid putatur fOehler) putatus (Migne).
4 Or, "feeling —"sensu."
S The Dioscuri, Castor and Pollux.

^Perhaps ^gipana (marginal reading of the MS. as given in
Oehler and Migne).
7 i.e., Bacchus.

8 Oehler reads "vi^eetem; " but Migne's " vir/entem" seems
better: indeed, Oehler's is probably a misprint. The punctuation
of this treatise in Oehler is very faulty throughout, and has been
disregarded.

9 " Immensum,"' rendered " incomprehensible " in the " Atha-
nasian Creed.


ELUCIDATION.


This Fragment is noted as spurious, by Oehler who attributes it to somebody only mode-
rately acquainted with Tertullian's style and teaching.' I do not find it mentioned by Dupin,
nor by Routh. This translation is by Thelwall.


See page 14, supra.


AN ANSWER TO THE )EWS,

TRANSLATED BY THE REV. S. THELWALL.


CHAP. I. — OCCASION OF WRITING. RELATIVE
POSITION OF JEWS AND GENTILES ILLUS-
TRATED.

It happened very recently a dispute was-
held between a Christian and a Jewish pros-
elyte. Alternately with contentious cable
they each spun out the day until evening. By
the opposing din, moreover, of some partisans
of the individuals, truth began to be overcast
by a sort of cloud. It was therefore our
pleasure that that which, owing to the con-
fused noise of disputation, could be less fully
elucidated point by point, should be more
carefully looked into, and that the pen should
determine, for reading purposes, the questions
handled

For the occasion, indeed, of claiming Divine
grace even for the Gentiles derived a pre-
eminent fitness from this fact, that the man
who set up to vindicate God's Law as his own
was of the Gentiles, and not a Jew " of the
stock of the Israelites." =■ For this fact — that
Gentiles are admissible to God's Law — is
enough to prevent Israel from priding himself
on the notion that " the Gentiles are accounted
as a little drop of a bucket," or else as " dust
out of a threshing-floor: " ^ although we have
God Himself as an adequate engager and
faithful promiser, in that He promised to
Abraham that " in his seed should be blest all
nations of the earth;" '^ and that 5 out of the


womb of Rebecca " two peoples and two na-
tions were abnnf to proceed,"^ — of course


1 [This treatise was written while our author was a Catholic.
This seems to me the best ^pported of the theories concerninpr it.
Let us accept Pamelius, for once and date it a.d. 198. Dr. AUix
foUowinK Haronius, will have it as late as a.d. 208. Neander
thinks the work, after the quotation from Isaiah in the beginning
of chapter ninth, is not our author s, but was finished by an-
other hand, clumsily annexing what is said on the same chapter
of Isaiah in the Third Book against Marcion. It is only slightly
varied. Bp. Kaye admits the very striking facts instanced by
Neander, in support of this theory, but demolishes, with a word
any argument drawn from thence that the genuine work was
written after the author's lapse. This treatise is sufficiently an-
notated by Thelwall, and covers ground elsewhere gone over in
this Series. My own notes are therefore very few.]

2 Comp. Phi'l. iii. 5.

3 See Isa. xl. 15 : " dust of the balance,'^ Eng. ver. ; pottt) C,v^o\t
LXX. For the expression " dust out of a threshing-floor," how-
ever, see Ps. i. 4, Dan. ii. 33.

4 See Gen. xxii. 18 ; and coinp. Gal. iii. 16, and the references
in both places.


_thpse of the Jews, that is. of Israel; and of the
CrentileSf that is ours. Each, then, was called
a people and a nation-, lest, from the nun-
cupative appellation, any should dare to claim
for himself the privilege of grace. For God
ordained "two peoples and two nations" as
about to proceed out of the womb of one
woman: nor did grace ^ make distinction in
the nuncupative appellation, but in the order
of birth; to the effect that, which ever was to
be prior in proceeding from the womb, should
be subjected to "the less," that is, the pos-
terior. For thus unto Rebecca did God speak:
"Two nations are in thy womb, and two
peoples shall be divided from thy bowels; and
people shall overcome people, and the greater
shall serve the less." ^ Accordingly, since the
people or fiation of the Jews is anterior in


time^ and "greater" through the grace of
primary favour in the Law, whereas ours is
understood to be " less " in the age of times.


as having in the last era of the world ^ attained
the knowledge of divine mercy: beyond doubt,
through the edict of the divine utterance, the
prior and " greater " people^that is, the Jew-
ish— must necessarily serve the " less; " and
the "less" people — that is, the Christian —
overcome the "greater. " For, withal, ac-
cording to the memorial records of the divine
Scriptures, the people oi the Tews — that is, the
more ancient — quite forsook God, and did
degrading service to idols, and ^ abandoning
the Divinity, was surrendered to images; while
" the people said to Aaron, " ^^ke Us gods
to go before us. " » And when the gold out of
the necklaces of the women and the rings of


-i


5 This promise may be said to have been given '* to Abraham,"
because (of course) he was still living at the time ; as we see by
comparing Gen. xxi. 5 with xxv. 7 and 26. See, too, Heb. xi. 9.

6 Or, " nor did He make, by grace, a di.stinction."

7 See Gen. xxv. 21-23, especially in the LXX.; and comp. Rom.


9 Ex. xxxii. r, 23; Actsvii, 39, 40.


152


AN ANSWER TO THE JEWS.


[chap. II.


the men had been wholly smelted by fire, and
there had come forth a calf-like head, to this
figment Israel with one consent (abandoning
God) gave honour, saying, "These are the
gods who brought us from the land of Egypt. "'
For thus, in the later times in which kings
were governing them, did they again, in con-
junction with Jeroboam, worship golden kine,
and groves, and enslave themselves to Baal.='
Whence is proved that they have ever been de-
picted, out.QliKe volume oLthfijiiyiiie-S^jp^
turcs, ;is^rujjty_af Jhfixnmejjiidolatiy; where-
as our " less "— ihaLis, gQ3iQliQI=r^^/>k, qu i t-
tin- the idols which formerly it used slavishly
to serve, has been converted to the same God
from whom Israel, as we have above related,
had departed. 3 For thus has the IMfiSsJirrr
that is, posterior— ^^^/i^ overcome the* 'greater
people," while it attains the grace of divine
favour+^IroiiLwhich-JLsmeUlias lieen-divorced.

CHAP. II. — THE LAW ANTERIOR TO MOSES.

Stand we, therefore, foot to foot, and de-
termine we the sum and substance of the actual
question within definite lists.

For why should God, the founder of the uni-
verse, the GoYernoT-QfLlhe^wh o1 e wnri d j/^ the
Fashioner of humanity, the Sower s of universal
nations be believed to haye^givfin R law through
Moses to one peopjCj and not bf sflid ^f^ Hnvp
assigned it to all nations ? For unless He
had given it to all by no means would He
have habitually permitted even proselytes out
of the nations to have access to it. But — as
is congruous with the goodness of God, and
with His equity, as the Fashioner of mankind
— He gave to .^W nations the selfsame law,
which at definite and stated times He enjoined
should be observed, when He willed, and
through whom He willed, and as He willed.
For in the beginning of the world He gave to
Adam himself and Eve a law, that they were
not to eat of the fruit of the tree planted in
the midst of paradise; but that, if they did
contrariwise, by death they were to die.^
Which law had continued enough for them,
had it been kept. For in this law given to
Adam we recognise in embryo' all the pre-
cepts which afterwards sprouted forth when
given through Moses; that is, Thou shalt love
the Lord thy God from thy whole heart and
out of thy whole soul; Thou shalt love thy


> Ex. xxxii. 4 : comp. Acts vii. 18-41 ; i Cor. x. 7; Ps. cvi. 19-23.

= Comp. I KiriKS xii. 25-33 ; 2 KinRs xvii. 7-17 (in LXX. 3 and
4 Kings). The Eng. ver. speaks of "calves ;" the LXX. call them
" heifers."

3 Comp. X Thess. i. 9, 10

4 Mundi.
LXX, it is xxxviii. 27) ; Hos. ii. 23 ;


5 Comp. Ter. xxxi. 27 (in LX
Zech. X. o; Matt. xiii. 31-43.

6 See Gen. ii. 16, 17, iii. 2, 3.


7 Condita.


neighbour as thyself;^ Thou- shalt not kill;
Thou shalt not commit adultery; Thou shalt
not steal; False witness thou shalt not utter;
Honour thy father and mother; and, That
which is another's, shalt thou not covet. For
the primordial law was given to Adam and Eve
in paradise, as the womb of all the precepts
of God. In short, if they had loved the Lord
their God, they would not have contravened
His precept; if they had habitually loved
their neighbour — that is, themselves » — they
would not have believed the persuasion of the
serpent, and thus would not have committed
murder upon themselves, ' by falling '° from
immortality, by contravening God's precept;
from theft also they would have abstained, if
they had not stealthily tasted of the fruit of
the tree, nor had been anxious to skulk be-
neath a tree to escape the view of the Lord
their God; nor would they have been made
partners with the falsehood-asseverating devil,
by believing him that they would be " like
God;" and thus they would not have offended
God either, as their Father, who had fashioned
them from clay of the earth, as out of the
womb of a mother; if they had not coveted
another's, they would not have tasted of the
unlawful fruit.

Therefore, in this general and primordial
law of God, the observance of which, in the
case of the tree's fruit, He had sanctioned, we
recognise ^wclosed all the precepts specially
of the posterior Law, which germinated when
disclosed at their proper times. For the sub-
sequent superinductidn of a law is the work
of the same Being who had before premised
a precept; since it is His province withal sub-
sequently to train, who had before resolved
to form, righteous creatures. For what wonder
if He extends a discipline who institutes it ?
if He advances who begins ? T^i short, before
th£_Lgy-Pf J^^^^^^i" written in stone-tables^ I
contend that there was a law unwrltteil^llidb
was habitually understood naturally, and by
the fathers was habitually kej)!. I'or whence
was Noah " found righteojus, " : i i u lii&jcase
the righteou sness of a naUtraj lawhad not
jDreceded ? Whence was Abraham accounted
" a friend of God," '^ if npt on the ground of
equity and righteousness, (in the observance)
of a natural law? Whence was Melchizedek
named " priest of the most high God," '* if.


8 Deut. vi. 4, 5 ; Lev. xix. 18 ; comp. Matt. xxii. 34-40 ; Mark
xii. 28-34 -Luke x. 25-28 ; and for the rest, Ex. xx. 12-17 ; Deut.
V. 16-21 ; Rom. xiii. 9.

9 Semetipsos. ? Each other.

»o Excidendo ; or, perhaps, " by self-excision," or " mutual ex-
cision."

" Or, " the Law written for Moses m stone-tablcs."
»3Gen. vi. 9, vii. i ; comp. Heb. xi. 7.

13 See Isa. xii. 8 ; Jas. ii. 23.

14 Gen. xiv. 18 • Ps. ex. (cix. in. LXX.) 4 ; Heb. v. 10, vii. 1-3,
10, 15, 17


CHAP. III.]


AN ANSWER TO THE JEWS.


153


before the priesthood of the Levitical law, there
were not levites who were wont to offer sacri-
fices to God ? For thus, after the above-men-
tioned patriarchs, was the Law given to Moses,
at that (well-known) time after their exode
from Egypt, after the interval and spaces of
four hundred years. In fact, it was after
Abraham's " four hundred and thirty years " '
that the Law was given. W'jience we under-
stand that God's law was anterior even to


Moses, and w^as not first (given) in Horeb, nor
m~Srnai and in the desert, but was more aiT"
ctenr["{existing) nrst in paradise, subsequently
re-formed for the patriarchs, and so agaiiTTbr
tb£_j£w&,-.at definite periods : so that wpi are
_— aoLJO give heed to Moses' Law as to the
primitive law, but as to a subsequent, which
at a definite period God has set forth to tlie
Gentiles too and ^ after r_epe.atedly promis-
ing so to do through the i^rophets, has re-
Tormed for the better; and has premonished
tlTat it slibuld come to pass that, just as " the
law was given through Moses " = at a definite
time, so it should be believed to have been
temporarily observed and kept. And let us
not annul this power which God has, which
reforms the law's precepts answerably to tHe
circum stances o7 the times, with a view to
jnan^s aahiation. In fine, let him who
contends that the Sabbath is still to be ob-
served as a balm of salvation, and circumcision
on the eighth day because of the threat of
death, teach us that, for the time past, right-
eous men kept the Sabbath, or practised cir-
cumcision, and were thus rendered "friends
of God . ' ' For if circumcision purges a man
since God mnde Adam uncircumcised, why
did_He. not circumcise him, even after his
sinning, ifxircumcision purges ? At all events,
in settling him in paradise. He appointed one
uncircumcised as colonist of paradise. There-
fore, since God originated Adam uncircum-
cised, and inobservant of the Sabbath, conse-
quently his offspring also, Abel, offering Him
sacrifices, uncircumcised and inobservant of
the Sabbath, was by Him commended; while
He accepted ^ what he was offering in simplicity
of heart, and reprobated the sacrifice of his
brother Cam, who was not rightly dividing
what he was offering. ■♦ Noah also, uncircum-
Qise_d— yes, and inobservant of the Sabbath —
God freed from the deluge. s For Enoch, too,
most righteous man, uncircumcised and in-
observant of the Sabbath, He translated from


this world ;*^ who did not first taste' death, in
order that, being a candidate for eternal life,*
he might by this time show us that we also
may, without the burden of the law of Moses,
please God. Melchizedek also, "the priest
of the most high God, " uncircumcised and


inobservant of the Sabbath, was chosen to the
priesthood of God.^ Lot, withal, the brother '°
of Abraham, proves that it was for the merits
of righteousness, without observance of the
law, that he was freed from the conflagration
of the Sodomites."

CHAP. III. OF CIRCUMCISION AND THE SUPER-
CESSION OF THE OLD LAW.

But Abraham»--(-^Qii say,) was circumcl&ed.
Yes, but he pleased God before his circum- _
rision;" nor yet did he observe the Sabbath.
For he had " accepted "'^circumcision; but
such as was to be for " a sign " of that time,
not for a prerogative title to saJYation. In fact,
subsequent patriarchs were uncircumcised,
like Melchizedek, who, uncircumcised, offer-
ed to Abraham himself, already circumcised,
on his return from battle, bread and wine.'*
"But again," (you say) "the son of Moses
would upon one occasion have been choked
by an angel, if Zipporah '^ had not circum-
cised the foreskin of the infant with a pebble;
whence, "there is the greatest peril if any
fail to circumcise the foreskin of his flesh."
Nay, but if circumcision altogether brought
salvation, even Moses himself, in the case of
his own son, would not have omitted to cir-
cumcise him on the eighth day; whereas it is
agreed that Zipporah did it on the journey,
at the compulsion of the angel. Consider
we, accordingly, that' one single infant's com-
pulsory circumcision cannot have prescribed
to every people, and founded, as it were, a
law for keeping this precept. For God, fore-
seeing that He was about to give this circum-
cision to the people of Israel for "a sign,"
not for salvation, urges the circumcision of
tbe^.&QjiiiL.Mnses, Iheiriiiture Jeader^ for .this
reason; that, since He had begun, through
him, to give the People the precept of cir-


1 Comp. Gen. xv. 13 with Ex. xii. 40-42 and Acts vii. 6.

2 John i. 17.

Or, " credited him with.

4 Gen. iv. 1-7, especially in the LXX. ; comp. Heb. xi. 4.

5 Gen. vi. 18, vii. 23 ; 2 Pet. ii. 5.


6 See Gen. v. 22. 24 ; Heb. xi. 5.

7 Or, perhaps, " has not yet tasted."'

8 i^ternitatis candidatus. Comp. ad Ux. 1. i. c. vii., and note
3 there.

9 See above.

10 i.e., nephew. See Gen. xi. 31, xii. 5.
II See Gen. xix. 1-29 ; and comp. 2 Pet. ii. 6-9.
'2 See Gen. xii.-xv. compared with xvii. and Rom. iv.
'3 Acceperat. So Tertuilian renders, as it appears to me, the
fAa^e of i5t. Paul in Rom. iv. 11. q. v.

14 There is, if the text be genuine, some confusion here. Mel-
chizedek does not appear to have been, in any sense, " subse-
quent " to Abraham, for he probably was senior to him ; and,
moreover, Abraham does «<?/ appear to have been "already cir-
cumcised " carnally when Melchizedek met him. Comp. Gen.
xiv. with Gen. xvii.

15 Tertuilian writes Seflora ; the LXX. in loco, 2(Tr<f>mpa, Ex.
iv. 24-26, where the Eng. ver. says, "the Lord met him," etc.;
the LXX. oyyeAos Kwpiov.


154


AN ANSWER TO THE JEWS.


[chap. III.


cumcision, the people should not despise it,
from seeing this example (of neglect) already
exhibited conspicuously in their leader's son.
For circumcision had to be given; but as " a
sign," whence Israel in the last time would
have to be distinguished, when, in accordance
with their deserts, they should be prohibited
from entering the holy city, as we see through
the words of the prophets, saying, "Your
land is desert; your cities utterly burnt with
fire; your country, in your sight, strangers
shall eat up; and, deserted and subverted by
strange peoples, the daughter of Zion shall
be derelict, like a shed in a vineyard, and like
a watchhouse in a cucumber-field, and as it
were a city which is being stormed." ' Why
so ? Because the subsequent discourse of the
prophet reproaches them, saying, " Sons
have I begotten and upraised, but they have
reprobated me;""* and again, "And if ye
shall have outstretched hand--., I will avert my
face from you; and if ye shall have multiplied
prayers, I will not hear you: for your hands
are full of blood; " ^ and again, " Woe ! sinful
nation; a people full of sins; wicked sons;
ye have quite forsaken God, and have pro-
voked unto indignation the Holy One of
Israel."^ This, therefore, was Godls.Jore-
sight, — that of giving circumcision to Israel,
for a sigajwhencelfiey might bedisltinguished
when the time should arrive wherein their
^bove-mentioned deserts should prohibit their
admission into Jerusalem l which circum-i
[stance, because it was to be, used to be an-
jnounced; and, because we see it accomplished,
is recognised by us. For, as the carnal cjr-
cumcision, which was tejnporary, was in-
wrought for "a sign '.' in a contumacious
people, so the spiritual has .been giyiui .for
^salvation to an obedient people; Avhile the
prophet Jeremiah says, " Make a renewal for
you, and sow not in .thorns; be circumcised
to God, and circumcise the foreskin of your
heart: " * and in another place he says, "^-
hold, days shall come, saith the Lord, and I
will "draw up, for the house of Judah and for
the house of Jacob,^ a new testarnent; riot
such as I once gave their fathers in the day
wherein I led them out from the land .of
Egypt..'.' ^ Whence we understand that the
coming cessation of the former circumcision
then given, and the coming procession of a
new law (not such as He had already given to


' Isa. i. 7, 8. See c. xiii. sub fin,

2 Again an error ; for these ^Qt^ precede the others. These
arc found in Isa. i. 3.

3 Isa. i. 15.

4 Isa. i. 4.

5 Jer, iv. 3, 4. In Enjr. ver., " Break up your fallow ground ;"
but comp. de Pit. c. vi. ad init.

6 So TorttiUian. In Jer. ibid. " Israel and . . . Judah."

7 Jer. xxxi. 31, 32 (in LXX. ibid, xxxviii. 31, 32) ; comp. Heb.
viii. 8-13.


the fathers.), -are _aniiQimced: just as Isaiah
foretold, saying that in the last days the mount
of the Lord and the house of God were to be
manifest above the tops of the mounts: " And
it shall be exalted," he says, "above the
hills; and there shall come over it all nations;
and many shall walk, and say. Come, ascend
we unto the mount of the Lord, and unto the
house of the God of Jacob y'' ^ — not of Esau^
the former son, but of Jacobs the second;
that is, of our " people," whose " mount " is
Christ, " prascised without concisors' hands,5>
filling every land," shown in the book of
Daniel.'° In short, the coming procession of
a new law out of this " house of the God of
Jacob" Isaiah in the ensuing words an-
nounces, saying, "Zor Jrom. Zinn shall go
mit aJaw, and the .word-oi the 1 .ord out of
Jerusalem, and shajl judge _amoiig. Ihe na-


tions." — that is, among us., who have been
called out of the nations, — " and they, sjiall
join to beat their glaives into ploughs, and
their lances into sickles; and nations shall
not take up glaive against nadon, and they
shall jio more )eara.J:o fighL."f" WJiajdae^
therefore, are understood but we, who, fully


taught by .^the^jiew. Jaw.,, ..observe ' these prac-
ti.ces,rr-lhe__Qld... law_ being obliterated, the
coming of whose, abolition the action itself"
demonstrates ? For the wont of the old law
was to avenge itself by the vengeance of the
glaive, and to pluck out "eye for eye," and
to inflict retaliatory revenge for injury. '3 But
the new law's wont was to point to clemency,
and to convert to tranquillity the pristine
ferocity of "glaives " and " lances," and to
remodel the pristine execution of "war"
upon the rivals and foes of the law into the
pacific actions of "ploughing" and "till-
ing" the land.'* Therefore, as we have shown
above that the coming cessation of the old
law and of the carnal circumcision was de-
clared, so, too, the observance of the new law
and the spiritual circumcision has shone out
into the voluntary obediences 's of peace. For
" a people," he says, ,"_whom I knew_not
hatli stTvcd nic; in olicdiencc of the cat it
hatli ()Ih.')-c(1 ww^.'^ '" I'rop'.K'Ls made the an-
nounccmcnt. Hul what is the ''pe_ogle"
which was ignorant of ('.dd, bul ^v// v, whn in
days bygone km \\ not (iod ? and who, in the


8 Isa. li. 2, 3.

9 Perhaps an allusion to Phil. iii. i, 2.

«°See Dan. ii. 34, 35, 44, 45. Seec. xiv. below.
(" Isa. ii. 1, 4.

^^ /.<■;, drbeatins: swords into ploughs, etc.

'3 Comp. Ex. xxi. 24, 25 ; Lev. xxiv. 17-22 ; Deut. xix. 11-21 ;
Matt. V. 38.

■4 Especially spiritually. Comp. i Cor. iii. 6-9, ix. 9, 10, and
similar passages.

'5 Obsequia. See de Pa. c. iv. note i.

'6 See Ps. xviii. 43, 44 (xvii. 44, 45 in LXX.). where the Eng.
ver. has the future ; the LXX., like Tertullian, the past. Comp.
2 Sara, (in LXX. 2 Kings) xxii. 44, 45, and Rom. x. 14-17.


^'


r\(J>i^ CHAP. IV.]


AN ANSWER TO THE JEWS.


^55


oil


^ hearing of the ear, gave heed to Him, but
^ ^'c. who, forsaking idols, have been_cQnv£rted
to God ? For Israel — who /lad been known to
God, and who had by Him been ** upraised " '
in Egypt, and was transported through the
Red Sea, and who in the desert, fed forty
years with manna, was wrought to the sem-
blance of eternity, and not contaminated with
human passions, ^^ or fed on this world's ^
meats, but fed on "angel's loaves"-^ — the
manna — and sufficiently bound to God by His
benefits — forgat his Lord and God, saying to
Aaron: " Make us..^Qds. to go before us: for
that Moses, who ejected us from the land of.
Egypt, hath quite forsaken us; and what hath
befallen him we know not." And accordingly
we, who "were not the_peqplej)f God '' in
days bygone, have been made His people, s
hy arrppfing the ncw law above mentioned,
and the new circumcision before foretold.

CHAP. IV. — OF THE OBSERVANCE OF THE
SABBATH.

It follows, accordingly, that, in so far as
the abolition of carnal circumcision and of the
old law is demonstrated as having been con-
summated at its specific times,_so_also__tJi£L.
observance of the Sabbath is demonstrated to
have been temporary.

For the Jews say, that from the beginning
God sanctified the seventh day, by resting on
it from all His works which He made; and
that thence it was, likewise, that Moses said
to the People: "Remember the day of the
sabbaths, to sanctify it: every servile work ye
shall not do therein, except what pertaineth
unto life."^ Whence we (Christians) under-
stand that 7ae still more ought to observe a
sabbath from all " servile work " ^ always, and
not only every seventh day, but through all
time. And through this arises the question for


us, w/iaf sabbath God willed us to keep? For
the Scriptures point to a sabbath eternal and


a sabbath temporal. For Isaiah the proph e t
says, " Vot/r sabbaths my soul hateth;" ^ and in
another place he says, " My sabbaths ye have
profaned." 9 Whence we discerji_that__the
/ temporal sabbath is hnm^in, nnd the eternal
*< sabbath is accounted divine; concerning which
He predicts through Isaiah: "And there shall
be," He says, " month after month, and day


» Comp. Isa. i. 2 as above, and Acts xiii. 17.
^Saeculi.

3 Or perhaps, "not affected, as a body, with human suffer-
ings ;" in allusion to such passages as Deut. viii. 4 xxix. 5, Neh-
ix. 21.

4 Ps. Ixxviii. (Ixxvii. in LXX.) 25 ; comp. John vi. 31, 32.

5 See Hos. i. 10 ; x Pet. ii. 10.

6 Comp. Gal. v. i, iv. 8, o.

7 See Ex. xx. 8-11 and xii. 16 (especially in the LXX.).

8 Isa. i. 13.

9 This is not said by Isaiah ; it is found in substance in Ezek.
xxii. 8.


after day, and sabbath after sabbath; and all /
flesh shall come to adore in Jerusalem, saith f
the Lord;""* which we understand to have [
been fulfilled in the times of Christ, when \
" all flesh " — that is, every nation — " came to y
adore in Jerusalem " God the Father, through
Jesus Christ His Son, as was predicted through
the prophet: " Behold, proselytes through me
shall go unto Thee."" Thus, therefore,
before this temporal sabbath, there was withal
an eternal sabbath foreshown and foretold;
just as before the carnal circumcision there
was withal a spiritual circumcision foreshown.
In short, let them teach us, as^we have al-
ready. prs^mLs-ed. that Adam observed'the sah-
bath; or that Abel, when offering to God a
. holy. vIctiiiU-PJea&ed_ Him ■b>^Aj:£ligiQus.revei:=,
^'^ce for the sabbath; or that Enoch, when
translated, had been a keeper of the sabbath;
or that Noah the ark-builder observed, on
account of the deluge, an immense sabbath;
or that Abraham, in obser\^ance of the sab-
bath, offered Isaac his son; or that Mel-
chizedek in his priesthood received the law of
the sabbath.

-Exit the Jews are sure to say, that ever since
this precept was given through Moses, the
observance has been binjiijig. Manifest ac-
cordingly it is, that the precept was not eter-
nal nor spiritual, but temporary," which would
one day cease. In short, so true is it that it
is not in the exemption from work of the sab-
bath— that is, of the seventh day — that the
celebration of this solemnity is to consist,
that Joshua the son of Nun, at the time that
he was reducing the city Jericho by war,
stated that he had received from God a pre-
cept to order the People that priests should
carry the ark of the testament of God seven
days, making the circuit of the city; and
thus, when the seventh day's circuit had been
performed, the walls of^ the city would spon-
taneously fall. '3 Which was so done; and
when the space of the seventh day was fin-
ished, just as was predicted, down fell the
walls of the city. Whence it is manifestly
shown, that in the number of the seven days
there intervened a sabbath-day. For seven
days, whencesoever they may have com-
menced, must necessarily include within them
a sabbath-day; on which day not only must
the priests have worked, but the city must
have been made a prey by the edge of the
sword by all the people of Israel. Nor is it
doubtful that they "wrought servile work,"


10 Isa. Ixvi. 23 in LXX.

" I am not acquainted with any such passage. Oehler refers
to Isa. xlix. in his margin, but gives no verse, and omits to notice
this passage of the present treatise in his index.

" Or, *' temporal. '

13 Josh. vi. 1-20.


156


AN ANSWER TO THE JEWS.


[chap.


when, in obedience to God's precept, they
drave the preys of war. For in the times of
the Maccabees, too, they did bravely in fight-
ing on the sabbaths, a.nd £oute^_Jhe[t_ioreign
foeSj^aricI "recalled the law of their fathers to
the primitive style of life by fighting on the
sabbaths.' Nor should I think it was any
other law which they thus vindicated, than
the one in which they remembered the exist-
ence of the prescript touching "the day of
the sabbaths." '

Whence it is manifest that the force of such
precepts was temporary, and respected the
necessity of present circumstances; and that
it was not with a view to its observance in
perpetuity that God formerly gave them such
a law.


CHAP. V,


SACRIFICES.


SQj_ _a_gai n ,^ we show that sacrifices of earthly
oblations and of spiritual sacrifices ^ were pre-
dicted j_and,^jmQr^ilY£r^JhaLJrom the begin-
ning theearlhly3Y£re foreshown, in the person
oL Cain, to be those nf the " elder son, ' '
that is, of Israel; and the opposite sacrifices
demonstrated .to be those of the "younger
SQn^'_AJ:)eU tliaUs*J2JU22^.peQpie.'.„For_the
elder,. Cain.,_Qi££ifid gifts -to, _God- fromJtlie
fruit of the earth: but the younger son, Abel^
from the fruit of his ewes. "God had re-
spect unto Abel, and unto his gifts; but unto
Cain and unto his gifts He had not respect.
, And God said unto Cain, Why is thy counte-
\ nance fallen ? hast thou not — if thou offerest
-dv^indeed aright, but dost not divide aright —
sinned? Jiold thy peace. For nnto thee


the people of Israel that sacrifices should in
no other place be offered to God than in the
land of promise; which the Lord God was
about to give to " the people " Israel and to
their brethren, in order that, on Israel's in-
troduction thither, there should there be cel-
ebrated sacrifices and holocausts, as well for
sins as for souls; and nowhere else but in the
holy land. 5 Why, accordingly, does the Spirit
aftenvards predict, through the prophets, that
it should come to pass that in every place and
in every land there should be offered sacri-
fices to God ?_as_ He say_s_ through the angel
Malachi, one of the twelve prophets: " Lyijl
^9L^Q?i^ sacrifice from your hand s ; for from
the rising sun unto the setting my Name hath
been made famous among all the nations,
saith the Lord AJmight^^^jtnd^in eyej;y jlare
they offer clean sacrifices jo^nTj'^Nagie^


shall thy conversion be and he shall lord it


over thee. And then Cam said unto Abel
his brother. Let us go into the field: and he
went away with him thither, and he slew him.
And then God said unto Cain, Where is Abel
thy brother? And he said, I know not: am I
my brother's keeper? To whom God said,
The voice of the blood of thy brother crieth
forth unto me from the earth. Wherefore
cursed is the earth, which hath opened her
mouth to receive the blood of thy brother.
Groaning and trembling shalt thou be upon
the earth, and every one who shall have found
thee shall slay thee."* JrQn3i._tllis_pi0C££iJ-
ing we gather that the twofold sar.ri fires of
" the peoples" were even from the very he.
ginning foreshown. In short, when the sac-
erdotal law was being drawn up, through
Moses, in Leviticus, we find it prescribed to


^ See I Mace. ii. 41, etc.

2 See Ex. xx. 8 ; Deut. v. 12, 15 : in I.XX.

3 This Uutolojfy is due to the author, not to the translator:
■*'sacrificia . . . spiritalium sacrificiorum.

4 See Gen. iv. 2-14. But it is to be obser\'ed that the version
^iven in our author differs widely in some particulars from the
Heb. and the LXX.


Again, in the Pslams, David says: " Bring to
God, ye countries of the nations " — undoubt-
edly lkcau_se_llu,iTto_eyeiy land_"
in^ of the apostles had to "go out" ''—
^^bring^to God fame and honour; bring to
God the sacrifices of His name: take up^ vic-
tims and enter into His courts." 5 For that
it is not by earthly sacrifices, but by spiritual,
that offering is to be made to God, we thus
read, as it is written. An heart contribulate
and humbled is a victim for God; " '° and
elsewhere, " Sacrifice to God a sacrifice of
praise, and render to the Highest thy vows." "
Thus, accordingly, the spiritual " sacrifices of
praise" are pointed to, and "an heart
contribulate" is demonstrated an acceptable
■sacrifice to God. And thus, as carnal sacri-
fices are understood to be reprobated — of
which Isaiah withal speaks, saying, " To what
end is the multitude of your sacrifices to me ?
saith the Lord " '- — so spiritual sacrifices are
predicted '^ as accepted, as the prophets an-
nounce. For, " even if ye shall have brought
me," He says, "the finest wheat flour, it js
a vain supplicatory gift: a thing execrable to


me; " and again He says, "Your holocausts


and sacrifices, and the fat of goats, and blood
of bulls, I will not, not even if ye come to be
seen by me: for who hath required these
things from your hands?"'* for "from the
rising sun unto the setting, my Name hath
been made famous among all the nations,


5 See Lev, xvii. 1-9 • Deut. xii. 1-26.
IP See MaL_L.ze^-U+,m XXX-

7Comp. Matt. xx\nii. 19, 20, Mark xvi. 15. 16, Luke xxiv, 45-
48, with Ps. xix. 4 (xviii. 5 in LXX.), as explained in Rom. x. 18.

8 Tollite =« Gr. opare. Perhaps — " away with."

9 See Ps. xcvi. (xcv. in LXX.) 7, 8 : and comp. xxix. (xxviii. m
LXX.) 1. 2.

'oSeePs. li. 17 (in LXX. I. 19).

" Ps. 1. (xlix. in LXX.) 14. ;

" Isa. i. II.

nOr, "foretold."

»4Comp. Isa. i. 11-14, especially in the LXX.


ti].


CllAV. VII.]


AN ANSWER TO THE JEWS.


157


saith the Lord."' But of the spiritual sac-
rifices He adds, saying, " And in every place
they offer clean sacrifices to my Name, saith
the Lord." '

CHAP. VI. — OF THE ABOLITION AND THE ABOL-
ISHER OF THE OLD LAW.

Therefore, since it is manifest that a sab-
bath temporal was shown, and a sabbath eter-
nal foretold; a circumcision carnal foretold,
and a circumcision spiritual pre-indicated; a
law temporal and a law eternal formally de-
clared; sacrifices carnal and sacrifices spirit-
ual foreshown; it follows that, after all these
precepts had been given carnally, in time


f


preceding, to the people Israel,Uhere was to
s u pervene a time whereat the precepts of
the ancient Law and of the old ceremonieTs


would cease, and the promise' of the new
law, and the recognition of spiri|:ual sacri-
fices, aiul the promke of th^ New Tpsfampntj
supervene;^ while the light from on high
would beam upon us who were sitting in
darkness, and were being detained in the
shadow of death.-* And so there is incum-
bent on us a necessity 5 binding us, since we
have premised that a new law was predicted
the prophets, and that not such as had


h^-


-been already given to their father? at the time
when He led them forth from the land of
Egypt. ^ to show and prove, on the one hand,
that that old Law has ceased, and on the
other, that the promised new law is now in
operation.

And, indeed, iirst-we must inquire.whether
there.be expected a giver of, the nevy. law,, and
an heir of the new testament, and a priest^of
tli£_ii£w sacrifices, aiul a purger oi the- new
gircumcision, and an observer of the eternal
sabbath, to suppress the old law, and insti-
tute-JJie__new_L£slament, and offer the new
sacrifices, and repress the ancient ceremonies,
and suppress'' the old circumcision together
with its own sabbath,^ and announce the new
kingdom which is not corruptible. Inquire,
J say, we must, whether this giver of the new
law, observer of the spiritual sabbath, priest
]of the eternal sacrifices, eternal ruler of the
eternal kingdom, be come or no: that, if he
is already come, service may have to be ren-
dered him; if he is not yet come, he may
have to be awaited, until by his advent it be


' See Mai. i. as above.

2 Or, "sending forth" — proinissio.

3 The tautology is again due to the author.

4Comp. Luke 1. 78, 79, Isa. ix. 1, 2, with Matt. iv. 12-16.

SComp. I Cor. ix. 16.

^See ch. iii. above.

7 Here again the repetition is the author's.

8 Cum suo sibi sabbato. Unless the meaning be — which the
context seems to forbid — " together with a sabbath of His own :"
the Latinity is plainly incorrect.


manifest that the old Law's precepts are sup-
pressed, and that the beginnings of the jiew
law ought to arise. And, primarily, ge mu§^
lay it down that the ancient Law and the


prophets could not have ceased, unless Hp,

were come who was rnn^fnnfly nnnnnn/;^^/-!^

through the same Law and through the same
prophets, as to come.


CHAP. VII. THE QUESTION WHETHER CHRIST

BE COME TAKEN UP.

Therefore upon this issue plant we foot to
foot, whether the Christ who was constantly
announced as to come be already come, or
whether His coming be yet a subject of hope.
For proof of which question itself, the times
likewise must be examined by us when the
prophets announced that the Christ would
come; that, if we succeed in recognising that
He has come within the limits of those times,
we may without doubt believe Him to be the
very one whose future coming was ever the

theme of prophetic song, npnn whom ?/'/> — fhp
nations, to wit — were ever nnnnnnrprl ag Hpc-

tined to believe: and that, when it shall have
been agreed that He is come, we may un-


doubtedly likewise believe fhaf the npw laur
has by Him been given, and not disavow the
new testament in Him and through Him
drawn up for us. For that Christ was to come
we know that even the Jews do not attempt


to disprove, inasmuch as it is to His advent
that thev are directing their hope. Nor need
we inquire at more length concerning f/iaf
matter, since in days bygone all the prophets
have prophesied of it; as Isaiah: " Thus saith
the Lord God to my Christ (the) Lord,' whose
right hand I have holden, that the nations
may hear Him: the powers of kings will I
burst asunder; I will open before Him the
gates, and the cities shall not be closed to
Him." Which very thing we see fulfilled.
For whose right hand does God the Father
hold but Christ's, His Son ? — whom all nations
have heard, that is, whom all nations have
believed, — whose preachers, withal, the apos-
tles, are pointed to in the Psalms of David :
*' Into the universal earth," says he, " is gone
out their sound, and unto the ends of the earth
their words." '" For upon whom else have the
universal nations believed, but upon the Christ
who is already come? JEoLwhornJiaye the_
nations believed, — ParthiaaSy^Medes^ Elarn-
ites, and they Vho inhabit Me-SiopotamiaT


Armenia, Phrygia, Cappadocia, and theywlio


19 The reference is to Isa. xlv. i. A glance at the LXX. will at
onc6 explain the difference between the reading of our author and
the genuine reading. One letter — an " i " — makes all the differ-
ence. For Kvp<i> has been read Kupioj. In the Eng. ver. we read
" Ni's A nointed."

»o Ps. xix. 4 (xviii. 5 in LXX.) and Rom. x. 18.


i:^8


AN ANSWER TO THE JEWS.


[chap. VIII.


dwell in Pontus, and Asia, and Pamphylia,
tarriers in Eg^pt, and inhabiters of the region
of Africa whidi is beyond Cyrenc, Romn^- ■
and sojourners, yes, and in Jcrusak-ni Jew
and airother nations.; as, for instance, by tlll^5
time, the varied races of the Gaetulians, and
manifold confines of the Moors, all the limits
of the Spa-ins, and the diverse nations of the
Gauls, and_thgJiaunts_of the Britons— inac-
cessible to the Romans, but subjugated to

_Christ. and of the Sarmatians, and Dacians,
and Germans, and Scythians, and of many
remote nations, and of provinces and islands
many, to us unknown, and which we can
scarce enumerate? In all which places the
name of the Christ who is already come reigns,

~ as of Him before whom the gates of all cities
havel^een opened, and, to whoni none are
rlo^f^, before whom iron bars have been
crumbled, and brazen gates'' opened. Al-
tliough there be withal a spiritual sense to be
affixed to these expressions, — ^^thaJJhe_heArLs
^f indivicln^l^T blor.knded in vnrions ways bv
the devil, are unbarred by the, faith of Christ,
-still they have been evidently fulfilled, in-


asmuch as in all these places dwells the
'' people " of the Name of Christ. |=;or who
^ot//ii have reigned 07>er all natio7is but Christ,
God's Son, who was ever announced as des-
tined to reign over all to eternity? For if
Solomon "reigned," why, it was within the
confines of Judea merely: " from Beersheba
unto Dan " the boundaries of his kingdom are
marked. 3 If, moreover, Darius "reigned"
over the Babylonians and Parthians, he had
not power fw^r all natiotis; if Pharaoh, or who-
ever succeeded him in his hereditary kingdom,
over the Egyptians, in that country merely
did he possess his kingdom's dominion; if
Nebuchadnezzar with his petty kings, " from
India unto Ethiopia" he had his kingdom's
boundaries; 5 if Alexander the Macedonian,
he did not hold more than universal Asia, and
other regions, after he had quite conquered
them; if the Germans, to this day they are
not suffered to cross their own limits; the
Britons are shut within the circuit of their own
ocean; the nations of the Moors, and the bar-
barism of the Gsetulians, are blockaded by
the Romans, lest they exceed the confines of
their own regions. What shall I say of tjig
Romans themselves, s who fortify their own


empire with garrisons of their own legions,
nor can extend the might of their kingdom

' nfj these nntinnfj^f But Christ's Name is

iling everywhere, believed everywhere,
u ui^b n i g]:)e d by all the above-enumerated
nations, reigning everywhere, adored every-
where, conferred equally everywhere upon
all. No king, with Him, finds greater favour,
no barbarian lesser joy; no dignities or pedi-
grees enjoy distinctions of merit; to all He
is equal,- to all King, to all Judge, to all " God
and Lord."^ Nor would you hesitate to be-
lieve what we as^^everatej sinre yon sfiC- it

taking place.


CHAP. VIII. — OF THE TIMES OF CHRIST S BIRTH
AND PASSION, AND OF JERUSALEM'S DESTRUC-
TION.

Accordingly the times must be inquired into
of the predicted and future nativity of the
Christ, and of His passion, and of the exter-
mination of the city of Jerusalem, that is, its
devastation. For Dnnlel says, that " bnth
the holy city and the holy place are extermi-
nated together with the romin^ T enrler, -and
that the pinnnnle it; HegtrnyeH mitn rnin " ^


» See Acts ii. 9, 10 ; but comp. ver. 5.

2 See Isa. xlv, i, 2 (especially in Lowth's version and the LXX.).

3 See 1 Kings iv. 25. (In the LXX. it is 3 Kings iv. 25 ; but the
verse is omitted in Tischendorf's text, ed. Lips, i860, though
given in his footnotes there.) The statement in the text differs
slightly from Oehler's reading ; where I suspect there is a trans-
position of a syllable, and that for "in finibus Juda tantum, a
Bersaliete,'' we ought to read " in finibus Judcece tantum, a Ber-
sabeT Setdi'Jej. c. ix

ese statements define the Empire after


4 See Esth. i. 1, viii. 9.

5 [Dr. AUix thinks thi


And SO the times of the coming Christ, the
Leader,^ must be inquired into, which we shall
trace in Daniel; and, after computing them,
shall prove Him to be come, even on the
ground of the times prescribed, and of com-
petent signs and operations of His. Which
matters we prove, again, on the ground of the
consequences which were ever announced as to
follow His advent; in order that we may be-
lieve all to have been as well fulfilled as fore-
seen.

In such wise, therefore, did DT^n'^l predict
concerning Him, as to show both ^^hpn nnd
in what time He was to set th^ nations free;
and how, after the passion of thfi Christ, that
city had to be exterminated.. For he says
thus: " In the first year under Darius, son of
Ahasuerus, of the seed of the Medes, who
reigned over the kingdom of the Chaldees, I
Daniel understood in the books the number
of the years. . . . And while I was yet speak-
ing in my prayer, behold, th^ man Gabriel,
whom I saw in the vision in the beginning,
flying; and he touched me, as it were, at the
hour of the evening sacrifice, and made me
understand, and spake with me, and said,
Daniel I am now come out to imbue thee with
understanding; in the beginning of thy sup-
plication went out a word. And I am come
to announce to thee, because thou art a man


Severus, and hence accepts the date we have mentioned, for this


6 Comp. John xx. 28.

'"7^ee Dan. ix. 26 (especially in the LXX.).
8 Comp. Isa h". 4.


CHAP. VIII.]


AN ANSWER TO THE JEWS.


159


of desires; ' and ponder thou on the word, and
understand in the vision. Seventy hebdomads
have been abridged =" apon thy commonalty,
and upon the holy city, until delinquency be
made inveterate, and sins sealed, and right-
eousness obtained by entreaty, and righteous-
ness eternal introduced; and in order that
vision and prophet may be sealed, and an holy
one of holy ones anointed. And thou shalt
know, and thoroughly see, and understand,
from the going forth of a word for restoring
and rebuildirig Jerusalem unto the Christ, the
Leader, heftclomads (seven and an half, and 3)
Ixii and an half: and it shall convert, and
shall be built into height and entrenchment,
and the times shall be renewed: and after
these Ixii hebdomads shall the anointing be
exterminatedj and shall not be: and the city
and the holy place shall he exterminnte to-
gether with the Leader, who is making His
advent: and thev shall be rnt ghnrt as in n
deluge, until (the) end of a war, which shall


who is to come; and they shall be cut short as
in a deluere: and he shall destroy the DinnacTe


he cut short unto ruin. And he shall confirm
a testament in many. In one hebdomad and
the half of the hebdomad shall be taken away
my sacrifice and libation, and in the holy
place the execration of devastation, (and*)
until the end of (the) time consummation shall
be given with regard to this devastation." s

Observe we, therefore, the Hmit, — how, in
truth, he predicts that there are to be Ixx
hebdomads, within which if they receive Him,
"it shall be built into height and entrench-
ment, and the times shall be renewed." But
God, foreseeing what was to be — that they
will not merely not receive Him, but will both
persecute and deliver Him to death — both re-
capitulated, and said, that in Ix and ii and an
half of an hebdomad He is born, and an holy
one of holy ones is anointed; but that when
vii hebdomads^ and an half were fulfilling,
He had to suffer, and the holy city had to be
exterminated after one and an half hebdomad,
— whereby, namely, the seven and an halJf
hebdomads have been completed. For he
says thus: " Andlhe city„aiid Jthe holy pjace
to be exterminated together with the leader


^ Vir desideriorum ; Gr. avrip en-iflw/aiwi' ; Eng. ver. " a man
greatly beloved." Elsewhere Tertullian has another rendering—
" miserabilis." See de Jej. cc. vii, ix.

2 Or, " abbreviated ; ' breviatse sunt ; Gr. o-vveT/xrjflijerai'. For
this rendering, and the interpretations which in ancient and mod-
ern days have been founded on it, see G. S. Faber's Di.ssert. on
the prophecy of the seventy weeks, pp. 5, 6, 109-112. (London,
1811.) The whole work will well repay perusal.

3 These words are given, by Oehler and Rig., on the authority
of Pamelius. The mss. and early editions are without them.

4 Also supplied by Pamelius.

5 See Dan. ix. 24-27. It seemed best to render with the
strictest literality, without regard to anything else ; as an idea will
thus be given of ,the condition of the text, which, as it stands,
differs widely, as' will be seen, from the Hebrew and also from
the LXX., as it stands in the ed. Tisch. Lips, i860, to which I al-
ways adapt my references.

^ Hebdomadcj is preferred to Oehler's -as, a reading which he
follows apparently on slender authority.


in a deluge; and he shall destroy the pinnacTe
unto ruin." ^ Whence, therefore, do we show
that the rhri<;t name within the ixii and nn
half hebdomnds ? Wp shnll munt, moreovpr.


from the first year of Darius^ as at this ^ar-
ticiilar time is shown to DanieLthis particular
vision: for he says, " And understand and


conjecture that at the completion of thy word ^
I make thee these answers." Whence we are
bound to compute from the first year of
Darius, when Daniel saw this vision.

Let us see, therefore, how the years are
filled up until the advent of the Christ: —

For Darius reigned . . xviiii 9 years (19).

Artaxerxes reigned . . xl and i years (41).
Then King Ochus (who is also

called Cyrus) reigned . xxiiii years (24).

Argus one year.

Another Darius, who is also

named Melas, . . . xxi years (21).

Alexander the Macedonian, . xii years (12).

Then, after Alexander, who had reigned
over both Medes and Persians, whom he had
reconquered, and had established his king-
dom firmly in Alexandria, when withal he
called that (city) by his own name; '° after him
reigned, (there, in Alexandria,)

Soter, . .
To whom succeeds

Philadelphus, reigning
To him succeeds

Euergetes,
Then

Philopator .
After him

Epiphanes,
Then another

Euergetes, .
Then another

Soter,

Ptolemy

Cleopatra, . . . xx years v months (20 5-12).
Yet again

Cleopatra reigned joint-
ly with Augustus .

After Cleopatra, Angus
tus reigned other


XXXV years (35).

xxx and viii years (38).

XXV years (25).

xvii years (17)

xxiiii years (24).

xxviiii years (29).

xxxviii years (38).
xxxvii years (37).
XX years v months (20 5-

xiii years (13.)


xliii years (43).
For all the years of the empire of Augustus were Ivi
years (56).

Let US see, moreover, how in the forty-first
year of the empire of Augustus, when he has
been reigning for xx andT yiiryears aTter the
death of Cleopatra, the Christ isl^orrr! (A nd
the same Augustus survived, after Christ is
born, XV years; and the remaining times of
years to the day of the birth of Christ will


7 There is no trace of these last words in Tischendorf s LXX.
here ; and only in his footnotes is the " pinnacle " mentioned.

f* Or, "speech." 'Ihe reference seems to be to ver. 33, but
there is no such statement in Daniel.

9 So Oehler ; and I print all these numbers uniformly— as in
the former part of the present chapter — exactly in accordance
with the Latin forms, for the sake of showing how easily, in such
calculations, errors may creep in.

loComp. Ps. xlix. II (in LXX. Ps. xlviii. 12).


i6o


AN ANSWER TO THE JEWS.


[chap. IX.


bring us to the xl first year, which is the xx
and viiith of Augustus after the death of
Cleopatra.) There are, (then,) made up
cccxxx and vii years, v months: (whence are
filled up Ixii hebdomads and an half: which
make up ccccxxxvii years, vi months:) on
the day of the birth of Christ. And (then)
*' righteousness eternal " was manifested, and
** an Holy One of holy ones was anointed " —
that is, Christ — and " sealed was vision and
prophet," and "sins" were remitted, which,
through faith in the name of Christ, are
washed away' for all who believe on Him.
But what does he mean by saying that " vision
and prophecy an scaM^ ' ' That all prophets
^fijiannounced of Him that H^jmsJiiiiome,
and had to suffer. Therefore, since the
prophecy was fulfilled through His advent,
for that reason he said that " vision and proph-
ecy 7uere sealed;'' inasmuch as He is the
signet of all prophets, fulfilling all things
which in days bygone they had announced of
Him,' For after thf: advent of Christ nnd


His passion there. is no longer ''vision or
prophet" to announce ffim as to come. In, .
short, if this is not so, let the Jews exhibit,
subsg^uenUy tQ Christ, any YoIumes~oT!p.ropTi-
|£ls, visihlft miradfs wrnnght by any angels,


(such as those) which in bygone days the-pa.-
tri^rcks 5aw_untiJ_the_advent of Christ, who. is
now come; since Ay|iich event " sealed is vision
and prophecy," that is, confirmed. And
justly does the evangelist ^ write, "^he law
and the prophets (were) until John" the
Baptist. For, on Christ's being baptized,
that is, on His sanctifying the waters in His
own baptism,* all the plenitude of bygone
spiritual grace-gifts ceased in Christ, sealing
ns He did -all vision and propLhecies, which
by. His advent He fulfilled. Whence most
firmly does he assert that His advent " seals
visions and prophecy."

Accordingly, showing, (as we have done,)
both the number of the years, and the time of
the Ix two and an half fulfilled hebdomads,
on completion of which, (we have shown) that
Christ is come, that is, has been born, let us
see what (mean) other "vii and an half heb-
domads," which have been subdivided in the
abscision of s the former hebdomads; (let us
see, namely,) in what event they have been
fulfilled:—


For, after Augustus who
survived after the birth of
Christ, are made up . .

To whom succeeded Tibe-
rius Caesar, and held the
empire

(In the fiftieth year of his
empire Christ suffered,
being about xxx years of
age when he suffered.)

Again Caius Ccesar, also
called Caligula, .

Nero Csesar, .

Galba ....

Otho ....

Vitellius,

Vespasian, in the first year
of his empire, subdues
the Jews in war; and there
are made Hi years, vi
months. For he reigned
xi years. And thus, in the
day of their storming, the
Jews fulfilled the Ixx
hebdomads predicted in
Daniel.


XV years (i 5).


XX years, vii months, xxviii
days (20 etc.).


iii years, viii months, xiii

days (3 etc.).
xi years, ix months, xiii

days (II etc.).
vii months, vi days. (7 etc.).
iii days,
viii mos. , xxvii days (8mos.)


Therefore^ when these times also w^ere com-
pleted, and the Jews subdued, there after-


wards ceased in that place " HbafinnR anH


I Diluuntur. So Oehler has amended for the reading of the
Mss. and edd., " tribuuntur."

^Comp. Pusey on Daniel, pp. 178, 179, notes 6, 7, 8, and the
passages therein referred to. And tor the whole question of the
seventy weeks, and of the LXX. version of Daniel, comp. the
same book, Lect. iv. and Note E (2d thousand, 1864). See also
pp. 376-381 of the same book ; and F"aber (as above), pp. 293-297.

3 Or rather, our Lord Himself. See Matt. xi. 13 ; Luke xvi. 16.

4 Comp. the very obscure passage in de Pu. c. vi., towards the
end, on which this expression appears to cast some light.

5 Or, " in abscision from."


sacrifices." which thenceforward have not
been abie to b£,in that pl^ice^celebratexi; for
" the unction," too,^ was " exterminated " in
that place after the passion of Christ. For
it had been predicted that the unction should
be exterminated in that place; as in the Psalms
it is prophesied, "They exterminated my
hands and feet." ^ And the suffering of this
"extermination" was perfected within the
times of the Ixx hebdomads, under Tiberius
Cassar, in the consulate of Rubellius Geminus
and Fufius Geminus, in the month of March,
at the times of the passover, on the eighth
day before the calends of April, ^ on the first
day of unleavened bread, on which they slew
the lamb at even, just as had been enjoined
by Moses. 5 Accordingly, all the synagogue
of Israel ^/^^sTay Him, sapng to PiTate, when
he'was desirous to dismiss Him, "'His bTdod
be upon us, and upon our_childrjen;J^** and,
*' If thou dismiss him, thou art not a friend
of Ccnesar; " " in order that all things might be
fulfilled which had been written of Him."

CHAP. IX. — OF THE PROPHECIES OF THE BIRTH
AND ACHIEVEMENTS OF CHRIST

Begin we, therefore, to prove that the rtrtr


6 And, without "unction" — i.e. without a priesthood, the
head whereof, or high priest, was always anointed — no " sacri-
fices " were lawful.

7 See Ps. xxii. 16 (xxi, 17 in LXX.).

8 i.e., March 25.

9 Comp. Ex. xii. 6 with Mark xiv. 12, Luke xxii. 7.

10 See Matt, xxvii. 24, 25, with John xix. 12 and Acts iii.

" John xix. 12.

"Comp. Luke xxiv. 44, etc.


)


'3-


CHAI'. IX.]


AN ANSWER TO THE JEWS.


I6l


of Christ was announced by prophets; as
jLsaiah {e.g. ,) foretells, "" Hear ye^ house of
IJavidi; aa-petty contest, have ye with men.

..since. God is proposing n sfriigrgrle. Therefore
God Himself will give you a sign; Behold,
the virgin^ shall conceive, and bear a son, and
ye shall call his name Emmanuel" ' (which
is, interpreted, "God with us "3); "Jiutt£i
and honey shall he eat;"'*: " since, ere the


\ child learn to call father or mother, he shall
L£^^^X?J^il^_E2^-^^ ^f Damascus and the spoils
' of Samaria, in .QP4lQsitioii_to„tiiii_Jdiig. _i)i -the
' Assyrians. ' ' s

Arrnrdingly the Jews <;ay T ,et ng rhallenge

that prediction of Isaiah, and let us institute
a comparison whether, in the case of the Christ
who is already come, there be applicable to
Him, firstly, the name which Isaiah foretold,
and (secondly) the signs of it** which he an-
nounced of Him.

Well, then, Isaiah foretells that it behoves
Him to be called Emmanuel; and that subse-
quently He is to take the power of Damascus
and the spoils of Samaria, in opposition to
the king of the Assyrians. " Now." say they,
"that (Ch r i s t ) ^ o f .y p u r s ^ \y h o is come, neither
was called by that name, nor engaged in war-
Taxe." But we, on the contrary, have thought
they ought to be admonished to recall to mind
the context of this passage as well. For~sub-
joined is withal the interpretation of Em-
manuel— " God with us " J'Trinjorder^that yjou
may regard not the sound only of the name, but
_tJie_seiLsZ'tob." ~Tor^the"Hel)few "sound, which
is Emmanuel, has an interpretation, which is,
God with us. Inquire, then, whether this
speech, "God with us" (which is Emmanuel),
be commonly applied to Christ ever since
Christ's light has dawned, and I think you
will not deny it. For they who out of Juda-
ism believe in Christ, ever since their believ-
ing on Hi m^_do. whenever they shall wish to
.SayiL Kmmnnnel, signify thnt God is with us:
and thus it is agreed that He who was ever
predicted as Emmanuel is already come, be-
cause th a t wh i ch E m m gnn e 1 srgni fi eg j s^com e
—that is, " God with us." Equally are they
led by the sound of the name when they so
understand " the power of Damascus," and
"the spoils of Samaria," and "the kingdom
of the Assyrians," as if they portended Christ

* " A virgin," Eng. ver. ; r\ 7rapff«Vos, LXX. ; " the virgin,"
Lowth.

*See Isa. vii. 13, 14.

3 See Matt. i. 23.

4 See Isa. vii. 15.

5 See Isa. viii. 4. (All these passages should be read in the

^ i.e , of the predicted name. [Here compare Against Marcion,
Book III. (vol. vii. Edin. series) Cap. xii. p. 142. Seemy note (1)
on Chapter First ; and also Kaye, p. xix.]

7 In Isa. viii. 8, 10, compared with vii. 14 in the Eng. ver. and
the LXX., and also Lowth, introductory remarks on ch. viii.

8 Or, "to call Him."

11


as a warrior; not observing tliat Scripture
premises, " since, ere the child leain^lQ. call
father or mother, he shall receive the power


of Damascus and the spoils of Samaria, in
opposition to the king of the Assyrians. ' * For
the first step is to look at the demonstration
of His age, to see whether the age there in-
dicated can possibly exhibit the Christ as al-
ready a vian, not to say a general. Eoisooth,
by-- His.- babyish cry the infant would summo n
men to armS;.-iind - ivnnld give the sjgnnl ni

war not with clarion^ but with rattle, and po i n t
out the foe, not from His charger's back or
irom a rampart, but from the back or neck
of His suckler and nurse, and thus subdue
Damascus and Samaria in place of the breast.
(It is another matter if, among you, infants
rush out into battle. — oiled first, I suppose, to
dry in the sun, and then armed with satchels
and rationed on butter, — who are to know
how to lance sooner than how to lacerate the

bosom !) 5 r.erfninly^ if nntnre nowhere allows
this. — (namely^) to serve as a soldier before


developing into manhood^ to take " the power
of Damascus " before knowing yonr father^ —

it follows that the pronounr.emfint is visibly


figurative. "Bntagnjn/' say they, "nature


sutlers noTa 'virgin ' to be a parent: and vet
the prophet must be believed." And de-
servedly so; for he bespoke credit for a thing ^
incredible, by saying that it was to be a sign.
" Therefore," he says, " shall a sign be given
you. Behold, a virgin shall conceive in womb,
and bear a son." But a sign from God, nn-

elty, would not have appeared a sign. In a
word, if7 when you are anxious to cast any
down from (a belief in) this divine prediction,
or to convert whoever are simple, you have
the audacity to lie, as if the Scripture contained
(the announcement), that not "a virgin," but
a young female," was to conceive and bring
forth; you are refuted even by this fact, that
a daily occurrence — the pregnancy and par-
turition of a young female, namely — cannot
possibly seem anything of a sign. And the
setting before us, then, of a virgin-mother is
deservedly believed to be a sign; but not
equally so a warrior-infant. For there would
not in this case again be involved the question
of a sign; but, the sign of a novel birth hav-
ing been awarded, the next step after the sign
is, that there is enunciated a different ensuing
ordering '° of the infant, who is to eat " honey
and butter." Nor is this, of course, for a
sign. It is natural to infancy. But that he


9 See adv. Marc. 1. iii. c. xiii., which, with the preceding chap-
ter, should be compared throughout with the chapter before us.

'oComp. Judg. xiii. 12; Eng. ver., "How shall we order the
child?"


l62


AN ANSWER TO THE JEWS.


[chap. IX.


is to receive' "the power of Damascus and
the spoils of Samaria in opposition to the king
of the Assyrians," this is a wondrous sig?i.
Keep to the limit of (the infant's) age, and
inquire into the sense of the prediction; nay,
rather, repay to truth what you are unwilling
to credit her with, and the prophecy becomes
intelligible by the relation of its fulfilment.
Let those Eastern magi be believed^ dowering
with gold a.n_d J ncense the infancy of Christ
-iis_a_king;.!_ an^lM infant has received. "the
pmvpr nf Damascus " without battle and arms.
For, besides the fact that it is known to all that
the " power " — for that is the " strength " —
of the East is wont to abound in gold and
odours, certain it is that the divine Scriptures
regard " gold " as constituting the " power "
also of all other nations; as it says^ through
Zechariah: "And Judah keepeth guard at
Jerusalem, and shall amass all the vigour of
the surrounding peoples, gold and silver." ^
For of this gift of "gold" David likewise
says, " And to Him shall be given of the gold
of Arabia; " s and again, " The kings of the
Arabs and Saba shall bring Him gifts. ' ' ^ For
the East, on the one hand, generally held the
magi (to be) kings; and Damascus, on the
other hand, used formerly to be reckoned to
Arabia before it was transferred into Syro-
phoenicia on the division of the Syrias: the
-"-power " whereof Christ then "received ' '

in rprpjving its pn«;ign«;^— gnlfl^ tn vvit^ ~^c\

pdon r s . " The spoils," _m ore o.y^X, _li-Oi_.Sa-
mnria ' ' (He received in receiving)- -the-magi
themselves, who, on recognising Him, and
honouring Him wlth^gifts^ and_ adorijigJFij.m
on bended knee as Lord and King, on the
evidence of the guiding and indicating star,
became "the spoils of _ Samaria^ '1 that . is,^ of
idolatryr^by believing, .jiamely , _on -Chri st .
For (Scripture) denoted idolatry by the name
of " Samaria," Samaria being ignominious on
the score of idolatry; for she had at that time
revolted from God under King Jeroboam.
For this, again, is no novelty to the Divine
Scriptures, figuratively to use a transference
of na7ne grounded on parallelism of crimes.
For it 7 calls your rulers " rulers of Sodom,"
and your people the " people of Gomorrha," ^
when those cities had already long been ex-
tinct.' jVndjelsewhere it says,throiigh a proph-
et, to the people of israelj "TRy" father


* Or, " accept."

a See Matt. li. 1-12.

3 Of course he ought to have said, " they say"

■♦Zech. xiv. 14, omitting the last clause.

SPs. Ixxii. 15 (Ixxi. 15 in LXX.) : "Sheba" in Eng. ver. ;
*' Arabia " in the " Great Bible " of 1539 ; and so the LX X.

6Ps. Ixxii. 10, in LXX, and "Great Bible;" " Sheba and
Seba," Eng. ver-

7 Strictly, Tertullian ought to have said "they call," having
Above said " Divine Scriptures ; " as above on the preceding page.

8 Isa. i. 10.

9SGi Gen. xix. 23-29.


(was ) an Amorite^^ind thy mother an Hit-
tit^; " '° of whose race they were nof'bpgnytf>n ,
Hit" (were called their sons) by reason of their
consimilarity in impiety, whom of old (God)
had called Bis aivn sons through Isaiah the
prophet: "I have generated and exalted
sons."" So, too, Egypt is sometimes un-
derstood to mean the whole world " in that
prophet, on the count of superstition and
malediction. '3 So, again, Babylon, in our own
John, is a figure of the city Rome, as being
equally great and proud of her sway, and
triumphant over the saints. '-• On this wise,
accordin^y^ (Scri]Dtur^'i_.eilti.tJe_d„t]ie__ii}agi
also with the appellation of !_LSamaritans, ' '—
""cTespoIIed "" (of that) whirh thpy harj had in
common with the Samaritans, as we have said
^idolatry m opposition to the Lord. (It '^
addstr^''i^"0T5posinoir,""~ mbr'eover^^ ' ' to the
king of the Assyrians," — in opposition to the
devil, who to this hour thinks himself to be
reigning, if he detrudes the saints from the
religion of God.

Moreover, this our interpretation will be
supported while (we find that) elsewhere as
well the Scriptures designate Christ a warrior,
as we gather from the names of certain wea-
pons, and words of that kind. But by a
comparison of the remaining .senses the Jews
shall be convicted.,,." Gird thee/' says David,
' ' the swijjid-, Jii30n .Ihje _thigh. ' ' '7 But what
do you read above concerning the Christ ?
^' Blooniiiijji in beauLy above-the ^on^ of men ;
grace is outpoured in thy lips." '^ _ But very
absurd it is if he was complimenting on the
bloom.of his beauty and the. grace of his lips,
one whom he was girding for war with a
sword; of whom he proceeds subjunctively
to say, Outstretch and prosper, advance and
reign ! " And he has added, " because of thy
lenity and justice." '» Who will ply the sword
without practising the contraries to lenity and
justice; that is, guile, and asperity, and in-
justice, proper (of course) to the business of
battles ? See we, then, whether thaf whirV)
has another action be not gijotjier sword^--
that is, the Divine word of God, doubly
sharpened " with the two Testaments of the
ancient law and the new law; sharpened by
the equity of its own wisdom; rendering to
each one according to his own action." Law-


'o Ezek. xvi. 3, 4
" Isa. i.
" Orbis


" Isa. i. 2, as before


V&


'3 0ehler refers to Isa. xix

'4 See Rev. xvii., etc.

'S Or we may supply here [" Isaiah "1.

«6 0r, "he"^ ■"


See, too, Isa. xxx. and xxxi.


»7 Ps. xlv. 3. clause i (in LXX. Ps. xliv. 4).

»8See Ps. xlv. 2 (xliv. 3 in LXX.).

19 Ps. xlv. 4 (xliv. 5 in LXX.).

=oComp. Heb. iv. 12; Rev. i. 16, ii. 12, xix, 15, 21; alsoEph. vi. 17.

" Corap. Ps. Ixu. 12 (Ui. 13 in LXX.); Rom. ii. 6.


CHAP. IX.]


AN ANSWER TO THE JEWS.


1^3


ful, then, it was for the Christ of God to be
precinct, in the Psalms, without warlike
achievements, with the fijyiirafive sword of the
word nLXUif]- to which sword is congruous
the predicated "bloom," together with the
"grace of the lips;" with which sword He
was then "girt upon the thigh," in the eye
of David, when He was announced as about
to come to earth in obedience to God the
Father's decree. "The greatness of thy
right hand, he says, "shall conduct thee " ^
— the virtue to wit, of the spiritual' grace
from which the recognition of Christ is de-
duced. "Thine arrows," he says, "are
sharp," = — God's everywhere-flying precepts
(arrows) threatening the exposure ^ of every
heart, and carrying compunction and trans-
fixion to each conscience: " peoples shall fall
beneath thee," * — of course, in adoration.
Thus mighty in war and weapon-bearing is
Christ; thus will He "receive the spoils,"
not of " Samaria " alone, but of all nations
"as well. Acknowledge that His " spoils " are
ruratiye whose weapons ynn have learnt to


be allegforical. And thus, so far, the Christ
who is come was not a warrior, because He
was not predicted as such by Isaiah.

"But if the Christ," say they, "who is
believed to be coming is not called Jesus,
why is he who is come called Jesus Christ? "
Well, each name will meet in the Christ of
God, in whom is found likewise the appella-
tion s Jesus. Learn the habitual character of
your error. In the course of the appointing
of a successor to Moses, Oshea^ the son of
Nun 7 is certainly transferred from his pris-
tine name, and begins to be called Jesus. ^
Certainly, you say. This we first assert to
have been a figure of the future. For, be-
caiisc Jesus Christ was to introduce the
second people (which is composed of us na-
tions, lingering- deserted in the world ^ afore -
time) into the land o'Epfomisp, "Tnwing with
miik_antl honey " '° (that is, into the posses-
sion of eternal life^- than which nought is
sweeter); and this had to come about, not
through Moses (that is, not through the Law's


I


I See Ps. xlv. s (xHv, 6 in LXX.).
2Ps. xlv. 5 (xliv. 6 in LXX.).

3 Traductionem (comp. Heb, iv. 13).

4 Ps. xlv. 5.

5 I can find no authority for " appellatus " as a substantive, but
such forms are familiar with TertuUian. Or perhaps we may ren-
der : " in that He is found to have been likewise called Jesus."

6 Auses; Auo-jj m LXX.

7 Nave ; Navrj in LXX.

SJehoshua, Joshua, Jeshua, Jesus, are all forms of the same
name. But the change from Oshea or Hoshea to Tehoshua ap-
pears to have been made when he was sent to spy the land. See
Num. xiii. 16 ^17 in LXX., who call it a j«rnammg).

9 If Oehler s " in saeculo desertse ' is to be retained, this ap-
pears to be the construction. But this passage, like others above
noted, is but a reproduction of parts of the third book in answer to
Marcion ; and there the reading is " in sasculi desertis"=" in the
desert places of the world," or " of heathendom."
^° See Ex. iii. 8, and the references there.


discipline), but through Joshua (that is,
through the new law's grace), after our cir-
cumcision with " a knife of rock " " (that is,
with Christ's precepts, for Christ is in many
ways and figures predicted as a rock "); there^
fore the man who was being prepared to act
as images of this sacrament was inaugurated
under the figure/Of the Lord's name, even so


sus.'3 For He who ejrer

spakeJx) JMoses was the Son (jf G(m! HimsellJ
whOy too, was ahvays s,;7i.'- 1 ,; God-ihe
FaTher hone ever saw, and lived.'? And ac-
cordingly it is agreed that the Son of God
Himself spake to Moses, and said to the
people, " Behold, I send mine angel before
thy" — that is, the people's — " face, to guard
thee on the march, and to introduce thee into
the land which I have prepared thee: attend
to him, and be not disobedient to him; for
he hath not escaped '^ thy notice, since my
name is upon him." '^ For Joshua was to in-
troduce the people into the land of promise,
not Moses. Now He called him an " angel,"
on account of the magnitude of the mighty
deeds which he was to achieve (which mighty
deeds Joshua the son of Nun did, and you
yourselves read), and on account of his office
of prophet announcing (to wit) the divine
will; just as withal the Spirit, speaking in the
person of the Father, calls the forerunner of
Christ, John, a future "angel," through the
prophet: "Behold, I send mine angel before
Thy" — that is, Christ's — "face, who shall
prepare Thy way before Thee." '^ Nor is it
a novel practice to the Holy Spirit to call
those " angels " whom God has appointed as
ministers of His power. For the same John
is called not merely an " angel " of Christ,
but withal a " lamp " shining before Christ:
for David predicts, "I have prepared the
lamp for my Christ; " '' and him Christ Him-
self, coming " to fulfil the prophets," " called
so to the Jews. "He was," He says, "the
burning and shining lamp;"'* as being he
who not merely " prepared His ways in the
desert," "but withal, by pointing out " the
Lamb of God," '^ illumined the minds of men
by his heralding, so that they understood Him


" See Josh. v. 2-9, especially in LXX. Comp. the margin in
the Eng. ver. on yen 2, " flint knives," and Wordsworth in loc.y
who refers to Ex. iv. 35, for which sec ch. iii. above.

'2 See especially i Cor. x. 4.

13 Or, " Joshua."

'4 Comp. Num. xii. 5-8.

'5 Comp. Ex. xxxiii. 20 ; John i. 18, xiv. 9 ; Col. i. 15 ; Heb. '\.\.

16 Oehler and others read "celat'/V/ but the correction of Fr.

{unius and Rig., " cela^tV," is certainly more agreeable to the
XX. and the Eng. ver.
>7 Ex. xxiii. 30, 21.

'8 Mai. iii. i : comp. Matt. xi. 10 ; Mark i. 2 ; Luke vii. 27.
19 See Ps. cxxxii. 17 (cxxi. 17 in LXX.).

=0 Matt. V. 17, briefly ; a very favourite reference with Tertul-
lian.

2« John V. 3S, & Avx«'0? o Kaio/mevof tal ^axwtv.

2= Comp. reference 8, p. 232 ; and Isa. xl. 3, John i. 23.

23 See John i. 29, 36.


164


AN ANSWER TO THE JEWS.


[chap. X.


to be that Lamb whom Moses was wont to
announce as destined to suffer. Thus, too,
(was the son of Nun called) Joshua, on ac-
count of the future mystery' of his name: for
that name (He who spake with Moses) con-
firmed as His own which Himself had con-
ferred on him, because He had bidden him
thenceforth be called, not "angel" nor
"Oshea," but "Joshua." Thus, therefore,
each name is appropriate to the Christ of
God — that He should be called Jesus as well
(as Christ).

And that the virgin of whom it behoved
Christ to be born (as we have above men-
tioned) must derive her lineage of the seed
of David, the prophet in subsequent passages
evidently asserts. " And there shall be born,"
he says, "a rod from the root of Jesse" —
which rod is Mary — "and a flower shall as-
cend from his root: and there shall rest upon
him the Spirit of God, the spirit of wisdom
and understanding, the spirit of discernment
and piety, the spirit of counsel and truth; the
spirit of God's fear shall fill Him." ' For to
none of men was the universal aggregation of
spiritual credentials appropriate, except to
Christ; paralleled as He is to a " flower " by
reason of glory, by reason of grace; but ac-
counted " of the root of Jesse," whence His
origin is to be deduced, — to wit, through
Mary. 3 For He was from the native soil of
Bethlehem, and from the house of David;
as, among the Romans, Mary is described in
the census, of whom is born Christ. ■♦

I demand, again — granting that He who
was ever predicted by prophets as destined to
come out of Jesse's race, was withal to exhibit
all humility, patience, and tranquillity —
whether He be come? Equally so (in this
case as in the former), the man who is shown
to bear that character will be the very Christ
who is come. For of Him the prophet says,
" A man set in a plague, and knowing how
to bear infirmity; " who " was led as a sheep
for a victim; and, as a lamb before him who
sheareth him, opened not His mouth. "s If
He " neither did contend nor shout, nor was
His voice heard abroad," who "crushed
not the bruised reed" — Israel's faith, who
"quenched not the burning flax " ^ — that is,
the momentary glow of the Gentiles — but
made it shine more by the rising of His own
light, — He can be none other than He who
was predicted. The action, therefore, of the
Christ who is come must be examined by


being placed side by side with the rule of the
Scriptures. For, if I mistake not, we find Him
distinguished by a twofold operation, — that
of preachmg and that of pmuer. Now, let
each count be disposed of summarily. Ac-
cordingly, let us work out the order we have
set down, teaching that Christ was announced
di% 3. preacher; as, through Isaiah: "Cry out,"
he says, "in vigour, and spare not; lift up,
as with a trumpet, thy voice, and announce to
my commonalty their crimes, and to the
house of Jacob their sins. Me from day to
day they seek, and to learn my ways they
covet, as a people which hath done righteous-
ness, and hath not forsaken the judgment of
God," and so forth: ^ that, moreover. He was
to do acts of poiacr from the Father: " Be-
hold, our God will deal retributive judgment;
Himself will come and save us: then shall
the infirm be healed, and the eyes of the
blind shall see, and the ears of the deaf shall
hear, and the mutes' tongues shall be loosed,
and the lame shall leap as an hart," ^ and so
on; which works not even you deny that
Christ did, inasmuch as you were wont to say
that, "on account of the works ye stoned
Him not, but because He did them on the
Sabbaths." 9

CHAP. X. CONCERNING THE PASSION OF

CHRIST, AND ITS OLD TESTAMENT PREDICr
TIONS AND ADUMBRATIONS. /'/::i<>A-fV .V\C^'f/tt/)

^nnrerninp^ the last step, plainly, of His
passion you raise a doubt; affirming that the
passion of the cross was not predicted with


reference to Christ, and urging, besides, that
it is not credible that God should have exposed
His own Son to that kind of death: because
Himself said, " Cursed is every one who shall
have hung on a tree." '" But the reason of the
case antecedently explains the sense of this
malediction; for He says in Deuteronomy:
" If, moreover, (a man) shall have been (in-
volved) in some sin incurring the judgment of
death, and shall die, and ye shall suspend him
on a tree, his body shall not remain on the
tree, but with burial ye shall bury him on the
very day; because cursed by God is every one
who shall have been suspended on a tree; and
ye shall not defile the land which the Lord
thy God shall give thee for (thy) lot.""
Therefore He did not maledictivelv adjudge
Christ to this passion, but drew a distinction ,
that whoever, in any sin, had incurred the
judgment ni de.arh, and dip.d snspendedon a


' Sacramentum.

2 See Isa. xi. i, a, especially in LXX.

3 See Luke i. 27.

4 See Luke ii. 1-7.

SSee laa. liii. 3, 7, in LXX. ; and comp. Ps, xxxviii. 17 (xxxvii.
18 in LXX.) in the " Great Bible" of 1539.
6 See Isa. xlii. 2, 3, and Matt. xii. 19, 20.


7 See Isa. Iviii. i, 2, especially in LXX.
^See Isa. xxxv. 4, 5, 6.

9 See John v. 17, 18, compared with x. 31-33.
'oComp. Deut. xxi. 23 with Gal. iii. 13, with Prof. Lightfoot on
the latter passage.

" Deut. xxi. i2, 23 (especially in the LXX.).


AN ANSWER TO THE JEWS.


65


._ir££^/i^ should be '* cursed by God/' because

his own sins were the cause of his suspension
on the tree. — £)n the olher_JtiaiLd» Christy who
spake not guile from His mouth/ and who
exhibited all righteousness and humility, not
only (as we have above recorded it predicted
of Him) was not exposed to that kind of death
for /lis oic'?i Jrserfs, but (was so exposed) in
erdcr that what was predicted by the prophets
__as destined to come upon Him through yniir
means" might be fulfdled; just as, in the
JPsalms, the Spirit Himself of Christ was
_already singing, saying, '" 'J'hey w ere repaying
ine_evil. fgr^godj " 3 and, "What I had not
seized I was then paying in full;'^" They ex-
terminated my hands and feet;" s and, " They
put into my drink gall, and in my thirst they
slaked me with vinegar;" ^ " Upon my vesture
they did cast (the) lot;"7 just as the other
(outrages) which you were to commit on Him
were foretold, — all which He, actually and
thoroughly suffering, suffered not for any evil
action of His own, but " that the Scriptures
from the mouth of the prophets might be
fulfilled." «

And, of course, it had been meet that the
mystery 9 of the passion itself should be
"^^ figuratively set forth in predictions; and the
more incredible (that mystery), the more likely
to be " a stumbling-stone," '° if it had been
nakedly predicted; and the more magnificent,
the more to be adumbrated^ that the difficulty
of its intelligence might seek (help from) the
grace of God.

Accordingly, to begin with, Isaac, when led
by his father as a victim, and himself bearing
his own "wood," " was even at that early period
__j^inting to Christ's death; conceded, as He
was, as a victim by the Father; carrying, as
He did, the " wood " of His own passion.'-'

Joseph, again, himself was made a figure

of Christ ^3 in this point alone (to name no

more, not to delay my own course), that he

suffered persecution at the hands of his breth-

t p ren, and was sold into Egypt, on account of

'Xj^ the favour of God ; '^ just as Christ was sold by

' Israel — (and therefore,) " according._tQ_Ibe

flesh," by His " brethren " '^ — w'hen He is be-


* See I Pet. ii. 22 with Isa. liii. 9.
= Oehler's pointing is disregarded.
3Ps. XXXV. (xxxiv. in LXX.) 12.
4Ps. Ixix. 4 (Ixviii. >; in LXX.).
5Ps. xxii. 16 (xxi. !> in LXX.).
«Ps. Ixix. 21 (Ixviii. 22 in LXX.).

7 Ps. xxii. 18 (xxi. 19 in LXX.).

8 See Matt. xxvi. 56, xxvii. 34, 35 ; John xix. 23, 24, .28, 32-37.

9 Sacramentum.

»° See Rom. ix. 32, 33, with Isa. xxviii. 16 ; i Cor. i. 25 ; Gal. v, 11.
''Lignum = ^uAov ; constantly used for the "tree.
'=Comp. Gen. xxii. i-io with John xix. 17.

13 " Chrisj'?<7« figur«/«j" is Oehler's reading, after the two
Mss. and the Pamelian ed. of 1579 5 ^^^ r^st read "figura«j" or
figuraw/V."

'4 Manifested e.^.^ in his two dreams. See Gen, xxxvii.
'S Comp. Rom. ix. 5.


trayed by Judas.'* For Joseph is withal blest
by his father '7 after this form: " His glory (is
that) of a bull; his horns, the horns of an
unicorn; on them shall he toss nations alike
unto the very extremity of the earth." Of
course no one-horned rhinoceros was there
pointed to, nor any two-horned minotaur.
But Christ was therein signified: " bull, " by
reason of each of His two characters, — to
some fierce, as Judge; to others gentle, as
Saviour; whose "horns" were to be the ex-
tremities of the cross. For even in a ship's
yard — which is part of a cross — this is the
name by which the extremities are called;
while the central pole of the mast is a " uni-
corn. " By this power, in fact, of the cross,
and in this manner horned. He does now, on
the one hand, "toss" universal nations
through faith^ wafting them away from earth
to heaven; and will one day, on the other,
" toss " them through yW^w^w/, casting them
down from heaven to earth.

He, again, will be the " bull " elsewhere too
in the same scripture.'^ When Jacob pro-
nounced a blessing on Simeon and Levi, he
prophesies of the scribes and Pharisees; for
from them '^ is derived their ^ origin. For (his
blessing) interprets spiritually thus: "Simeon
and Levi perfected iniquity out of their sect,"^'
— whereby, to wit, they persecuted Christ:
" into their counsel come not my soul ! and
upon their station rest not my heart ! because
in their indignation they slew men " — that is,
prophets — "and in their concupiscence they
hamstrung a bull !" =" — that is, Christ, whom —
after the slaughter of prophets — they slew,
and exhausted their savagery by transfixing
His sinews with nails. Else it is idle if, after
the murder already committed by them, he
upbraids others, and not them, with butchery. ^^

But,lQ_£omejiow to Moses, why, I wonder,
did he merely at the time when Josluia was
battling against Amalek, pray sittin;^ witTT
hands -.-expanded,^ w^h.eii» in circumstances so
critlcaL-lie- ought rather, surely, to have com-


i6 0r, " Judah."

'7 This is an error. It is not " his father, '"Jacob, but Moses,
who thus blesses him. See Deut. xxxiii. 17. llie same error oc-
curs in adv. Marc. 1. iii. c. xxiii.

18 Not strictly " the same ;" for here the reference is to Gen.
xlix. 5-7.

19 i.e., Simeon and Levi.

20 i.e., the scribes and Pharisees.

21 Perfecerunt iniquitatem ex sua secta. There seems to be a
play on the word " secta " in connection with the outrage com-
mitted by Simeon and Levi, as recorded in Gen. xxxiv, 25-31 ;and
for <TvviTi\iaa.v aSixiav e^aipco-cu; avrdi' Cwhich is the reading of
the LXX., ed. Tisch. 3, Lips, i860), TertuUian's I^tin seems to
have read, avveTe\taav aSiKiav ef alptafios avTuif.

22 See Gen. xlix. 5-7 in LXX. ; and comp. the margin of Eng.
ver. on ver. 7, and W^ordsworth in loc, who incorrectly renders
Tovpov an " ox " here.

23 What the sense of this is it is not easy to see. It appears to
have puzzled Pam. and Rig. so effectually that they both, conject-
urally and without authority, adopted the reading found in adv.
Marc. 1. iii. c. xviii. (from which book, as usual, the present pass-
age is borrowed), only altering illis to ipsis.


1 66


AN ANSWER TO THE JEWS.


[chap. X.


mended his prayer by knees bended, and
hands beating his breast, and a face prostrate
on the ground ;_£xcept it Avasthat.there,wheje
the name of the Lord Jesus was the theme of
speech — destiriedjasJIfiiJvasJlfiLjenief.the lists
one day singly against the devil — the figure^
of the cross was also necessary, (that figure)
through which Tesus was to win the victory ? '
Why, again, did the same Moses, after the
prohibition of any ''likeness of anything,"^
set forth a brazen serpent, placed on a " tree,"
in a hanging posture, for a spectacle of healing
to Israel, at the time when, after their idola-
try,3 they were suffering extermination by ser-
pents, except that in this case he was exhibit-
ing the Lord's cross on which the " serpent "
the devil was "made a show of," ^ and, for
every one hurt by such snakes — that is, his
angels 5 — on turning intently from the pec-
cancy of sins to the sacraments of Christ's
cross J salvation was outwrought ? For he who
then gazed upon that [cross) was freed from
the bite of the serpents. '^

Come^ now, if you have read in the utter-
ance of the prophet in the Psalms, " (lod hath
reigaed_//7v// ///t' //-vv," " I wait to lu:ar what
you understand thereby; for fear you may
perhaps think some carpenter-kin;^" is sig-
nified,and not Chriat^who has reigned from
that time onward when he overcame the death
which ensued from His passion of " the tree."

STiinllarly,'agarn, Isaiah says: " I'or a child
is born to us, and to us is given a son."^
What novelty is that, unless he is speaking of
the " Son " of God ? — and one is born to us,
the beginning of whose government has been
made " on His shoulder." What king in the
world wears the ensign of his power on his
shoulder, and does not bear either diadem on
his head, or else sceptre in his hand, or else
some mark of distinctive vesture ? But the
tunnel "King of ages," Christ Jesus, alone
reared "on His shoulder" His own navel
glory, and power, and sublimity, — the cross,
to wit; that, according to the former prophecy,
the Lord thenceforth "might rt\gn fro?n the
tree." For of this tree likewise it is that God
hints, through Jeremiah, that you would say,
" Come, let us Xiwtitfood^" into his bread, and let


' .See Ex. xvii. 8-16 ; and comp. Col. ii. 14, 15.
= Ex. XX. 4.

3 Their sin was " speaking against God and against Moses "
(Num. xxi. 4-9).

4 Comp. Col. ii. 14, 15, as before ; also Gen. iii. i, etc. ; 2 Cor.
xi. 3 -Rev. xii. 9.

5 Comp. 2 Cor. xi. 14, 15 ; Matt. xxv. 41 ; Rev. xii. 9.
^Comp. lie Idol. c. v. : adv. Marc. 1. iii. c. xviii.

7 A ligno. Oehler refers us to }^s. xcvi. 10 (xcv. 10 in LXX.);
but the special words " a ligno '"are wanting there, though the
text is often quoted by the Fathers.

8 Lignarium aliquem rcKcm. It is remarkable, in connection
herewith, that our Lord is not only called by the Jews "Mt" car-
penter s son " (Matt. xiii. 55 ; Luke iv. 22), but " tAe carpenter"
(Mark vi. 3).

9 Sec Isa. ix. 6.
'° Lignum.


US wear him away out of the land of the living;
and his name shall no more be remembered.""
Of course on ^\sbody that " wood " was put; "
for so Christ has revealed, calling His body
" bread," '^ whose body the prophet in bygone
days announced under the term "bread." If
you shall still seek for predictions of the
Lord's cross, the twenty-first Psalm will at
length be able to satisfy you, containing as it
does the whole passion of Christ; singing, as
He does, even at so early a date, His own
glory. ^-^ " They dug," He says, " my hands
and feet " 's — which is the peculiar atrocity of
the cross; and again when He implores the aid
of the Father, "Save me," He says, out of
the mouth of the lion " — of course, of death
— " and from the horn of the unicorns my
humility,"'^ — from the ends, to wit, of the
cross, as we have above shown; which cross
neither David himself suffered, nor any of the
kings of the Jews: that you may not think the
passion of some other particular man is here
prophesied than His who alone was so signally
crucified by the People.

Now, if the hardness of your heart shall
persist in rejecting and dpridin^j all thpc^ in-
terpretations, we will prove that it may suffice
that the death of the Christ had been prophe-
sied, in order that, from the fact that the fiature
of the death had not been specified, it may be
understood to have been effected by means
of the cross '7 and that the passion of the cross-
is not to be ascribed to any but Him whose
death was constantly being predicted. For I
desire to show, in one utterance of Isaiah,
His death, and passion, and sepulture. " By
the crimes," he says, " of my people was He
led unto death; and I will give the evil for
His sepulture, and the rich for His death, be-
cause He did not wickedness, nor was guile
found in his mouth; and God willed to re-
deem His soul from death," '^ and so forth.
He says again, moreover: " His sepulture
hath been taken away from the midst." '» For
neither was He buried except He were dead^
nor was His sepulture removed from the midst
except through His resurrection. P'inally,
he subjoins: " Therefore He shall have many
for an heritage, and of many shall He divide
spoils: =°" who else (shall so do) but He who


"See Jer. xi. 19 (in LXX.).

'* i.e., when they laid on Him the crossbeam to carry. See John
xix. 17.

13 See John vi. /««//«, and the various accounts of the institu-
tion of the Holy Supper.

'4 It is Ps. xxii, in our Bibles, xxi. in LXX.

isVer. 16 (17 in LXX.).

»6 Ps. xxii. 21 (xxi. 22 in LXX., who render it as Tertullian does).

'7 i.e., perhaps, because of the extreme ignominy attaching to-
that death, which prevented its being expressly nanied.

•8 Isa. liii. 8, o, 10 (in LXX.).

«9 Isa. Ivii. 2 (in LXX.).

^Isa. liii. 12 (in LXX.). Comp., too, Bp. Lowth. Oehler'.^t
pointing again appears to be faulty.


CHAP. XI.]


AN ANSWER TO THE JEWS.


67


"was born," as we have above shown ? — " in
return for the fact that His soul was delivered
unto death?" For, the cause of the favour
accorded Him being shown, — in return, to
wit, for the injury of a death which had to
be recompensed, — it is likewise shown that
He, destined to attain these rewards because
of death, was to attain them after death — of
course after resurrection. For that which
happened at His passion, that mid-day grew
dark, the prophet Amos announces, saying,
"And it shall be," he says, "in that day,
saith the Lord, the sun shall set at mid-day,
and the day of light shall grow dark over the
land: and I will convert your festive days into
grief, and all your canticles into lamentation;
and I will lay upon your loins sackcloth, and
upon every head baldness; and I will make
the grief like that for a beloved (son), and
them that are with him like a day of mourn-
ing."^ For that you would do thus at the
beginning of the first month of your new
(years) even Moses prophesied, when he was
foretelling that all the community of the sons
of Israel was =" to immolate at eventide a lamb,
and were to eat^ this solemn sacrifice of this
day (that is, of the passover of unleavened
bread) with bitterness;" and added that " it
was the passover of the Lord,'' '' that is, the
passio7i of Christ. Which prediction was thus
ttso fulfilled, that "on the first day of un-
leavened bread " s you slew Christ;'^ and (that
the prophecies might be fulfilled) the day
hasted to make an "eventide," — that is, to
cause darkness, which was made at mid-day;
and thus "your festive days God converted
into grief, and your canticles into lamenta-
tion." For after the passion of Christ there
overtook you even captivity and dispersion,
predicted before through the Holy Spirit.

CHAP. XI. FURTHER PROOFS, FROM EZEKIEL.

SUMMARY OF THE PROPHETIC ARGUMENT
THUS FAR.

For, again, it is for these deserts of yours
that Ezekiel announces your ruin as about to
come: and not only _in_this^ ^%'^Jr~3- ^^^^

Jthi£h..Jias already befallpn^int in t"hp ""dny
of .retribution," ^ which will be subsequent.
From which ruin none will be freed _lmJt. he.

- who shall havie. been frontally sealed ^.with^the.


^ See Amos viii. g, 10 (especially in the LXX.).
^Oehler's "esset" appears to be a mistake for " esse."

3 The change from singular to plural is due to the Latin, not to
the translator.

4 See Ex. .xii. i-ii.

5 See Matt. xxvi. 17 ; Mark xiv. 12 ; Luke xxii. 7 ; John xviii.
28.

sComp. I Cor. v. 7,

7 Saeculo.

^Comp. Isa. Ixi. 2.

9 Or possibly, simply, " sealed " — obsignatus.


passion of the Christ whom you have re-_
jected, For thus it is written: "And the
Lord said unto me. Son of man, thou hast
seen what the elders of Israel do, each one of
them in darkness, each in a hidden bed-cham-
ber: because they have said. The Lord seeth
us not; the Lord hath derelinquished the earth.
And He said unto me. Turn thee again, and
thou shalt see greater enormities which these
do. And He introduced me unto the thresh-
olds of the gate of the house of the Lord
which looketh unto the north; and, behold,
there, women sitting and bewailing Thammuz.
And the Lord said unto me. Son of man,
hast thou seen? Is the house of Judah
moderate, to do the enormities which they
have done ? And yet thou art about to see
greater affections of theirs. And He intro-
duced me into the inner shrine of the house
of the Lord; and, behold, on the thresholds
of the house of the Lord, between the midst
of the porch and between the midst of the
altar, '° as it were twenty and five men have
turned their backs unto the temple of the
Lord, and their faces over against the east;
these were adoring the sun. And He said
unto me, Seest thou, son of man ? Are such
deeds trifles to the house of Judah, that they
should do the enormities which these have
done ? because they have filled up (the meas-
ure of) their impieties, and, behold, are them-
selves, as it were, grimacing; I will deal with
mine indignation," mine eye shall not spare,
neither will I pity; they shall cry out unto
mine ears with a loud voice, and I will not
hear them, nay, I will not pity. And He
cried into mine ears with a loud voice, say-
ing. The vengeance of this city is at hand;
and each one had vessels of extermination in
his hand. And, behold, six men were com-
ing toward the way of the high gate which
was looking toward the north, and each one's
double-axe of dispersion was in his hand:
and one man in the midst of them, clothed
with a garment reaching to the feet," and a
girdle of sapphire about his loins: and they
entered, and took their stand close to the
brazen altar. And the glory of the God of
Israel, which was over the house, in the open
court of it, '3 ascended from the cherubim: and
the Lord called the man who was clothed with
the garment reaching to the feet, who had
upon his loins the girdle; and said unto him,


'o Inter mediam elam et inter medium altaris: i.e., probably=
" between the porch and the altar," as the Eng. ver. has.

y So Oehler points, and Tischendorf in his edition of the LXX.
points not very differently. I incline to read : " Because they
have filled up the measure of their impieties, and, behold (are)
themselves, as it were, grimacing, I will," etc.

"Comp. Rev. i. i3.

13 " Quae fuit super eam " (i.e. super domum) " m subdivali
domus ' is Oehler's reading ; but it differs from the LXX.


1 68


AN ANSWER TO TKE JEWS.


[chap. XII.


Pass through the midst of Jerusalem, and
write the sign Tau ' on the foreheads of the
men who groan and grieve over all the enor-
mities which are done in their midst. And
while these things were doing, He said unto
an hearer,' Go ye after him into the city, and
cut short; and spare not with your eyes, and
pity not elder or youth or virgin; and little
ones and women slay ye all, that they may
be thoroughly wiped away; but all upon whom
is the sign Tau approach ye not; and begin
with my saints." ^ Now the mystery of this
*'sign" was in various ways predicted; (a
" sign ") in which the foundation of life was
forelaid for mankind; (a " sign ") in which the
Jews were not to believe: just as Moses be-
foretime kept on announcing in Exodus,''
saying, '* Ye shall be ejected from the land
into which ye shall enter; and in those na-
tions ye shall not be able to rest: and there
shall be instability of the prints of thy foot:
and God shall give thee a wearying heart, and
a pining soul, and failing eyes, that they see
not: and thy life shall hang on the tree ^before
thine eyes; and thou shalt not trust thy life."
^ And so, since prophecy has been fulfilled
through His advent — that is, through the na-
tivity, which we have above commemorated,
and the passion, which we have evidently ex-
plained— that is the reason withal why Daniel
said, *' Vision and prophet were sealed ; " be-
cause Christ is the " signet " of all prophets,
fulfilling all that had in days bygone been
announced concerning Him: for, since His
advent and personal passion, there is no
longer "vision" or "prophet;" whence
most emphatically he says that His advent
"j^-^/j vision and prophecy." And thus, by
showing '* the number of the years, and the
time of the Ixii and an half fulfilled hebdo-
mads," we have proved that at that specified
time Christ came, that is, was born; and, (by
showing the time) of the " seven and an half
hebdomads," which are subdivided so as to
be cut off from the former hebdomads, within
which times we have shown Christ to have
suffered, and by the consequent conclusion of
the " Ixx hebdomads," and the extermina-
tion of the city, (we have proved) that " sacri-
fice and unction " thenceforth cease.


» The MS. which Oehler usually follows omits " Tau ;" so do
the LXX.

'Et in his dixit ad audientein. But the LXX. reading agrees
almost verbatim with the Eng. ver.

sEzek. viii. 12-ix. 6 (especially in the LXX.). Comp. adv.
Marc. 1. in. c. xxii. But our author differs considerably even
from the LXX.

4 Or rather in Deuteronomy. See xx^'iii. 6s sqq.

5 Or, "sole."

6 In ligno. There are no such words in the LXX. If the
words be retained, "Mr ///<?" will mean Christ, who is called
" our Life " in Col. iii. 4. See also John i. 4, xiv. 6, xi. 25. And
so, again, " Thou shalt not trust (or believe) thy li/c would
mean, " Thou shalt not believe Christ."


Sufficient it is thus far, on these points, to
have meantime traced the course of the or-
dained path of Christ, by which He is proved
to be such as He used to be announced, even
on the ground of that agreement of Scrip-
tures, which has enabled us to speak out, in
opposition to the Jews, on the ground ^ of the
prejudgment of the major part. For let
them not question or deny the writings we
produce; that the fact also that things which
were foretold as destined to happen after
Christ are being recognised as fulfilled may
make it impossible for them to deny (these
writings) to be on a par with divine Scriptures.
Else, unless He were come after whom the
things which we're wont to be annou"nced had
to be acconipli.shcd, \\()uld such a.s have been
completed be proved ? :_


CHAP. XII. — FURTHER PROOFS FROM
CALLING OF THE GENTILES.


THE


Look at the universal nations thenceforth
emerging from the vortex of human error to
the Lord God the Creator and His Christ;
and if you dare to deny that this was prophe-
sied, forthwith occurs to you the promise of
the Father in the Psalms, which says, " My
Son art Thou; to-day have I begotten Thee.
Ask of Me, and I will give Thee Gentiles as
Thine heritage, and as Thy possession the
bounds of the earth." ^ For you will not be
able to affirm that " son " to be David rath er
than Christ; or the "bounds of the earth"
to have been promised rather to David, who
reigned within the single (country of) Jiidea,
than to Christ, who has already taken captive
the whole orb with the faith of His gosi)el; as
He says through Isaiah: " r.chold, i have^
given Thee for a covenant ' of iny family, for
a light of Gentiles, that Thou mayst open the
eyes of the blind " — of course, such as err —
" to outloose from bonds the bound" — that
is, to free them from sins — " and from the
house of prison" — that is, of death — "such
as sit in darkness"" — of ignorance, to wit.
And if these blessings accrue through Christ,
they will not have been prophesied of another
than Him through whom we consider them to
have been accomplished."

CHAP. XIII. ARGUMENT FROM THE DESTRUC-
TION OF JERUSALEM AND DESOLATION OF
JUDEA.

Therefore, since the sons of Israel affirm


7 Or, " in accordance with."

8 i.e.. Would they have happened? and, by happening, have
been their own proof ?

9 Ps. ii. 7, 8.

10 Dispositionem ; Gr. h>.aA-i\Ky\v .
" Isa. xlii. 6, 7, comp. Ixi. 1 ; Luke iv. 14-18
" Comp. Luke ii. 25-33.


CHAP. XIII.]


AN ANSWER TO THE JEWS.


169


that we err in receiving the Christ, who is
already come, let us put in a demurrer against
them out of the Scriptures themselves, to the
effect that the Christ who was the theme of
prediction is come; albeit by the times of
Daniel's prediction we have proved that the
Christ is come already who was the theme of
announcement. Now it behoved Him to be
born In Bethlehem of Judah. For thus it is
written iii the prophet: "And thou, Bethle-
hem, are not the least in the leaders of


Judah: f(>r out of thee shall issue n Leader.


who shall feed mv People I<^rael.' ' " But if
hitherto he has not been born, what '' leader ' '
was it who was thus announced as to proceed
from the tribe of Tudah. out of Bethlehem ?
For it behoves him to proceed from the tribe
of Judah and from Bethlehem. But we per-
ceive that noiu none of the race of Israel has


rpmained in Bethlehem; and (so it has been}
ever since the interdict was issued forbidding
any one of the Jews to linger in the confines
of the very district, in order that this pro-
phetic utterance also should be perfectly ful-
filled: " Your land is desert, your cities burnt
up by fire," — that is, (he is foretelling) what
will have happened to them in time of war;
*'your region strangers shall eat up in your
sight, and it shall be desert and subverted by
alien peoples."^ And in another place it is
thus said through the prophet: "The King
with His glory ye shall see," — that is, Christ,
doing deeds of power in the glory of God the
Father; 3 "and your eyes shall see the land
from afar,"

^tQilibited^in_ reward o^^^ ypxar deserts^ .since
the storming of Jerusalem, to enter into your
land; it Ts"pefrhTtted~y6¥ merely to see it
with your eyes from afar: "your soul," he
says, "shall meditate terror," s — namely, at


selves.^ How, therefore, will a leader " be
born from Judea, and how far will he " pro-
ceed from Bethlehem," as the divine volumes
of the prophets do plainly announce; since


for the unction of the royal chrism to be com-
pounded.^ But, if there is no longer " unc-
tion " thcre^ as Daniel prophesied (for he
says, "Unction shall be exterminated"), it
follows that they *° no longer have it, because
neither have they a temple where was the
" horn " " from which kings were wont to be
anointed. If, then, there is no unction,
whence shall be anointed the "leader" who
shall be born in Bethlehem ? or how shall he
proceed "from Bethlehem," seeing that of
the seed of Israel none at all exists in Beth-
lehem.

A second time, in fact, let us show that
Christ is already come, (as foretold) through
the prophets, and has suffered, and is already
received back in the heavens, and thence is
to come accordingly as the predictions prophe-
sied. For, after His advent, we read, ac-
cordingto Daniel, that the city itselT~had to


be exterminated; and we recognise that so it


has befallen. For the Scripture says thus.


that "the city and the holy place are simul-
tanpontily PYterminated together with the
leader. ' ' " — undoubtedly (that Leader) who
was to proceed " from Bethlehem," and from
the tribe of " Judah." Whence, again, it is
manifest that "the city must simultaneously be
exterminated " at the time when its " Leader "
had to suffer in it, (as foretold) through the
Scriptures of the prophets, who say: " I have
outstretched my hands the whole day unto a
People contumacious and gainsaying Me, who


walketh in a way not good, but after their
which is what you do, being I own sins." '^ And in the Psalms, Z>«Z7'^ says:

" They exterminated my hands and feet: they
counted all my bones; they themselves, more-
over, contemplated and saw me, and in my
thirst slaked me with vinegar."'* These
things David did not suffer, so as to seem
the time when they suffered the ruin of them- [justly to_iiaye„§^kejl„Qf „b.ims£lf;_biit_the


none at all is left there to this day of (the


house of) Israel, of whose stock Christ coutH"


b£,.hnrn ?

Now, if (according to the Jews) He is hith-
erto not come, when He begins to come
whence will He be anointed ? ^ For the Law
enjoined that, in captivity, it was not lawful


Christ who.._w.as crucified. Moreover, the

"hands and feet J "are not " exterminatjed.^'.' '^
except His who is suspended on a "tree."
Whence, again, David said that "the Lord
would reign frofn the tree: " '** for elsewhere,
too, the prophet predicts the fruit of this
"tree," saying "The earth hath given her
blessings," '^ — of course that virgin-earth, not
yet irrigated with rains, nor fertilized by


^ Mic. V. 2 ; Matt. ii. 3-6. Tertullian's Latin agrees rather with
the Greek of St. Matthew than with the LXX.
= See Isa. i. 7.
3Comp. John v. 43, x. 37, 38.

4 Isa. xxxiii. 17.

5 Isa. xxxiii. 18.

*Comp. the ^'' failing eyes'''' in the passage from Deuteronomy
given in c. xi., if " eyes " is to be taken as the subject here. If
not, vye have another instance of the slipshod writing in which this
treatise abounds.

7 As His name " Christ " or " Messiah " implies.


8 Comp. Ex. xxx. 22-33.

9 i.e., in Jerusalem or judea.
10 The Jews.

" Comp. I Kings (3 Kings in I-XX.) i. 39, where the Eng. ver.
has "rt« horn ;" the LXX. to /cepos, " the horn ;" which at that
time, of course, was in David's tabernacle (2 Sam. — 2 Kings in
LXX.— vi. 17,) for " temple " there was yet none.

'2 Dim. ix. 26.

13 See Isa. Ixv. 2 ; Rom. x. 21.

14 Ps. xxii. 16, 17 (xxi. 17, 18, in LXX.), and Ixix. 21 (Ixviii. 22
in LXX.).

iSi.e., displaced, dislocated.

16 See c. X. above.

17 See Ps. Ixvii. 6 (Ixvi.. 7 in LXX.), ixxxv. 12 (Ixxxiv. 13 in
LXX.).


170


AN ANSWER TO THE JEWS.


[chap. XIII-


showers, out of which man was of yore first
formed, out of which now Christ through the
flesh has been born of a virgin ; ' 'and the tree, ' ' '
he says, " hath brought his fruit," ' — not that
" tree " in paradise which yielded death to the
protoplasts, but the " tree " of the passion of
Christ, whence life, hanging, was by you not
believed ! ^ For this " tree " in a mystery,* it
was of yore wherewith Moses sweetened the
bitter water; whence the People, which was
perishing of thirst in the desert, drank and
revived ;s just as we do, who, drawn out from
the calamities of the heathendom^ in which
we were tarrying perishing with thirst (that is,
deprived of the divine word), drinking, " by
the faith which is on Him,"' the baptismal
water of the " tree " of the passion of Christ,
have revivpd, — a faith from which Israel has
fallen away, (as foretold) through Jeremiah,
who says. Send, and ask exceedingly
whether such things have been done, whether
nations will change their gods (and these are
not gods !). But My People hath changed
their glory: whence no profit shall accrue to
them: the heaven turned pale thereat " (and
when did it turn pale ? undoubtedly when
Christ suffered), "and shuddered," he says,
"most exceedingly; " ^ and "the sun grew
dark at mid-day: " ' (and when did it " shud-
der exceedingly" except at the passion of
Christ, when the earth also trembled to her
centre, and the veil of the temple was rent,
and the tombs were burst asunder ?'°) " be-
cause these, two e vi Is . hath .My People done;
Me," He says, " they My?. quite forsaken,
the fount of water of life," and they have
digged for themselves worn-out tanks, which
will not be able to contain water. " Undoubt-
e^dTy,"5y hot receiving" Christ, the " fount of
water of life," they haye beg^un to have
"worn-out tanks," that is, synagogues for
the use of the '^ ^dispersions of the Gentiles^" "
In which the Holy Spirit no longer lingers, as
for the time past He was wont to tarry in the
temple before .the_advent oj jChrist, whojs
tH^jt.rue temple of God. For, "that they
should withal suffer this thirst of the Divine
Spirit, the prophet Isaiah had said, saying:


* " Lignum, " as before.

2 See Joel ii. 22.

3 See c. xi. above, and the note there.

4 Sacramento.

5 See Ex. xv. 22-26.
^Sseculi.

7 See Acts xxvi. 18, ad fin.

8 See Jer. ii. 10-12.

9 See Amos viii. 9, as before, in c. x,

wSee Matt, xxvii. 45, 50-52 ; Mark xv. 33, 37, 38 , i.uke xxiii.
44» 45*

'* viarof ^cuTJs in the LXX. here (ed. Tischendorf, who quotes
the Cod. Alex, as reading, however, vSarot ^wrTos). Comp. Rev.
xxii. i_, 17, and xxi. 6; John vii. 37-39. (The reference, it will be
seen, u still to Jer. ii. 10-13 \ '^"^ '"^ writer has mixed up words


'2 Comp. the Tr\v Siaanopav riitv 'EAA^wf of John vii. 35 ; and
see I Pet. i. i.


"Behold, they who serve Me shall eat, but
ye shall be hungry; they who serve Me shall
drink, but ye shall thirst, and from general
tribulation of spirit shall howl: for ye shall
transmit your name for a satiety to Mine
elect, but you the Lord shall slay; but for
them who serve Me shall be named a new
name, which shall be blessed in the lands." ^^

Again, the mystery of this " tree " '* we
read as being celebrated even in the Books
of the Reigns. For when the sons of the
prophets were cutting " wood " 's with axes on
the bank of the river Jordan, the iron flew
off and sank in the stream; and so, on Elisha '^
the prophet's coming up, the sons of the
prophets beg of him to extract from the
stream the iron which had sunk. And ac-
cordingly Elisha, having taken "wood," and
cast it into that place where the iron had been
submerged, forthwith it rose and swam on
the surface, '7 and the " wood " sank, which
the sons of the prophets recovered.'^ Whence
they understood that Elijah's spirit was pres-
ently conferred upon him.'^ What is more
manifest than the mystery =* of this "wood,"
— that the obduracy of this world =' had been
sunk in the profundity of error, and is freed
in baptism by the "wood " of Christ, that is,
of His passion; in order that what had for-
merly perished through th^ '.l^ree" in Adam,
should be restored through "the "tree" in
Christ ?==* while we, of course, who haveTuc-
ceeded to, and occupy, [lie room jofZiHe
propliets, at tlie present day sustain iii-the
world ^3 that treatment which the prophets
always suffered on account of divine religion:
Tor some they stoned, some they bani_shed;
more, however, they delivered to mortal
slaughterj^-* — a fact which they cannot deny.^'s

This "wood," again, Isaac the son of
Abraham personally carried for his own sac-
rifice, when God had enjoined that he should
be made a victim to Himself. But, because
these had been mysteries =^ which were being-
kept for perfect fulfilment in the times of
Christ, Isaac, on the one hand, with his
"wood," was reserved, the ram being of-


»3 See Isa. Ixv. 13-16 in LXX.

14 Hujus ligni sacramentum.

'5 Lignum.

16 Helisaeo. Comp. Luke iv. 27.

'7 The careless construction of leaving the nominative " Elisha ""
with no verb to follow it is due to the original, not to the trans-
lator.

18 See 2 Kings vi. 1-7 {4 Kings vi. 1-7 in LXX). It is not said,
however, that the wood sank.

19 This conclusion they had drawn before, and are not said to
have drawn, consequently, upon this occasion. See 2 Kings (4
Kings in LXX.) ii. 16.

20 Sacramento.

« '• Saecuh," or perhaps here " heathendom."
^ For a similar argument, see Anselm's Cur Deus Homo ? 1. i.
C. \\\. sub fin.
23 Sseculo.
*♦ Mortis necem.

25 Comp. Acts vii. 51, 52 ; Heb. xi. 32-38
=6 Sacramenta.


CHAP. XIII.]


AN ANSWER TO THE JEWS.


71


fered which was caught by the horns in the
bramble;' Christ, on the other hand, in His
times, carried His "wood" on His own
shoulders, adhering to the horns of the cross,
with a thorny crown encircling His head.
For Him it behoved to be made a sacrifice
on behalf of all Gentiles, who "was led as a
sheep for a victim, and, like a lamb voice-
less before his shearer, so opened not His
mouth" (for He, when Pilate interrogated
Him, spake nothing^); for "in humility His^
judgment was taken away: His nativity, more-
over, who shall declare?" Because no one at
all of human beings was conscious of the na-
tivity of Christ at His conception, when as the
Virgin Mary was found pregnant by the word
of God; and because " His life was to be
taken from the land."^ Why, accordingly,
after His resurrection from the dead, which
was effected on the third day, did the heavens
receive Him back ? It was in accordance
with a prophecy of Hosea, uttered on this
wise: " Before daylDreak shall they arise unto
Me, saying, Let us go and return unto the
Lord our God, because Himself will draw us
out and free us. After a space of two days,
on the third day"" — which is His glorious
resurrection — He received back into the
heavens (whence withal the Spirit Himself
had come to the Virgin s) Him whose nativity
and passion alike the Jews have failed to

- - acknowledge. Therefore, since the Jews still

contend that the Christ is_not_y£LcQme, whom

we have iii" so many ways approved ^ to be-

~come, let the Jews recognise their own fate,— r

a fate which they were constantly foretold as

^ destined to incur after the advent of the.
Christ, "on account of the impiety with.wJlicJi
"thev~gespised and slew_Him. For first, from
the day when, according to the saying of
Isaiah, " a man cast forth his abominations,
of gold and silver, which they made to adore
with vain and hurtful (rites)," ^ — that is, ever

sincewe Gentiles, wil-b r>»ir hrpaRfTTonhly p.n-

lighlenedthrough Christ's truth, cast forth
(tet^h^V|^ews"see it) our idols. — what follows
hayjrkewise been fulfilled. For " the Lord
(Si Sabaoth hath taken gway^ among thp Jpwt;
trom Jerusalem," among the other things
named, '^'the wise architect " too^^ who build s
"th^e-ctniTch. God*s temple, and the holy city,
and~the house of the Lord. For thenceforth
God^s giace desisted (troni working) among


^See Gen. xxii. 1-14.

2 See Matt, xxvii. ii-i^ ; Mark xv. 1-5 ; John xix. 8-12.

3 See Isa. liii. 7, 8.

4 0ehler refers to Hos. vi. i ; add 2 {ad init.).


5 See Luke i. 35.

* For this sense of the word " approve," comp. I
Oreek and English, and Phil. i. 10, Greek and English.

7 see Isa ii. 20.
^ See Isa. iii. i, 3 ; and comp. 1 Cor. iii. 10, Eph.
I x'et. n. 4-8, and many similar passages.


comp. Acts ii. 22


them. And " the clouds_were commanded
noTto rain a shower upon the vineyard of
Sorek,"' — the clouds being celestial benefits,
which were commanded not to be forthcoming
to the house of Israel; for it "had borne
thorns'' — whereof that house of Israel had
wrought a crown for Christ — and not " right-
eousfiess, but a clamour,'' — the clamour where-
by it had extorted His surrender to the cross. '°
And thus, the former gifts of gmrp h«^ing„
withdrawn, " the law and the prophets were
until John," " and the fishpool of Bethsaida "
until the advent of Christ: thereafter it ceased
curatively to remove from Israel infirmities
of health; since, as the result of their perse-
verance in their frenzy, the name of the Lord
was through them blasphemed, as it is writ-
ten: " On your account the name of God is
blasphemed among the Gentiles:" '^ for it is V'^^
From them that the infamy (attached to that. 1^^^^
name) began, and (was propagated during)
the interval from Til)erius to Vesi^asian. And
because they had committed the.se crimes^ "^
and had failed to understand that Christ
'' was to be found " "^ in " the time of th^ir
visitation," '^ their land has been made " des-
ert, and their cities utterly burnt with fire.
wlTile strangers devour their region in thei r
signt: tne daughter ofSion is derelict, as a
watch-tower in a vineyard, or as a shed in a
cucumber garden," — ever since the time, to-
wit, when " Israel knew not " the Lord, and
"^' the People understood Him not;" but rather
"quite forsook, and provoked unto indigna-
tion, the Holy One of Israel."'^ So, again,
we find a co?iditional threat of the siuord: " If
ye shall have been unwilling, and shall not
have been obedient, the glaive shall eat you
up." '7 Whence we prove that the s7C'ord was
Christ, by not hearing whom they perished;
who, again, in the Psalm, demands of the
Father their dispersion, saying, " Disperse
them in Thy power; " '^ who, withal, again
through Isaiah prays for their z/tter burning.
"On My account," He says, "have these
things happened to you; in anxiety shall ye
sleep." '9

- Since, therefore, the Jews were predicted as
d estined to"suffer these calamities on OirlxYx
account, and we find that they have suffered
them, and seejhem sent into dispersion and


A


9 Comp. Isa. V. 2 in LXX. and Lowth.

10 Comp. Isa V. 6, 7, with Matt, xxvii. 20-25, Mark xv. 8-15,
Luke xxiii. 13-25, John xix. 12-16.
" Matt. xi. 13; Luke xvi. 16.

12 See John v. 1-9; and comp. de Bapt. c. v., and the note there.

13 See Isa. Hi. 5; Ezek. xxxvi. 20,23: Rom. ii. 24. (The pass-
age in Isaiah in the LXX. agrees with Rom. ii. 24.)

14 See Isa. iv. 6, 7.

15 See Luke xix. 41-44

16 See Isa. i. 7, 8, 4.

17 Isa. i. 20.

18 See Ps. lix. 11 (iviii. 12 in LXX.)

19 See Isa. 1. 11 in LXX


AN ANSWER TO THE JEWS.


[chap. XIV.


abiding m^ it, manifest it is that it is on
Christ's jicco unt that these things have be-
fallen the Jews^ the sense of the Scriptures
Jiarmonizm^ with the i.?g\ie »f events and ai

the order of the, times.. Or else, if Christ is

not \ct cniiic, on whose account they were
predicted as destined thjuis^lQLSdlfffir, when He
shall have, come it follows that thejTi'/W^lhus
auftfir. ,, And where will then be a daughter
of Sion to be derelict, who nmv has no exist-
ence ? where the cities to be exust, which are
already exust and in heaps ? where thejdis-
2ersion_of_a raGe.whicli is now In jexile? Re-
storeTo Jud e a '^^_ condition which Christ i s
to find; and (then^ if you will), contend that
some_Qther (Christ) js £omin^.

CHAP. XIV. — CONCLUSION. CLUE TO THE
ERROR OF THE JEWS.

Learn now (over and above the immediate
I question) the clue to your error. We affirm
hvo characters of the Christ demonstrated
by the prophets, and as many advefits of His
forenoted: one, in humility (of course the
V first), when He has to be led " as a sheep for
a victim; and, as a lamb voiceless before
the shearer, so He opened not His mouth,"
not even in His aspect comely. For " we
have announced," says the prophet, " concern-
ing Him, (He is) as a little child, as a root in a
thirsty land; and there was not in Him attrac-
tiveness or glory. And we saw Him, and He
had not attractiveness or grace; but His mien
was unhonoured, deficient in comparison of
the sons of men," ' " a man set in the plague,^
and knowing how to bear infirmity: " to wit,
as having been set by the Father " for a stone
of offence," 3 and "made a little lower" by
Him "than angels," * He pronounces Him-
self " a worm, and not a man, an ignominy
of man, and the refuse of the People." s
Which evidences of ignobility suit the First
Advent, just as those of sublimity do the
Second; when He shall be made no longer
**a stone of offence nor a rock of scandal,"
but " the highest corner-stone," ^ after repro-
bation (on earth) taken up (into heaven) and
raised sublime for the purpose of consumma-
tion,^ and that " rock " — so we must admit —
which is read of in Daniel as forecut from a
mount, which shall crush and crumble the
image of secular kingdoms. « Of which sec-


I See Isa. liii. 2 in LXX.

,J3T K^; -^?''^",i-.. '7.'" ^J"^ "G''*=at Bible" (xxxvii. 18 in
LXX.). Also Isa. lui. 3 in LXX.

3 See Isa. viii. i^ (where, however, the LXX. rendering is
widely different) with Rom. ix. 32, 33; Ps. cxviii 22 (cxvii. 22 in
LXX.); I Pet. u. 4.
_ 4 See Ps. viii. 5 (viii. 6 in LXX.) with Heb. ii. 5-9.

5 See Ps. xxii. 6 (xxi. 7 in LXX., the Alex. ms. of which here
agrees well with TertuUian).

6 See reference 3 above, with Isa. xxviii. 16.
1 Comp. Eph. i. 10.

s Or, " worldly kingdoms." See Dan. ii, 34, 35, 44, 45.


ond advent of the same (Christ) Daniel has
said: " And, behold, as it were a Son of man,
coming with the clouds of the heaven, came
unto the Ancient of days, and was present in
His sight; and they who were standing by
led (Him) unto Him.- And there was given
Him royal power; and all nations of the earth,
according to their race, and all glory, shall
serve Him: and His power is eternal, which
shall not be taken away, and His kingdom
ofie which shall not be corrupted." ^ Then,
assuredly, is He to have an honourable mien,
and a grace not "deficient more than the
sons of men; " for (He will then be) " bloom-
ing in beauty in comparison with the sons of
men." ^^ " Grace," says the Psalmist, " hath
been outpoured in Thy lips: wherefore God
hath blessed Thee unto eternity. Gird Thee
Thy sword around Thy thigh, most potent in
Thy bloom and beauty !" '° while the Father
withal afterwards, after making Him some-
what lower than angels, "crowned Him with
glory and honour, and subjected all tliitigs be-
neath His feet."" And then shall they
" learn to know Him whom they pierced, and
shall beat their breasts tribe by tribe; " " of
course because in days bygone they did 7iot
know Him when conditioned in the humility
of human estate. Jeremiah says: " He is a
human being, and who will learn to know
Him ? " '-^ because, " His nativity," says Isa-
iah, " who shall declare ? " So, too, in Zech- \
ariah, in His own person, nay, in the very
mystery-**-el.His name withal, the most true
Priest of the l^^er. His own 's Christ, is de-
lineated in a twofold garb with reference to
the TWO ADVENTS.'*^ First, He was clad in
"sordid attire," that is, in the indignity of
passible and nTortal flesh, when the devil,
withal, was opposing himself to Him — the in-
stigator, to wit, of Judas the traitor '^ — who
even after His baptism had tempted Him.
In the next place. He was stripped of His
former sordid raiment, and adorned with a
garment down to the foot, and with a turban
and a clean mitre, that is, (with the garb) of
the SECOND advent; since He is demonstrated
as having attained " glory and honour." Nor


9 See Dan, vii. 13, 14.

'° See c. ix. tned,

"See Ps. viii. 5, 6 (6, 7 in LXX.) ; Heb. ii. 6-9.

I' See Zech. xii. 10, 12 (where the LXX., as we have it, differs
widely from our En^. ver. in ver, 10) ; Rev. i. 7.

>3 See Jer. xvii. 9 in LXX.

'4 Sacramento.

JSThe readinjf which Oehler follows, and which seems to have
the best authority, is " verissimus sacerdos Patris, Christus Ip-
sius," as in the text. But Rig., whose judgment is generally
very sound, prefers, with some others, to read, " verus summus
sacerdos Patris Christus Jesus ;" which agrees better with the
previous allusion to " the mystery of His name withal :" comp. c.
IX. above, towards the end.

'6 See Zech. iii. " The mystery of His name " refers to the
meaning of " Jeshua,' for which see c. ix. above.

17 Comp. John vi. 70 and xiii. 2 (especially in Greek, where the
word £ia^oAo( is used in each case).


[chap.


AN ANSWER TO THE JEWS.


^7Z


will you be able to say that the man (there
depicted) is *' the son of Jozadak," ' who was
never at all clad in a sordid garment, but was
always adorned with the sacerdotal garment,
nor ever deprived of the sacerdotal function.
But the " Jesus " = there alluded to is Christ,
the Priest of God the most high Father; who
at His FIRST ADVENT camc in humility, in
human form, and passible, even up to the
period of His passion; being Himself likewise,
made, through all (stages of suffering) a vic-
tim for us all; who after His resurrection was
"clad with a garment down to the foot,"^
and named the Priest of God the Father unto
eternity.'^ So, again, I will make an interpre-
tation of the two goats which were habitually
offered on the fast-day. s Do not they, too,
point to each successive stage in the character
of the Christ who is already come ? A pair,
on the one hand, and consimilar (they were),
because of the identity of the Lord's general
appearance, inasmuch as He is not to come
in some other form, seeing that He has to be
recognised by those by whom He was once
hurt. But the one of them, begirt with scar-
let, amid cursing and universal spitting, and
tearing, and piercing, was cast away by the
People outside the city into perdition, marked
with manifest tokens of Christ's passion; who,
after being begirt with scarlet garment, and
subjected to universal spitting, and afflicted
with all contumelies, was crucified outside the
city.^ The other, however, offered for sins,
and given as food to the priests merely of the
temple, 7 gave signal evidences of the second
appearance; in so far as, after the expiation
of all sins, the priests of the spiritual temple,
that is, of the church, were to enjoy ^ a spirit-
ual public distribution (as it were) of the
Lord's grace, while all others are fasting from
salvation.

Therefore, since the vaticinations of the
FIRST ADVENT obscurcd It with manifold fig-
ures, and debased it with every dishonour,
while the second (was foretold as) manifest
and wholly worthy of God, it has resulted
therefrom, that, by fixing their gaze on that
one alone which they could easily understand
and beheve (that is, the second, which is in
honour and glory), they have been (not un-
deservedly) deceived as to the more obscure
— at all events, the more unworthy — that is,
the FIRST. And thus to the present moment


they affirm that their Christ is not come, be-
cause He is not come in majesty; while they
are ignorant of ' the fact that He was first to
come in humility.

Enough it is, meantime, to have thus far
followed the stream downward of the order
of Christ's course, whereby He is proved such
as He was habitually announced: in order
that^ as a result of this harmony nf the Divinp
Scriptures, we may understand ; and that the
events which used to be predicted as destined
to take place after Christ may be believed to
have been accomplished as che result of a
divine arrangement. For unless He come
after whom they had to be accomplished, by
no means would the events, the future oc-
currence whereof was predictively assigned to
His advent, have come to pass. Therefore, if
you see universal nations thenceforth emerg-
ing from the profundity of human error to
God the Creator and His Christ Avhich you
dare not assert to have not been prophesied,
because, albeit you were so to assert, there
would forthwith — as we have already pre-
mised ^° — occur to you the promise of the Fa-
ther saying, " My Son art Thou; I this day
have begotten Thee; ask of Me, and I will
give. Thee Gentiles as Thine heritage, and as
Thy possession the boundaries of the earth."
Nor will you be able to vindicate, as the sub-
ject of that prediction, rather the son of David,
Solomon, than Christ, God's Son; nor "the
boundaries of the earth," as promised rather
to David's son, who reigned within the single
land of Judea, than to Christ the Son of God,
who has already illumined the whole world "
with the rays of His gospel. In short, again,
a throne " unto the age " '^ is more suitable to
Christ, God's Son, than to Solomon, — a tem-
poral king, to wit, who reigned over Israel
alone. For at thf? present day nationsare in-
■vnking Christ which nspd not tO kno\\^ HTiri;
and peoples at the present day are fieeingjn
a body to the Christ of whom in davs bygone,'
they wprp ignnrant ^3]^ y^^i rannnt rnnfend tha^
that is future which vou see taking place. '^
Either deny that these events were prophe-
sied, while they are ^een before your eyes ;~qr_]
else have been fulfilled, while you hear them
read : or7 on th'e~6Ther~fiaM7'1T' yoir fatL to
deny each position, they will have their fulfil-
ment in Him with respect to whom they were
prophesied.


1 Or " Josedech," as TertuUian here writes, and as we find in
Hag. i. I 12, ii. 2, 4, Zech. vi. 11, and in the LXX.

2 Or, '' Jeshua.''

3 See Rev. i. 13.

4 See Ps. ex. (cix. in LXX.) 4 ; Heb. v. 5-10.

5 See Lev. xvi.

* Comp. Heb. xiii. 10-13. It is to be noted, however, that all this
spitting, etc., formed no part of the divinely ordained ceremony.

7 This appears to be an error. See Lev. vi. 30.

8 Unless Oehler's ' fruerentur " is an error ifor " fruentur" =
will enjoy,"


9 Or, "ignore."
10 See cc. xi. xii. above.
" Orbem.

12 Or, " unto eternity." Comp. 2 Sam. (2 Kings in LXX.) vii.
13 ; 1 Chron. xvii. 12 ; Ps. Ixxxix. 3, 4, 29, 35, 36, 37 (in LXX. Ps,
Ixxxviii. 4, 5, 30, 36, 37, 38).

13 See Isa. Iv. 5 (especially in the LXX).

M Oehler's pointing is discarded. The whole passage, from
" which you dare not assert " down to " ignorant,' appears to be
parenthetical ; and I have therefore marked it as such.


*^


VIII.


THE SOUL'S TESTIMONY.

[BY THE REV S. THELWALL.J


CHAP. I.
If, with the object of convicting the rivals
and persecutors of Christian truth, from their
own authorities, of the crime of at once being
untrue to themselves and doing injustice to
us, one is bent on gathering testimonies in its
favour from the writings of the philosophers,
or the poets, or other masters of this world's
learning and wisdom, he has need of a most in-
quisitive spirit, and a still greater memory to
carry out the research. Indeed, some of our
people, who still continued their inquisitive
labours in ancient literature, and still occupied
memory with it, have published works we have
in our hands of this very sort; works in which
they relate and attest the nature and origin of
their traditions, and the grounds on which
opinions rest, and from which it may be seen
at once that we have embraced nothing new or
monstrous — nothing for which we cannot claim
the support of ordinary and well-known writ-
ings, whether in ejecting error from our creed,
or admitting truth into it. But the unbeliev-
ing hardness of the human heart leads them
to slight even their own teachers, otherwise
approved and in high renown, whenever they
touch upon arguments which are used in de-
fence of Christianity. Then the poets are
fools, when they describe the gods with human
passions and stories; then the philosophers are
without reason, when they knock at the gates
of truth. He will thus far be reckoned a wise
and sagacious man who has gone the length of
uttering sentiments that are almost Christian;
while if, in a mere affectation of judgment and
wisdom, he sets himself to reject their cere-
monies, or to convicting the world of its sin,
he is sure to be branded as a Christian. We


''{.The tract De Testt'fttonio A m'mep is cast into an apologetic
form and very properly comes into place here. It was written in
u- u ''^ and forms a valuable preface to the De Anit>ta,ol
which we cannot say that it is c^uite free from errors. As it refers to
^•|^ Apology, we cannot place it before that work, and perhaps we
?nailnot greatly err if we consider it a sequel to the Apology. If
It prtAres to others the source of as much enjoyment as it affords
to me, It will be treasured by them as one of the most precious
testimonies to the Gospel, introducing Man to himself.]


will have nothing, then, to do with the liter-
ature and the teaching, perverted in its best
results, which is believed in its errors rather
than its truth. We shall lay no stress on it,
if some of their authors have declared that
there is one God, and one God only. Nay, let
it be granted that there is nothing in heathen
writers which a Christian approves, that it may
be put out of his power to utter a single word
of reproach. For all are not familiar with their
teachings; and those who are, have no assur-
ance in regard to their truth. Far less do men
assent to out writings, to which no one comes
for guidance unless he is already a Christian.
I call in a new testimony, yea, one which is bet-
ter known than all literature, more discussed
than all doctrine, more public than all publica-
tions, greater than the whole man — I mean all
which is man's. Stand forth, O soul, whether
thou art a divine and eternal substance,
as most philosophers believe — if it be so, thou
wilt be the less likely to lie, — or whether thou
art the very opposite of divine, because indeed
a mortal thing, as Epicurus alone thinks —
in that case there will be the less temptation
for thee to speak falsely in this case: whether
thou art received from heaven, or sprung from
earth; whether thou art formed of numbers,
or of atoms; whether thine existence begins
with that of the body, or thou art put into it at a
later stage; from whatever source, and in what-
ever way, thou makest man a rational being,
in the highest degree capable of thought and
knowledge, — stand forth and give thy witness.
But I call thee not as when, fashioned in
schools, trained in libraries, fed in Attic acad-
emies and porticoes, thou belchest wisdom.
I address thee simple, rude, uncultured and
untaught, such as they have thee who have
thee only; that very thing of the road, the
street, the work-shop, wholly. I want thine
inexperience, since in thy small experience
no one feels any confidence. I demand
of thee the things thou bringest with thee
into man, which thou knowest either from


I/O


THE SOUL'S TESTIMONY


[chap. III.


thyself, or from thine author, whoever he may
be. Thou art not, as I well know. Christian;
for a man becomes a Christian, he is not born
one. Yet Christians earnestly press thee for
a testimony; they press thee, though an alien,
to bear witness against thy friends, that they
may be put to shame before thee, for hating
and mocking us on account of things which
convict thee as an accessory.

CHAP. II.

We give offence by proclaiming that there is
one God, to whom the name of God alone
belongs, from whom all things come, and who
is Lord of the whole universe.' Bear thy tes-
timony, if thou knowest this to be the truth;
for openly and with a perfect liberty, such as
we do not possess, we hear thee both in private
and in public exclaim, "Which may God
grant," and, "If God so will." By expres-
sions such as these thou declarest that there
is one who is distinctively God, and thou con-
fessest that all power belongs to him to whose
will, as Sovereign, thou dost look. At the same
time, too, thou deniest any others to be truly
gods, in calling them by their own names of
Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Minerva; for thou
affirmest Him to be God alone to whom thou
givest no other name than God; and though
thou sometimes callest these others gods, thou
plainly usest the designation as one which does
not really belong to them, but is, so to speak,
a borrowed one. Nor is the nature of the God
we declare unknown to thee: "God is good,
God does good," thou art wont to say; plainly
suggesting further, "But man is evil." In as-
serting an antithetic proposition, thou, in a
sort of indirect and figurative way, reproachest
man with his wickedness in departing from a
God so good. So, again, as among us, as be-
longing to the God of benignity and goodness,
" Blessing " is a most sacred act in our relig-
ion and our life, thou too sayest as readily as
a Christian needs, " God bless thee;" and
when thou turnest the blessing of God into
a curse, in like manner thy very words con-
fess with us that His power over us is abso-
lute and entire. There are some who, though
they do not deny the existence of God, hold
withal that He is neither Searcher, nor Ruler,
nor Judge; treating with especial disdain
those of us who go over to Christ out of fear
of a coming judgment, as they think, honour-
ing God in freeing Him from the cares of
keeping watch, and the trouble of taking note,
— not even regarding Him as capable of


* [The student of Plato will recall such evidences, readily. See
The Lams, in Jowett's Translation, vol. iv. p. 416. Also Eluci-
dation 1.]


anger. For if God, they say, gets angry, then
He is susceptible of corruption and passion;
but that of which passion and corruption can
be affirmed may also perish, which God can-
not do. But these very persons elsewhere,
confessing that the soul is divine, and be-
stowed on us by God, stumble against a tes-
timony of the soul itself, which affords an
answer to these views. For if either divine
or God-given, it doubtless knows its giver;
and if it knows Him, it undoubtedly fears Him
too, and especially as having been by Him
endowed so amply. Has it no fear of Him
whose favour it is so desirous to possess, and
whose anger it is so anxious to avoid ? AV^hence,
then, the soul's natural fear of God, if God
cannot be angry ? How is there any dread of
Him whom nothing offends ? What is feared
but anger ? Wlience comes anger, but from
observing what is done ? What leads to watch-
ful oversight, but judgment in prospect?
Whence is judgment, but from power? To
whom does supreme authority and power be-
long, but to God alone ? So thou art always
ready, O soul, from thine own knowledge,
nobody casting scorn upon thee, and no one
preventing, to exclaim, "God sees all," and
" I commend thee to God," and " May God
repay," and "God shall judge between us."
How happens this, since thou art not Chris-
tian ? How is it that, even with the garland of
Ceres on the brow, wrapped in the purple cloak
of Saturn, wearing the white robe of the god-
dess Isis, thou invokest God as judge ?
Standing under the statue of ^sculapius,
adorning the brazen image of Juno, arraying
the helmet of Minerva with dusky figures, thou
never thinkest of appealing to any of these
deities. In thine own forum thou appealest to
a God who is elsewhere ; thou permittest
honour to be rendered in thy temples to a
foreign god. Oh, striking testimony to truth,
which in the very midst of demons obtains a
witness for us Christians !

CHAP. III.

But when we say that there are demons — as
though, in the simple fact that we alone expel
them from the men's bodies," we did not also
prove their existence — some disciple of Chry-
sippus begins to curl the lip. Yet thy curses
sufficiently attest that there are such beings,
and that they are objects of thy strong dislike.*
As what comes to thee as a fit expression of
thy strong hatred of him, thou callest the man
a daemon who annoys thee with his filthiness,


I


2 (^The existence of demoniacal possessions in heathen coun-
tries IS said to be probable, even in our days. The Fathers unani-
mously assert the effectual exorcisms of their days.]

^[e.g. Horace, Erodes , Ode V.]


CHAr. IV.]


THE SOUL'S TESTIMONY.


11


or malice, or insolence, or any other vice
which we ascribe to evil spirits. In express-
ing vexation, contempt, or abhorrence, thou
hast Satan constantly upon thy lips; ' the very
same we hold to be the angel of evil, the
source of error, the corrupter of the whole
world, by whom in the beginning man was
entrapped into breaking the commandment of
God. And (the man) being given over to
death on account of his sin, the entire human
race, tainted in their descent from him, were
made a channel for transmitting his condem-
nation. Thou seest, then, thy destroyer; and
though he is fully known only to Christians,
or to whatever sect^ confesses the Lord, yet,
even thou hast some acquaintance with him
while yet thou abhorrest him !

CHAP. IV.

Even now, as the matter refers to thy opin-
ion on a point the more closely belonging to
thee, in so far as it bears on thy personal well-
being, we maintain that after life has passed
away thou still remainest in existence, and
lookest forward to a day of judgment, and
according to thy deserts art assigned to misery
or bliss, in either way of it for ever; that, to
be capable of this, thy former substance must
needs return to thee, the matter and the
memory of the very same human being: for
neither good nor evil couldst thou feel if thou
wert not endowed again with that sensitive
bodily organization, and there would be no
grounds for judgment without the presenta-
tion of the very person to whom the suffer-
ings of judgment were due. That Christian
view, though much nobler than the Pythago-
rean, as it does not tranfser thee into beasts;
though more complete than the Platonic,
since it endows thee again with a body; though
more worthy of honour than the Epicurean,
as it preserves thee from annihilation, — yet,
because of the name connected with it, it is
held to be nothing but vanity and folly, and,
as it is called, a mere presumption. But we
are not ashamed of ourselves if our pre-
sumption is found to have thy support. Well,
in the first place, when thou speakest of one
who is dead, thou sayest of him, "Poor
man " — poor, surely, not because he has been
taken from the good of life, but because he
has been given over to punishment and con-
demnation. But at another time thou speak-
est of the dead as free from trouble; thou
professest to think life a burden, and death a


'^\,Satanan^ in omni vexatione . . . pronuntias. Does he
mean that they used this word? Rather, he means the demon is
none other than Satan.]

2 [I have been obliged, somewhat, to simplify the translation
here.]

13


blessing. Thou art wont, too, to speak of
the dead as in repose, ^ when, returning to
their graves beyond the city gates * with food
and dainties, thou art wont to present offer-
ings to thyself rather than to them; or when,
coming from the graves again, thou art stag-
gering under the effects of wine. But I want
thy sober opinion. Thou callest the dead
poor when thou speakest thine own thoughts,
when thou art at a distance from them. For
at their feast, where in a sense they are pres-
ent and recline along with thee, it would
never do to cast reproach upon their lot.
Thou canst not but adulate those for whose
sake thou art feasting it so sumptuously.
Dost thou then speak of him TX'&poor who feels
not ? How happens it that thou cursest, as one
capable of suffering from thy curse, the man
whose memory comes back on thee with the
sting in it of some old injury? It is thine
imprecation that " the earth may lie heavy on
him," and that there may be trouble " to his
ashes in the realm of'the dead. ' ' In like man-
ner, in thy kindly feeling to him to whom thou
art indebted for favours, thou entreatest " re-
pose to his bones and ashes," and thy desire
is that among the dead he may " have pleasant
rest. ' ' If thou hast no power of suffering after
death, if no feeling remains, — if, in a word,
severance from the body is the annihilation
of thee, what makes thee lie against thyself,
as if thou couldst suffer in another state ?
Nay, why dost thou fear death at all ? There
is nothing after death to be feared, if there
is nothing to be felt. For though it may be
said that death is dreadful not for anything it
threatens afterwards, but because it deprives
us of the good of life; yet, on the other hand,
as it puts an end to life's discomforts, which
are far more numerous, death's terrors are
mitigated by a gain that more than outweighs
the loss. And there is no occasion to be
troubled about a loss of good things, which is
amply made up for by so great a blessing as
relief from every trouble. There is nothing
dreadful in that which delivers from all that
is to be dreaded. If thou shrinkest from
giving up life because thy experience of it has
been sweet, at any rate there is no need to
be in any alarm about death if thou hast no
knowledge that it is evil. Thy dread of it
is the proof that thou art aware of its evil.


3 [This whole passage is useful as a commentary on classic
authors who use these poetical expressions. Cae/o Musa beat
(Hor. Ode viii. B. 4.) but the real feeling comes out in such ex-
pressions as one finds in Horace's odes to Sextius, (B. i. Ode 4.),
or to Postumus, B. ii. Od. 14. |

4 [The tombs, by the roadside, of which the traveller still sees
specimens, used to be scenes of debauchery when the dead were
honoured m this way. Now, the funeral honours (See Dc Corona,
cap. iii.) which Christians substituted for these were Eucharistic
alms and oblations : thanking God for their holy lives and perpet-
uating relations with them in the Communion of Saints.]


178


THE SOUL'S TESTIMONY.


[chap, v.


Thou wouldst never think it evil — thou
wouldst have no fear of it at all — if thou
wert not sure that after it there is something
to make it evil, and so a thing of terror.' Let
us leave unnoted at this time that natural way
of fearing death. It is a poor thing for any
one to fear what is inevitable. I take up the
other side, and argue on the ground of a joy-
ful hope beyond our term of earthly life; for
desire of posthumous fame is with almost
every class an inborn thing.' I have not time
to speak of the Curtii, and the Reguli, or the
brave men of Greece, who afford us innumer-
able cases of death despised for after renown.
Who at this day is without the desire that he
may be often remembered when he is dead ?
AVho does not give all endeavour to preserve
his name by works of literature, or by the
simple glory of his virtues, or by the splen-
dour even of his tomb ? How is it the nature
of the soul to have these posthumous ambi-
tions and with such amazing effort to prepare
the things it can only use after decease ? It
would care nothing about the future, if the
future were quite unknown to it. But per-
haps thou thinkest thyself surer, after thy exit
from the body, of continuing still to feel, than
of any future resurrection, which is a doctrine
laid at our door as one of our presumptuous
suppositions. But it is also the doctrine of
the soul; for if any one inquires about a per-
son lately dead as though he were alive, it
occurs at once to say, " He has gone." He
is expected to return, then.

CHAP. v.

These testimonies of the soul are simple
as true, commonplace as simple, universal as
commonplace, natural as universal, divine
as natural. I don't think they can appear
frivolous or feeble to any one, if he reflect on
the majesty of nature, from which the soul
derives its authority. ^ If you acknowledge
the authority of the mistress, you will own it
also in the disciple. Well, nature is the mis-
tress here, and her disciple is the soul. But
everything the one has taught or the other
learned, has come from God — the Teacher of
the teacher. And what the soul may know
from the teachings of its chief instructor,
thou canst judge from that which is within
thee. Think of that which enables thee to
think; reflect on that which in forebodings is
the prophet, the augur in omens, the foreseer


I [Butler, Analogy, Part I. chap, i.]

a [Horace, Book III. Ode 30.]

3 [This appeal to the universal conscience and consciousness of
mankind is unanswerable, and assures us that counter-theories will
never prevail. See Bossuet, De la Connoisance de Dieu et de
Soi-menie. CEuvres, Tom. V. pp. 86 ct. seqq. Ed. Paris, 1846.]


of coming events. Is it a wonderful thing,
if, being the gift of God to man, it knows
how to divine ? Is it anything very strange,
if it knows the God by whom it was bestowed ?
Even fallen as it is, the victim of the great
adversary's machinations, it does not forget
its Creator, His goodness and law, and the
final end both of itself and of its foe. Is it
singular then, if, divine in its origin, its rev-
elations agree with the knowledge God has
given to His own people? But he whodoes
not regard those outbursts of the soul as the
teaching of a congenital nature and the secret
deposit of an inborn knowledge, will say that
the habit and, so to say, the vice of speaking
in this way has been acquired and confirmed
from the opinions of published books widely
spread among men. Unquestionably the soul
existed before letters, and speech before
books, and ideas before the writing of them,
and man himself before the poet and philoso-
pher.-* Is it then to be believed, that before
literature and its publication no utterances of
the sort we have pointed out came from the
lips of men ? Did nobody speak of God and
His goodness, nobody of death, nobody of
the dead ? Speech went a-begging, I suppose;
nay, (the subjects being still awanting, with-
out which it cannot even exist at this day,
when it is so much more copious, and rich,
and wise), it could not exist at all if the things
which are now so easily suggested, that cling
to us so constantly, that are so very near to
us, that are somehow born on our very lips,
had no existence in ancient times, before let-
ters had any existence in the world — before
there was a Mercury, I think, at all. And
whence was it, I pray, that letters themselves
came to know, and to disseminate for the use
of speech, what no mind had ever conceived,
or tongue put forth, or ear taken in ? But,
clearly, since the Scriptures of God, whether
belonging to Christians or to Jews, into
whose olive tree we have been grafted — are
much more ancient than any secular litera-
ture, (or, let us only say, are of a somewhat
earlier date, as we have shown in its proper
place when proving their trustworthiness); if
the soul have taken these utterances from
writings at all, we must believe it has taken
them from ours, and not from yours, its in-
struction coming more naturally from the
earlier than the later works. Which latter in-
deed waited for their own instruction from the
former, and though we grant that light has
come from you, still it has flowed from the
first fountainhead originally; and we claim as


4 [Compare the heathen ideas in Plato : e.g. the story Soc-
rates tells in the Gorgias, (near the close) about death and Judg-
ment.]


■CHAP. VI,]


THE SOUL'S TESTIMONY.


79


entirely ours, all you may have taken from
us and handed down. Since it is thus, it
matters little whether the soul's knowledge
was put into it by God or by His book.
Why, then, O man, wilt thou maintain a view
so groundless, as that those testimonies of the
soul have gone forth from the mere human
speculations of your literature, and got har-
dening of common use ?

CHAP. VI.

Believe, then, your own books, and as to our
Scriptures so much the more believe writings
which are divine, but in the witness of the
soul itself give like confidence to Nature.
Choose the one of these you observe to be
the most faithful friend of truth. If your
own writings are distrusted, neither God nor
Nature lie. And if you would have faith in
God and Nature, have faith in the soul; thus
you will believe yourself. Certainly you value
the soul as giving you your true greatness, —
that to which you belong; which is all things
to you; without which you can neither live nor
die; on whose account you even put God
away from you. Since, then, you fear to be-
come a Christian, call the soul before you,
and put her to the question. Why does she
worship another ? why name the name of
God ? Why does she speak of demons, when
she means to denote spirits to be held ac-
cursed ? Why does she make her protesta-
tions towards the heavens, and pronounce her
ordinary execrations earthwards ? Why does
she render service in one place, in another in-
voke the Avenger? Why does she pass judg-
ments on the dead ? What Christian phrases
are those she has got, though Christians


she neither desires to see nor hear? Why
has she either bestowed them on us, or re-
ceived them from us ? Why has she either
taught us them, or- learned them as our
scholar ? Regard with suspicion this accord-
ance in words, while there is such difference
in practice. It is utter folly — denying a uni-
versal nature — to ascribe this exclusively to
our language and the Greek, which are re-
garded among us as so near akin. The soul
is not a boon from heaven to Latins and Greeks
alone. Man is the one name belonging to
every nation upon earth: there is one soul and
many tongues, one spirit and various sounds;
every country has its own speech, but the
subjects of speech are common to all. God is
everywhere, and the goodness of God is every-
where; demons are everywhere, and the curs-
ing of them is everywhere; the invocation of
divine judgment is everywhere, death is every-
where, and the sense of death is everywhere,
and all the world over is found the witness of
the soul. There is not a soul of man that
does not, from the light that is in itself, pro-
claim the very things we are not permitted to
speak above our breath. Most justly, then,
every soul is a culprit as well as a witness: in
the measure that it testifies for truth, the
guilt of error lies on it; and on the day of judg-
ment it will stand before the courts of God,
without a word to say. Thou proclaimedst
God, O soul, but thou didst not seek to know
Him: evil spirits were detested by thee, and
yet they were the objects of thy adoration;
the punishments of hell were foreseen by thee,
but no care was taken to avoid them; thou
hadst a savour of Christianity, and withal wert
the persecutor of Christians.


ELUCIDATIONS.


I.

(Recognition of the Supreme God, cap. ii., p. 176.)

The passage referred to in the note, begins thus in Jowett's rendering: " The Ruler of
the Universe has ordered all things with a view to the preservation and perfection of the
whole etc." So, in the same book: " Surely God must not be supposed to have a nature
which he himself hates." Again: " Let us not, then, deem God inferior to human work-
men, who in proportion to their skill finish and perfect their works .... or that God,
the wisest of beings, who is willing and able to extend his care to all things, etc." Now, it
is a sublime plan which our author here takes up, (making only slight reference to the
innumerable citations which were behind his apostrophe to the soul if any one should
dispute it) to bid the soul stand forth and confess its consciousness of God.


l8o ELUCIDATIONS.


II.

(Daemons, cap. vi. p. 176.)

Those who would pursue the subject of Demonology, which Tertullian opens in this
admirable treatise, should follow it up in a writer whom Tertullian greatly influenced, in
many particulars, even when he presents a remarkable contrast. The Ninth Book of the
City of God is devoted to inquiries which throw considerable light on some of the startling
sayings of our author as to the heathen systems, and their testimony to the Soul's Conscious-
ness of God and of the great enemy of God and the inferior spirit of Evil.


j#-.-


IX.


A TREATISE ON THE SOUL.

[TRANSLATED BY PETER HOLMES, D.D.]


CHAP. I. IT IS NOT TO THE PHILOSOPHERS

THAT WE RESORT FOR INFORMATION ABOUT
THE SOUL BUT TO GOD.=

Having discussed with Hermogenes the
single point of the origin of the soul, so far
as his assumption led me, that the soul con-
sisted rather in an adaptation ^ of matter than
of the inspiration '^ of God, I now turn to the
other questions incidental to the subject; and
(in my treatment of these) I shall evidently
have mostly to contend with the philosophers.
In the very prison of Socrates they skirmished
about the state of the soul. I have my doubts
at once whether the time was an opportune
one for their (great) master — (to say nothing
of the place), although ^/la^ perhaps does not
much matter. For what could the soul of
Socrates then contemplate with clearness and
serenity? The sacred ship had returned
(from Delos), the hemlock draft to which he
had been condemned had been drunk, death
was now present before him: (his mind) was,s
as one may suppose,^ naturally excited ^ at
every emotion; or if nature had lost her in-
fluence, it must have been deprived of all


' [It is not safe to date this treatise before a.d. 203, and per-
haps it would be unsafe to assign a later date. The note of the
translator, which follows, relieves me from any necessity to add
more, just here.]

2 In this treatise we have TertulHan's speculations on the
origin, the nature, and the destiny of the human soul. There
are, no doubt, paradoxes startling to a modern reader to be found
in it, such as that of the soul's corporeity ; and there are weak and
inconclusive arguments. But after all such drawbacks (and they
are not more than what constantly occur in the most renowned
speculative writers of antiquity), the reader will discover many
interesting proofs of our author's character for originality of
thought, width of information, firm grasp of his subject, and viva-
cious treatment of it, such as we have discovered in other parts of
his writings. If his subject permits Tertullian less than usual of
an appeal to his favourite Holy Scripture, he still makes room for
occasional illustration from it, and with his characteristic ability ;
if, however, there is less of this sacred learning in it, the treatise
teems with curious infprmation drawn from the secular literature
of that early age. Our author often measures swords with Plato
m his discussions on the soul, and it is not too much to say that
he shows himself a formidable opponent to the great philosopher.
See Bp. Kaye, On Tertullian, pp. 199. 200.

3 Suggestu. [Kaye, pp. 60 and 541.J

4 Flatu " the breath.*^'

5 Utique.

* Consternata.


power of thought. 7 Or let it have been as
placid and tranquil so you please, inflexible,
in spite of the claims of natural duty,^ at the
tears of her who was so soon to be his widow,
and at the sight of his thenceforward orphan
children, yet his soul must have been moved
even by its very efforts to su ppress emotion ; and
his constancy itself must have b^en shaken, as
he struggled against the disturbance of the ex-
citement around him. Besides, what other
thoughts could any man entertain who had
been unjustly condemned to die, but such as
should solace him for the injury done to him ?
Especially would this be the case with that
glorious creature, the philosopher, to whom
injurious treatment would not suggest a crav-
ing for consolation, but rather the feeling
of resentment and indignation. Accordingly,
after his sentence, when his wife came to him
with her effeminate cry, O Socrates, you are
unjustly condemned ! he seemed already to
find joy in answering, Would you then wish
me justly condemned ? It is therefore not to
be wondered at, if even in his prison, from a
desire to break the foul hands of Anytus and
Melitus, he, in the face of death itself, asserts
the immortality of the soul by a strong as-
sumption such, as was wanted to frustrate the
wrong (they had inflicted upon him). So*
that all the wisdom of Socrates, at that mo-
ment, proceeded from the affectation of an
assumed composure, rather than the firm con-
viction of ascertained truth. For by whom
has truth ever been discovered without God ?
By whom has God ever been found without
Christ ? By whom has Christ ever been ex-
plored without the Holy Spirit ? By whom
has the Holy Spirit ever been attained without
the mysterious gift of faith?' Socrates, as
none can doubt, was actuated by a different
spirit. For they say that a demon clave to


7 Extemata. " Extematus = «kt6s ^ptvitv. Gloss. Philox.

8 Pietatis.

9 Fidei sacramento.


l82


A TREATISE ON THE SOUL.


[CHAP/lL


him from his boyhood — the very worst teacher
certainly, notwithstanding the high place as-
signed to it by poets and philosophers — even
next to, (nay, along with) the gods themselves.
The teachings of the power of Christ had not
yet been given — (that power) which alone can
confute this most pernicious influence of evil
that has nothing good in it, but is rather the
author of all error, and the seducer from all
truth. Now if Socrates was pronounced the
wisest of men by the oracle of the Pythian
demon, which, you may be sure, neatly man-
aged the business for his friend, of how much
greater dignity and constancy is the assertion
of the Christian wisdom, before the very
breath of which the whole host of demons
is scattered ! This wisdom of the school of
heaven frankly and without reserve denies
the gods of this world, and shows no such
inconsistency as to order a " cock to be sacri-
ficed to yEsculapius: " ' no new gods and de-
mons does it introduce, but expels the old
ones; it corrupts not youth, but instructs
them in all goodness and moderation; and
so it bears the unjust condemnation not ^of
one city only, but of all the world, in the
cause of that truth which incurs indeed the
greater hatred in proportion to its fulness: so
that it tastes death not out of a (poisoned)
cup almost in the way of jollity; but it ex-
hausts it in every kind of bitter cruelty, on
gibbets and in holocausts.' Meanwhile, in
the still gloomier prison of the world amongst
your Cebeses and Phsedos, in every investi-
gation concerning (man's) soul, it directs its
inquiry according to the rules of God. At
all events, you can show us no more power-
ful expounder of the soul than the Author
thereof. From God you m"ay learn about
that which you hold of God; but from none
else will you get this knowledge, if you get it
not from God. For who is to reveal that
which God has hidden ? To that quarter must
we resort in our inquiries whence we are most
safe even in deriving our ignorance. For it
is really better for us not to know a thing,
because He has not revealed it to us, than to
know it according to man's wisdom, because
he has been bold enough to assume it.

CHAP. II. THE CHRISTIAN HAS SURE AND

SIMPLE KNOWLEDGE CONCERNING THE SUB-
JECT BEFORE US.

Of course we shall not deny that philoso-
phers have sometimes thought the same
things as ourselves. The testimony of truth


I The allusion is to the inconsistency of the philosopher, who
condemned the gods of the vulgar, and died offering a gift to one
of them.

^ Vivicomburio.


is the issue thereof. It sometimes happens
even in a storm, when the boundaries of sky
and sea are lost in confusion, that some har-
bour is stumbled on (by the labouring ship)
by some happy chance; and sometimes .in
the very shades of night, through blind luck
alone, one finds access to a spot, or egress
from it. In nature, however, most conclu-
sions are suggested, as it were, by that com-
mon intelligence wherewith God has been
pleased to endow the soul of man. This in-
telligence has been caught up by philosophy,
and, with the view of glorifying her own art,
has been inflated (it is not to be wondered
at that I use this language) with straining after
that facility of language wihch is practised
in the building up and pulling down of every-
thing, and which has greater aptitude for per-
suading men by speaking than by teaching.
She assigns to things their forms and condi-
tions; sometimes makes them common and
public, sometimes appropriates them to pri-
vate use; on certainties she capriciously
stamps the character of uncertainty; she
appeals to precedents, as if all things are
capable of being compared together; she
describes all things by rule and definition,
allotting diverse properties even to similar
objects; she attributes nothing to the divine
permission, but assumes as her principles the
laws of nature. I could bear with her pre-
tensions, if only she were herself true to
nature, and would prove to me that she had
a mastery over nature as being associated
with its creation. She thought, no doubt, that
she was deriving her mysteries from sacred
sources, as men deem them, because in an-
cient times most authors were supposed to be
(I will not say godlike, but) actually gods:
as, for instance, the Egyptian Mercury,^ to
whom Plato paid very great deference; -* and
the Phrygian Silenus, to whom Midas lent his
long ears, when the shepherds brought him
to him; and Hermotimus, to whom the good
people of Clazomenae built a temple after his
death; and Orpheus; and Musaeus; and
Pherecydes, the master of Pythagoras. But
why need we care, since these philosophers
have also made their attacks upon those writ-
ings which are condemned by us under the
title of apocryphal, 5 certain as we are that
nothing ought to be received which does not
agree with the true system of prophecy, which
has arisen in this present age;* because we
do not forget that there have been false proph-


3 Mentioned below, c. xxxiii. ; also Adi'. Valent. c. xv.

4 See his Phtedrus, c. lix. (p. 27^); also Augustin, De. Civ.
Dei, viii. II ; Euscb. Prap. E^iang. ix. 3.

5 Or spurious ; not to be confounded with our so-called Apoc~
rypha, which were in Tertullian's days called Libri Ecclesiastici.

6 Here is a touch of Tertullian's Slontanism,


CHAP. III.]


A TREATISE ON THE SOUL.


183


ets, and long previous to them fallen spirits,
which have instructed the entire tone and as-
pect of the world with cunning knowledge of
i\\\?> {philosophic) cast? It is, indeed, not in-
credible that any man who is in quest of wis-
dom may have gone so far, as a matter of curi-
osity, as to consult the very prophets; {but be
this as it may), if you take the philosophers, you
would find in them more diversity than agree-
ment, since even in their agreement their di-
versity is discoverable. Whatever things are
true i?i their systems, and agreeable to pro-
phetic wisdom, they either recommend as
emanating from some other source, or else
perversely apply ' in some other sense. This
process is attended with very great detriment
to the truth, when they pretend that it is either
helped by falsehood, or else that falsehood
derives support from it. The following cir-
cumstance must needs have set ourselves and
the philosophers by the ears, especially in
this present matter, that they sometimes clothe
sentiments which are common to both sides,
in arguments which are peculiar to themselves,
but contrary in some points to our rule and
standard of faith; and at other times defend
opinions which are especially their own, with
arguments which both sides acknowledge to
be valid, and occasionally conformable to
their system of belief. The truth has, at this
rate, been well-nigh excluded by the philoso-
phers, through the poisons with which they
have infected it; and thus, if we regard both
the modes of coalition which 7ue have now
vicfitioned, and which are equally hostile to
the truth, !we feel the urgent necessity of free-
ing, on the one hand, the sentiments held by
us in common with them from the arguments
of the philosophers, and of separating, on the
other hand, the arguments which both parties
employ from the opinions of the same philos-
ophers. And this we may do by recalling all
questions to God's inspired standard, with
the obvious exception of such simple cases as
being free from the entanglement of any pre-
conceived conceits, one may fairly admit on
mere hitman testimony; because plain evi-
dence of this sort we must sometimes borrow
from opponents, when our opponents have
nothing to gain from it. Now I am not un-
aware what a vast mass of literature the philos-
ophers have accumulated concerning the
subject before us, in their own commentaries
thereOn— what various schools of principles
there are, what conflicts of opinion, what pro-
lific sources of questions, what perplexing
methods of solution. Moreover, I have looked
into Medical Science also, the sister (as they


Subornant.


say) of Philosophy, which claims as her func-
tion to cure the body, and thereby to have a
special acquaintance with the soul. From
this circumstance she has great differences
with her sister, pretending as the latter does
to know more about the soul, through the
more obvious treatment, as it were, of her in
her domicile of the body. But never mind
all this contention between them for pre-
eminence ! For extending their several re-
searches on the soul. Philosophy, on the one
hand, has enjoyed the full scope of her
genius; while Medicine, on the other hand,
has possessed the stringent demands of her
art and practice. Wide are men's inquiries
into uncertainties; wider still are their dis-
putes about conjectures. However great the
difficulty of adducing proofs, the labour of
producing conviction is not one whit less; so
that the gloomy Heraclitus was quite right,
when, observing the thick darkness which ob-
scured the researches of the inquirers about
the soul, and wearied with their interminable
questions, he declared that he had certainly
not explored the limits of the soul, although
he had traversed every road /« her domains.
To the Christian, however, but few words are
necessary for the clear understanding of the
whole subject. But in the few words there
always arises certainty to him; nor is he per-
mitted to give his inquiries a wider range than
is compatible with their solution; for "end-
less questions " the apostle forbids. =" It must,
however, be added, that no solution may be
found by any man, but such as is learned from
God; and that which is learned of God is the
sum and substance of the whole thing.

CHAP. III. THE soul's ORIGIN DEFINED OUT

OF THE SIMPLE WORDS OF SCRIPTURE.

Would to God that no "heresies had been
ever necessary, in order that they which are ap-
proved may be made manifest ! " - We should
then be never required to try our strength
in contests about the soul with philosophers,
those patriarchs of heretics, as they may be
fairly called,-* The apostle, so far back as his
own time, foresaw, indeed, that philosophy
would do violent injury to the truth. s This
admonition about false philosophy he was
induced to offer after he had been at Athens,
had become acquainted with that loquacious
city,^ and had there had a taste of its huckster-
ing wiseacres and talkers. In like manner is
the treatment of the soul according to the
sophistical doctrines of men which " mix their


4 Compare Tertullian's Adv. Herntog. c. viii,

5 Col. li. 8.

6 Linguatam civitatem. Comp. Acts xvii. 21.


1 84


A TREATISE ON THE SOUL.


[chap. v.


wine with water." ' Some of them deny the
immortality of the soul; others affirm that it
is immortal, and something more. Some raise
disputes about its substance; others about its
form; others, again, respecting each of its
several faculties. One school of philosophers
derives its state from various sources, while
another ascribes its departure to different
destinations. The various schools reflect the
character of their fnasters, according as they
have received their impressions from the dig-
nity' of Plato, or the vigour ^ of Zeno, or the
equanimity* of Aristotle, or the stupidity ^ of
Epicurus, or the sadness^ of Heraclitus, or
the madness' of Empedocles. The fault, I
suppose, of the divine doctrine lies in its
springing from Judaea^ rather than from
Greece. Christ made a mistake, too, in send-
ing forth fishermen to preach, rather than the
sophist. Whatever noxious vapours, accord-
ingly, exhaled from philosophy, obscure the
clear and wholesome atmosphere of truth, it
will be for Christians to clear away, both by
shattering to pieces the arguments which are
drawn from the principles of things — I mean
those of the philosophers — and by opposing
to them the maxims of heavenly wisdom — that
is, such as are revealed by the Lord; in order
that both the pitfalls wherewith philosophy
captivates the heathen may be removed, and
the means employed by heresy to shake the
faith of Christians may be repressed. We
have already decided one point in our con-
troversy with Hermogenes, as we said at the
beginning of this treatise, when we claimed
the soul to be formed by the breathing ^ of
God, and not out of matter. We relied even
there on the clear direction of the inspired
statement which informs us how that "the
Lord God breathed on man's face the breath
of life, so that man became a living soul " '° —
by that inspiration of God, of course. On
this point, therefore, nothing further need be
investigated or advanced by us. It has its
own treatise," and its own heretic. I shall
regard it as my introduction to the other
branches of the subject.

CHAP. IV. — IN OPPOSITION TO PLATO, THE SOUL
WAS CREATED AND ORIGINATED AT BIRTH.

After settling the origin of the soul, its con-
dition or state comes up next. P'or when we


* Isa. i. 33.

3 Honor.

3Vigor. Another reading has " rigor " (aicArjpoTTjs), harshness.

4 Tenor.

5 Stupor.

6 Moeror.

7 Furor.

8 Isa. ii. 3.
S^latu.

MOen. ii. 7. '

»» Titulus.


acknowledge that the soul originates in the
breath of God, it follows that we attribute a
beginning to it. This Plato, indeed, refuses
to assign to it, for he will have the soul to be
unborn and unmade." We, however, from
the very fact of its having had a beginning, as
well as from the nature thereof, teach that it
had both birth and creation. And when we
ascribe both birth and creation to it, we have
made no mistake: for being born, indeed, is
one thing, and being 7nade is another, — the
former being the term which is best suited to
living beings. When distinctions, however,
have places and times of their own, they oc-
casionally possess also reciprocity of applica-
tion among themselves. Thus, the being
made admits of being taken in the sense of
being brought forth; '^ inasmuch as everything
which receives being or existence, in any way ^
whatever, is in fact generated. For the
maker may really be called the parent of the
thing that is made: in this sense Plato also
uses the phraseology. So far, therefore, as
concerns our belief in the souls being made
or born, the opinion of the philosopher is
overthrown by the authority of prophecy'*
even.

CHAP. v. PROBABLE VIEW OF THE STOICS,

THAT THE SOUL HAS A CORPOREAL NATURE. .

Suppose one summons a Eubulus to his
assistance, and a Critolaus, and a Zenocrates,
and on this occasion Plato's friend Aristotle.
They may very possibly hold themselves
ready for stripping the soul of its corporeity,
unless they happen to see other philosophers
opposed to them in their purpose — and this,
too, in greater numbers — asserting for the
soul a corporeal nature. Now I am not re-
ferring merely to those who mould the soul
out of manifest bodily substances, as Hip-
parchus and Heraclitus (do) out of fire; as
Hippon and Thales (do) out of water; as
Empedocles and Critias (do) out of blood; as
Epicurus (does) out of atoms, since even
atoms by their coherence form corporeal
masses; as Critolaus and his Peripatetics (do)
out of a certain indescribable quintesse?ice,^^ if
that may be called a body which rather in-
cludes and embraces bodily substances; — but
I call on the Stoics also to help me, who,
while declaring almost in our own terms that
the soul is a spiritual essence (inasmuch as
breath and spirit are in their nature very near
akin to each other), will yet have no difficulty
in persuading (us) that the soul is a corporeal


»2 See his Phcedrus^ c. xxiv.

'3 Capit itaque et facturam provenisse poni.

14 Or, "inspiration."

»5 Ex quinta nescio qua substantia. Comp. Cicero's Tuscul. i. 10.


CHAP. VI.]


A TREATISE ON THE SOUL.


185


substance. Indeed, Zeno, defining the soul
to be a spirit generated with (the body,') con-
structs his argument in this way: That sub-
stance which by its departure causes the living
being to die is a corporeal one. Now it is by
the departure of the spirit, which is gene-
rated with (the body,) that the living being
dies; therefore the spirit which is generated
with (the body) is a corporeal substance. But
this spirit which is generated with (the body)
is the soul: it follows, then, that the soul
is a corporeal substance. Cleanthes, too, will
have it that family likeness passes from
parents to their children not merely in bod-
ily features, but in characteristics of the
soul; as if it were out of a mirror of (a
man's) manners, and faculties, and affec-
tions, that bodily likeness and unlikeness are
caught and reflected by the soul also. It is
therefore as being corporeal that it is suscep-
tible of likeness and unlikeness. Again,
there is nothing in common between things
corporeal and things incorporeal as to their
susceptibility. But the soul certainly sympa-
thizes with the body, and shares in its pain,
whenever it is injured by bruises, and wounds,
and sores: the body, too, suffers with the
soul, and is united with it (whenever it is
afflicted with anxiety, distress, or love) in the
loss of vigour which its companion sustains,
whose shame and fear it testifies by its own
blushes and paleness. The soul, therefore,
is (proved to be) corporeal from this inter-
communion of susceptibility. Chrysippus also
joins hands in fellowship with Cleanthes,
when he lays it down that it is not at all pos-
sible for things which are endued with body
to be separated from things which have not
body; because they have no such relation as
mutual contact or coherence. Accordingly
Lucretius says: =

" Tangere enim et tangi nisi corpus nulla potest res."

" For nothing but body is capable of touching or of
being touched."

(Such severance, however, is quite natural
between the soul and the body); for when the
body is deserted by the soul, it is overcome
by death. The soul, therefore, is endued
with a body; for if it were not corporeal, it,
could not desert the body,

CHAP. VI, THE ARGUMENTS OF THE PLATON-

ISTS FOR THE SOUL's INCORPOREALITY, OP-
POSED, PERHAPS FRIVOLOUSLY.

These conclusions the Platonists disturb
more by subtilty than by truth. Every body,
they say, has necessarily either an animate


Consitum.

Dc Nat. Rer. i. 305.


nature 3 or an inanimate one.* If it has the
inanimate nature, it receives motion exter-
nally to itself; if the animate one, internally.
Now the soul receives motion neither exter-
nally nor internally: not externally, since if
has not the inanimate nature; nor internally,
because it is itself rather the giver of motion
to the body. It evidently, then, is not a
bodily substance, inasmuch as it receives mo-
tion neither way, according to the nature and
law of corporeal substances. Now, what first
surprises us here, is the unsuitableness of a
definition which appeals to objects which have
no affinity with the soul. For it is impossible
for the soul to be called either an animate
body or an inanimate one, inasmuch as it is
the soul itself which makes the body either
animate, if it be present to it, or else inani-
mate, if it be absent from it. That, therefore,
which produces a result, cannot itself be the
result, so as to be entitled to the designation
of an animate thing or an inanimate one.
The soul is so called in respect of its own
substance. If, then, that which is the soul
admits not of being called an animate body
or an inanimate one, how can it challenge
comparison with the nature and law of ani-
mate and inanimate bodies ? Furthermore,
since it is characteristic of a body to be
moved externally by something else, and as
we have already shown that the soul receives
motion from some other thing when it is
swayed (from the outside, of course, by some-
thing else) by prophetic influence or by mad-
ness, therefore I must be right in regarding
that as bodily substance which, according to
the examples we have quoted, is moved by
some other object from without. Now, if to
receive motion from some other thing is char-
acteristic of a body, how much more is it so
to impart motion to something else! But the
soul moves the body, all whose efforts are
apparent externally, and from without. It is
the soul which gives motion to the feet for
walking, and to the hands for touching, and to
the eyes for sight, and to the tongue for
speech — a sort of internal image which moves
and animates the surface. Whence could
accrue such power to the soul, if it were in-
corporeal ? How could an unsubstantial thing
propel solid objects ? But in what way do
the senses in man seem to be divisible into
the corporeal and the intellectual classes ?
They tell is that the qualities of things cor-
poreal, such as earth and fire, are indicated
by the bodily senses — of touch and sight;
whilst (the qualities) of incorporeal things —
for instance, benevolence and malignity — are


3 Animale, " having the nature of soul.

4 Inanimale.


1 86


A TREATISE ON THE SOUL.


[CHAr. VII.


discovered by the intellectual faculties. And
from this (they deduce what is to them) the
manifest conclusion, that the soul is incor-
poreal, its properties being comprehended by
the perception not of bodily organs, but of
intellectual faculties. Well, (I shall be much
surprised) if I do not at once cut away the
very ground on which their argument stands.
For I show them how incorporeal things are
commonly submitted to the bodily senses —
sound, for instance, to the organ of hearing;
colour, to the organ of sight; smell, to the
olfactory organ. And, just as in these in-
stances, the soul likewise has its contact with ^
the body; not to say that the incorporeal ob-
jects are reported to us through the bodily
organs, for the express reason that they come
into contact with the said organs. Inasmuch,
then, as it is evident that even incorporeal
objects are embraced and comprehended by
corporeal ones, why should not the soul,
which is corporeal, be equally comprehended
and understood by incorporeal faculties ? It
is thus certain that their argument fails.
Among their more conspicuous arguments
will be found this, that in their judgment
every bodily substance is nourished by bodily
substances; whereas the soul, as being an in-
corporeal essence, is nourished by incorporeal
aliments — for instance, by the studies of wis-
dom. But even this ground has no stability
in it, since Soranus, who is a most accom-
plished authority in medical science, affords
us as answer, when he asserts that the soul is
even nourished by corporeal aliments; that
in fact it is, when failing and weak, actually
refreshed oftentimes by food. Indeed, when
deprived of all food, does not the soul en-
tirely remove from the body ? Soranus, then,
after discoursing about the soul in the am-
plest manner, filling four volumes with his
dissertations, and after weighing well all the
opinions of the philosophers, defends the cor-
poreality of the soul, although in the process
he has robbed it of its immortality. For to
all men it is not given to believe the truth
which Christians are privileged to hold. As,
therefore, Soranus has shown us from facts
that the soul is nourished by corporeal ali-
ments, let the philosopher (adopt a similar
mode of proof, and) show that it is sustained
by an incorporeal food. But the fact is, that
no one has even been able to quench this
rnan's » doubts and difficulties about the condi-
tion of the soul with the honey-water of
Plato's subtle eloquence, nor to surfeit them
with the crumbs from the minute nostrums of


» Accedit.

2 We follow Oehler's view of this obscure passage, in preference
to Rigaltius'.


Aristotle. But what is to become of the souls
of all those robust barbarians, which have
had no nurture of philosopher's lore indeed,
and yet are strong i-n untaught practical wis-
dom, and which although very starvelings in
philosophy, without your Athenian academies
and porches, and even the prison of Socrates,
do yet contrive to live? For it is not the
soul's actual substance which is benefited by
the aliment of learned study, but only its con-
duct and discipline; such ailment contributing
nothing to increase its bulk, but only to en-
hance its grace. It is, moreover, a happy
circumstance that the Stoics affirm that even
the arts have corporeality; since at the rate
the soul too must be corporeal, since it is
commonly supposed to be nourished by the
arts. Such, however, is the enormous pre-
occupation of the philosophic mind, that it is
generally unable to see straight before it.
Hence (the story of) Thales falling into the
well. 3 It very commonly, too, through not
understanding even its own opinions, sus-
pects a failure of its own health. Hence
(the story of) Chrysippus and the hellebore.
Some such hallucination, I take it, must have
occurred to him, when he asserted that two
bodies could not possibly be contained in
one: he must have kept out of mind and
sight the case of those pregnant women who,
day after day, bear not one body, but even
two and three at a time, within the embrace
of a single womb. One finds likewise, in the
records of the civil law, the instance of a cer-
tain Greek woman who gave birth to a quint '^
of children, the mother of all these at one
parturition, the manifold parent of a single
brood, the prolific produce from a single
womb, who, guarded by so many bodies — I
had almost said, a people — was herself no
less then the sixth person! The whole crea-
tion testifies how that those bodies which are
naturally destined to issue from bodies, are
already (included) in that from which they
proceed. Now that which proceeds from
some other thing must needs be second to
it. Nothing, however, proceeds out of an-
other thing except by the process of genera-
tion; but then they are two (things).

CHAP. VII. THE soul's CORPOREALITY DEMON-
STRATED OUT OF THE GOSPELS.

So far as the philosophers are concerned,
we have said enough. As for our own teach-
ers, indeed, our reference to them is ex abun-
danti — a surplusage of authority: in the Gos-
pel itself they will be found to have the


3 See Tertullian's Ad Nationes (our translation), p. 33, Supra.

4 Quinionein.


CHAP. VIII.]


A TREATISE ON THE SOUL.


87


clearest evidence for the corporeal nature of
the soul. In hell the soul of a certain man is
in torment, punished in flames, suffering ex-
cruciating thirst, and imploring from the finger
of a happier soul, for his tongue, the solace
of a drop of water.' Do you suppose that
this end of the blessed poor man and the
miserable rich man is only imaginary ? Then
why the name of Lazarus in this narrative, if
the circumstance is not in (the category of) a
real occurrence ? But even if it is to be re-
garded as imaginary, it will still be a testi-
mony to truth and reality. For unless the
soul possessed corporeality, the image of a
soul could not possibly contain a finger of a
bodily substance; nor would the Scripture
feign a statement about the limbs of a body,
if these had no existence. But what is that
which is removed to Hades =" after the separa-
tion of the body; which is there detained;
which is reserved until the day of judgment;
to which Christ also, on dying, descended ? I
imagine it is the souls of the patriarchs. But
wherefore (all this), if the soul is nothing in
its subterranean abode ? For nothing it cer-
tainly is, if it is not a bodily substance. For
whatever is incorporeal is incapable of being
kept and guarded in any way; it is also ex-
empt from either punishment or refreshment.
That must be a body, by which punishment
and refreshment can be experienced. Of this
I shall treat more fully in a more fitting place.
Therefore, whatever amount of punishment
or refreshment the soul tastes in Hades, in its
prison or lodging, ^ in the fire or in Abraham's
bosom, it gives proof thereby of its own cor-
poreality. For an incorporeal thing suffers
nothing, not having that which makes it capa-
ble of suffering; else, if it has such capacity,
it must be a bodily substance. For in as far
as every corporeal thing is capable of suffering,
in so far is that which is capable of suffering
also corporeal.'^

CHAP. VIII. — OTHER PLATONIST ARGUMENTS
CONSIDERED.

Besides, it would be a harsh and absurd
proceeding to exempt anything from the class
of corporeal beings, on the ground that it is
not exactly like the other constituents of that
class. And where individual creatures pos-
sess various properties, does not this variety
in works of the same class indicate the great-


' Luke xvi. 23, 24.

2 Ad inferna. [See p. 59, supra^

3 Diversorio.

4 Compare De Resur. Carnis, xvii. There is, however, some
variation in Tertullian's language on this subject. In his Apol.
xlviii. he speaks as if the soul could not suffer when separated
from the body. See also his De Testimonio Anima, ch. iv., p.
XTj,su/>ra\ and see Bp. Kaye, p. 183.


ness of the Creator, in making them at the
same time different and yet like, amicable
yet rivals ? Indeed, the philosophers them-
selves agree in saying that the universe con-
sists of harmonious oppositions, according to
Empedocles' (theory of) friendship and en-
mity. Thus, then, although corporeal es-
sences are opposed to incorporeal ones, they
yet differ from each other in such sort as to
amplify their species by their variety, with-
out changing their genus, remaining all alike
corporeal; contributing tO God's glory .in
their manifold existence by reason of their
variety; so various, by reason of their differ-
encs; so diverse, in that some of them pos-
sess one kind of perception, others another;
some feeding on one kind of aliment, others
on another; some, again, possessing visibility,
while others are invisible ; some being weighty,
others light. They are in the habit of saying
that the soul must be pronounced incorporeal
on this account, because the bodies of the
dead, after its departure from them, become
heavier, whereas they ought to be lighter,
being deprived of the weight of a body — since
the soul is a bodily substance. But what,
says Soranus (in answer to this argument), if
men should deny that the sea is a bodily sub-
stance, because a ship out of the water be-
comes a heavy and motionless mass ? How
much truer and stronger, then, is the soul's
corporeal essence, which carries about the
body, which eventually assumes so great a
weight with the nimblest motion! Again,
even if the soul is invisible, it is only in strict
accordance with the condition of its own cor-
poreality, and suitably to the property of its
own essence, as well as to the nature of even
those beings to which its destiny made it to
be invisible. The eyes of the owl cannot en-
dure the sun, whilst the eagle is so well able
to face his glory, that the noble character of
its young is determined by the unblinking
strength of their gaze; while the eaglet, which
turns away its eye from the sun's ray, is ex-
pelled from the nest as a degenerate crea-
ture! So true is it, therefore, than to one
eye an object is invisible, which may be quite
plainly seen by another, — without implying
any incorporeality in that which is not en-
dued with an equally strong power (of vision).
The sun is indeed a bodily substance, because
it is (composed of) fire; the object, however,
which the eaglet at once admits the existence
of, the owl denies, without any prejudice,
nevertheless, to the testimony of the eagle.
There is the selfsame difference in respect of
the soul's corporeality, which is (perhaps)
invisible to the flesh, but perfectly visible to
the spirit. Thus John, being ** in the Spirit '*


A TREATISE ON THE SOUL.


[chap. IX.


of God,^ beheld plainly the souls of the mar-
tyrs."

CHAP. IX. PARTICULARS OF THE ALLEGED

COMMUNICATION TO A MONTANIST SISTER.

When we aver that the soul has a body of a
quality and kind peculiar to itself, in this spe-
cial condition of it we shall be already sup-
plied with a decision respecting all the other
accidents of its corporeity; how that they
belong to it, because we have shown it to be
a body, but that even they have a quality
peculiar to themselves, proportioned to the
special nature of the body (to which they
belong); or else, if any accidents (of a body)
are remarkable in this instance for their ab-
sence, then this, too, results from the pecul-
iarity of the condition of the soul's corpo-
reity, from which are absent sundry quali-
ties which are present to all other corporeal
beings. And yet, notwithstanding all this,
we shall not be at all inconsistent if we de-
clare that the more usual characteristics of
a body, such as invariably accrue to the cor-
poreal condition, belong also to the soul —
such as form 3 and limitation; and that triad
•of dimensions * — I mean length, and breadth,
and height — by which philosophers gauge all
bodies. What now remains but for us to
give the soul a figure ps Plato refuses to do
this, as if it endangered the soul's immor-
tality.* For everything which has figurp is,
according to him, compound, and composed
of parts; 7 whereas the soul is immortal; and
being immortal, it is therefore indissoluble;
and being indissoluble, it is figureless: for if,
on the contrary, it had figure, it would be of
a composite and structural formation. He,
however, in some other manner frames for
the soul an effigy of intellectual forms, beau-
tiful for its just symmetry and tuitions of
philosophy, but misshapen by some contrary
qualities. As for ourselves, indeed, we in-
scribe on the soul the lineaments of corpo-
reity, not simply from the assurance which
reasoning has taught us of its corporeal na-
ture, but also from the firm conviction which
divine grace impresses on us by revelation.
For, seeing that we acknowledge spiritual
charisviata, or gifts, we too have merited the
attainment of the prophetic gift, although
coming after John (the Baptist). We have
now amongst us a sister whose lot it has been
to be favoured with sundry gifts of revelation.


* Rev. i. lo.
a Rev. vi. 9.

3 Habitum.

4 lllud trifariam distantivum (Tpix«?6ia(rTT)AiaTi»tdi') Fr.Junius.

5 Effigiem.

ftS«e his Phtedo, pp. 105, 106.
rStfuctile.


which she experiences in the Spirit by ecstatic
vision amidst the sacred rites of the Lord's ■
day in the church: she converses with angels, \
and sometimes even with the Lord; she both
sees and hears mysterious communications;^
some men's hearts she understands, and to
them who are in need she distributes reme-
dies. Whether it be in the reading of Scrip-
tures, or in the chanting of psalms, or in the
preaching of sermons, or in the offering up of
prayers, in all these religious services matter
and opportunity are afforded to her of seeing
visions. It may possibly have happened to
us, whilst this sister of ours was rapt in the
Spirit, that we had discoursed in some ineffa-
ble way about the soul. After the people are
dismissed at the conclusion of the sacred ser-
vices, she is in the regular habit of reporting
to us whatever things she may have seen in vis-
ion (for all her communications are examined
with the most scrupulous care, in order that
their truth may be probed). " Amongst other
things," says she, "there has been shown to
me a soul in bodily shape, and a spirit has
been in the habit of appearing to me; not,
however, a void and empty illusion, but such
as would offer itself to be even grasped by the
hand, soft and transparent and of an etherial
colour, and in form resembling that of a hu-
man being in every respect." This was her
vision, and for her witness there Was God;
and the apostle most assuredly foretold that
there were to be "spiritual gifts" in the
church.' Now, can you refuse to believe
this, even if indubitable evidence on every
point is forthcoming for your conviction ?
Since, then, the soul is a corporeal substance,
no doubt it possesses qualities such as those
which we have just mentioned, amongst them
the property of colour, which is inherent in
every bodily substance. Now what colour
would you attribute to the soul but an etherial
transparent one ? Not that its substance is
actually the ether or air (although this was
the opinion of yEnesidemus and Anaximenes,
and I suppose of Heraclitus also, as some
say of him), nor transparent light (although
Heraclides of Pontus held it to be so).
" Thunder-stones," '° indeed, are not of igne-
ous substance, because they shine with ruddy
redness; nor are beryls composed of aqueous
matter, because they are of a pure wavy white-
ness. How many things also besides these
are there which their colour would associate
in the same class, but which nature keeps
widely apart! Since, however, everything
which is very attenuated and transparent


^Sacramenta.

9 I Cor. xii. i-ii. [A key to our author's
'^ Cerauniis gemmis.


CHAP. X.]


A TREATISE ON THE SOUL.


189


bears a strong resemblance to the air, such
would be the case with the soul, since in its
material nature ' it is wind and breath, (or
spirit); whence it is that the belief of its cor-
poreal quality is endangered, in consequence
of the extreme tenuity and subtilty of its
essence. Likewise, as regards the figure of
the human soul from your own conception,
you can well imagine that it is none other
than the human form; indeed, none other
than the shape of that body which each indi-
vidual soul animates and moves about. This
we may at once be induced to admit from
contemplating man's original formation. For
only carefully consider, after God hath
breathed upon the face of man the breath of
life, and man had consequently become a
living soul, surely that breath must have
passed through the face at once into the in-
terior structure, and have spread itself through-
out all the spaces of the body; and as soon as
by the divine inspiration it had become con-
densed, it must have impressed itself on each
internal feature, which the condensation had
filled in, and so have been, as it were, con-
gealed in shape, (or stereotyped). Hence,
by this densifying process, there arose a fix-
ing of the soul's corporeity; and by the im-
pression its figure was formed and moulded.
This is the inner man, different from the
outer, but yet one in the twofold condition.^
It, too, has eyes and ears of its own, by
means of which Paul must have heard and
seen the Lord;^ it has, moreover all the other
members of the body by the help of which
it effects all processes of thinking and all
activity in dreams. Thus it happens that the
rich man in hell has a tongue and poor
(Lazarus) a finger and Abraham a bosom. '^
By these features also the souls of the mar-
tyrs under the altar are distinguished and
known. The soul indeed which in the begin-
ning was associated with Adam's body, which
grew with its growth and was moulded after
its form proved to be the germ both of the
entire substance (of the human soul) and of
that (part of) creation

CHAP. X. THE SIMPLE NATURE OF THE SOUL

IS ASSERTED WITH PLATO. THE IDENTITY
OF SPIRIT AND SOUL.

It is essential to a firm faith to declare with
Plato s that the soul is simple; in other words
uniform and uncompounded; simply that is
to say in respect of its substance. Never


' Tradux.
^Dupliciter unus.

3 2 Cor. xii. 2-4.

4 Luke xvi. 23, 24.

5 See his F/icedo, p
265)


Tim<gus, § 12, p. 35 (Bekker, pp. 264,


mind men's artificial views and theories, and
away with the fabrications of heresy!** Some
maintain that there is within the soul a natu-
ral substance — the spirit — which is different
from it: 7 as if to have life — the function of
the soul — were one thing; and to emit breath
— the alleged^ function of the spirit — were
another thing. Now it is not in all animals
that these two functions are found; for there
are many which only live but do not breathe
in that they do not possess the organs of res-
piration— lungs and windpipes. ' But of what
use is it, in an examination of the soul of
man, to borrow proofs from a gnat or an ant,
when the great Creator in His divine arrange-
ments has allotted to every animal organs of
vitality suited to its own disposition and na-
ture, so that we ought not to catch at any
conjectures from comparisons of this sort?
Man, indeed, although organically furnished
with lungs and windpipes, will not on that
account be proved to breathe by one process,
and to live by another; '° nor can the ant,
although defective in these organs, be on that
account said to be without respiration, as if it
lived and that was all. For by whom has so
clear an insight into the works of God been
really attained, as to entitle him to assume
that these organic resources are wanting to
any living thing? There is that Herophilus,
the well-known surgeon, or (as I may almost
call him) butcher, who cut up no end of per-
sons," in order to investigate the secrets of
nature, who ruthlessly handled '^ human creat-
ures to discover (their form and make): I
have my doubts whether he succeeded in
clearly exploring all the internal parts of their
structure, since death itself changes and dis-
turbs the natural functions of life, especially
when the death is not a natural one, but such
as must cause irregularity and error amidst
the very processes of dissection. Philoso-
phers have affirmed it to be a certain fact,
that gnats, and ants, and moths have no pul-
monary or arterial organs. Well, then, tell
rne, you curious and elaborate investigator of
these mysteries, have they eyes for seeing
withal ? But yet they proceed to whatever
point they wish, and they both shun and aim
at various objects by processes of sight: point
out their eyes to me, show me their pupils.
Moths also gnaw and eat: demonstrate to me
their mandibles, reveal their jaw-teeth. Then,


6 We have here combined two readings, effigies (Oehler's) and
hasreses (the usual one).

7 Aliam.

8 This is the force of the subjunctive yfa^.

9 Arterias.

10 Aliunde spirabit, aliunde vivet. " In the nature of man, life
and breath are inseparable-" Bp. Kaye. p. 184.
" Sexcentos
i2 0dit.


190


A TREATISE ON THE SOUL.


[chap. XI.


again, gnats hum and buzz, nor even in the
dark are they unable to find their way to our
ears:' point out to me, then, not only the
noisy tube, but the stinging lance of that
mouth of theirs. Take any living thing what-
ever, be it the tiniest you can find, it must
needs be fed and sustained by some food or
other: show me, then, their organs for taking
into their system, digesting, and ejecting food.
What must we say, therefore? If it is by
such instruments that life is maintained, these
instrumental means must of course exist in
all things which are to live, even though they
are not apparent to the eye or to the appre-
hension by reason of their minuteness. You
can more readily believe this, if you remem-
ber that God manifests His creative greatness
quite as much in small objects as in the very
largest. If, however, you suppose that God's
wisdom has no capacity for forming such in-
finitesimal corpuscles, you can still recognise
His greatness, in that He has furnished even
to the smallest animals the functions of life,
although in the absence of the suitable or-
gans,— securing to them the power of sight,
even without eyes; of eating, even without
teeth; and of digestion, even without stomachs.
Some animals also have the ability to move
forward without feet, as serpents, by a gliding
motion; or as worms, by Vertical efforts; or
as snails and slugs, by their slimy crawl.
Why should you not then believe that respira-
tion likewise may be effected without the bel-
lows of the lungs, and without arterial canals ?
You would thus supply yourself with a strong
proof that the spirit or breath is an adjunct
of the human soul, for the very reason that
some creatures lack breath, and that they
lack it because they are not furnished with
organs of respiration. You think it possible
for a thing to live without breath; then why
not suppose that a thing might breathe with-
out lungs? Pray, tell me, what is it to
breathe ? I suppose it means to emit breath
from yourself. What is it not to live ? I
suppose it means not to emit breath from
yourself. This is the answer which I should
have to make, if *' to breathe" is not the
same thing as "to live." It must, however,
be characteristic of a dead man not to respire:
to respire, therefore, is the characteristic of a
living man. But to respire is likewise the
characteristic of a breathing man: therefore
also to breathe is the characteristic of a living
man. Now, if both one and the other could
possibly have been accomplished without the
soul, to breathe might not be a function of
the soul, but merely to live. But indeed to


I Aunura caeci.


live is to breathe, and to breathe is to live.
Therefore this entire process, both of breath-
ing and living, belongs to that to which living
belongs — that is, to the soul. Well, then,
since you separate the spirit (or breath) and
the soul, separate their operations also. Let
both of them accomplish some act apart from
one another — the soul apart, the spirit apart.
Let the soul live without the spirit; let the
spirit breathe without the soul. Let one of
them quit men's bodies, let the other remain;
let death and life meet and agree. If indeed
the soul and the spirit are two, they may be
divided; and thus, by the separation of the
one which departs from the one which remains,
there would accrue the union and meeting
together of life and of death. But such a
union never will accrue: therefore they are
not two, and they cannot be divided; but di-
vided they might have been, if they had been
(two). Still two things may surely coalesce in
growth. But the two in question never will
coalesce, since to live is one thing, and to
breathe is another. Substances are distin-
guished by their operations. How much
firmer ground have you for believing that the
soul and the spirit are but one, since you
assign to them no difference; so that the soul
is itself the spirit, respiration being the func-
tion of that of which life also is! But what
if you insist on supposing that the day is one
thing, and the light, which is incidental to
the day, is another thing, whereas day is only
the light itself ? There must, of course, be
also different kinds of light, as (appears) from
the ministry of fires. So likewise will there
be different sorts of spirits, according as they
emanate from God or from the devil. When-
ever, indeed, the question is about soul and
spirit, the soul will be (understood to be)
itself the spirit, just is the day is the light
itself. For a thing is itself identical with
that by means of which itself exists.


CHAP. XI. — SPIRIT A TERM EXPRESSIVE OF AN

OPERATION OF THE SOUL, NOT OF ITS NA-
TURE. TO BE CAREFULLY DISTINGUISHED
FROM THE SPIRIT OF GOD.

But the nature of my present inquiry obliges
me to call the soul spirit or breath, because
to breathe is ascribed to another substance.
We, however, claim this (operation) for the
soul, which we acknowledge to be an indivisi-
ble simple substance, and therefore we must
call it spirit in a definitive sense — not because
of its condition, but of its action; not in re-
spect of its nature, but of its operation; be-
cause it respires^ and not because it is spirit


[


CHAP. XII.]


A TREATISE ON THE SOUL.


91


in any especial sense.' For to blow or breathe
is to respire. So that we are driven to de-
scribe, by (the term which indicates this respi-
ration— that is to say) spirit — the soul which
we hold to be, by the propriety of its action,
breath. Moreover, we properly and especially
insist on calling it breath (or spirit), in oppo-
sition to Hermogenes, who derives the soul
from matter instead of from the afflatus or
breath of God. He, to be sure, goes flatly
against the testimony of Scripture, and with
this view converts breath into spirit, because
he cannot believe that the (creature on which
was breathed the) Spirit of God fell into sin,
and then into condemnation; and therefore
he would conclude that the soul came from
matter rather than from the Spirit or breath
of God. For this reason, we on our side,
even from that passage, maintain the soul to
be breath and not the spirit, in the scriptural
and distinctive sense of the spirit; and here
it is with regret that we apply the term spirit
at all in the lower sense, in consequence of
the identical action of respiring and breathing.
In that passage, the only question is about
the natural substance,; to respire being an act
of nature. I would not tarry a moment longer
on this point, were it not for those heretics
who introduce into the soul some spiritual
germ which passes my comprehension: (they
make it to have been) conferred upon the soul
by the secret liberality of her mother Sophia
( Wisdoni), without the knowledge of the Crea-
tor.^ But (Holy) Scripture, which has a better
knowledge of the soul's Maker, or rather
God, has told us nothing more than that God
breathed on man's face the breath of life, and
that man became a living soul, by means of
which he was both to live and breathe; at the
same time making a sufficiently clear distinc-
tion between the spirit and the soul,^ in such
passages as the following, wherein God Him-
self declares: "My Spirit went forth from
me, and I made the breath of each. And
the breath of my Spirit became soul." '^ And
again: "He giveth breath unto the people
that are on the earth, and Spirit to them that
walk thereon. ' ' s First of all there comes the
(natural) soul, that is to say, the breath, to
the people that are on the earth, — in other
words, to those who act carnally in the flesh;
then afterwards comes the Spirit to those who
walk thereon, — that is, who subdue the works
of the flesh; because the apostle also says,
that " that is not first which is spiritual, but


I Proprie " by reason of its nature."

2 See the tract Adv. Valentin^ c. xxv. infra.

3 Compare ^^7/. Hermog. xxxii. xxxiii. ; also Irenaeus, v. 12,
17- [See Vol. I. p. 527, this Series.]|

4 Tertullian's reading of Isa. Ivii. 16.

5 Isa, xlii. 5.


that which is natural, (or in possession of the
natural soul,) and afterward that which is
spiritual. ' ' ^ For, inasmuch as Adam straight-
way predicted that "great mystery of Christ
and the church," ^ when he said, " This now
is bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh;
therefore shall a man leave his father and his
mother, and shall cleave unto his wife, and
they two shall become one flesh," ^ he experi-
enced the influence of the Spirit. For there
fell upon him that ecstasy, which is the Holy
Ghost's operative virtue of prophecy. And
even the evil spirit too is an influence which
comes upon a man. Indeed, the Spirit of
God not more really "turned Saul into an-
other man," 5 that is to say, into a prophet,
when " people said one to another, What is
this which is come to the son of Kish ? Is
Saul also among the prophets?"" than did
the evil spirit afterwards turn him into another
man — in other words, into an apostate. Judas
likewise was for a long time reckoned among
the elect (apostles), and was even appointed
to the office of their treasurer; he was not yet
the traitor, although he was become fraudu-
lent; but afterwards the devil entered into
him. Consequently, as the spirit neither of
God nor of the devil is naturally planted with
a man's soul at his birth, this soul must evi-
dently exist apart and alone, previous to the
accession to it of either spirit: if thus apart
and alone, it must also be simple and un-
compounded as regards its substance; and
therefore it cannot respire from any other
cause than from the actual condition of its
own substance.

CHAP. XII. — DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE MIND
AND THE SOUL, AND THE RELATION BE-
TWEEN THEM.

In like manner the mind also, or aniinusy
which the Greeks designate N0Y2, is taken by
us in no other sense than as indicating that
faculty or apparatus " which is inherent and
implanted in the soul, and naturally proper
to it, whereby it acts, whereby it acquires
knowledge, and by the possession of which it
is capable of a spontaneity of motion within
itself, and of thus appearing to be impelled
by the mind, as if it were another substance,
as is maintained by those who determine the
soul to be the moving principle of the uni-
verse"— the god of Socrates, Valentinus'
" only-begotten " of his father '3 Bythiis^ and


6 I Cor. XV. 46.

7 Eph. y. 31, 32.
^ Gen. ii. 24, 25.
9 I Sam. X. 6.

10 1 Sam. X. II.
Suggest um.


" Comp. The Apology., c. xlviii. ; August. De Civ.
i3Comp. Adv. Valentin, vii. infra.


Dei, xiii. 17.


192


A TREATISE ON THE SOUL.


[chap. XIII.


his mother Sige. How confused is the opinion
of Anaxagoras ! For, having imagined the
mind to be the initiating principle of all things,
and suspending on its axis the balance of the
universe; affirming, moreover, that the mind
is a simple principle, unmixed, and incapable
of admixture, he mainly on this very consid-
eration separates it from all amalgamation
with the soul; and yet in another passage he
actually incorporates it with' the soul. This
(inconsistency) Aristotle has also observed;
but whether he meant his criticism to be con-
structive, and to fill up a system of his own,
rather than destructive of the principles of
others, I am hardly able to decide. As for
himself, indeed, although he postpones his
definition of the mind, yet he begins by men-
tioning, as one of the two natural constituents
of the mind,=' that divine principle which he
conjectures to be impassible, or incapable of
emotion, and thereby removes from all asso-
ciation with the soul. For whereas it is evi-
dent that the soul is susceptible of those
emotions which it falls to it naturally to suffer,
it must needs suffer either by the mind or
with the mind. Now if the soul is by nature
associated with the mind, it is impossible to
draw the conclusion that the mind is impassi-
ble; or again, if the soul suffers not either by
the mind or with the mind, it cannot possibly
have a natural association with the mind, with
which it suffers nothing, and which suffers
nothing itself. Moreover, if the soul suffers
nothing by the mind and with the mind, it
will experience no sensation, nor will it ac-
quire any knowledge, nor will it undergo any
emotion through the agency of the mind, as
they maintain it will. For Aristotle makes
even the senses passions, or states of emotion.
And rightly too. For to exercise the senses
is to suffer emotion, because to suffer is to
feel. In like manner, to acquire knowledge is
to exercise the senses; and to undergo emotion
is to exercise the senses; and the whole of
this is a state of suffering. But we see that
the soul experiences nothing of these things,
in such a manner as that the mind also is not
affected by the emotion, by which, indeed,
and with which, all is effected. It follows,
therefore, that the mind is capable of admix-
ture, in opposition to Anaxagoras; and passi-
ble or susceptible of emotion, contrary to the
opinion of Aristotle. Besides, if a separate
condition between the soul and mind is to be
admitted, so that they be two things in sub-
stance, then of one of them, emotion and sen-
sation, and every sort of taste, and all action


Addicit.

Alterum animi ^enus.


and motion, will be the characteristics; whilst
of the other the natural condition will be calm,
and repose, and stupor. There is therefore
no alternative: either the mind must be use-
less and void, or the soul. But if these affec-
tions may certainly be all of them ascribed
to both, then in that case the two will be one
and the same, and Democritus will carry his
point when he suppresses all distinction be-
tween the two. The question will arise how
two can be one — whether by the confusion of
two substances, or by the disposition of one ?
We, however, affirm that the mind coalesces
with 3 the soul, — not indeed as being distinct
from it in substance, but as being its natural
function and agent.-*

CHAP. XIII. — THE soul's SUPREMACY.

It next remains to examine where lies the
supremacy; in other words, which of the two
is superior to the other, so that that with
which the supremacy clearly lies shall be the
essentially superior substance ;5 whilst that
over which this essentially superior substance
shall have authority shall be considered as the
natural functionary of the superior substance.
Now who will hesitate to ascribe this entire
authority to the soul, from the name of which
the whole man has received his own designa-
tion in common phraseology ? How many
sou/s, says the rich man, do I maintain ? not
how many minds. The pilot's desire, also, is
to rescue so many sou/s from shipwreck, not
so many minds; the labourer, too, in his work,
and the soldier on the field of battle, affirms
that he lays down his soul (or life), not his
mind. Which of the two has its perils or its
vows and wishes more frequently on men's
lips — the mind or the soul ? Which of the
two are dying persons, said to have to do with
the mind or the soul ? In short, philosophers
themselves, and medical men, even when it
is their purpose to discourse about the mind,
do in every instance inscribe on their title-
page*^ and table of contents, ^ ^^ De Anima"
("^ treatise on the sour'). And that you
may also have God's voucher on the subject,
it is the soul which He addresses; it is the
soul which He exhorts and counsels, to turn
the mind and intellect to Him. It is the soul
which Christ came to save; it is the soul which
He threatens to destroy in hell; it is the soul
(or life) which He forbids being made too
much of; it is His soul, too (or life), which
the good Shepherd Himself lays down for His


3 Concretum.

4 Substantia: oflRcium.

5 Substantia: massa.

6 Faciem operis.

7 Fontein materia:.


I


CHAP. XV.]


A TREATISE ON THE SOUL.


193


sheep. It is to the soul, therefore, that you
ascribe the supremacy; in // also you possess
that union of substance, of which you perceive
the mind to be the instrument, not the ruling
power.

CHAP. XIV. THE SOUL VARIOUSLY DIVIDED BY

THE philosophers; this DIVISION IS NOT
A MATERIAL DISSECTION.

Being thus single, simple, and entire in it-
self, it is as incapable of being composed and
put together from external constituents, as it
is of being divided in and of itself, inasmuch
as it is indissoluble. For if it had been pos-
sible to construct it and to destroy it, it
would no longer be immortal. Since, how-
ever, it is not mortal, it is also incapable of
dissolution and division. Now, to be di-
vided means to be dissolved, and to be
dissolved means to die. Yet (philosophers)
have divided the soul into parts: Plato,
for instance, into two; Zeno, into three; Pan-
aetius, into five or six; Soranus, into seven;
Chrysippus, into as many as eight; and Apol-
lophanes, into as many as nine; whilst certain
of the Stoics have found as many as twelve
parts in the soul. Posidonius makes even
two more than these: he starts with two lead-
ing faculties of the soul, — the directing faculty,
which they designate rp/efioviKov; and the ra-
tional faculty, which they call TioyiKoy, — and
ultimately subdivided these into seventeen'
parts. Thus variously is the soul dissected
by the different schools. Such divisions,
however, ought not to be regarded so much
as parts of the soul, as powers, or faculties,
or operations thereof, even as Aristotle him-
self has regarded some of them as being.
For they are not portions or organic parts of
the soul's substance, but functions of the soul
— such as those of motion, of action, of
thought, and whatsoever others they divide
in this manner; such, likewise, as the five
senses themselves, so well known to all — see-
ing, hearing, tasting, touching, smelling.
Now, although they have allotted to the whole
of these respectively certain parts of the body
as their special domiciles, it does not from
that circumstance follow that a like distribu-
tion will be suitable to the sections of the soul;
for even the body itself would not admit of
such a partition as they would have the soul
undergo. But of the whole number of the
limbs one body is made up, so that the ar-
rangement is rather a concretion than a di-
vision. Look at that very wonderful piece of
organic mechanism by Archimedes, — I mean
his hydrauHc organ, with its many limbs, parts,


I This is Oehler's text ; another reading has t^velve, which one
would suppose to be the right one.


bands, passages for the notes, outlets for their
sounds, combinations for their harmony, and
the array of its pipes; but yet the whole of
these details constitute only one instrument.
In like manner the wind, which breathes
throughout this organ at the impulse of the
hydraulic engine, is not divided into separate
portions from the fact of its dispersion through
the instrument to make it play: it is whole
and entire in its substance, although divided
in its operation. This example is not remote
from (the illustration) of Strato, and ^nesi-
demus, and Heraclitus: for these philoso-
phers maintain the unity of the soul, as dif-
fused over the entire body, and yet in every
part the same." Precisely like the wind blown
in the pipes throughout the organ, the soul
displays its energies in various ways by means
of the senses, being not indeed divided, but
rather distributed in natural order. Now,
under what designations these energies are to
be known, and by what divisions of themselves
they are to be classified, and to what special
offices and functions in the body they are to
be severally confined, the physicians and the
philosophers must consider and decide: for
ourselves, a few remarks only will be proper.

chap. XV. the soul's vitality and IN-
TELLIGENCE. ITS CHARACTER AND SEAT IN

MAN.

In. the first place, (we must determine)
whether there be in the soul some supreme
principle of vitality and intelligence ^ which
they call "the ruling power of the soul" —
TO //yefioviKov for if this be not admitted, the
whole condition of the soul is put in jeopardy.
Indeed, those men who say that there is no
such directing faculty, have begun by sup-
posing that the soul itself is simply a nonen-
tity. One Dicaearchus, a Messenian, and
amongst the medical profession Andreas and
Asclepiades, have thus destroyed the (soul's)
directing power, by actually placing in the
mind the senses, for which they claim the
ruling faculty. Asclepiades rides rough-shod
over us with even this argument, that very
many animals, after losing those parts of their
body in which the soul's principle of vitality
and sensation is thought mainly to exist, still
retain life in a considerable degree, as well
as sensation: as in the case of flies, and
wasps, and locusts, when you have cut off
their heads; and of she-goats, and tortoises,
and eels, when you have pulled out their
hearts. (He concludes), therefore, that
there is no especial principle or power of the


^Ubique ipsa.
3 Sapientialis.


194


A TREATISE ON THE SOUL.


[chap. XVI.


soul; for if there were, the soul's vigour and
strength could not continue when it was re-
moved with its domiciles (or corporeal or-
gans). However, Dicaearchus has several au-
thorities against him — and philosophers too —
Plato, Strato, Epicurus, Democritus, Emped-
ocles, Socrates, Aristotle; whilst in opposi-
tion to Andreas and Asclepiades (may be
placed their brother) physicians Herophilus,
Erasistratus, Diodes, Hippocrates, and Sora-
nus himself; and better than all others, there
are our Christian authorities. We are taught
by God concerning both these questions — viz.
that there is a ruling power in the soul, and
that it is enshrined ' in one particular recess
of the body. For, when one reads of God
as being "the searcher and witness of the
heart; "=' when His prophet is reproved by
His discovering to him the secrets of the
heart; 3 when God Himself anticipates in His
people the thoughts of their heart,-* "Why
think ye evil in your hearts ? " s when David
prays, "Create in me a clean heart, O God," ^
and Paul declares, " With the heart man be-
lieveth unto righteousness," ^ and John says,
" By his own heart is each man condemned;" ^
when, lastly, " he who looketh on a woman so
as to lust after her, hath already committed
adultery with her in his heart, "^ — then both
points are cleared fully up, that there is a di-
recting faculty of the soul, with which the
purpose of God may agree; in other words, a
supreme principle of intelligence and vitality
(for where there is intelligence, there must
be vitality), and that it resides in that most
precious part'° of our body to which God es-
pecially looks: so that you must not suppose,
with Heraclitus, that this sovereign faculty of
which we are treating is moved by some ex-
ternal force; nor with Moschion," that it floats
about through the whole body; nor with
Plato, that it is enclosed in the head; nor
with Zenophanes, that it culminates in the
crown of the head; nor that it reposes in the
brain, according to the opinion of Hippoc-
rates; nor around the basis of the brain, as
Herophilus thought; nor in the membranes
thereof, as Strato and Erasistratus said; nor
in the space between the eyebrows, as Strato
the physician held; nor within the enclosure "
of the breast, according to Epicurus: but


« Consecratum.
2Wisd. i. 6.
3 Prov. xxiv. 12.
4Ps. cxxxix. 23.
SMatt. ix. 4.

6 Ps. li. 12.

7 Rom. X. 10.

8 I John iii. 20.

9 Matt. V. 28.

10 In eo thesauro.

" Not Suidas' philosopher of that name, but a renowned ohy-
sidan mentioned by Galen and Pliny (Oehler).
»2 Lorica.


rather, as the Egyptians have always taught,
especially such of them as were accounted the
expounders of sacred truths;'^ in accordance,
too, with that verse of Orpheus or Empedo-
cles:

" Namque homini sanguis circumcordialis est sensus." '♦
" Man has his (supreme) sensation in the blood around
his heart."

Even Protagoras 's likewise, and Apollodo-
rus, and Chrysippus, entertain this same view,
so that (our friend) Asclepiades may go in
quest of his goats bleating without a heart,
and hunt his flies without their heads; and let
all those (worthies), too, who have predeter-
mined the character of the human soul from
the condition of brute animals, be quite sure
that it is themselves rather who are alive in a
heartless and brainless state.

CHAP. XVI. THE soul's PARTS. ELEMENTS

OF THE RATIONAL SOUL.

That position of Plato's is also quite in
keeping with the faith, in which he divides
the soul into two parts — the rational and the
irrational. To this definition we take no ex-
ception, except that we would not ascribe this
twofold distinction to the nature (of the soul).
It is the rational element which we must be-
lieve to be its natural condition, impressed
upon it from its very first creation by its
Author, who is Himself esentially rational.
For how should that be other than rational,
which God produced on His own prompting;
nay more, which He expressly sent forth by
His own afflatus or breath ? The irrational
element, however, we must understand to
have accrued later, as having proceeded from
the instigation of the serpent — the very
achievement of (the first) transgression —
which thenceforward became inherent in the
soul, and grew with its growth, assuming the
manner by this time of a natural development,
happening as it did immediately at the be-
ginning of nature. But, inasmuch as the same
Plato speaks of the rational element only as
existing in the soul of God 'Himself, if we
were to ascribe the irrational element likewise
to the nature which our soul has received
from God, then the irrational element will be
equally derived from God, as being a natural
production, because God is the author of na-
ture. Now from the devil proceeds the in-
centive to sin. All sin, however, is irrational:
therefore the irrational proceeds from the
devil, from whom sin proceeds; and it is ex-


»3 The Ejfyptian hierophants.

14 The original, as given in Stobseus, Eclo^. \. p. 1026, is this
hexameter : Al/ixa ya.f> avOputnoi.^ irtpiKafi&iOv effTi v6rifi.a.

'5 Or probably that Prnxagoras the physician who is often
mentioned by Athenseus and by Pliny (Pamel.).


I


CHAP. XVII.]


A TREATISE ON THE SOUL.


195


traneous to God, to whom also the irrational
is an alien* principle. The diversity, then,
between these two elements arises from the
difference of their authors. When, therefore,
Plato reserves the rational element (of the
soul) to God'alone, and subdivides it into two
departments the irascible^ which they call
&viiik6v, and the co7icupisciblc^ which they desig-
nate by the term ■'t-KLQv^riTiKov (in such a way as
to make the first common to us and lions, and
the second shared between ourselves and flies,
whilst the rational element is confined to us
and God) — I see that this point will have to
to be treated by us, owing to the facts which
we find operating also in Christ. For you
may behold this triad of qualities in the Lord.
There was the rational element, by which He
taught, by which He discoursed, by which
He prepared the way of salvation; there was
moreover indignatioti in Him, by which He
inveighed against the scribes and the Phari-
sees; and there was the principle of desire, by
which He so earnestly desired to eat the pass
over with His disciples.' In our own cases,
accordingly, the irascible and the concupisci-
ble elements of our soul must not invariably
be put to the account of the irrational (nature),
since we are sure that in our Lord these ele-
ments operated in entire accordance with
reason. God will be angry, with perfect
reason, with all who deserve His wrath; and
with reason, too, will God desire whatever ob-
jects and claims are worthy of Himself. For
He will show indignation against the evil
man, and for the good man will He desire
salvation. To ourselves even does the apostle
allow the concupiscible quality. ' ' If any man, ' '
says he, " desireth the -office of a bishop, he
desireth a good work."^ Now, by saying
"a good work," he shows us that the desire
is a reasonable one. He permits us likewise
to feel indignation. How should he not,
when he himself experiences the same? "I
would," says he, "that they were even cut
off which trouble you." 3 In perfect agree-
ment with reason was that indignation which
resulted from his desirfe to maintain discipline
and order. When, however, he says, "We
were formerly the children of wrath," -» he
censures an irrational irascibility, such as
proceeds not from that nature which is the
production of God, but from that which the
devil brought in, who is himself styled the
lord or " master " of his own class, " Ye can-
not serve two masters," ^ and has the actual
designation of "father:" " Ye are of your


' Luke xxii. 15

2 I Tim. iii. x.

3 Gal. V. 12.
* Eph. ii. 3.

5 Matt. vi. 24.


father the devil." * So that you need not be
afraid to ascribe to him the mastery and do-
minion over that second, later, and deterio-
rated nature (of which we have been speak-
ing), when you read of him as " the sower of
tares," and the nocturnal spoiler of the crop
of corn. 7

CHAP. XVII. THE FIDELITY OF THE SENSES,

IMPUGNED BY PLATO, VINDICATED BY CHRIST
HIMSELF.

Then, again, when we encounter the ques-
tion (as to the veracity of those five senses
which we learn with our alphabet; since from
this source even there arises some support
for our heretics. They are the faculties of
seeing, and hearing, and smelling, and tasting,
and touching. The fidelity of these senses
is impugned with too much severity by the
Platonists,^ and according to some by Herac-
litus also, and Diodes, and Empedocles; at
any rate, Plato, in the Timceus, declares the
operations of the senses to be irrational, and
vitiated 9 by our opinions or beliefs. Decep-
tion is imputed to the sight, because it asserts
that oars, when immersed in the water, are
inclined or bent, notwithstanding the certainty
that they are straight; because, again, it is
quite sure that that distant tower with its
really quadrangular contour is round; because
also it will discredit the fact of the truly par-
allel fabric of yonder porch or arcade, by sup-
posing it to be narrower and narrower towards
its end; and because it will join with the sea
the sky which hangs at so great a height above
it. In the same way, our hearing is charged
with fallacy: we think, for instance, that that
is a noise in the sky which is nothing else
than the rumbling of a carriage; or, if you
prefer it '° the other way, when the thunder
rolled at a distance, we were quite sure that
it was a carriage which made the noise. Thus,
too, are our faculties of smell and taste at
fault, because the selfsame perfumes and
wines lose their value after we have used them
awhile. On the same principle our touch is
censured, when the identical pavement which
seemed rough to the hands is felt by the feet to
be smooth enough; and in the baths a stream
of warm water is pronounced to be quite hot
at first, and beautifully temperate afterwards.
Thus, according to them, our senses deceive
us, when all the while we are (the cause of
the discrepancies, by) changing our opinions.
The Stoics are more moderate in their views;


6 John vi. 44.

7 Matt. xiii. 25.

8 Academici.

9 Coimplicitam "entangled" or "embarrassed." See the
Tintaeus pp. 27, 28.
xoVel.


196


A TREATISE ON THE SOUL.


[chap. XVII,


for they do not load with the obloquy of de-
ception every one of the senses, and at all
times. The Epicureans, again, show still
greater consistency, in maintaining that all
the senses are equally true in. their testimony,
and always so — only in a different way. It is
not our organs of sensation that are at fault,
but our opinion. The senses only experience
sensation, they do not exercise opinion; it is
the soul that opines. They separated opinion
from the senses, and sensation from the soul.
Well, but whence comes opinion, if not from
the senses ? Indeed, unless the eye had de-
scried a round shape in that tower, it could
have had no idea that it possessed roundness.
Again, whence arises sensation if not from the
soul? For if the soul had no body, it would
have no sensation. Accordingly, sensation
comes from the soul, and opinion from sensa-
tion; and the whole (process) is the soul. But
further, it may well be insisted on that there
is a something which causes the discrepancy
between the report of the senses and the
reality of the facts. Now, since it is possible,
(as we have seen), for phenomena to be re-
ported which exist not in the objects, why
should it not be equally possible for phe-
nomena to be reported which are caused not
by the senses, but by reasons and conditions
which intervene, in the very nature of the
case ? If so, it will be only right that they
should be duly recognised. The truth is, that
it was the water which was the cause of the oar
seeming to be inclined or bent: out of the
water, it was perfectly straight in appearance
(as well as in fact). The delicacy of the sub-
stance or medium which forms a mirror by
means of its luminosity, according as it is
struck or shaken, by the vibration actually
destroys the appearance of the straightness of
a right line. In like manner, the condition
of the open space which fills up the interval
between it and us, necessarily causes the true
shape of the tower to escape our notice; for
the uniform density of the surrounding air
covering its angles with a similar light oblit-
erates their outlines. So, again, the equal
breadth of the arcade is sharpened or narrowed
off towards its termination, until its aspect,
becoming more and more contracted under its
prolonged roof, comes to a vanishing point in
the direction of its farthest distance. So the
sky blends itself with the sea, the vision be-
coming spent at last, which had maintained
duly the boundaries of the two elements, so
long as its vigorous glance lasted. As for the
(alleged cases of deceptive) hearing, what else
could produce the illusion but the similarity
of the sounds? And if the perfume after-
wards was less strong to the smell, and the


wine more flat to the taste, and the water not
so hot to the touch, their original strength
was after all found in the whole of them
pretty well unimpaired. In the matter, how-
ever, of the roughness and smoothness of the
pavement, it was only natural and right that
limbs like the hands and the feet, so different
in tenderness and callousness, should have
different impressions. In this way, then,
there cannot occur an illusion in our senses
without an adequate cause. Now if special
causes, (such as we have indicated,) mis-
lead our senses and (through our senses)
our opinions also, then we must no longer
ascribe the deception to the senses, which
follow the specific causes of the illusion,,
nor to the opinions we form; for these are
occasioned and controlled by our senses, which
only follow the causes. Persons who are
afflicted with madness or insanity, mistake
one object for another. Orestes in his sister
sees his mother; Ajax sees Ulysses in the
slaughtered herd; Athamas and Agave descry
wild beasts in their children. Now is it their
eyes or their phrenzy which you must blame
for so vast a fallacy ? All things taste bitter,
in the redundancy of their bile, to those who-
have the jaundice. Is it their taste which
you will charge with the physical prevarica-
tion, or their ill state of health ? All the
senses, therefore, are disordered occasionally,
or imposed upon, but only in such a way as to
be quite free of any fault in their own natural
functions. But further still, not even against
the specific causes and conditions themselves
must we lay an indictment of deception. For,
since these physical aberrations happen for
stated reasons, the reasons do not deserve to
be regarded as deceptions. Whatever ought
to occur in a certain manner is not a decep-
tion. If, then, even these circumstantial
causes must be acquitted of all censure and
blame, how much more should we free from
reproach the senses, over which the said causes
exercise a liberal sway ! Hence we are bound
most certainly to claim for the senses truth,
and fidelity, and integrity, seeing that they
never render any other account of their im-
pressions than is enjoined on them by the
specific causes or conditions which in all cases
produce that discrepancy which appears be-
tween the report of the senses and the reality
of the objects. What mean you, then, O
most insolent Academy ? You overthrow the
entire condition of human life; you disturb
the whole order of nature; you obscure the
good providence of God Himself: for the
senses of man which God has appointed over
all His works, that we might understand, in-
habit, dispense, and enjoy them, (you re-


CHAP. XVIII.]


A TREATISE ON THE SOUL.


197


proach) as fallacious and treacherous tyrants !
But is it not from these that all creation re-
ceives our services? Is it not by their means
that a second form is impressed even upon
the world ? — so many arts, so many industri-
ous resources, so many pursuits, such busi-
ness, such offices, such commerce, such
remedies, counsels, consolations, modes, civ-
ilizations, and accomplishments of life ! All
these things have produced the very relish
and savour of human existence; whilst by
these senses of man, he alone of all animated
nature has the distinction of being a rational
animal, with a capacity for intelligence and
knowledge — nay, an ability to form the Acad-
emy itself ! But Plato, in order to disparage
the testimony of the senses, in the PhcBdrus
denies (in the person of Socrates) his own
ability to know even himself, according to the
injunction of the Delphic oracle; and in the
ThecEtetus he deprives himself of the faculties
of knowledge and sensation; and again, in the
Fhcedrus he postpones till after death the post-
humous knowledge, as he calls it, of the truth;
and yet for all he went on playing the philoso-
pher even before he died. We may not, I say,
we may not call into question the truth of the
(poor vilified) senses,' lest we should even in
Christ Himself, bring doubt upon ^ the truth of
their sensation; lest perchance it should be said
that He did 7wt really " behold Satan as light-
ning fall from heaven;'^ that He did no^ really
hear the Father's voice testifying of Himself ;■♦
or that He was deceived in touching Peter's
wife's mother; s or that the fragrance of the
ointment which He afterwards smelled was
different from that which He accepted for His
burial;^ and that the taste of the wine was dif-
ferent from that which He consecrated in
memory of His blood. ^ On this false prin-
ciple it was that Marcion actually chose to
believe that He was a phantom, denying to
Him the reality of a perfect body. Now, not
even to His apostles was His nature ever a
matter of deception. He was truly both seen
and heard upon the mount; ^ true and real was
the draught of that wine at the marriage of
(Cana in) Galilee ;5 true and real also was the
touch of the then believing Thomas. '° Read
the testimony of John: " That which we have
seen, which we have heard, which we have
looked upon with our eyes, and our hands


' Sensus istos.

2 Deliberetur.

3 Luke X. 18.

4 Matt. iii. 17.

5 Matt. viii. 15.
*Matt. xxvi. 7-12.

7 Matt. xxvi. 27, 2

8 Matt. xvii. 3-8.

9 Tohn ii. i-io.
^° John XX. 27.


Luke xxii. 19, 20 ; i Cor. xi. 25.


have handled, of the Word of life." " False,
of course, and deceptive must have been
that testimony, if the witness of our eyes, and
ears, and hands be by nature a lie.

CHAP. XVIH. PLATO SUGGESTED CERTAIN ER-
RORS TO THE GNOSTICS. FUNCTIONS OF
THE SOUL.

I turn now to the department of our intel-
lectual faculties, such as Plato has handed it
over to the heretics, distinct from our bodily
functions, having obtained the knowledge of
them before death.*' He asks in the Phado^
What, then, (do you think) concerning the
actual possession of k?io7vlcdge? Will the
body be a hindrance to it or not, if one shall
admit it as an associate in the search after
knowledge ? I have a similar question to
ask: Have the faculties of their sight and
hearing any truth and reality for human
beings or not ? Is it not the case, that even
the poets are always muttering against us,
that we can never hear or see anything for
certain ? He remembered, no doubt, what
Epicharmus the comic poet had said: " It is
the mind which sees, the mind that hears —
all else is blind and deaf." To the same
purport he says again, that that man is the
wisest whose mental power is the clearest;
who never applies the sense of sight, nor adds
to his mind the help of any such faculty, but
employs the intellect itself in unmixed se-
renity when he indulges in contemplation for
the purpose of acquiring an unalloyed insight
into the nature of things; divorcing himself
with all his might from his eyes and ears and
(as one must express himself) from the whole
of his body, on the ground of its disturbing
the soul, and not allowing it to possess either
truth or wisdom, whenever it is brought into
communication with it. We see, then, that
in opposition to the bodily senses another
faculty is provided of a much more serviceable
character, even the powers of the soul, which
produce an understanding of that truth whose
realities are not palpable nor open to the
bodily senses, but are very remote from men's
everyday knowledge, lying in secret — in the
heights above, and in the presence of God
Himself. For Plato maintains that there are
certain invisible substances, incorporeal, ce-
lestial,'^ divine, and eternal, which they call
ideas, that is to say, (archetypal) forms, which
are the patterns and causes of those objects
of nature which are manifest to us, and lie
under our corporeal senses: the former, (ac-
cording to Plato,) are the actual verities, and


" I John i. I.

" Said ironicallly, as if rallying Plato for inconsistency between
his theory here and the fact.

^3 Supermundiales " placed above this world."


198


A TREATISE ON THE SOUL.


[chap. XVIII.


the latter the images and likenesses of them.
Well, now, are there not here gleams of the
heretical principles of the Gnostics and the
Valentinians ? It is from this philosophy that
they eagerly adopt the difference between the
bodily senses and the intellectual faculties, —
a distinction which they actually apply to the
parable of the ten virgins: making the five
foolish virgins to symbolize the five bodily
senses, seeing that these are so silly and so
easy to be deceived; and the wise virgin to
express the meaning of the intellectual facul-
ties, which are so wise as to attain to that
mysterious and supernal truth, which is placed
in the pleroma. (Here, then, we have) the
mystic original of the ideas of these heretics.
For in this philosophy lie both their ^ons
and their genealogies. Thus, too, do they
divide sensation, both into the intellectual
powers from their spiritual seed, and the sen-
suous faculties from the animal, which cannot
by any means comprehend spiritual things.
From the former germ spring invisible things;
from the latter, visible things which are grov-
elling and temporary, and which are obvious
to the senses, placed as they are in palpable
forms.' It is because of these views that we
have in a former passage stated as a prelim-
inary fact, that the mind is nothing else than
an apparatus or instrument of the soul,=' and
that the spirit is no other faculty, separate
from the soul, but is the soul itself exercised
in respiration; although that influence which
either God on the one hand, or the devil on
the other, has breathed upon it, must be re-
garded in the light of an additional element. ^
And now, with respect to the difference be-
tween the intellectual powers and the sensu-
ous faculties, we only admit it so far as the
natural diversity between them requires of
us. (There is, of course, a difference) be-
tween things corporeal and things spiritual,
between visible and invisible beings, between
objects which are manifest to the view and
those which are hidden from it; because the
one class are attributed to sensation, and the
other to the intellect. But yet both the one
and the other must be regarded as inherent
in the soul, and as obedient to it, seeing that
it embraces bodily objects by means of the
body, in exactly the same way that it con-
ceives incorporeal objects by help of the
mind, except that it is even exercising sensa-
tion when it is employing the intellect. For
is it not true, that to employ the senses is to
use the intellect ? And to employ the intel-
lect amounts to a use of the senses ? * What


' Imaginibus.

» See above, c. xii. p. 192.

3 Above, c. xi. p. 191.

4 Intelligere sentire est.


indeed can sensation be, but the understand-
ing of that which is the object of the sensa-
tion ? And what can the intellect or under-
standing be, but the seeing of that which is
the object understood ? Why adopt such ex-
cruciating means of torturing simple knowl-
edge and crucifying the truth? Who can
show me the sense which does not understand
the object of its sensation, or the intellect
which perceives not the object which it un-
derstands, in so clear away as to prove to me
that the one can do without the other? If
corporeal things are the objects of sense, and
incorporeal ones objects of the intellect, it is
the classes of the objects which are different,
not the domicile or abode of sense and intel-
lect; in other words, not the soul [ariima) and
the mind (afiitnus). By what, in short, are
corporeal things perceived ? If it is by the
soul, 5 then the mind is a sensuous faculty, and
not merely an intellectual power; for whilst
it understands, it also perceives, because with-
out the perception there is no understanding.
If, however, corporeal things are perceived
by the soul, then it follows that the soul's
power is an intellectual one, and not merely
a sensuous faculty; for while it perceives it
also understands, because without understand-
ing there is no perceiving. And then, again,
by what are incorporeal things understood ?
If it is by the mind,*^ where will be the soul ?
If it is by the soul, where will be the mind ?
For things which differ ought to be mutually
absent from each other, when they are occu-
pied in their respective functions and duties.
It must be your opinion, indeed, that the
mind is absent from the soul on certain occa-
sons; for (you suppose) that we are so made
and constituted as not to know that we have
seen or heard something, on the hypothesis '
that the mind was absent at the time. I must
therefore maintain that the very soul itself
neither saw nor heard, since it was at the
given moment absent with its active power —
that is to say, the mind. The truth is, that
whenever a man is out of his mind,^ it is his
soul that is demented — not because the mind
is absent, but because it is a fellow-sufferer
(with the soul) at the time.' Indeed, it is
the soul which is principally affected by casu-
alties of such a kind. Whence is this fact
confirmed ? It is confirmed from the follow-


5 Oehler has " anima ;" we should rather have expected
" animo," which is another reading.
6" Animo " this time.

7 Subjunctive verb, " fueiit."

8 Dementit.

9 The opposite opinion was held by Tertullian's opponents, who
distinguished between the mind and the soul. They said, that
when a man was out of his mind, his mind left him, but that his
soul remained. (Lactantius, Dc Opi/. xviii. ; Instit. Div. vii. 12 ;
La Cerda).


I


CHAP. XIX.]


A TREATISE ON THE SOUL.


199


ing consideration: that after the soul's de-
parture, the mind is no longer found in a
man: it always follows the soul; nor does it
at last remain behind it alone, after death.
Now, since it follows the soul, it is also indis-
solubly attached to it; just as the under-
standing is attached to the soul, which is fol-
lowed by the mind, with which the under-
standing is indissolubly connected. Granted
now that the understanding is superior to the
senses, and a better discoverer of mysteries,
what matters it, so long as it is only a pecul-
iar faculty of the soul, just as the senses
themselves are ? It does not at all affect my
argument, unless the understanding were
held to be superior to the senses, for the pur-
pose of deducing from the allegation of such
superiority its separate condition likewise.
After thus combating their alleged difference,
I have also to refute this question of superi-
ority, previous to my approaching the belief
(which heresy propounds) in a superior god.
On this point, however, of a (superior) god,
we shall have to measure swords with the
heretics on their own ground." Our present
subject concerns the soul, and the point is to
prevent the insidious ascription of a superi-
ority to the intellect or understanding. Now,
although the objects which are touched by
the intellect are of a higher nature, since they
are spiritual, than those which are embraced
by the senses, since these are corporeal, it
will still be only a superiority in the objects — as
of lofty ones contrasted with humble — not in
Xht faculties of the intellect against the senses.
For how can the intellect be superior to the
senses, when it is these which educate it for
the discovery of various truths ? It is a fact,
that these truths are learned by means of pal-
pable forms; in other words, invisible things
are discovered by the help of visible ones,
even as the apostle tells us in his epistle:
" For the invisible things of Him are clearly
seen from the creation of the world, being
understood by the things that are made;"^
and as Plato too might inform our heretics:
" The things which appear are the image ^ of
the things which are concealed from view," *
whence it must needs follow that this world
is by all means an image of some other: so
that the intellect evidently uses the senses for
its own guidance, and authority, and main-
stay; and without the senses truth could not
be attained. How, then, can a thing be su-
perior to that which is instrumental to its ex-
istence, which is also indispensable to it, and


^ See his treatise, Against Marcion.
' Rom. i. 20.

3 Facies.

4 Timceus^ pp. 29, 30, 37, 38.


to whose help it owes everything which it ac-
quires ? Two conclusions therefore follow
from what we have said : (i) That the intellect
is not to be preferred above the senses, on
the (supposed) ground that the agent through
which a thing exists is inferior to the thing
itself; and (2) that the intellect must not be
separated from the senses, since the instru-
ment by which a thing's existence is sustained
is associated with the thing itself.

CHAP. XIX. — THE INTELLECT COEVAL WITH
THE SOUL IN THE HUMAN BEING. AN EX-
AMPLE FROM ARISTOTLE CONVERTED INTO
EVIDENCE FAVOURABLE TO THESE VIEWS.

Nor must we fail to notice those writers who
deprive the soul of the intellect even for a
short period of time. They do this in order
to prepare the way of introducing the intellect
— and the mind also — at a subsequent time
of life, even at the time when intelligence
appears in a man. They maintain that the
stage of infancy is supported by the soul
alone, simply to promote vitality, without any
intention of acquiring knowledge also, because
not all things have knowledge which possess
life. Trees, for instance, to quote Aristotle's
example, 5 have vitality, but have not knowl-
edge; and with him agrees every one who
gives a share to all animated beings of the
animal substance, which, according to our
view, exists in man alone as his special prop-
erty,— not because it is the work of God,
which all other creatures are likewise, but
because it is the breath of God, which this
(human soul) alone is, which we say is born
with the full equipment of its proper faculties.
Well, let them meet us with the example of
the trees: we will accept their challenge, (nor
shall we find in it any detriment to our own
argument;) for it is an undoubted fact, that
whilst trees are yet but twigs and sprouts, and
before they even reach the sapling stage, there
is in them their own proper faculty of life, as
soon as they spring out of their native beds.
But then, as time goes on, the vigour of the
tree slowly advances, as it grows and hardens
into its woody trunk, until its mature age
completes the condition which nature destines
for it. Else what resources would trees pos-
sess in due course for the inoculation of grafts,
and the formation of leaves, and the swelling
of their buds, and the graceful shedding of
their blossom, and the softening of their sap,
were there not in them the quiet growth of
the full provision of their nature, and the dis-
tribution of this life over all their branches
for the accomplishment of their, maturity ?


5 His De Anima. ii. 2. 3.


200


A TREATISE ON THE SOUL.


[chap. XX.


Trees, therefore, nave ability or knowledge;
and they derive it from whence they also de-
rive vitality — that is, from the one source of
vitality and knowledge which is peculiar to
their nature, and that from the infancy which
they, too, begin with. For I observe that
even the vine, although yet tender and im-
mature, still understands its own natural busi-
ness, and strives to cling to some support,
that, leaning on it, and lacing through it,' it
may so attain its growth. Indeed, without
waiting for the husbandman's training, with-
out an espalier, without a prop, whatever its
tendrils catch, it will fondly cling to,=' and em-
brace with really greater tenacity and force
by its own inclination than by your volition.
It longs and hastens to be secure. Take also
ivy-plants, never mind how young: I observe
their attempts from the very first to grasp
objects above them, and outrunning every-
thing else, to hang on to the highest thing,
preferring as they do to spread over walls
with their leafy web and woof rather than
creep on the ground and be trodden under
by every foot that likes to crush them. On
the other hand, in the case of such trees as
receive injury from contact with a building,
how do they hang off as they grow and avoid
what injures them ! You can see that their
branches were naturally meant to take the
opposite direction, and can very well under-
stand the vital instincts ^ of such a tree from
its avoidance of the wall. It is contented (if
it be only a little shrub) with its own insig-
nificant destiny, which it has in its foreseeing
instinct thoroughly been aware of from its
infancy, only it still fears even a ruined build-
ing. On my side, then, why should I not
contend for these wise and sagacious natures
of trees ? Let them have vitality, as the phi-
losophers permit it; but let them have knowl-
edge too, although the philosophers disavow
it. Even the infancy of a log, then, may
have an intellect (suitable to it): how much
more may that of a human being, whose soul
(which may be compared with the nascent
sprout of a tree) has been derived from Adam
as its root, and has been propagated amongst
his posterity by means of woman, to whom it
has been entrusted for transmission, and thus
has sprouted into life with all its natural ap-
paratus, both of intellect and of sense ! I
am much mistaken if the human person, even
from his infancy, when he saluted life with
his infant cries, does not testify to his actual
possession of the faculties of sensation and
intellect by the fact of his birth, vindicating


* Innixa et innexa.

aAmabit.

3 Animationem. The possession and use of an " aniraa."


at one and the same time the use of all his
senses — that of seeing by the light, that of
hearing by sounds, that of taste by liquids,
that of smell by the air, that of touch by the
ground. This earliest voice of infancy, then,
is the first effort of the senses, and the initial
impulse of mental perceptions.-* There is
also the further fact, that some persons un-
derstand this plaintive cry of the infant to
be an augury of affliction in the prospect of
our tearful life, whereby from the very mo-
ment of birth (the soul) .has to be regarded
as endued with prescience, much more with
intelligence. Accordingly by this intuition s
the babe knows his mother, discerns the
nurse, and even recognises the waiting-maid;
refusing the breast of another woman, and
the cradle that is not his own, and longing
only for the arms to which he is accustomed.
Now from what source does he acquire this
discernment of novelty and custom, if not
from instinctive knowledge ? How does it j
happen that he is irritated and quieted, if not j
by help of his initial intellect? It would be
very strange indeed that infancy were natu-
rally so lively, if it had not mental power;
and naturally so capable of impression and
affection, if it had no intellect. But (we hold
the contrary): for Christ, by "accepting
praise out of the mouth of babes and suck-
lings,"^ has declared that neither childhood
nor infancy is without sensibility, ^ — the for-
mer of which states, when meeting Him with
approving shouts, proved its ability to offer
Him testimony;^ while the other, by being
slaughtered, for His sake of course, knew
what violence meant. 5"

CHAP. XX. — THE SOUL, AS TO ITS NATURE UNI-
FORM, BUT ITS FACULTIES VARIOUSLY DEVEL-
OPED. VARIETIES ONLY ACCIDENTAL.

And here, therefore, we draw our conclu-
sion, that all the natural properties of the soul
are inherent in it as parts of its substance;
and that they grow and develope along with
it, from the very moment of its own origin at
birth. Just as Seneca says, whom we so often
find on our side:'° "There are implanted
within us the seeds of all the arts and periods
of life. And God, our Master, secretly pro-
duces our mental dispositions; " that is, from
the germs which are implanted and hidden in
us by means of infancy, and these are the intel-
lect: for from these our natural dispositions are


4 Intellectuam.

5 Spiritu. The mental instinct, just mentioned.

6 Ps. viii. 2 ; Matt. xxi. i6.

7 Hebetes.

8 Matt. xxi. 15.

9 Matt. ii. i6-r8.
'oSaepe noster.


CHAP. XXI.]


A TREATISE ON THE SOUL.


20 1


evolved. Now, even the seeds of plants have
one form in each kind, but their development
varies: some open and expand in a healthy
and perfect state, while others either improve
or degenerate, owing to the conditions of
weather and soil, and from the appliance of
labour and care; also from the course of the
seasons, and from the occurrence of casual
circumstances. In like manner, the soul may-
well be ' uniform in its seminal origin, al-
though multiform by the process of nativity.^
And here local influences, too, must be taken
into account. It has been said that dull and
brutish persons are born at Thebes; and the
most accomplished in wisdom and speech at
Athens, where in the district of Colythus^
children speak — such is the precocity of their
tongue — before they are a month old. In-
deed, Plato himself tells us, in the Timaus^
that Minerva, when preparing to found her
great city, only regarded the nature of the
country which gave promise of mental dispo-
sitions of this kind; whence he himself in The
Laws instructs Megillus and Clinias to be
careful in their selection of a site for building
a city. Empedocles, however, places the
cause of a subtle or an obtuse intellect in the
quality of the blood, from which he derives
progress and perfection in learning and
science. The subject of national peculiarities
has grown by this time into proverbial noto-
riety. Comic poets deride the Phrygians for
their cowardice; Sallust reproaches the Moors
for their levity, and the Dalmatians for their
cruelty; even the apostle brands the Cretans
as " liars." ^ Very likely, too, something
must be set down to the score of bodily con-
dition and the state of the health. Stoutness
hinders knowledge, but a spare form stimu-
lates it; paralysis prostrates the mind, a de-
cline preserves it. How much more will those
accidental circumstances have to be noticed,
which, in addition to the state of one's body
or one's health, tend to sharpen or to dull the
intellect ! It is sharpened by learned pursuits,
by the sciences, the arts, by experimental
knowledge, business habits, and studies; it is
blunted by ignorance, idle habits, inactivity,
lust, inexperience, listlessness, and vicious
pursuits. Then, besides these influences,
there must perhaps s be added the supreme
powers. Now these are the supreme powers:
according to our (Christian) notions, they are
the Lord God and His adversary the devil;
but according to men's general opinion about


' Licebit.
2Fetu.

3 Tertullian perhaps mentions this " demus " of Athens as the
birthplace of Plato (Oehler).

4 Tit. i. 12.

5 Si et alia.


providence, they are fate and necessity; and
about fortune, it is man's freedom of will.
Even the philosophers allow these distinc-
tions; whilst on our part we have already
undertaken to treat of them, on the principles
of the (Chriiitian) faith, in a separate work.**
It is evident how great must be the influences
which so variously affect the one nature of the
soul, since they are commonly regarded as
separate " tiatures." Still they are not differ-
ent species, but casual incidents of one nature
and substance — even of that which God con-
ferred on Adam, and made the mould of all
(subsequent ones). Casual incidents will they
always remain, but never will they become
specific differences. However great, too, at
present is the variety of men's manners, it was
not so in Adam, the founder of their race.
But all these discordances ought to have ex-
isted in him as the fountainhead, and thence
to have descended to us in an unimpaired
variety, if the variety had been due to nature.

CHAP. XXI. AS FREE-WILL ACTUATES AN INDI-
VIDUAL SO MAY HIS CHARACTER CHANGE.

Now, if the soul possessed this uniform and
simple nature from the beginning in Adam,
previous to so many mental dispositions (be-
ing developed out of it), it is not rendered
multiform by such various development, nor
by the triple 7 form predicated of it in '"''the
Valenti?ua?i tri?iity'' (that we may still keep
the condemnation of that heresy in view), for
not even this nature is discoverable in Adam.
What had he that was spiritual ? Is it because
he prophetically declared "the great mystery
of Christ and the church ? " ^ " This is bone
of my bone, and flesh of my flesh: she shall
be called Woman. Therefore shall a man
leave his father and mother, and he shall
cleave unto his wife; and they two shall be
one flesh." ' But this (gift of prophecy) only
came on him afterwards, when God infused
into him the ecstasy, or spiritual quality, in
which prophecy consists. If, again, the evil
of sin was developed in him, this must not be
accounted as a 7iattiral disposition: it was
rather produced by the instigation of the
(old) serpent as far from being incidental to
his nature as it was from being material in
him, for we have already excluded belief in
" Matter." "<» Now, if neither the spiritual
element, nor what the heretics call the ma-
terial element, was properly inherent in him


6 Tertullian wrote a work De Faio, which is lost. Fulgen-
tius, p. 561, gives a quotation from it.

7 i.e., the carnal, the animal, and the spiritual. Comp. Adv.
Valentin, xxv., and De Resur. Curfits, Iv,

8 Eph. V. 32.

9 Gen. ii. 23, 24.

'° See Adv. nerntog. xiiL


202


A TREATISE ON THE SOUL.


[chap. xxii.


(since, if he iiad been created out of matter,
the germ of evil must have been an integral
part of his constitution), it remains that the
one only original element of his nature was
what is called the animal (the principle of
vitality, the soul), which we maintain to be
simple and uniform in its condition. Con-
cerning this, it remains for us to inquire
whether, as being called natural, it ought to
be deemed subject to change. (The here-
tics whom we have referred to) deny that
nature is susceptible of any change,' in order
that they may be able to establish and settle
their threefold theory, or "trinity," in all its
characteristics as to the several natures, be-
cause "a good tree cannot produce evil
fruit, nor a corrupt tree good fruit; and no-
body gathers figs of thorns, nor grapes of
brambles." "^ If so, then "God will not be
able any longer to raise up from the stones
children unto Abraham; nor to make a gen-
eration of vipers bring forth fruits of repent-
ance." ^ And if so, the apostle too was in
error when he said in his epistle, " Ye were
at one time darkness, (but now are ye light
in the Lord;)"^ and, "We also were by
nature children of wrath; " s and, " Such were
some of you, but ye are washed."^ The
statements, however, of holy Scripture will
never be discordant with truth. A corrupt
tree will never yield good fruit, unless the
better nature be grafted into it; nor will a
good tree produce evil fruit, except by the
same process of cultivation. Stones also will
become children of Abraham, if educated in
Abraham's faith; and a generation of vipers
will bring forth the fruits of penitence, if they
reject the poison of their malignant nature.
This will be the power of the grace of God,
more potent indeed than nature, exercising
its sway over the faculty that underlies itself
within us — even the freedom of our will, which
is described as avre^oimo^ (of independent au-
thority); and inasmuch as this faculty is itself
also natural and mutable, in whatsoever direc-
tion it turns, it inclines of its own nature.
Now, that there does exist within us naturally
this independent authority {rd avre^oimov), we
have already shown in opposition both to
Marcion ^ and to Hermogenes.^ If, then, the
natural condition has to be submitted to a
definition, it must be determined to be twofold
— there being the category of the born and the
unborn, the made and not-made. Now that


»See Adv. Valentin, xxix.
a Luke vi. 43, 44.

3 Matt. iii. 7-9.

4 Eph. V. 8.
5Eph.ii.3.
*i Cor. VI. II.

7 See our Anti-Marcion, ii. 5-7,

8 In his work aeainst this man, e


now extant.


entitled De Censu A ni*na, not


which has received its constitution by being
made or by being born, is by nature capable
of being changed, for it can be both born again
and re-made; whereas that which is not-made
and unborn will remain for ever immoveable.
Since, however, this state is suited to God
alone, as the only Being who is unborn and
not-made (and therefore immortal and un-
changeable), it is absolutely certain that the
nature of all other existences which are born
and created is subject to modification and
change; so that if the threefold state is to be
ascribed to the soul, it must be supposed to
arise from the mutability of its accidental cir-
cumstances, and not from the appointment
of nature.

CHAP. XXII. — RECAPITULATION. DEFINITION
OF THE SOUL.

Hermogenes has already heard from us
what are the other natural faculties of the
soul, as well as their vindication and proof; 1
whence it may be seen that the soul is rather |
'the offspring of God than of matter. The '
names of these faculties shall here be simply
repeated, that they may not seem to be for-
gotten and passed out of sight. We have as-
signed, then, to the soul both that freedom
of the will which we just now mentioned, and
its dominion over the works of nature, and its
occasional gift of divination, independently
of that endowment of prophecy which accrues
to it expressly from the grace of God. We
shall therefore now quit this subject of the
soul's disposition, in order to set out fully in
order its various qualities. « The soul, then,
we define to be sprung from the breath of
God, immortal, possessing body, having form,
simple in its substance, intelligent in its own
nature, developing its power in various ways,
free in its determinations, subject to ]fe f^j
changes of accident, in its faculties mutable,
rational, supreme, endued with an instinct of
presentiment, evolved out of one (archetypal
soul). It remains for us now to consider how
it is developed out of this one original source;
in other words, whence, and when, and how
it is produced.


9 TertulHan had shown that " the soul is the breath or ajjfiatus
of God," in ch. iv. and xi. above. He demonstrated its " immor-
tality " in ch. ii.-iv., vi., ix.j xiv. ; and he will repeat his proof
hereafter, in ch. xxiv., xxxviii., xlv., li., liii., liv. Moreover, he
illustrates the soul's " corporeity " in ch. v.-viii. ; its " endow-
ment withyhrw or fi^rCy'' in ch. ix. ; its " simplicity in sub-
stance " in ch. X. and xi. ; its " inherent intelligence,^'' in ch. xii. ;
its varied development, in ch. xiii.-xv. The soul's " rationality^^
'■'■supremacy''' and "instinctive divination,'' Tertullian treated
of in his treatise De Censu Animce against Hermogenes (as he
has said in the text) ; but he has treated somewhat of the soul's
*' rational nature " in the sixteenth chapter above ; in the four-
teentliand fifteenth chapters he referred to the soul's "supremacy
or hegemony r y,h\\9,t •we have had a hmt about ils'* divining
faculty," even in infants, in ch. xix. The propagation of souls
from the one archetypal soul is the subject of the chapter before
us, as well as of the five succeeding ones (La Cerda).


CHAP. XXIV.]


A TREATISE ON THE SOUL.'


203


CHAP. XXIII. — THE OPINIONS OF SUNDRY HERE-
TICS WHICH ORIGINATE ULTIMATELY WITH
PLATO.

Some suppose that they came down from
heaven, with as firm a belief as they are apt
to entertain, when they indulge in the pros-
pect of an undoubted return thither. Satur-
ninus, the disciple of Menander, who belonged
to Simon's sect, introduced this opinion: he
affirmed that man was made by angels. A
futile, imperfect creation at first, weak and
unable to stand, he crawled upon the ground
like a worm, because he wanted the strength
to maintain an erect posture; but afterwards
having, by the compassion of the Supreme
Power (in whose image, which had not been
fully understood, he was clumsily formed),
obtained a slender spark of life, this roused
and righted his imperfect form, and animated
it with a higher vitality, and provided for its
return,. on its relinquishment of life, to its
original principle. Carpocrates, indeed, claims
for himself so extreme an amount of the
supernal qualities, that his disciples set their
own souls at once on an equality with Christ
(not to mention the apostles); and sometimes,
when it suits their fancy, even give them the
superiority — deeming them, forsooth, to have
partaken of that sublime virtue which looks
down upon the principalities that govern this
world. Apelles tells us that our souls were
enticed by earthly baits down from their super-
celestial abodes by a fiery angel, Israel's God
and ours, who then enclosed them firmly
within our sinful flesh. The hive of Valen-
tinus fortifies the soul with the germ of Sophia,
or Wisdom; by means of which germ they
recognise, in the images of visible objects,
the stories and Milesian fables of their own
^ons. 1 am sorry from my heart that Plato
has been the caterer to all these heretics. For
in the Phcedo he imagines that souls wander
from this world to that, and thence back again
hither; whilst in the TimcEtis he supposes
that the children of God, to whom had been
assigned the production of mortal creatures,
having taken for the soul the germ of im-
mortality, congealed around it a mortal
body, — thereby indicating that this world is
the figure of some other. Now, to procure
belief in all this — that the soui had formerly
lived with God in the heavens above, sharing
His ideas with Him, and afterwards came
down to live with us on earth, and whilst
here recollects the eternal patterns of things
which it had learnt before — he elaborated his
new formula, ^adijaeig avafivrjaei^, which means
that " learning is reminiscence;" implying
that the souls which come to us from thence
forget the things amongst which they formerly


lived, but that they afterwards recall them,
instructed by the objects they see around
them. Forasmuch, therefore, as the doctrines
which the heretics borrow from Plato are
cunningly defended by this kind of argument,
I shall sufficiently refute the heretics if I
overthrow the argument of Plato.

CHAP. XXIV. PLATO's INCONSISTENCY. HE

SUPPOSES THE SOUL SELF-EXISTENT, YET
CAPABLE OF FORGETTING WHAT PASSED IN A
PREVIOUS STATE.

In the first place, I cannot allow that the
soul is capable of a failure of memory; be-
cause he has conceded to it so large an amount
of divine quality as to put it on a par with
God. He makes it unborn, which single at-
tribute I might apply as a sufficient attesta-
tion of its perfect divinity; he then adds that
the soul is immortal, incorruptible, incorpo-
real— since he believed God to be the same
— invisible, incapable of delineation, uniform,
supreme, rational, and intellectual. What
more could he attribute to the soul, if he
wanted to call it God ? We, however, who
allow no appendage to God ' (in the sense of
equality), by this very fact reckon the soul
as very far below God: for we suppose it to
be born, and hereby to possess something of
a diluted divinity and an attenuated felicity,
as the breath (of God), though not His spirit;
and although immortal, as this is an attribute
of divinity, yet for all that passible, since this
is an incident of a born condition, and conse-
quently from the first capable of deviation
from perfection and right, "" and by consequence
susceptible of a failure in memory. This
point I have discussed sufficienly with Her-
mogenes.3 But it may be further observed,
that if the soul is to merit being accounted a
god, by reason of all its qualities being equal
to the attributes of God, it must then be sub-
ject to no passion, and therefore to no loss
of memory; for this defect of oblivion is as
great an injury to that of which you predicate
it, as memory is the glory thereof, which
Plato himself deems the very safeguard of
the senses and intellectual faculties, and which
Cicero has designated the treasury of all the
sciences. Now we need not raise the doubt
whether so divine a faculty as the soul was
capable of losing memory: the question rather
is, whether it is able to recover afresh that
which it has lost. I could not decide whether
that, which ought to have lost memory, if
it once incurred the loss, would be powerful
enough to recollect itself. Both alternatives,


r Nihil Deo appendimus.

2 Exorbitationis.

3 In his, now lost, treatise, De Ccnsu Anitn<e.


204


A TREATISE ON THE SOUL.


[chap. XXIV.


indeed, will agree very well with my soul,
but not with Plato's. In the second place,
my objection to him will stand thus: (Plato,)
do you endow the soul with a natural compe-
tency for understanding those well-known
ideas of yours? Certainly I do, will be your
answer. Well, now, no one will concede to
you that the knowledge, (which you say is)
the gift of nature, of the natural sciences can
fail. But the knowledge of the sciences fails;
the knowledge of the various fields of learning
and of the arts of life fails; and so perhaps
the knowledge of the faculties and affections
of our minds fails, although they seem to be
inherent in our nature, but really are not so:
because, as we have already said,^ they are
affected by accidents -of place, of manners
and customs, of bodily condition, of the state
of man's health — by the influences of the
Supreme Powers, and the changes of man's
free-will. Now the instinctive knowledge of
natural objects never fails, not even in the
brute creation. The lion, no doubt, will for-
get his ferocity, if surrounded by the soften-
ing influence of training; he may become,
with his beautiful mane, the plaything of some
Queen Berenice, and lick her cheeks with his
tongue. A wild beast may lay aside his
habits, but his natural instincts will not be
forgotten. He will not forget his proper food,
nor his natural resources, nor his natural
alarms; and should the queen offer him fishes
or cakes, he will wish for flesh; and if, when
he is ill, any antidote be prepared for him,
he will still require the ape; and should no
hunting-spear be presented against him, he
will yet dread the crow of the cock. In like
manner with man, who is perhaps the most
forgetful of all creatures, the knowledge of
everything natural to him will remain in-
eradicably fixed in him, — but this alone, as
being alone a natural instinct. He will never
forget to eat when he is hungry; or to drink
when he is thirsty; or to use his eyes when
he wants to see; or his ears, to hear; or his
nose, to smell; or his mouth, to taste; or his
hand, to touch. These are, to be sure, the
senses, which philosophy depreciates by her
preference for the intellectual faculties. But
if the natural knowledge o( the sensuous fac-
ulties is permanent, how happens it that the
knowledge of the intellectual faculties fails,
to which the superiority is ascribed? Whence,
now, arises that power of forgetfulness itself
which precedes recollection ? From long lapse
of time, he says. But this is a shortsighted
answer. Length of time cannot be incidental
to that which, according to him, is unborn.


Above, in ch. xix. xx. pp. 200, 201.


and which therefore must be deemed most
certainly eternal. For that which is eternal,
on the ground of its being unborn, since it
admits neither of beginning nor end of time,
is subject to no tetnporal criterion. And that
which time does not measure, undergoes no
change in consequence of time; nor is long
lapse of time at all influential over it. If
time is a cause of oblivion, why, from the time
of the soul's entrance into the body, does
memory fail, as if thenceforth the soul were
to be affected by time ? for the soul, being
undoubtedly prior to the body, was of course
not irrespective of time. Is it, indeed, im-
mediately on the soul's entrance into the body
that oblivion takes place, or some time after-
wards ? If immediately, where will be the
long lapse of the time which is as yet inad-
missible in the hypothesis ? =^ Take, for in-
stance, the case of the infant. If some time
afterwards, will not the soul, during the in-
terval previous to the moment of oblivion,
still exercise its powers of memory? And
how comes it to pass that the soul subse-
quently forgets, and then afterwards again
remembers ? How long, too, must the lapse
of the time be regarded as having been, dur-
ing which the oblivion oppressed the soul?
The whole course of one's life, I apprehend,
will be insufficient to efface the memory of
an age which endured so long before the
soul's assumption of the body. But then,
again, Plato throws the blame upon the body,
as if it were at all credible that a born sub-
stance could extinguish the power of one that
is unborn. There exist, however, among
bodies a great many differences, by reason
of their rationality, their bulk, their condition,
their age, and their health. Will there then
be supposed to exist similar differences in
obliviousness ? Oblivion, however, is uniform
and identical. Therefore bodily peculiarity,
with its manifold varieties, will not become
the cause of an effect which is an invariable
one. There are likewise, according to Plato's
own testimony, many proofs to show that the
soul has a divining faculty, as we have already
advanced against Hermogenes. But there is
not a man living, who does not himself feel
his soul possessed with a presage and augury
of some omen, danger, or joy. Now, if the
body is not prejudicial to divination, it will
not, I suppose, be injurious to memory. One
thing is certain, that souls in the same body
both forget and remember. If any corporeal
condition engenders forgetfulness, how will
it admit the opposite state of recollection?
Because recollection, after forgetfulness, is


2 Or, '* which has been too short for calculation.


CHAP. XXV.]


A TREATISE ON THE SOUL.


205


actually the resurrection of the memory.
Now, how should not that which is liostile to
the memory at first, be also prejudicial to it
in the second instance ? Lastly, who have
better memories than little children, with
their fresh, unworn souls, not yet immersed
in domestic and public cares, but devoted
only to those studies the acquirement of which
is itself a reminiscence? Why, indeed, do
we not all of us recollect in an equal degree,
since we are equal in our forgetfulness ? But
this is true only of philosophers! But not
even of the whole of them. Amongst so many
nations, in so great a crowd of sages, Plato,
to be sure, is the only man who has combined
the oblivion and the recollection of ideas.
Now, since this main argument of his by no
means keeps its ground, it follows that its
entire superstructure must fall with it, —
namely, that souls are supposed to be unborn,
and to live in the heavenly regions, and to
be instructed in the divine mysteries thereof;
moreover, that they descend to this earth,
and here recall to memory their previous
existence, for the purpose, of course, of sup-
plying to our heretics the fitting materials for
their systems.

CHAP. XXV. TERTULLIAN REFUTES, PHYSIO-
LOGICALLY, THE NOTION THAT THE SOUL IS
INTRODUCED AFTER BIRTH.

I shall now return to the cause of this di-
gression, in order that I may explain how all
souls are derived from one, when and where
and in what manner they are produced. Now,
touching this subject, it matters not whether
the question be started by the philosopher,
by the heretic, or by the crowd. Those who
profess the truth care nothing about their
opponents, especially such of them as begin
by maintaining that the soul is not conceived
in the womb, nor is formed and produced at
the time that the flesh is moulded, but is im-
pressed from without upon the infant before
his complete vitality, but after the process of
parturition. They say, moreover, that the
human seed having been duly deposited ex
concubitcr in the womb, and having been by nat-
ural impulse quickened, it becomes condensed
into the mere substance of the flesh, which
is in due time born, warm from the furnace
of the womb, and then released from its heat.
(This flesh) resembles the case of hot iron,
which is in that state plunged into cold water;
for, being smitten by the cold air (into which
it is born), it at once receives the power of
animation, and utters vocal sound. This view
is entertained by the Stoics, along with ^ne-
sidemus, and occasionally by Plato himself,


when he tells us that the soul, being quite a
separate formation, originating elsewhere and
externally to the womb, is inhaled ' when the
new-born infant first draws breath, and by and
by exhaled' with the man's latest breath.
We shall see whether this view of his is
merely fictitious. Even the medical profes-
sion has not lacked its Hicesius, to prove a
traitor both to nature and his own calling.
These gentlemen, I suppose, were too modest
to come to terms with women on the mysteries
of childbirth, so well known to the latter.
But how much more is there for them to blush
at, when in the end they have the women to
refute them, instead of commending them.
Now, in such a question as this, no one can
be so useful a teacher, judge," or witness, as
the sex itself which is so intimately concerned.
Give us your testimony, then, ye mothers,
whether yet pregnant, or after delivery (let
barren women and men keep silence), — the
truth of your own nature is in question, the
reality of your own suffering is the point to
be decided. (Tell us, then,) whether you
feel in the embryo within you any vital force ^
other than your own, with which your bowels
tremble, your sides shake, your entire womb
throbs, and the burden which oppresses you
constantly changes its position ? Are these
movements a joy to you, and a positive re-
moval of anxiety, as making you confident
that your infant both possesses vitality and
enjoys it? Or, should his restlessness cease,
your first fear would be for him; and he
would be aware of it within you, since he is
disturbed at the novel sound; and you would
crave for injurious diet,* or would even loathe
your food — all on his account; and then you
and he, (in the closeness of your sympathy,)
would share together your common ailments
— so far that with your contusions and bruises
would he actually become marked, — whilst
within you, and even on the selfsame parts
of the body, taking to himself thus peremp-
torily s the injuries of his mother! Now,
whenever a livid hue and redness are incidents
of the blood, the blood will not be without
the vital principle,^ or soul; or when disease
attacks the soul or vitality, (it becomes a
proof of its real existence, since) there is no
disease where there' is no soul or principle of
life. Again, inasmuch as sustenance by food,
and the want thereof, growth and decay, fear
and motion, are conditions of the soul or life,
he who experiences them must be alive.


1 " Inhaled " is Bp. Kaye's word for adduciy " taken up.'

2 Educi.

3 Vivacitas.

4 Ciborum vanitates.

5 Rapiens.

6 Anima.


2o6


A TREATISE ON THE SOUL.


[chap, xxvl


And, so, he at last ceases to live, who ceases
to experience them. And thus by and by
infants are still-born; but how so, unless they
had had life ? For how could any die, who
had not previously lived ? But sometimes by
a cruel necessity, whilst yet in the womb, an
infant is put to death, when lying awry in the
orifice of the womb he impedes parturition,
and kills his mother, if he is not to die him-
self. Accordingly, among surgeons' tools
there is a certain instrument, which is formed
with a nicely-adjusted flexible frame for
opening the titenis first of all, and keeping it
open; it is further furnished with an annular
blade.' by means of which the limbs within
the womb are dissected with anxious but un-
faltering care; its last appendage being a
blunted or covered hook, wherewith the entire
foetus is extracted' by a violent delivery.
There is also (another instrument in the shape
of ) a copper needle or spike, by which the
actual death is managed in this furtive rob-
bery of life: they give it, from its infanticide
function, the name of H^pvoct^K-rti,^ the slayer
of the infant, which was of course alive. Such
apparatus was possessed both by Hippocrates,
and Asclepiades, and Erasistratus, and He-
rophilus, that dissector of even adults, and the
milder Soranus himself, who all knew well
enough that a living being had been conceived,
and pitied this most luckless infant state,
which had first to be put to death, to escape
being tortured alive. Of the necessity of
such harsh treatment I have no doubt even
Hicesius was convinced, although he imported
their soul into infants after birth from the
stroke of the frigid air, because the very term
for soul, forsooth, in Greek answered to such a
refrigeration ! ^ Well, th^n, have the barbarian
and Roman nations received souls by some
other process, (I wonder;) for they have called
the soul by another name than -^x^ ? How many
nations are there who commence life ^ under
the broiling sun of the torrid zone, scorching
their skin into its swarthy hue? Whence do
they get their souls, with no frosty air to help
them ? I say not a word of those well-warmed
bed-rooms, and all that apparatus of heat
which ladies in childbirth so greatly need,
when a breath of cold air might endanger
their life. But in the very bath almost a
babe will slip into life, and at once his cry is
heard ! If, however, a good frosty air is to
the soul so indispensable a treasure, then be-
yond the German and the Scythian tribes, and
the Alpine and the Argaean heights, nobody
ought ever to be born ! But the fact really is,


' Anulocultro. [To be seen in the Museum at Naples.]
= Or, " the whole business (totum facinus) is despatched.

3 So Plato, Cratylus, p. 399, c. 17.

4 Censentur.


that population is greater within the temper-
ate regions of the East and the West, and
men's minds are sharper; whilst there is not
a Sarmatian whose wits are not dull and hum-
drum. The minds of men, too, would grow
keener by reason of the cold, if their souls
came into being amidst nipping frosts; for as
the substance is, so must be its active power.
Now, after these preliminary statements, we
may also refer to the case of those who, having
been cut out of their mother's womb, have
breathed and retained life — your Bacchuses'
and Scipios.^ If, however, there be any one
who, like Plato,^ supposes that two souls can-
not, more than two bodies could, co-exist in
the same individual, I, on the contrary, could
show him not merely the co-existence of two
souls in one person, as also of two bodies in
the same womb, but likewise the combination
of many other things in natural connection
with the soul — for instance, of demoniacal pos-
session; and that not of one only, as in the
case of Socrates* own demon; but of seven
spirits as in the case of the Magdalene; ^ and
of a legion in number, as in the Gadarene.'
Now one soul is naturally more susceptible of
conjunction with another soul, by reason of
the identity of their substance, than an evil
spirit is, owing to their diverse natures.
But when the same philosopher, in the sixth
book of The Laws, warns us to beware lest a
vitiation of seed should infuse a soil into both
body and soul from an illicit or debased concu-
binage, I hardly know whether he is more in-
consistent with himself in respect of one of his
previous statements, or of that which he had
just made. For he here shows us that the
soul proceeds from human seed (and warns
us to be on our guard about it), not, (as he
had said before,) from the first breath of the
new-born child. Pray, whence comes it that
from similarity of soul we resemble our parents
in disposition, according to the testimony of
Cleanthes,'° if we are not produced from this
seed of the soul ? Why, too, used the old
astrologers to cast a man's nativity from his
first conception, if his soul also draws not its
origin from that moment? To this (nativity)
likewise belongs the inbreathing of the soul,
whatever that is.

CHAP. XXVI. — SCRIPTURE ALONE OFFERS CLEAR
KNOWLEDGE ON THE QUESTIONS WE HAVE
BEEN CONTROVERTING.

Now there is no end to the uncertainty and


5 Liberi aliqui.

6 See Pliny, Natural History^ vii. 9.

7 See above, ch. x.

8 Mark xvi. 9.
' Mark vi. 1-9.

»o See above, ch. v.


CHAP. XXVII.]


A TREATISE ON THE SOUL.


207


irregularity of human opinion, until we come
to the limits which God has prescribed. I
shall at last retire within our own lines and
firmly hold my ground there, for the purpose
of proving to the Christian (the soundness of)
my answers to the Philosophers and the
Physicians. Brother (in Christ), on your own
foundation' build up your faith. Consider
the wombs of the most sainted women instinct
with the life within them, and their babes
which not only breathed therein, but were
even endowed with prophetic intuition. See
how the bowels of Rebecca are disquieted, =
though her child-bearing is as yet remote, and
there is no impulse of (vital) air. Behold,
a twin offspring chafes within the mother's
womb, although she has no sign as yet of the
twofold nation. Possibly we might have re-
garded as a prodigy the contention of this in-
fant progeny, which struggled before it lived,
which had animosity previous to animation,
if it had simply disturbed the mother by its
restlessness within her. But when her womb
opens, and the number of her offspring is
seen, and their presaged condition known, we
have presented to us a proof not merely of
the (separate) souls of the infants, but of their
hostile struggles too. He who was the first
to be born was threatened with detention by
him who was anticipated in birth, who was
not yet fully brought forth, but whose hand
only had been born. Now if he actually
imbibed life, and received his soul, in Platonic
style, at his first breath; or else, after the
Stoic rule, had the earliest taste of animation
on touching the frosty air; what was the other
about, who was so eagerly looked for, who
was still detained within the womb, and was
trying to detain (the other) outside? I sup-
pose he had not yet breathed when he seized
his brother's heel ;3 and was still warm with
his mother's warmth, when he so strongly
wished to be the first to quit the womb. What
an infant ! so emulous, so strong, and already
so contentious; and all this, I suppose, be-
cause even now full of life ! Consider, again,
those extraordinary conceptions, which were
more wonderful still, of the barren woman
and the virgin: these women would only be
able to produce imperfect offspring against
the course of nature, from the very fact that
one of them was too old to bear seed, and the
other was pure from the contact of man. If
there was to be bearing at all in the case, it
was only fitting that they should be born with-
out a soul, (as the philosopher would say,)
who had been irregularly conceived. How-


' Of the Scriptures.
-Gen. XXV. 22, 23.
3 Gen. XXV. 26.


ever, even these have life, each of them in
his mother's womb. Elizabeth exults with
joy, (for) John had leaped in her womb;*
Mary magnifies the Lord, (for) Christ had
instigated her within. 5 The mothers recognise
each their own offspring, being moreover each
recognised by their infants, which were there-
fore of course alive, and were not souls merely,
but spirits also. Accordingly you read the
word of God which was spoken to Jeremiah,
" Before I formed thee in the belly, I knew
thee."^ Since God forms us in the womb.
He also breathes upon us, as He also did at
the first creation, when " the Lord God formed
man, and breathed into him the breath of
life." 7 Nor could God have known man in
the womb, except in his entire nature: " And
before thou camest forth out of the womb, I
sanctified thee."^ Well, was it then a, dead
body at that early stagQ ? Certainly not. For
" God is not the God of the dead, but of the
living."

CHAP. XXVII. SOUL AND BODY CONCEIVED,

FORMED AND PERFECTED IN ELEMENT SIMUL-
TANEOUSLY.

How, then, is a living being conceived ? Is
the substance of both body and soul formed
together at one and the same time ? Or does
one of them precede the other in natural for-
mation ? We indeed maintain that both are
conceived, and formed, and perfectly simulta-
neously, as well as born together; and that
not a moment's interval occurs in their con-
ception, so that a prior place can be assigned
to either.' Judge, in fact, of the incidents
of man's earliest existence by those which
occur to him at the very last. As death is
defined to be nothing else than the separation
of body and soul,'° life, which is the opposite
of death, is susceptible of no other definition
than the conjunction' of body and soul. If
the severance happens at one and the same
time to both substances by means of death,
so the law of their combination ought to as-
sure us that it occurs simultaneously to the
two substances by means of life. Now we
allow that life begins with conception, because
we contend that the soul also begins from
conception; life taking its commencement at
the same moment and place that the soul
does. Thus, then, the processes which act
together to produce separation by death, also
combine in a simultaneous action to produce


4 Luke i. 41-45.

5 Luke i. 46.
6Jer. i. 5.

7 Gen. ii. 7.
8Jer. i. 5.

9 Comp. De Resurr. Carnis, xlv.
10 So Plato, PheedO; p. 64.


208


A TREATISE ON THE SOUL.


[chap, xxviir.


i


life. If we assign priority to (the formation
of) one of the natures, and a subsequent time
to the other, we shall have further to deter-
mine the precise times of the semination, ac-
cording to the condition and rank of each.
And that being so, what time shall we give to
the seed of the body, and what to the seed of
the soul ? Besides, if different periods are
to be assigned to the seminations then arising
out of this difference in time, we shall also
have different substances.' For although we
shall allow that there are two kinds of seed —
that of the body and that of the soul — we still
declare that they are inseparable, and there-
fore contemporaneous and simultaneous in
origin. Now let no one take offence or feel
ashamed at an interpretation of the processes
of nature which is rendered necessary (by the
defence of the truth). Nature should be to
us an object of reverence, not of blushes. It
is lust, not natural usage, which has brought
shame on the intercourse of the sexes. It is
the excess, not the normal state, which is im-
modest and unchaste: the normal condition
has received a blessing from God, and is blest
by Him: " Be fruitful, and multiply, (and re-
plenish the earth.)" ^^ Excess, however, has
He cursed, in adulteries, and wantonness,
and chambering. 3 Well, now, in this usual
function of the sexes which brings together
the male and the female in their common in-
tercourse, we know that both the soul and the
flesh discharge a duty together: the soul sup-
plies desire, the flesh contributes the gratifi-
cation of it; the soul furnishes the instigation,
the flesh affords the realization. The entire
man being excited by the one effort of both
natures, his seminal substance is discharged,
deriving its fluidity from the body, and its
warmth from the soul. Now if //le soul in
Greek is a word which is synonymous with
cold^*- how does it come to pass that the body
grows cold after the soul has quitted it ? In-
deed (if I run tlTe risk of offending modesty
even, in my desire to prove the truth), I can-
not help asking, whether we do not, in that
very heat of extreme gratification when the
generative fluid is ejected, feel that somewhat
of our soul has gone from us ? And do we
not experience a faintness and prostration
along with a dimness of sight? This, then,
must be the soul-producing seed, which arises
at once from the out-drip of the soul, just as
that fluid is the body-producing seed which
proceeds from the drainage of the flesh.
Most true are the examples of the first crea-


• Materia;.
»Gen. i. 28.

3 Lupanaria.

4 See above, c, xxv. p. 206.


tion. Adam's flesh was formed of clay. Now
what is clay but an excellent moisture, whence
should spring the generating fluid ? Yrom
the breath of God first came the soul. But
what else is the breath of God than the vapour
of the spirit, whence should spring that which
we breathe out through the generative fluid ?
Forasmuch, therefore, as these two different
and separate substances, the clay and the
breath, combined at the first creation in
forming the individual man, they then both
amalgamated and mixed their proper seminal
rudiments in one, and ever afterwards com-
municated to the human race the normal
mode of its propagation, so that even now the
two substances, although diverse from each
other, flow forth simultaneously in a united
channel; and finding their way together into
their appointed seed-plot, they fertilize with
their combined vigour the human fruit out of
their respective natures. And inherent in this
human product is his own seed, according to
the process which has been ordained for every
creature endowed with the functions of gen-
eration. Accordingly from the one (primeval)
man comes the entire outflow and redundance
of men's souls — nature proving herself true to
the commandment of God, " Be fruitful, and
multiply." 5 For in the very preamble of this
one production, " Let us make man," ^ man's
whole posterity was declared and described in
a plural phrase, " Let the7n have dominion
over the fish of the sea," etc' And no
wonder: in the seed lies the promise and
earnest of the crop.

CHAP. XXVIII. THE PYTHAGOREAN DOCTRINE

OF TRANSMIGRATION SKETCHED AND CEN-
SURED.

What, then, by this time means that ancient
saying, mentioned by Plato,® concerning the
reciprocal migration of souls; how they re-
move hence and go thither, and then return
hither and pass through life, and then again
depart from this life, and afterwards become
alive from the dead ? Some will have it that
this is a saying of Pythagoras; Aibinus sup-
poses it to be a divine announcement, perhaps
of the Egyptian Mercury.' But there is no
divine saying, except of the one true God, by
whom the prophets, and the apostles, and
Christ Himself declared their grand message.
More ancient than Saturn a good deal (by some
nine hundred years or so), and even than his
grandchildren, is Moses; and he is certainly
much more divine, recounting and tracing out,


5 Gen. i. 28.

6 Ver. 26.

7 Ver. ;26.

8 PhadOy p. 70.

9 [Hermes. See Bacon, De Aug.


P-990


CHAP. XXIX.]


A TREATISE ON THE SOUL.


209


as he does, the course of the human race from
the very beginning of the world, indicating
the several births (of the fathers of mankind)
according to their names and their epochs;
giving thus plain proof of the divine character
of his work, from . its divine authority and
word. If, indeed, the sophist of Samos is
Plato's authority for the eternally revolving
migration of souls out of a constant alternation
of the dead and the living states, then no
doubt did the famous Pythagoras, however
excellent in other respects, for the purpose gf
fabricating such an opinion as this, rely on a
falsehood, which was not only shameful, but
also hazardous. Consider it, you that are ig-
norant of it, and believe with us. He feigns
death, he conceals himself underground, he
condemns himself to that endurance for some
seven years, during which he learns from his
mother, who was his sole accomplice and at-
tendant, what he was to relate for the belief
of the world concerning those who had died
since his seclusion;' and when he thought
that he had succeeded in reducing the frame
of his body to the horrid appearance of a dead
old man, he comes forth from the place of his
concealment and deceit, and pretends to have
returned from the dead. Who would hesitate
about believing that the man, whom he had
supposed to have died, was come back again
to life ? especially after hearing from him
facts about the recently dead/ which he evi-
dently could only have discovered in Hades
itself ! Thus, that men are made alive after
death, is rather an old statement. But what
if it be rather a recent one also ? The truth
does not desire antiquity, nor does falsehood
shun novelty. This notable saying I hold to
be plainly false, though ennobled by antiquity.
How should that not be false, which depends
for its evidence on a falsehood ? — How can I
help believing Pythagoras to be a deceiver,
who practises deceit to win my belief ? How
will he convince me that, before he was
Pythagoras, he had been ^thalides, and Eu-
phorbus, and the fisherman Pyrrhus, and
Hermotimus, to make us believe that men
live again after they have died, when he actual-
ly perjured himself afterwards as Pythagoras.
In proportion as it would be easier for me to
believe that he had returned once to life in
his own person, than so often in the person
of this man and that, in the same degree has
he deceived me in things which are too hard
to be credited, because he has played the im-
postor in matters which might be readily be-
lieved. Well, but he recognised the shield of
Euphorbus, which had been formerly conse-


crated at Delphi, and claimed it as his own,
and proved his claim by signs whick were
generally unknown. Now, look again at his
subterranean lurking-place, and believe his
story, if you can. For, as to the man who
devised such a tricksty scheme, to the injury
of his health, fraudulently wasting his life,
and torturing it for seven years underground,
amidst hunger, idleness, and darkness — with
a profound disgust for the mighty sky — what
reckless effort would he not make, what cu-
rious contrivance would he not attempt, to
arrive at the discovery of this famous shield ?
Suppose now, that he found it in some of those
hidden researches; suppose that he recovered
some slight breath of report which survived
the now obsolete tradition; suppose him to
have come to the knowledge of it by an in-
spection which he had bribed the beadle to
let him have, — we know very well what are
the resources of magic skill for exploring
hidden secrets: there are the catabolic spirits,
which floor their victims;^ and the paredral
spirits, which are ever at their side "> to haunt
them; and t\\t pythonic spirits, which entrance
them by their divination and ventriloquistic*
arts. For was is not likely that Pherecydes
also, the master of our Pythagoras, used to
divine, or I would rather say rave and dream,
by such arts and contrivances as these ?
Might not the self-same demon have been in
him, who, whilst in Euphorbus, transacted
deeds of blood ? But lastly, why is it that the
man, who proved himself to have been Eu-
phorbus by the evidence of the shield, did
not also recognise any of his former Trojan
comrades ? For they, too, must by this time
have recovered life, since men were rising
again from the dead.

CHAP. XXIX. — THE PYTHAGOREAN DOCTRINE
REFUTED BY ITS OWN FIRST PRINCIPLE, THAT
LIVING MEN ARE FORMED FROM THE DEAD.

It is indeed, manifest that dead men are
formed from living ones; but it does not fol-
low from that, that living men are formed
from dead ones. For from the beginning the
living came first in the order of things, and
therefore also from the beginning the dead
came afterwards in order. But these pro-
ceeded from no other source except from the
living. The living had their origin in any
other source (you please) than in the dead;
whilst the dead had no source whence to de-
rive their beginning, except from the living.


De posteris defunctis.

14


2 From itoTa/SaAAeii/, to knock down.

3 From irapefio9, sitting by one.

4 From jrvtfoJviKO?, an attribute of Pythius Apollo ; this class
were sometimes called €y7aa-Tpi>vfloi, ventriloquists.


2IO


A TREATISE ON THE SOUL.


[chap. XXX.


If, then, from the very first the living came
not from the dead, why should they afterwards
(be said to) come from the dead ? Had that
original source, whatever it was, come to an
end ? Was the form or law thereof a matter
for regret ? Then why was it preserved in
the case of the dead ? Does it not follow that,
because the dead came from the living at the
first, therefore they always came from the
living? For either the law which obtained at
the beginning must have continued in both
of its relations, or else it must have changed
in both; so that, if it had become necessary
for the living afterwards to proceed from the
dead, it would be necessary, in like manner,
for the dead also not to proceed from the liv-
ing. For if a faithful adherence to the insti-
tution was not meant to be perpetuated in
each respect, then contraries cannot in due
alternation continue to be re-formed from
contraries. We, too, will on our side adduce
against you certain contraries, of the born
and the unborn, of vision ' and blindness, of
youth and old age, of wisdom and folly. Now
it does not follow that the unborn proceeds
from the born, on the ground that a contrary
issues from a contrary; nor, again, that vision
proceeds from blindness, because blindness
happens to vision; nor, again, that youth
revives from old age, because after youth
comes the decrepitude of senility; nor that
folly ' is born with its obtuseness from wisdom,
because wisdom may possibly be sometimes
sharpened out of folly. Albinus has some
fears for his (master and friend) Plato in these
points, and labours with much ingenuity to
distinguish different kinds of contraries; as if
these instances did not as absolutely partake
of the nature of contrariety as those which are
expounded by him to illustrate his great mas-
ter's principle — I mean, life and death. Nor
is it, for the matter of that, true that life is
restored out of death, *l)ecause it happens that
death succeeds ^ life.

CHAP. XXX. — FURTHER REFUTATION OF THE
PYTHAGOREAN THEORY. THE STATE Of
CONTEMPORARY CIVILISATION.

But what must we say in reply to what fol-
lows? For, in the first place, if the living
come from the dead, just as the dead proceed
from the living, then there must always re-
main unchanged one and the selfsame num-
ber of mankind, even the number which orig-
inally introduced (human) life. The living
preceded the dead, afterwards the dead issued
from the living, and then again the living


I Visualitatis.

a Insipientiam. " Imbecility " is the meaning here, though the
word takes the more general sense in the next clause.
3 Deferatur.


from the dead. Now, since this process was
evermore going on with the same persons,
therefore they, issuing from the same, must
always have remained in number the same.
For they who emerged (into life) could never
have become more nor fewer than they who
disappeared (in death). We find, however,
in the records of the Antiquities of Man,-* that
the human race has progressed with a gradual
growth of population, either occupying differ-
ent portions of the earth as aborigines, or as
qomad^ tribes, or as exiles, or as conquerors
— as the Scythians in Parthia, the Temenidae
in Peloponnesus, the Athenians in Asia, the
Phrygians in Italy, and the Phoenicians in
Africa; or by the more ordinary methods of
emigration, which they call arroiKlai or co/mies,
for the purpose of throwing off redundant
population, disgorging into other abodes their
overcrowded masses. The aborigines remain
still in their old settlements, and have also
enriched other districts with loans of even
larger populations. Surely it is obvious
enough, if one looks at the whole world, that
it is becoming daily better cultivated and more
fully peopled than anciently. All places are
now accessible, all are well known, all open
to commerce; most pleasant farms have ob-
literated all traces of what were once dreary
and dangerous wastes; cultivated fields have
subdued forests; flocks and herds have ex-
pelled wild beasts; sandy deserts are sown;
rocks are planted; marshes are drained; and
where once were hardly solitary cottages,
there are now large cities. No longer are
(savage) islands dreaded, nor their rocky
shores feared; everywhere are houses, and
inhabitants, and settled government, and civ-
ilised life. What most frequently meets our
view (and occasions complaint), is our teem-
ing population: our numbers are burdensome
to the world, which can hardly supply us from
its natural elements; our wants grow more
and more keen, and our complaints more bit-
ter in all mouths, whilst Nature fails in afford-
ing us her usual sustenance. In very deed,
pestilence, and famine, and wars, and earth-
quakes have to be regarded as a remedy for
nations, as the means of pruning the luxuri-
ance of the human race; and yet, when the
hatchet has once felled large masses of
men, the world has hitherto never once been
alarmed at the sight of a restitution of its
dead coming back to life after their millennial
exile. s But such a spectacle would have be-
come quite obvious by the balance of mortal


4 A probable allusion to Varro's work, De Antigq, Rerum
Humanarunt.

5 An allusion to Plato's notion that, at the end of a thousand
years, such a restoration of the dead, took place. See his Pha-
drus, p. 248, and De Rcpubl, x. p. 614.


CHAP. XXXII.]


A TREATISE ON THE SOUL.


211


loss and vital recovery, if it were true that
the dead came back again to life. Why,
however, is it after a thousand years, and not
at the moment, that this return from death
is to take place, when, supposing that the loss
is not at once supplied, there must be a risk
of an utter extinction, as the failure precedes
the compensation ? Indeed, this furlough of
our present life would be quite disproportioned
to the period of a thousand years; so much
briefer is it, and on that account so much
more easily is its torch extinguished than re-
kindled. Inasmuch, then, as the period
which, on the hypothesis we have discussed,
ought to intervene, if the living are to be
formed from the dead, has not actually oc-
curred, it will follow that we must not believe
that men come back'to life from the dead (in
the way surmised in this philosophy).


-FURTHER EXPOSURE OF TRANSMI-
ITS INEXTRICABLE EMBARRASS-


CHAP. XXXI.
GRATION.
MENT.

Again, if this recovery of life from the dead
take place at all, individuals must of course
resume their own individuality. Therefore the
souls which animated each several body must
needs have returned separately to their several
bodies. Now, whenever two, or three, or
five souls are re-enclosed (as they constantly
are) in one womb, it will not amount in such
cases to life from the dead, because there is
not the separate restitution which individuals
ought to have; although at this rate, (no
doubt,) the law of the primeval creation is
signally kept,^ by the production still of sev-
eral souls out of only one ! Then, again, if
souls depart at different ages of human life,
how is it that they come back again at one
uniform age ? For all men are imbued with
an infafit soul at their birth. But how hap-
pens it that a man who dies in old age returns
to hfe as an infant? If the soul, whilst dis-
embodied, decreases thus by retrogression of
its age, how much more reasonable would it
be, that it should resume, its life with a richer
progress in all attainments of Hfe after the
lapse of a thousand years ! At all events, it
should return with the age it had attained at
its death, that it might resume the precise life
which it had relinquished. But even if, at
this rate, they should reappear the same
evermore in their revolving cycles, it would
be proper for them to bring back with them,
if not the selfsame forms of body, at least
their original peculiarities of character, taste,
and disposition, because it would be hardly


' Signatur. Rigaltius reads "singulatur, -after the Codex
Agobard.^ as meaninsr, " The single origin of the human race is
in principle maintained," etc.


possible ' for them to be regarded as the same,
if they were deficient in those characteristics
by means of which their identity should be
proved. (You, however, meet me with this
question): How can you possibly know, you
ask, whether all is not a secret process ? may
not the work of a thousand years take from
you the power of recognition, since they re-
turn unknown to you ? But I am quite cer-
tain that such is not the case, for you yourself
present Pythagoras to me as (the restored)
Euphorbus. Now look at Euphorbus: he
was evidently possessed of a military and
warlike soul, as is proved by the very renown
of the sacred shields. As for Pythagoras,
however, he was such a recluse, and so un-
warlike, that he shrank from the military ex-
ploits of which Greece was then so full, and
preferred to devote himself, in the quiet re-
treat of Italy, to the study of geometry, and
astrology, and music — the very opposite to
Euphorbus in taste and disposition. Then,
again, the Pyrrhus (whom he represented)
spent his time in catching fish; but Pythagoras,
on the contrary, would never touch fish, ab-
staining from even the taste of them as from
animal food. Moreover, ^thalides and Her-
motimus had included the bean amongst the
common esculents at meals, while Pythagoras
taught his disciples not even to pass through
a plot which was cultivated with beans. I ask,
then, how the same souls are resumed, which
can offer no proof of their identity, either by
their disposition, or habits, or living? And
now, after all, (we find that) only four souls
are mentioned as recovering life ^ out of all
the multitudes of Greece. But limiting our-
selves merely to Greece, as if no transmigra-
tions of souls and resumptions of bodies oc-
curred, and that every day, in every nation,
and amongst all ages, ranks, and sexes, how
is it that Pythagoras alone experiences these
changes into one personality and another?
Why should not I too undergo them ? Or if
it be a privilege monopolized by philosophers
—and Greek philosophers only, as if Scythians
and Indians had no philosophers — how is it
that Epicurus had no recollection that he had
been once another man, nor Chrysippus, nor
Zeno, nor indeed Plato himself, whom we
might perhaps have supposed to have been
Nestor, from his honeyed eloquence ?

CHAP. XXXII. — EMPEDOCLES INCREASED THE
ABSURDITY OF PYTHAGORAS BY DEVELOPING
THE POSTHUMOUS CHANGE OF MEN INTO
VARIOUS ANIMALS.

But the fact is, Empedocles, who used to


2 Temere.

3 Recensentur.


212


A TREATISE ON THE SOUL.


[chap. XXXII.


dream that he was a god, and on that account,
I suppose, disdained to have it thought that
he had ever before been merely some hero,
declares in so many words: "I once was
Thamnus, and a fish." Why not rather a
melon, seeing that he was such a fool; or a
cameleon, for his inflated brag? It was, no
doubt, as a fish (and a queer one too !) that
he escaped the corruption of some obscure
grave, when he preferred being roasted by a
plunge into ^tna; after which accomplish-
ment there was an end for ever to his fxerevau-
fidriMLq or putting himself into another body
— (fit only now for) a light dish after the roast-
meat. At this point, therefore, we must
likewise contend against that still more mon-
strous presumption, that in the course of the
transmigration beasts pass from human be-
ings, and human beings from beasts. Let
(Empedocles') Thamnuses alone. Our slight
notice of them in passing will be quite enough:
(to dwell on them longer will inconvenience
us,) lest we should be obliged to have recourse
to raillery and laughter instead of serious
instruction. Now our position is this: that
the human soul cannot by any means at all
be transferred to beasts, even when they are
supposed to originate, according to the phi-
losophers, out of the substances of the ele-
ments. Now let us suppose that the soul is
either fire, or water, or blood, or spirit, or air,
or light; we must not forget that all the ani-
mals in their several kinds have properties
which are opposed to the respective elements.
There are the cold animals which are opposed
to fire — water-snakes, lizards, salamanders,
and what things soever are produced out of
the rival element of water. In like manner,
those creatures are opposite to water which
are in their nature dry and sapless; indeed,
locusts, butterflies, and chameleons rejoice
in droughts. So, again, such creatures are
opposed to blood which have none of its pur-
ple hue, such as snails, worms, and most of
the fishy tribes. Then opposed to spirit are
those creatures which seem to have no respi-
ration, being unfurnished with lungs and wind-
pipes, such as gnats, ants, moths, and minute
things of this sort. Opposed, moreover, to
air are those creatures which always live under
ground and under water, and never imbibe
air — things of which you are more acquainted
with the existence than with the names.
Then opposed to light are those things which
are either wholly blind, or possess eyes for
the darkness only, such as moles, bats, and
owls. These examples (have I adduced), that
I might illustrate my subject from clear and
palpable natures. But even if I could take
in my hand the " atoms " of Epicurus, or if


my eye could see the "numbers" of Pythago-
ras, or if my foot could stumble against the
" ideas " of Plato, or if I could lay hold of
the " entelechies " of Aristotle, the chances
would be, that even in these (impalpable)
classes I should find such animals as I must
oppose to one another on the ground of their
contrariety. For I maintain that, of which-
soever of the before-mentioned natures the
human soul is composed, it would not have
been possible for it to pass for new forms into
animals so contrary to each of the separate
natures, and to bestow an origin by its pas-
sage on those beings, from which it would
have to be excluded and rejected rather than
to be admitted and received, by reason of
that original contrariety which we have sup-
posed it to possess,' and which commits the
bodily substance receiving it to an intermina-
ble strife; and then again by reason of the
subsequent contrariety, which results from the
development inseparable from each several
nature. Now it is on qui4:e different condi-
tions * that the soul of man has had assigned
to it (in individual bodies 3) its abode, and
aliment, and order, and sensation, and affec-
tion, and sexual intercourse, and procreation
of children; also (on different conditions has
it, in individual bodies, received especial)
dispositions, as well as duties to fulfil, likings,
dislikes, vices, desires, pleasures, maladies,
remedies — in short, its own modes of living,
its own outlets of death. How, then, shall
that (human) soul which cleaves to the earth,
and is unable without alarm to survey any
great height, or any considerable depth, and
which is also fatigued if it mounts many steps,
and is suffocated if it is submerged in a fish-
pond,— (how, I say, shall a soul which is be-
set with such weaknesses) mount up at some
future stage into the air in an eagle, or plunge
into the sea in an eel ? How, again, shall it,
after being nourished with generous and del-
icate as well as exquisite viands, feed deliber-
ately on, I will not say husks, but even on
thorns, and the wild fare of bitter leaves, and
beasts of the dung-hill, and poisonous worms,
if it has to migrate into a goat or into a quail ?
— nay, it may be, feed on carrion, even on
human corpses in some bear or lion ? But
how indeed (shall it stoop to this), when it
remembers its own (nature and dignity) ? In
the same way, you may submit all other in-
stances to this criterion of incongruity, and
so save us from lingering over the distinct
consideration of each of them in turn. Now,


» Hujus.

2 Alias.

3 This is the force of the objective nouns, which are all put in.
Khe plural form.


-CHAP. XXXIII.]


A TREATISE ON THE SOUL.


213


whatever may be the measure and whatever
the mode of the human soul, (the question
is forced upon us,) what it will do in far larger
animals, or in very diminutive ones ? It must
needs be, that every individual body of what-
ever size is filled up by the soul, and that the
soul is entirely covered by the body. How,
therefore, shall a man's soul fill an elephant?
How, likewise, shall it be contracted within a
gnat ? If it be so enormously extended or
contracted, it will no doubt be exposed to
peril. And this induces me to ask another
question: If the soul is by no means capable
of this kind of migration fnto animals, which
are not fitted for its reception, either by the
habits of their bodies or the other laws of
their being, will it then undergo a change ac-
cording to the properties of various animals,
and be adapted to their life, notwithstanding
its contrariety to human life — having, in fact,
become contrary to its human self by reason
•of its utter change ? Now the truth is, if it
undergoes such a transformation, and loses
what it once was, the human soul will not be
what it was; and if it ceases to be its former
self, the metensomatosis, or adaptation of some
other body, comes to nought, and is not of
course to be ascribed to the soul which will
cease to exist, on the supposition of its com-
plete change. For only then can a soul be
5aid to experience this process of the jneten-
-somatosts, when it undergoes it by remaining
unchanged in its own (primitive) condition.
Since, therefore, the soul does not admit of
change, lest it should cease to retain its iden-
tity; and yet is unable to remain unchanged
in its original state, because it fails then to
receive contrary (bodies), — I still want to
know some credible reason to justify such a
transformation as we are discussing. For al-
though some men are compared to the beasts
because of their character, disposition, and
pursuits (since even God says, " Man is like
the beasts that perish " '), it does not on this
account follow that rapacious persons become
kites, lewd persons dogs, ill-tempered ones
panthers, good men sheep, talkative ones swal-
lows, and chaste men doves, as if the self-
same substance of the soul everywhere re-
peated its own nature in the properties of the
animals (into which it passed). Besides, a
substance is one thing, and the nature of that
substance is another thing; inasmuch as the
substance is the special property of one given
thing, whereas the nature thereof may pos-
sibly belong to many things. Take an exam-
ple or two. A stone or a piece of iron is the
substance: the hardness of the stone and


Ps. xlix. 20.


the iron is the nature of the substance. Their
hardness combines objects by a common
quality; their substances keep them separate.
Then, again, there is softness in wool, and
softness in a feather: their natural qualities
are alike, (and put them on a par;) their sub-
stantial qualities are not alike, (and keep them
distinct.) Thus, if a man likewise be desig-
nated a wild beast or a harmless one, there is
not for all that an identity of soul. Now the
similarity of nature is even then observed,
when dissimilarity of substance is most con-
spicuous: for, by the very fact of your judg-
ing that a man resembles a beast, you confess
that their soul is not identical; for you say
that they resemble each other, not that they
are the same. This is also the meaning of
the word of God (which we have just quoted):
it likens man to the beasts in nature, but not
in substance. Besides, God would not have
actually made such a comment as this concern-
ing man, if He had known him to be in sub-
stance only bestial

CHAP. XXXIII. — THE JUDICIAL RETRIBUTION OF
THESE MIGRATIONS REFUTED WITH RAILLERY.

Forasmuch as this doctrine is vindicated
even on the principle of judicial retribution,
on the pretence that the souls of men obtain
as their partners the kind of animals which are
suited to their life and deserts, — as if they
ought to be, according to their several charac-
ters, either slain in criminals destined to ex-
ecution, or reduced to hard work in menials,
or fatigued and wearied in labourers, or foully
disgraced in the unclean; or, again, on the
same principle, reserved for honour, and love,
and care, and attentive regard in characters
most eminent in, rank and virtue, usefulness,
and tender sensibility, — I must here also re-
mark, that if souls undergo a transformation,
they will actually not be able to accomplish
and experience the destinies which they shall
deserve; and the aim and purpose of judicial
recompense will be brought to nought, as
there will be wanting the sense and conscious-
ness of merit and retribution. And there
must be this want of consciousness, if souls
lose their condition; and there must ensue
this loss, if they do not continue in one stay.
But even if they should have permanency
enough to remain unchanged until the judg-
ment,— a point which Mercurius ^gyptius
recognised, when he said that the soul, after
its separation from the body, was not dissi-
pated back into the soul of the universe, but
retained permanently its distinct individuality,
"in order that it might render," to use his
own words, " an account to the Father of
those things which it has done in the body; "


214


A TREATISE ON THE SOUL.


[chap. XXXIIl.


— (even supposing all this, I say,) I still want
to examine the justice, the solemnity, the
majesty, and the dignity of this reputed judg-
ment of God, and see whether human judg-
ment has not too elevated a throne in it —
exaggerated in both directions, in its office
both of punishments and rewards, too severe
in dealing out its vengeance, and too lavish in
bestowing its favour. What do you suppose
will become of the soul of the murderer ? (It
will animate), I suppose, some cattle destined
for the slaughter-house and the shambles,
that it may itself be killed, even as it has
killed; and be itself flayed, since it has fleeced
others; and be itself used for food, since it
has cast to the wild beasts the ill-fated victims
whom it once slew in woods and lonely roads.
Now, if such be the judicial retribution which
it is to receive, is not such a soul likely to find
more of consolation than of punishment, in
the fact that it receives its coup de grdce from
the hands of most expert practitioners- — is
buried with condiments served in the most
piquant styles of an Apicius or a Lurco, is
introduced to the tables of your exquisite
Ciceros, is brought up on the most splendid
dishes of a Sylla, finds its obsequies in a
banquet, is devoured by respectable (mouths)
on a par with itself, rather than by kites and
wolves, so that all may see how it has got a
man's body for its tomb, and has risen again
after returning to its own kindred race — ex-
ulting in the face of human judgments, if it
has experienced them ? For these barbarous
sentences of death consign to various wild
beasts, which are selected and trained even
against their nature for their horrible office,
the criminal who has committed murder, even
while yet alive; nay, hindered from too easily
dying, by a contrivance which retards his last
moment in order to aggravate his punishment.
But. even if his soul should have anticipated
by its departure the sword's last stroke, his
body at all events must not escape the weapon :
retribution for his own crime is yet exacted by
stabbing his throat and stomach, and piercing
his side. After that he is flung into the fire,
that his very grave may be cheated. ' In no
other way, indeed, is a sepulture allowed him.
Not that any great care, after all, is bestowed
on his pyre, so that other animals light upon
his remains. At any rate, no mercy is shown
to his bones, no indulgence to his ashes, which
must be punished with exposure and naked-
ness. The vengeance which is inflicted among
men upon the homicide is really as great as
that which is imposed by nature. Who would
not prefer the justice of the world, which, as


» Or, " that he may be punished even in his sepulture."


the apostle himself testifies, "beareth not
the sword in vain," ' and which is an institute
of religion when it severely avenges in defence
of human life ? When we contemplate, too,
the penalties awarded to other crimes — gib-
bets, and holocausts, and sacks, and harpoons,
and precipices — who would not think it better
to receive his sentence in the courts of Py-
thagoras and Empedocles ? For even the
wretches whom they will send into the bodies
of asses and mules to be punished by drudgery
and slavery, how will they congratulate them-
selves on the mild labour of the mill and the
water-wheel, when they recollect the mines,
and the convict-gangs, and the public works,
and even the prisons and black-holes, terrible
in their idle, do-nothing routine ? Then,
again, in the case of those who, after a course
of integrity, have surrendered their life to the
Judge, I likewise look for rewards, but I
rather discover punishments. To be sure, it
must be a handsome gain for good men to be
restored to life in any animals whatsoever !
Homer, so dreamt Ennius, remembered that
he was once a peacock; however, I cannot for
my part believe poets, even when wide awake.
A peacock, no doubt, is a very pretty bird,
pluming itself, at will, on its splendid feathers;,
but then its wings do not make amends for its
voice, which is harsh and unpleasant; and
there is nothing that poets like better than a
good song. His transformation, therefore,
into a peacock was to Homer a penalty, not
an honour. The world's remuneration will
bring him a much greater joy, when it lauds
him as the father of the liberal sciences; and
he will prefer the ornaments of his fame to
the graces of his tail ! But never mind! let
poets migrate into peacocks, or into swans, if
you like, especially as swans have a respecta-
ble voice: in what animal will you invest that
righteous hero ^.acus ? In what beast will
you clothe the chaste and excellent Dido ?
What bird shall fall to the lot of Patience?
what animal to the lot of Holiness ? what fish
to that of Innocence ? Now all creatures are
the servants of man; all are his subjects, all
his dependants. If by and by he is to become
one of these creatures, he is by such a change
debased and degraded he to whom, for his
virtues, images, statues, and titles are freely
awarded as public honours and distinguished
privileges, he to whom the senate and the
people vote even sacrifices ! Oh, what ju-
dicial sentences for gods to pronounce, as-
men's recompense after death ! They are
more mendacious than any human judgments;
they are contemptible as punishments, dis-


3 Rom. xiii. 4.


CHAP. XXXIV.]


A TREATISE ON THE SOUL.


21


gusting as rewards; such as the worst of men
could never fear, nor the best desire; such in-
deed, as criminals will aspire to, rather than
saints, — the former, that they may escape
more speedily the world's stern sentence, — the
latter that they may more tardily incur it.
How well, (forsooth), O ye philosophers do
you teach us, and how usefully do you advise
us, that after death rewards and punishments
fall with lighter weight ! whereas, if any judg-
ment awaits souls at all, it ought rather to be
supposed that it will be heavier at the conclu-
sion of life than in the conduct^ thereof, since
nothing is more complete than that which
comes at the very last — nothing, moreover, is
more complete than that which is especially
divine. Accordingly, God's judgment will be
more full and complete, because it will be
pronounced at the very last, in an eternal ir-
revocable sentence, both of punishment and
of consolation, (on men whose) souls are not
to transmigrate into beasts, but are to return
into their own proper bodies. And all this
once for all, and on " that day, too, of which
the Father only knoweth; " ^ (only knoweth,)
in order that by her trembling expectation
faith may make full trial of her anxious sin-
cerity, keeping her gaze ever fixed on that
day, in her perpetual ignorance of it, daily
fearing that for which she yet daily hopes.

CHAP. XXXIV. — THESE VAGARIES STIMULATED
SOME PROFANE CORRUPTIONS OF CHRISTIAN-
ITY. THE PROFANITY OF SIMON MAGUS
CONDEMNED.

No tenet, indeed, under cover of any heresy
has as yet burst upon us, embodying any such
extravagant fiction as that the souls of human
beings pass into the bodies of wild beasts; but
yet we have deemed it necessary to attack
and refute this conceit, as a consistent sequel
to the preceding opinions, in order that Homer
in the peacock might be got rid of as effect-
ually as Pythagoras in Euphorbus; and in
order that, by the demolition of the metempsy-
chosis 2iW(k metetisomafosishy the same blow, the
ground might be cut away which has furnished
no inconsiderable support to our heretics.
There is the (infamous) Simon of Samaria in
the Acts of the Apostles, who chaffered for
the Holy Ghost: after his condemnation by
Htin, and a vain remorse that he and his
money must perish together,^ he applied his
energies to the destruction of the truth, as if
to console himself with revenge. Besides the
support with which his own magic arts fur-


» In administratione.

2 Mark xiii. 32.

3 Acts viii. i8-2i. [Vol. I. pp. 171, 182, 193, 347.]


nished him, he had recourse to imposture,
and purchased a Tyrian woman of the name
of Helen out of a brothel, with the same
money which he had offered for the Holy
Spirit, — a traffic worthy of the wretched man.
He actually feigned himself to be the Supreme
Father, and further pretended that the woman
was his own primary conception, wherewith
he had purposed the creation of the angels
and the archangels; that after she was pos-
sessed of this purpose she sprang forth from
the Father and descended to the lower spaces,
and there anticipating the Father's design had
produced the angelic powers, which knew
nothing of the Father, the Creator of this
world; that she was detained a prisoner by
these from a (rebellious) motive very like her
own, lest after her departure from them they
should appear to be the offspring of another
being; and that, after being on this account
exposed to every insult, to prevent her leav-
ing them anywhere after her dishonour, she
was degraded even to the form of man, to be
confined, as it were, in the bonds of the flesh.
Having during many ages wallowed about in
one female shape and another, she became
the notorious Helen who was so ruinous to
Priam, and afterwards to the eyes of Stesicho-
rus, whom, she blinded in revenge for his
lampoons, and then restored to sight to re-
ward him for his eulogies. After wandering
about in this way from body to body, she,
in her final disgrace, turned out a viler Helen
still as a professional prostitute. This wench,
therefore, was the lost sheep, upon whom the
Supreme Father, even Simon, descended,
who, after he had recovered her and brought
her back — ^whether on his shoulders or loins I
cannot tell — cast an eye on the salvation of
man, in order to gratify his spleen by liber-
ating them from the angelic powers. More-
over, to deceive these he also himself assumed
a visible shape; and feigning the appearance
of a man amongst men, he acted the part of
the Son in Judea, and of the Father in Sama-
ria. O hapless Helen, what a hard fate is
yours between the poets and the heretics, who
have blackened your fame sometimes with
adultery, sometimes with prostitution ! Only
her rescue from Troy is a more glorious affair
than her extrication from the brothel. There
were a thousand ships to remove her from
Troy; a thousand pence were probably more
than enough to withdraw her from the stews.
Fie on you, Simon, to be so tardy in seeking
her out, and so inconstant in ransoming her !
How different from Menelaus ! As soon as
he has lost her, he goes in pursuit of her; she
is no sooner ravished than he begins his
search; after a ten years' conflict he boldly


2l6


A TREATISE ON THE SOUL.


[chap. XXXV.


rescues her: there is no lurking, no deceiv-
ing, no cavilling. I am really afraid that he
was a much better " Father," who laboured
so much more vigilantly, bravely, and perse-
veringly, about the recovery of his Helen.

CHAP. XXXV. — THE OPINIONS OF CARPOCRATES,
ANOTHER OFFSET FROM THE PYTHAGOREAN
DOGMAS, STATED AND CONFUTED.

However, it is not for you alone, (Simon),
that the transmigration philosophy has fabri-
cated this story. Carpocrates also makes
equally good use of it, who was a magician
and a fornicator like yourself, only he had
not a Helen.' And why should he not ? since
he asserted that souls are reinvested with
bodies, in order to ensure the overthrow by
all means of divine and human truth. For,
(according to his miserable doctrine^ythis life
.became consummated to no man until all those
blemishes which are held to disfigure it have
been fully displayed in its conduct; because
there is nothing which is accounted evil by
nature, but simply as men think of it. The
transmigration of human souls, therefore,
into any kind of heterogeneous bodies, he
thought by all means indispensable, whenever
any depravity whatever had not been fully
perpetrated in the early stage of life's passage.
Evil deeds (one may be sure) appertain to
life. Moreover, as often as the soul has fallen
short as a defaulter in sin, it has to be recalled
to existence, until it *' pays the utmost
farthing," = thrust out from time to time into
the prison of the body. To this effect does,
he tamper with the whole of that allegory of
the Lord which is extremely clear and simple
in its meaning, and ought to be from the first
understood in its plain and natural sense.
Thus our *' adversary " (therein mentioned 3 )
is the heathen man, who is walking with us
along the same road of life which is common
to him and ourselves. Now " we must needs
go out of the world," < if it be not allowed us
to have conversation with them. He bids us,
therefore, show a kindly disposition to such
a man. *' Love your enemies," says He,
" pray for them that curse you," s lest such a
man in any transaction of business be irritated
by any unjust conduct of yours, and " deliver
thee to the judge" of his own (nation^), and
you be thrown into prison, and be detained in
its close and narrow cell until you have liqui-
dated all your debt against him.^ Then,


' For Carpocrates, see Irenxus, i, 34 ; Eusebius, H, E. iv. 7 ;
Epiphan. Har. 27.

2 Matt. V. 26.

3 Ver. 35.

■4 1 Cor. V. 10.

5 Luke vi. 27.

6 Matt. V. 25.

7 Ver. 26.


j again, should you be disposed to apply the
I term "adversary" to the devil, you are ad-
vised by the (Lord's) injunction, "while you
are in the way with him," to make even with
him such a compact as may be deemed com-
patible with the requirements of your true
faith. Now the compact you have made re-
specting him is to renounce him, and his
pomp, and his angels. Such is your agree-
ment in this matter. Now the friendly un-
derstanding you will have to carry out must
arise from your observance of the compact:
you must never think of getting back any
of the things which you have abjured, and
have restored to him, lest he should summon
you as a fraudulent man, and a transgressor
of your agreement, before God the Judge
(for in this light do we read of him, in another
passage, as "the accuser of the brethren,"^
or saints, where reference is made to the
actual practice of legal prosecution) ; and lest
this Judge deliver you over to the angel who
is to execute the sentence, and he commit you
to the prison of hell, out of which there will
be no dismissal until the smallest even of your
delinquencies be paid off in the period before
the resurrection. 9 What can be a more fitting
sense than this ? What a truer interpretation ?
If, however, according to Carpocrates, the
soul is bound to the commission of all sorts
of crime and evil conduct, what must we from
his system understand to be its " adversary "
and foe? I suppose it must be that better
mind which shall compel it by force to the
performance of some act of virtue, that it may
be driven from body to body, until it be found
in none a debtor to the claims of a virtuous
life. This means, that a good tree is known
by its bad fruit — in other words, that the doc-
trine of truth is understood from the worst
possible precepts. I apprehend '° that here-
tics of this school seize with especial avidity
the example of Elias, whom they assume to
have been so reproduced in John (the Baptist)
as to make our Lord's statement sponsor for
their theory of transmigration, when He said,
" Elias is come already, and they knew him
not; " " and again, in another passage, " And
if ye will receive it, this is Elias, which was
for to come." " Well, then, was it really in a
Pythagorean sense that the Jews approached
John with the inquiry, "Art thou Elias ?" "^
and not rather in the sense of the divine pre-


8 Rev. xii. 10.

9 Mori resurrectionis. For the force of this phrase, as appar-
ently implying a doctrine of purgatory, and an explanation of
Tertullian s teaching on this point, see Bp. Kaye on Tertniitan^
pp. 328, 329. [See p. 59, su/ra.J

10 Spero.
" ^latt. xvii. 12.
" Matt. xi. 14.
»3 John i. 21.


I


CHAP. XXXVII.]


A TREATISE ON THE SOUL.


217


diction, "Behold, I will send you Elijah"
the Tisbite ? ' The fact, however, is, that their
metempsychosis, or transmigration theory,
signifies the recall of the soul which had died
long before, and its return to some other body.
But Elias is to come again, not after quitting
life (in the way of dying), but after his
translation (or removal without dying); not for
the purpose of being restored to the body, from
which he had not departed, but for the purpose
of revisiting the world from which he was trans-
lated; not by way of resuming a life which he
had laid aside, but of fulfilling prophecy, —
really and truly the same man, both in re-
spect of his name and designation, as well as
of his unchanged humanity. How, there-
fore, could John be Elias ? You have your
answer in the angel's announcement: "And
he shall go before the people," says he, " in
the spirit and power of Elias " — not (observe)
in his soul and his body. These substances
are, in fact, the natural property of each in-
dividual; whilst " the spirit and power " are
bestowed as external gifts by the grace of God,
and so may be transferred to another person
according to the purpose and will of the Al-
mighty, as was anciently the case with respect
to the spirit of Moses. ^

chap. xxxvi. — the main points of our
author's subject, on the sexes of the
human race.

For the discussion of these questions we
abandoned, if I remember rightly, ground
to which we must now return. We had estab-
lished the position that the soul is seminally
placed in man, and by human agency, and
that its seed from the very beginning is uni-
form, as is that of the soul also, to the race
of man; (and this we settled) owing to the
rival opinions of the philosophers and the
heretics, and that ancient saying mentioned
by Plato (to which we referred above). ^ We
now pursue in their order the points which
follow from them, The soul, being sown in
the womb at the same time as the body, re-
ceives likewise along with it its sex; and this
indeed so simultaneously, that neither of the
two substances can be alone regarded as the
cause of the sex. Now, if in the semination of
these substances any interval were admissible
in their conception, in such wise that either
the flesh or the soul should be the first to be
conceived, one might then ascribe an especial
sex to one of the substances, owing to the
difference in the time of the impregnations,
so that either the flesh would impress its sex


Mai.


iv._5.


2 Num. xii. 2.

3 In ch. xxviii. at the beginning.


upon the soul, or the soul upon the sex ; even
as Apelles (the heretic, not the painter*) gives
the priority over their bodies to the souls of
men and women, as he had been taught by
Philumena, and in consequence makes the
flesh, as the later, receive its sex from the soul.
They also who make the soul supervene after
birth on the flesh predetermine, of course, the
sex of the previously formed soul to be male
or female, according to (the sex of) the flesh.
But the truth is, the seminations of the two
substances are inseparable in point of time,
and their effusion is also one and the same,
in consequence of which a community of
gender is secured to them; so that the course
of nature, whatever that be, shall draw the
line (for the distinct sexes). Certainly in this
view we have an attestation of the method of
the first two formations, when the male was
moulded and tempered in a completer way,
for Adam was first formed; and the woman
came far behind him, for Eve was the later
formed. So that her flesh was for a long time
without specific form (such as she aftenvards
assumed when taken out of Adam's side); but
she was even then herself a living being, be-
cause I should regard her at that time in soul
as even a portion of Adam. Besides, God's
afflatus would have animated her too, if there
had not been in the woman a transmission
from Adam of his soul also as well as of his
flesh.

CHAP. XXXVII. ON the FORMATION AND STATE

OF THE EMBRYO. ITS RELATION WITH THE
SUBJECT OF THIS TREATISE.

Now the entire process of sowing, forming,
and completing the human embryo in the
womb is no doubt regulated by some power,
which ministers herein to the will of God,
whatever may be the method which it is ap-
pointed to employ. Even the superstition of
Rome, by carefully attending to these points,
imagined the goddess Alemona to nourish the
foetus in the womb; as well as (the goddesses)
Nona and Decufia, called after the most
critical months of gestation; and Partula^ to
manage and direct parturition; and Luctna,
to bring the child to the birth and light of
day. We, on our part, believe the angels to
officiate herein for God. The embryo there-
fore becomes a human being in the womb from
the moment that its form is completed. The
law of Moses, indeed, punishes with due pen-
alties the man who shall cause abortion, inas-
much as there exists already the rudiment of
a human being,s which has imputed to it even


4 See above, ch. xxiii. [Also p. 246, in/ra."]

5 Causa hominis.


2l8


A TREATISE ON THE SOUL.


[chap. XXXVI I u


now the condition of life and death, since it
is already liable to the issues of both, although,
by living still in the mother, it for the most
part shares its own state with the mother.
I must also say something about the period
of the soul's birth, that I may omit nothing
incidental in the whole process. A mature
and regular birth takes place, as a general
rule, at the commencement of the tenth
month. They who theorize respecting num-
bers, honour the number ten as the parent of
all the others, and as imparting perfection to
the human nativity. For my own part, I
prefer viewing this measure of time in refer-
ence to God, as if implying that the ten months
rather initiated man into the ten command-
ments; so that the numerical estimate of the
time needed to consummate our natural birth
should correspond to the numerical classifi-
cation of the rules of our regenerate life. But
inasmuch as birth is also completed with the
seventh month, I more readily recognize in
this number than in the eighth the honour of
a numerical agreement with the sabbatical
period; so that the month in which God's im-
age is sometimes produced in a human birth,
shall in its number tally with the day on which
God's creation was completed and hallowed.
Human nativity has sometimes been allowed
to be premature, and yet to occur in fit and
perfect accordance withan/^^<^^^;;/^rt^or seven-
fold number, as an auspice of our resurrec-
tion, and rest, and kingdom. The ogdoad,
or eightfold number, therefore, is not con-
cerned in our formation;' for in the time it
represents there will be no more marriage.*
We have already demonstrated the conjunc-
tion of the body and the soul, from the con-
cretion of their very seminations to the com-
plete formation of the foetus. We now main-
tain their conjunction likewise from the birth
onwards; in the first place, because they both
grow together, only each in a different man-
ner suited to the diversity of their nature —
the flesh in magnitude, the soul in intelligence
— the flesh in material condition, the soul in
sensibility. We are, however, forbidden to
suppose that the soul increases in substance,
lest it should be said also to be capable of
diminution in substance, and so its extinction
even should be believed to be possible; but
its inherent power, in which are contained
all its natural peculiarities, as originally im-
planted in its being, is gradually developed
along with the flesh, without impairing the
germinal basis of the substance, which it re-


I The ogdoaei, or number eighty mystically representing " hea-
ven" where they do not marry.

» Beyond the hebdomad comes the resurrection, on which see
Matt. xxii. 30.


ceived when breathed at first into man. Take
a certain quantity of gold or of silver — a rough
mass as yet: it has indeed a compact condi-
tion, and one that is more compressed at the
moment than it will be; yet it contains within
its contour what is throughout a mass of gold
or of silver. When this mass is afterwards
extended by beating it into leaf, it becomes
larger than it was before by the elongation of
the original mass, but not by any addition
thereto, because it is extended in space, not
increased in bulk; although in a way it is
even increased when it is extended: for it
may be increased in form, but not in state.
Then, again, the sheen of the gold or the
silver, which when the metal was only in
block was inherent in it no doubt really, but
yet only obscurely, shines out in developed
lustre. Afterwards various modifications of
shape accrue, according to the feasibility in
the material which makes it yield to the ma-
nipulation of the artisan, who yet adds nothing
to the condition of the mass but its configura-
tion. In like manner, the growth and devel-
opments of the soul are to be estimated, not
as enlarging its substance, but as calling forth
its powers.

CHAP. XXXVIII. ON THE GROWTH OF THE

SOUL. ITS MATURITY COINCIDENT WITH THE
MATURITY OF THE FLESH IN MAN.

Now we have already ^ laid down the princi-
ple, that all the natural properties of the soul
which relate to sense and intelligence are in-
herent in its very substance, and spring from
its native constitution, but that they advance
by a gradual growth through the stages of life
and develope themselves in different ways by
accidental circumstances, according to men's
means and arts, their manners and customs
their local situations, and the influences of
the Supreme Powers;'' but in pursuance of
that aspect of the association of body and
soul which we have now to consider, we main-
tain that the puberty of the soul coincides with
that of the body, and that they attain both
together to this full growth at about the four-
teenth year of life, speaking generally, — the
former by the suggestion of the senses, and
the latter by the growth of the bodily mem-
bers; and (we fix on this age) not because, as
Asclepiades supposes, reflection then begins,
nor because the civil laws date the commence-
ment of the real business of life from this
period, but because this was the appointed
order from the very first. For as Adam and
Eve felt that they must cover their naked-


3 See above, in ch. xx.

4 See above, in ch. xxiv.


I


CHAP. XXXIX.]


A TREATISE ON THE SOUL.


219


ness after their knowledge of good and evil,
so we profess to have the same discernment
of good and evil from the time that we expe-
rience the siime sensation of shame. Now
from the before-mentioned age (of fourteen
years) sex is suffused and clothed with an es-
pecial sensibility, and concupiscence employs
the ministry of the eye, and communicates
its pleasure to another, and understands the
natural relations between male and female,
and wears the fig-tree apron to cover the
shame which it still excites, and drives man
out of the paradise of innocence and chastity,
and in its wild pruriency falls upon sins and
unnatural incentives to delinquency; for its
impulse has by this time surpassed the ap-
pointment of nature, and springs from its
vicious abuse. But the strictly natural con-
cupiscence is simply confined to the desire of
those aliments which God at the beginning
conferred upon man. " Of every tree of the
garden," He says, "ye shall freely eat;"'
and then again to the generation which fol-
lowed next after the flood He enlarged the
grant: " Every moving thing that liveth shall
be meat for you; behold, as the green herb
have I given you all these things," ^ — where
He has regard rather to the body than to the
soul, although it be in the interest of the soul
also. For we must remove all occasion from
the caviller, who, because the soul apparently
wants aliments, would insist on the soul's be-
ing from this circumstance deemed mortal,
since it is sustained by meat and drink and
after a time loses its vigour when they are
withheld, and on their complete removal ulti-
mately droops and dies. Now the point we
must keep in view is not merely which par-
ticular faculty it is which desires these (ali-
ments), but also for what end; and even if it
be for its own sake, still the question remains.
Why this desire, and when felt, and how
long ? Then again there is the consideration,
that it is one thing to desire by natural
instinct, and another thing to desire through
necessity; one thing to desire as a property
of being, another thing to desire for a special
object. The soul, therefore, will desire meat
and drink — for itself indeed, because of a
special necessity; for the flesh, however, from
the nature of its properties. For the flesh
is no doubt the house of the soul, and the
soul is the temporary inhabitant of the flesh.
The desire, then, of the lodger will arise from
the temporary cause and the special necessity
which his very designation suggests, — with a
view to benefit and improve the place of his
temporary abode, while sojourning in it; not


1 Gen. ii. 16.

2 Gen. ix. 3.


with the view, certainly, of being himself the
foundation of the house, or himself its walls,
or himself its support and roof, but simply and
solely with the view of being accommodated
and housed, since he could not receive such
accommodation except in a sound and well-
built house. (Now, applying this imagery to
the soul,) if it be not provided with this accom-
modation, it will not be in its power to quit
its dwelling-place, and for want of fit and
proper resources, to depart safe and sound,
in possession, too, of its own supports, and
the aliments which belong to its own proper
condition, — namely immortality, rationality,
sensibility, intelligence, and freedom of the
will.

CHAP. XXXIX. THE EVIL SPIRIT HAS MARRED

THE PURITY OF THE SOUL FROM THE VERY
BIRTH.

All these endowments of the soul which are
bestowed on it at birth are still obscured and
depraved by the malignant being who, in the
beginning, regarded them with envious eye,
so that they are never seen in their spontane-
ous action, nor are they administered as they
ought to be. For to what individual of the
human race will not the evil spirit cleave,
ready to entrap their souls from the very
portal of their birth, at which he is invited to
be present in all those superstitious processes
which accompany childbearing ? Thus it
comes to pass that all men are brought to the
birth with idolatry for the midwife, whilst the
very wombs that bear them, still bound with
the fillets that have been wreathed before the
idols, declare their offspring to be consecrated
to demons: for in parturition they invoke the
aid of Lucina and Diana; for a whole week
a table is spread in honour of Juno; on the
last day the fates of the horoscope ^ are in-
voked; and then the infant's first step on the
ground is sacred to the goddess Statina. After
this does any one fail to devote to idolatrous
service the entire head of his son, or to take
out a hair, or to shave off the whole with a
razor, or to bind it up for an offering, or seal
it for sacred use — in behalf of the clan, of
the ancestry, or for public devotion ? On
this principle of early possession it was that
Socrates, while yet a boy, was found by the
spirit of the demon. Thus, too, is it that to
all persons their genii are assigned, which is
only another name for demo7is. Hence in no
case (I mean of the heathen, of course) is
there any nativity which is pure of idolatrous
superstition. It was from this circumstance
that the apostle said, that when either of the


3 Fata Scribunda.


220


A TREATISE ON THE SOUL.


[chap. xli.


parents was sanctified, the children were
holy;' and this as much by the prerogative
of the (Christian) seed as by the discipline
of the institution (by baptism and Christian
education). " Else," says he, *' were the chil-
dren unclean" by birth:' as if he meant us to
understand that the children of believers
were designed for holiness, and thereby for
salvation; in order that he might by the pledge
of such a hope give his support to matrimony,
which he had determined to maintain in its
integrity. Besides, he had certainly not
forgotten what the Lord had so definitively
stated: " Except a man be born of water and
of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the king-
dom of God; " = in other words, he cannot be
holy.

CHAP. XL. JHE BODY OF MAN ONLY ANCIL-
LARY TO THE SOUL IN THE COMMISSION OF
EVIL.

Every soul, then, by reason of its birth,
has its nature in Adam until it is born again
in Christ; moreover, it is unclean all the while
that it remains without this regeneration ;3
and because unclean, it is actively sinful, and
suffuses even the flesh (by reason of their
conjunction) with its own shame. Now al-
though the flesh is sinful, and we are forbid-
den to walk in accordance with it,'* and its
works are condemned as lusting against the
spirit,^ and men on its account are censured
as carnal,^ yet the flesh has not such ignominy
on its own account. For it is not of itself that
it thinks anything or feels anything for the
purpose of advising or commanding sin. How
should it, indeed ? It is only a ministering
thing, and its ministration is not like that of
a servant or familiar friend — animated and
human beings; but rather that of a vessel, or
something of that kind: it is body, not soul.
Now a cup may minister to a thirsty man;
and yet, if the thirsty man will not apply the
cup to his mouth, the cup will yield no min-
istering service. Therefore the differentia^
or distinguishing property, of man by no
means lies in his earthy element; nor is the
flesh the human person, as being some faculty
of his soul, and a personal quality; but it is a
thing of quite a different substance and dif-
ferent condition, although annexed to the soul
as a chattel or as an instrument for the offices
of life. Accordingly the flesh is blamed in
the Scriptures, because nothing is done by the
soul without the flesh in operations of con-


* I Cor. vii. 14.

2 John iii. 5.

3 Rom. vi. 4.

4 Gal. V. i6.
SVer. 17.

6 Rom. viii. 5.


cupiscence, appetite, drunkenness, cruelty,
idolatry, and other works of the flesh, — oper-
ations, I mean, which are not confined to sen-
sations, but result in effects. The emotions
of sin, indeed, when not resulting in effects,
are usually imputed to the soul: " Whosoever
lookethonawomanto lust after, hath already
in his heart committed adultery with her."^
But what has the flesh alone, without the soul,
ever done in operations of virtue, righteous-
ness, endurance, or chastity ? What absurd-
ity, however, it is to attribute sin and crime
to that substance to which you do not assign
any good actions or character of its own ! Now
the party which aids in the commission of a
crime is brought to trial, only in such a way
that the principal offender who actually com-
mitted the crime may bear the weight of the
penalty, although the abettor too does not
escape indictment. Greater is the odium
which falls on the principal, when his officials
are punished through his fault. He is beaten
with more stripes who instigates and orders
the crime, whilst at the same time he who
obeys such an evil command is not acquitted.

CHAP. XLI. NOTWITHSTANDING THE DEPRAV-
ITY OF man's soul by original sin, there

IS YET LEFT A BASIS WHEREON DIVINE GRACE
CAN WORK FOR ITS RECOVERY BY SPIRITUAL
REGENERATION.

There is, then, besides the evil which su-
pervenes on the soul from the intervention of
the evil spirit, an antecedent, and in a certain
sense natural, evil which arises from its cor-
rupt origin. For, as we have said before,
the corruption of our nature is another nature
having a god and father of its own, namely
the author of (that) corruption. Still there is
a portion of good in the soul, of that original,
divine, and genuine good, which is its proper
nature. For that which is derived from God
is rather obscured than extinguished. It can
be obscured, indeed, because it is not God;
extinguished, however, it cannot be, because
it comes from God. As therefore light,
when intercepted by an opaque body, still
remains, although it is not apparent, by rea-
son of the interposition of so dense a body;
so likewise the good in the soul, being weighed
down by the evil, is, owing to the obscuring
character thereof, either not seen at all, its
light being wholly hidden, or else only a stray
beam is there visible where it struggles through
by an accidental outlet. Thus some men are
very bad, and some very good; but yet the
souls of all form but one genus: even in the
worst there is something good, and in the best


7 Matt. V. 28.


CHAI". XLIII.]


A TREATISE ON THE SOUL.


221


there is something bad. For God alone is
without sin; and the only man without sin is
Christ, since Christ is also God. Thus the
divinity of the soul bursts forth in prophetic
forecasts in consequence of its primeval good ;
and being conscious of its origin, it bears
testimony to God (its author) in exclamations
such as : Good God ! God kno7us ! and Good-
bye .i"- Just as no soul is without sin, so
neither is any soul without seeds of good.
Therefore, when the soul embraces the faith,
being renewed in its second birth by water
and the power from above, then the veil of its
former corruption being taken away, it beholds
the light in all its brightness. It is also taken
up (in its second birth) by the Holy Spirit, just
as in its first birth it is embraced by the un-
holy spirit. The flesh follows the soul now
wedded to the Spirit, as a part of the .bridal
portion — no longer the servant of the soul,
but of the Spirit. O happy marriage, if in it
there is committed no violation of the nuptial
vow !

CHAP. XLII. SLEEP, THE MIRROR OF DEATH,

AS INTRODUCTORY TO THE CONSIDERATION
OF DEATH.

It now remains (that we discuss the subject)
of death, in order that our subject-matter may
terminate where the soul itself completes it;
although Epicurus, indeed, in his pretty
widely known doctrine, has asserted that deatn
does not appertain to us. That, says he,
which is dissolved lacks sensation; and that
which is without sensation is nothing to us.
Well, but it is not actually death which suffers
dissolution and lacks sensation, but the human
person who experiences death. Yet even he
has admitted suffering to be incidental to the
being to whom action belongs. Now, if it is
in man to suffer death, which dissolves the
body and destroys the senses, how absurd to
say that so great a susceptibiHty belongs not
to man ! With much greater precision does
Seneca say: "After death all comes to an
end, even (death) itself." From which position
of his it must needs follow that death will ap-
pertain to its own self, since itself comes to
an end; and much more to man, in the ending
of whom amongst the " ^//," itself also ends.
Death, (says Epicurus) belongs not to us; then
at that rate, life belongs not to us. For cer-
tainly, if that which causes our dissolution
have no relation to us, that also which com-
pacts and composes us must be unconnected
with us. If the deprivation of our sensation
be nothing to us, neither can the acquisition
of sensation have anything to do with us.


Deo commendo = God be wf ye. De Test, c. ii. p. 176, supra.


The fact, however, is, he who destroys the
very soul, (as Epicurus does), cannot help de-
stroying death also. As for ourselves, indeed,
(Christians as we are), we must treat of death
just as we should of the posthumous life and
of some other province of the soul, (assuming)
that we at all events belong to death, if it
does not pertain to us. And on the same
principle, even sleeps which is the very mirror
of death, is not alien from our subject-matter.

CHAP. XLIII. SLEEP A NATURAL FUNCTION AS

SHOWN BY OTHER CONSIDERATIONS, AND BY
THE TESTIMONY OF SCRIPTURE.

Let US therefore first discuss the question
of sleep, and afterwards in what way the soul
encounters = death. Now sleep is certainly
not a supernatural thing, as some philosophers
will have it be, when they suppose it to be
the result of causes which appear to be above
nature. The Stoics affirm sleep to be "a
temporary suspension of the activity of the
senses; " ^ the Epicureans define it as an in-
termission of the animal spirit; Anaxagoras
and Xenophanes as a weariness of the same;
Empedocles and Parmenides as a cooling
down thereof; Strato as a separation of the
(soul's) connatural spirit; Democritus as the
soul's indigence; Aristotle as the interrup-
tion ^ of the heat around the heart. As for
myself, I can safely say that I have never
slept in such a way as to discover even a sin-
gle one of these conditions. Indeed, we can-
not possibly believe that sleep is a weariness;
it is rather the opposite, for it undoubtedly
removes weariness, and a person is refreshed
by sleep instead of being fatigued. Besides,
sleep is not always the result of fatigue; and
even when it is, the fatigue continues no
longer. Nor can I allow that sleep is a cool-
ing or decaying of the animal heat, for our
bodies derive warmth from sleep in such a
way that the regular dispersion of the food by
means of sleep could not so easily go on if
there were too much heat to accelerate it un-
duly, or cold to retard it, if sleep had the al-
leged refrigerating influence. There is also
the further fact that perspiration indicates an
over-heated digestion; and digestion is pred-
icated of us as a process of concoction, which
is an operation concerned with heat and not
with cold. In like manner, the immortality
of the soul precludes belief in the theory that
sleep is an intermission of the animal spirit,
or an indigence of the spirit, or a separation
of the (soul's) connatural spirit. The soul per-
ishes if it undergoes diminution or intermis-


2 Decurrat

3 So Bp. Kaye,

4 Marcorem


: p. 105.
' the dea


222


A TREATISE ON THE SOUL.


[chap, xliii.


sion. Our only resource, indeed, is to agree
with the Stoics, by determining the soul to
be a temporary suspension of the activity of
the senses, procuring rest for the body only,
not for the soul also. For the soul, as being
always in motion, and always active, never
succumbs to rest, — a condition which is alien
to immortality: for nothing immortal admits
any end to its operation; but sleep is an end
of operation. It is indeed on the body, which
is subject to mortality, and on the body
alone, that sleep graciously bestows ' a cessa-
tion from work. He, therefore, who shall
■doubt whether sleep is a natural function,
has the dialectical experts calling in question
the whole difference between things natural
and supernatural — so that what things he sup-
posed to be beyond nature he may, (if he
likes,) be safe in assigning to nature, which
indeed has made such a disposition of things,
that they may seemingly be accounted as be-
yond it; and so, of course, all things are nat-
ural or none are natural, ^as occasion re-
quires.) With us (Christians), however, only
that can receive a hearing which is suggested
by contemplating God, the Author of all the
things which we are now discussing. For we
believe that nature, if it is anything, is a rea-
sonable work of God. Now reason presides
over sleep; for sleep is so fit for man, so use-
ful, so necessary, that were it not for it, not
a soul could provide agency for recruiting the
body, for restoring its energies, for ensuring
its health, for supplying suspension from
work and remedy against labour, and for the
legitimate enjoyment of which day departs,
and night provides an ordinance by taking
from all objects their very colour. Since,
then, sleep is indispensable to our life, and
health, and succour, there can be nothing
pertaining to it which is not reasonable, and
which is not natural. Hence it is that physi-
cians banish beyond the gateway of nature
everything which is contrary to what is vital,
healthful, and helpful to nature; for those
maladies which are inimical to sleep — mala-
dies of the mind and of the stomach — they
have decided to be contrariant to nature, and
by such decision have determined as its corol-
lary that sleep is perfectly natural. More-
over, when they declare that sleep is not nat-
ural in the lethargic state, they derive their
conclusion from the fact that it is natural
when it is in its due and regular exercise. For
every natural state is impaired either by de-
fect or by excess, whilst it is maintained by
its proper measure and amount. That, there-
fore, will be natural in its condition which


Adalatur.


may be rendered non-natural by defect or by
excess. Well, now, what if you were to re-
move eating and drinking from the conditions
of nature ? if in them lies the chief incentive
to sleep. It is certain that, from the very
beginning of his nature, man was impressed
with these instincts (of sleep).' If you receive
your instruction from God, (you will find)
that the fountain of the human race, Adam,
had a taste of drowsiness before having a
draught of repose; slept before he laboured,
or even before he ate, nay, even before he
spoke; in order that men may see that sleep
is a natural feature and function, and one
which has actually precedence over all the
natural faculties. From this primary instance
also we are led to trace even then the image
of death in sleep. For as Adam was a figure
of Christ, Adam's sleep shadowed out the
death of Christ, who was to sleep a mortal
slumber, that from the wound inflicted on His
side might, in like manner (as Eve was
formed), be typified the church, the true
mother of the living. This is why sleep is so
salutary, so rational, and is actually formed
into the model of that death which is general
and common to the race of man. God, in-
deed, has willed (and it may be said in pass-
ing that He has, generally, in His dispensa-
tions brought nothing to pass without such
types and shadows) to set before us, in a man-
ner more fully and completely than Plato's
example, by daily recurrence the outlines of
man's state, especially concerning the begin-
ning and the termination thereof; thus stretch-
ing out the hand to help our faith more readily
by types and parables, not in words only, but
also in things. He accordingly sets before
your view the human body stricken by the
friendly power of slumber, prostrated by the
kindly necessity of repose immoveable in
position, just as it lay previous to life, and
just as it will lie after life is past: there it lies
as an attestation of its form when first mould-
ed, and of its condition when at last buried —
awaiting the soul in both stages, in the former
previous to its bestowal, in the latter after its
recent withdrawal. Meanwhile the soul is
circumstanced in such a manner as to seem
to be elsewhere active, learning to bear future
absence by a dissembling of its presence for
the moment. We shall soon know the case
of Hermotimus. But yet it dreams in the in-
terval. Whence then its dreams ? The fact
is, it cannot rest or be idle altogether, nor
does it confine to the still hours of sleep the
nature of its immortality. It proves itself to
possess a constant motion; it travels over land


2 Gen. ii. 21.


CHAP. XLV.]


A TREATISE ON THE SOUL.


223


and sea, it trades, it is excited, it labours, it
plays, it grieves, it rejoices, it follows pur-
suits lawful and unlawful; it shows what very
great power it has even without the body,
how well equipped it is with members of its
own, although betraying at the same time the
need it has of impressing on some body its
activity again. Accordingly, when the body
shakes off its slumber, it asserts before your
eye the resurrection of the dead by its own
resumption of its natural functions. Such,
therefore, must be both the natural reason
and the reasonable nature of sleep. If you
only regard it as the image of death, you ini-
tiate faith, you nourish hope, you learn both
how to die and how to live, you learn watch-
fulness, even while you sleep.


CHAP. XLIV. — THE STORY OF HERMOTIMUS, AND
THE SLEEPLESSNESS OF THE EMPEROR NERO.
NO SEPARATION OF THE SOUL FROM THE BODY
UNTIL DEATH.

With regard to the case of Hermotimus,
they say that he used to be deprived of his
soul in his sleep, as if it wandered away from
his body like a person on a holiday trip. His
wife betrayed the strange peculiarity. His
enemies, finding him asleep, burnt his body,
as if it were a corpse: when his soul returned
too late, it appropriated (I suppose) to itself
the guilt of the murder. However the good
citizens of Clazomenas consoled poor Hermo-
timus with a temple, into which no woman
ever enters, because of th6 infamy of this
wife. Now why this story ? In order that,
since the vulgar belief so readily holds sleep
to be the separation of the soul from the
body, credulity should not be encouraged by
this case of Hermotimus. It must certainly
have been a much heavier sort of slumber:
one would presume it was the nightmare, or
perhaps that diseased languor which Soranus
suggests in opposition to the nightmare, or
else some such malady as that which the fable
has fastened upon Epimenides, who slept
on some fifty years or so. Suetonius, how-
ever, informs us that Nero never dreamt, and
Theopompus says the same thing about Thra-
symedes; but Nero at the close of his life did
with some difficulty dream after some exces-
sive alarm. What indeed would be said, if
the case of Hermotimus were believed to be
such that the repose of his soul was a state
of actual idleness during sleep, and a positive
separation from his body? You may conjecture
it to be anything but such a licence of the soul
as admits of flights away from the body with-
out death, and that by continual recurrence,
as if habitual to its state and constitution.


If indeed such a thing were told me to have
happened at any time to the soul — resembling
a total eclipse of the sun or the moon — 1
should verily suppose that the occurrence
had been caused by God's own interposition,
for it would not be unreasonable for a man
to receive admonition from the Divine Being
either in the way of warning or of alarm, as
by a flash of lightning, or by a sudden stroke
of death; only it .would be much the more
natural conclusion- to believe that this process
should be by a dream, because if it must be
supposed to be, (as the hypothesis we are re-
sisting assumes it to be,) not a dream, the oc-
currence ought rather to happen to a man
whilst he is wide awake.

CHAP. XLV. DREAMS, AN INCIDENTAL EFFECT

OF THE soul's ACTIVITY. ECSTASY.

We are bound to expound at this point what
is the opinion of Christians respecting dreams,
as incidents of sleep, and as no slight or tri-
fling excitements of the soul, which we have
declared to be always occupied and active
owing to its perpetual movement, which again
is a proof and evidence of its divine quality
and immortality. When, therefore, rest ac-
crues to human bodies, it being their own
especial comfort, the soul, disdaining a repose ^
which is not natural to it, never rests; and ^c*^
since it receives no help from the limbs of the
body, it uses its own. Imagine a gladiator
without his instruments or arms, and a char-
ioteer without his team, but still gesticulating
the entire course and exertion of their respec-
tive employments: there is the fight, there is
the struggle; but the effort is a vain one.
Nevertheless the whole procedure seems to
be gone through, although it evidently has
not been really effected. There is the act,
but not the effect. This power we call
ecstasy^ in which the sensuous soul stands out
of itself, in a way which even resembles mad-
ness." Thus in the very beginning sleep was
inaugurated by ecstasy: "And God sent an
ecstasy upon Adam, and he slept. "=* The
sleep came on his body to cause it to rest,
but the ecstasy fell on his soul to remove
rest: from that very circumstance it still hap-
pens ordinarily (and from the order results
the nature of the case) that sleep is combined
with ecstasy. In fact, with what real feeling,
and anxiety, and suffering do we experience
joy, and sorrow, and alarm in our dreams !
Whereas we should not be moved by any such
emotions, by what would be the merest fan-


iWe had better give Tertullian's own succinct definition:
Excessus sensus et amentia; instar."
2 Gen. ii. 21.


224


A TREATISE ON THE SOUL.


[chap. xlvi.


tasies of course, if when we dream we were
masters of ourselves, (unaffected by ecstasy.)
In these dreams, indeed, good actions are use-
less, and crimes harmless; for we shall no
more be condemned for visionary acts of sin,
than we shall be crowned for imaginary mar-
tyrdom. But how, you will ask, can the soul
remember its dreams, when it is said to be
without any mastery over its own operations ?
This memory must be an especial gift of the
ecstatic condition of which we are treating,
since it arises not from any failure of healthy
action, but entirely from natural process; nor
does it expel mental function — it withdraws it
for a time. It is one thing to shake, it is an-
other thing to move; one thing to destroy,
another thing to agitate. That, therefore,
which memory supplies betokens soundness
of mind; and that which a sound mind ecstat-
ically experiences whilst the memory remains
unchecked, is a kind of madness. We are
accordingly not said to be mad, but to dream,
in that state; to be in the full possession also
of our mental faculties,' if we are at any time.
For although the power to exercise these fac-
ulties = may be dimmed in us, it is still not ex-
tinguished; except that it may seem to be
itself absent at the very time that the ecstasy
is energizing in us in its special manner, in
such wise as to bring before us images of a
sound mind and of wisdom, even as it does
those of aberration.

CHAP. XLVI. — DIVERSITY OF DREAMS AND
VISIONS. EPICURUS THOUGHT LIGHTLY .OF
THEM, THOUGH GENERALLY MOST HIGHLY
VALUED. INSTANCES OF DREAMS.

We now find ourselves constrained to ex-
press an opinion about the character of the
dreams by which the soul is excited. And
when shall we arrive at the subject of death ?
And on such a question I would say, When
God shall permit: that admits of no long delay
which must needs happen at all events. Epi-
curus has given it as his opinion that dreams
are altogether vain things; (but he says this)
when liberating the Deity from all sort of
care, and dissolving the entire order of the
world, and giving to all things the aspect of
merest chance, casual in their issues, fortui-
tous in their nature. Well, now, if such be
the nature of things, there must be some
chance even for truth, because it is impossible
for it to be the only thing to be exempted
from the fortune which is due to all things.
Homer has assigned two gates to dreams, ^ —
the horny one of truth, the ivory one of error


* Pnidentes.

' 5>apere.

3 See the Odyssey^ xix. 562, etc.


and delusion. For, they say, it is possible to
see through horn, whereas ivory is untrans-
parent. Aristotle, while expressing his opin-
ion that dreams are in most cases untrue, yet
acknowledges that there is some truth in them.
The people of Telmessus will not admit that
dreams are in any case unmeaning, but they
blame their own weakness when unable to
conjecture their signification. Now, who is
such a stranger to human experience as not
sometimes to have perceived some truth in
dreams ? I shall force a blush from Epicurus,
if I only glance at some few of the more re-
markable instances. Herodotus -♦ relates how
that Astyages, king of the Medes, saw in a
dream issuing from the womb of his virgin
daughter a flood which inundated Asia; and
again, in the year which followed her mar-
riage, he saw a vine growing out from the
same part of her person, which overspread the
whole of Asia. The same story is told prior
to Herodotus by Charon of Lampsacus. Now
they' who interpreted these visions did not de-
ceive the mother when they destined her son
for so great an enterprise, for Cyrus both in-
undated and overspread Asia. Philip of
Macedon, before he became a father, had
seen imprinted on the pudenda of his consort
Olympias the form of a small ring, with a lion
as a seal. He had concluded that an offspring
from her was out of the question (I suppose
because the lion only becomes once a father),
when Aristodemus or Aristophon happened
to conjecture that nothing of an unmeaning
or empty import lay under that seal, but that
a son of very illustrious character was por-
tended. They who know anything of Alex-
ander recognise in him the lion of that small
ring. Ephorus writes to this effect. Again,
Heraclides has told us, that a certain woman
of Himera beheld in a dream Dionysius' tyr-
anny over Sicily. Euphorion has publicly
recorded as a fact, that, previous to giving
birth to Seleucus, his mother Laodice foresaw
that he was destined for the empire of Asia.
I find again from Strabo, that it was owing
to a dream that even Mithridates took posses-
sion of Pontus; and I further learn from Cal-
listhenes that it was from the indication of a
dream that Baraliris the Illyrian stretched
his dominion from the Molossi to the frontiers
of Macedon. The Romans, too, were ac-
quainted with dreams of this kind. From a
dream Marcus Tullius (Cicero) had learnt
how that one, who was yet only a little boy,
and in a private station, who was also plain
Julius Octavius, and personally unknown to
(Cicero) himself, was the destined Augustus,


[Also, yEneid, vi. 894.I


4 See


CHAP. XLVII.]


A TREATISE ON THE SOUL.


-':)


and the suppressor and destroyer of (Rome's)
civil discords. This is recorded in the Com-
mentaries of Vitellius. But visions of this
prophetic kind were not confined to predictions
of supreme power; for they indicated perils
also, and catastrophes: as, for instance, when
Caesar was absent from the battle of Philippi
through illness, and thereby escaped the
sword of Brutus and Cassius, and then al-
though he expected to encounter greater dan-
ger still from the enemy in the field, he quitted
his tent for it, in obedience to a vision of Ar-
torius, and so escaped (the capture by the
enemy, who shortly after took possession of
the tent) ; as, again, when the daughter of
Polycrates of Samos foresaw the crucifixion
which awaited him from the anointing of the
sun and the bath of Jupiter/ So likewise in
sleep revelations are made of high honours
and eminent talents; remedies are also dis-
covered, thefts brought to light, and treasures
indicated. Thus Cicero's eminence, whilst
he was still a little boy, was foreseen by his
nurse. The swan from the breast of Socrates
soothing men, is his disciple Plato. The boxer
Leonymus is cured by Achilles in his dreams.
Sophocles the tragic poet discovers, as he was
dreaming, the golden crown, which had been
lost from the citadel of Athens. Neoptole-
mus the tragic actor, through intimations in
his sleep from Ajax himself, saves from de-
struction the hero's tomb on the Rhoetean
shore before Troy; and as he removes the
decayed stones, he returns enriched with gold.
How many commentators and chroniclers
vouch for this phenomenon ? There are Arte-
mon, Antiphon, Strato, Philochorus, Epi-
charmus, Serapion, Cratippus, and Diony-
sius of Rhodes, and Hermippus — the entire
literature of the age. I shall only laugh
at all, if indeed I ought to laugh at the
man who fancied that he was going to per-
suade us that Saturn dreamt before any-
body else; which we can only believe if Aris-
totle, (who would fain help us to such an opin-
ion,) lived prior to any other person. Pray
forgive me for laughing. Epicharmus, in-
deed, as well as Philochorus the Athenian,
assigned the very highest place among divina-
tions to dreams. The whole world is full of
oracles of this description: there are the
oracles of Amphiaraus at Oropus, of Amphi-
lochus at Mallus, of Sarpedon in the Troad,
of Trophonius in Boeotia, of Mopsus in Cili-
cia, of Hermione in Macedon, of Pasiphae in
Laconia.. Then, again, there are others,
which with their original foundations, rites,
and historians, together with the entire litera-


I See an account of her vision and its interpretation in Hero-
dot, iv. 124.

15


ture of dreams, Hermippus of Berytus in five
portly volumes will give you all the account
of, even to satiety. But the Stoics are very
fond of saying that God, in His most watchful
providence over every institution, gave us
dreams amongst other preservatives of the
arts and sciences of divination, as the especial
support of the natural oracle. So much for
the dreams to which credit has to be ascribed
even by ourselves, although we must interpret
them in another sense. As for all other ora-
cles, at which no one ever dreams, what else
must we declare concerning them, than that
they are the diabolical contrivance of those
spirits who even at that time dwelt in the em-
inent persons themselves, or aimed at reviving
the memory of them as the mere stage of their
evil purposes, going so far as to counterfeit a
divine power under their shape and form, and,
with equal persistence in evil, deceiving men
by their very boons of remedies, warnings,
and forecasts, — the only effect of which was
to injure their victims the more they helped
them; while the means whereby they rendered
the help withdrew them from all search after
the true God, by insinuating into their minds
ideas of the false one ? And of course so per-
nicious an influence as this is not shut up nor
limited within the boundaries of shrines and
temples: it roams abroad, it flies through the
air, and all the while is free and unchecked.
So that nobody can doubt that our very homes
lie open to these diabolical spirits, who beset
their human prey with their fantasies not only
in their chapels but also in their chambers.

CHAP. XLVII. DREAMS VARIOUSLY CLASSIFIED.

SOME ARE GOD-SENT, AS THE DREAMS OF
NEBUCHADNEZZAR ; OTHERS SIMPLY PROD-
UCTS OF NATURE. •

We declare, then, that dreams are inflicted
on us mainly by demons, although they some-
times turn out true and favourable to us.
When, however, with the deliberate aim after
evil, of which we have just spoken, they as-
sume a flattering and captivating style, they
show themselves proportionately vain, and
deceitful, and obscure, and wanton, and im-
pure. And no wonder that the images partake
of the character of the realities. But from
God — who has promised, indeed, " to pour
out the grace of the Holy Spirit upon all flesh,
and has ordained that His servants and. His
handmaids should see visions as well as utter
prophecies"^ — must all those visions be re-
garded as emanating, which may be compared
to the actual grace of God, as being honest,
holy, prophetic, inspired, instructive, inviting


■■ Joel iii.


226


A TREATISE ON THE SOUL.


[JHAI». XLIX.


to virtue, the bountiful nature of which causes
them to overflow even to the profane, since
God, with grand impartiality, "sends His
showers and sunshine on the just and on the
unjust."^ It was, indeed by an inspiration
from God that Nebuchadnezzar dreamt his
dreams;" and almost the greater part of man-
kind get their knowledge of God from dreams.
Thus it is that, as the mercy of God super-
abounds to the heathen, so the temptation of
the evil one encounters the saints, from whom
he never withdraws his malignant efforts to
steal over them as best he may in their very
sleep, if unable to assault them when they are
awake. The third class of dreams will consist
of those which the soul itself apparently
creates for itself from an intense application
to special circumstances. Now, inasmuch as
the soul cannot dream of its own accord (for
even Epicharmus is of this opinion), how can
it become to itself the cause of any vision ?
Then must this class of dreams be abandoned
to the action of nature, reserving for the soul,
even when in the ecstatic condition, the power
of enduring whatever incidents befall it?
Those, moreover, which evidently proceed
neither from God, nor from diabolical inspira-
tion, nor from the soul, being beyond the
reach as well of ordinary expectation, usual in-
terpretation, or the possibility of being intelli-
gibly related, will have to be ascribed in a
separate category to what is purely and simply
the ecstatic state and its peculiar conditions.

CHAP. XLVIII. CAUSES AND CIRCUMSTANCES

OF DREAMS. WHAT BEST CONTRIBUTES TO
EFFICIENT DREAMING.

They say that dreams are more sure and
clear when they happen .towards the end of
the night, because then the vigour of the soul
emerges, and heavy sleep departs. As to the
seasons of the year, dreams are calmer in
spring, since summer relaxes, and winter
somehow hardens, the soul; while autumn,
which in other respects is trying to health, is
apt to enervate the soul by the lusciousness
of its fruits. Then, again, as regards the
position of one's body during sleep, one ought
not to lie on his back, nor on his right side,
nor so as to wrench ^ his intestines, as if their
cavity were reversely stretched: a palpitation
of the heart would ensue, or else a pressure
on the liver would produce a painful disturb-
ance of the mind. But however this be, I
take it that it all amounts to ingenious con-
jecture rather than certain proof (although


» Matt. V. 45.

2 Dan. ii. ij etc.

3 Conresupmatis.


the author of the conjecture be no less a man
than Plato);* and possibly all may be no
other than the result of chance. But, gener-
ally speaking, dreams will be under control of
a man's will, if they be capable of direction
at all; for we must not examine what opinion
on the one hand, and superstition on the other,
have to prescribe for the treatment of dreams,
in the matter of distinguishing and modifying
different sorts of food. As for the supersti-
tion, we have an instance when fasting is pre-
scribed for such persons as mean to submit
to the sleep which is necessary for receiving
the oracle, in order that such abstinence may
produce the required purity; while we find
an instance of the opiniofi when the disciples
of Pythagoras, in order to attain the same
end, reject the bean as an aliment which would
load the stomach, and produce indigestion.
But the three brethren, who were the com-
panions of Daniel, being content with pulse
alone, to escape the contamination of the royal
dishes, 5 received from God, besides other
wisdom, the gift especially of penetrating and
explaining the sense of dreams. For my own
part, I hardly know whether fasting would not
simply make me dream so profoundly, that I
should not be aware whether I had in fact
dreamt at all. Well, then, you ask, has not
sobriety something to do in this matter?
Certainly it is as much concerned in this as it
is in the entire subject: if it contributes some
good service to superstition, much more does
it to religion. For even demons require such
discipline from their dreamers as a gratification
to their divinity, because they know that it is
acceptable to God, since Daniel (to quote him
again) " ate no pleasant bread " for the space
of three weeks. ^ This abstinence, however,
he used in order to please God by humiliation,
and not for the purpose of producing a sensi-
bility and wisdom for his soul previous to re-
ceiving communication by dreams and visions,
as if it were not rather to effect such action
in an ecstatic state. This sobriety, then, (in
which our question arises,) will have nothing
to do with exciting ecstasy, but will rather
serve to recommend its being wrought by
God.

CHAP. XLIX. NO SOUL NATURALLY EXEMPT

FROM DREAMS.

As for those persons who suppose that in-
fants do not dream, on the ground that all the
functions of the soul throughout life are ac-
complished according to the capacity of age,
they ought to observe attentively their


4 See his Timceus^ c. xxxii. p. 71

5 Dan. i. 8-14.

6 Dan. X. 2.


CHAP. L,]


A TREATISE ON THE SOUL.


227


tremors, and nods, and bright smiles as they
sleep, and from such facts understand that
they are the emotions of their soul as it
dreams, which so readily escape to the surface
through the delicate tenderness of their in-
fantine body. The fact, however, that the
African nation of the Atlantes are said to pass
through the night in a deep lethargic sleep,
brings down on them the censure that some-
thing is wrong in the constitution of their soul.
Now either report, which is occasionally ca-
lumnious against barbarians, deceived Herod-
otus,' or else a large force of demons of this
sort domineers in those barbarous regions.
Since, indeed, Aristotle remarks of a certain
hero of Sardinia that he used to withhold the
power of visions and dreams from such as re-
sorted to his shrine for inspiration, it must
lie at the will and caprice of the demons to
take away as well as to confer the faculty of
dreams; and from this circumstance may
have arisen the remarkable fact (which we
have mentioned ^ ) of Nero and Thrasymedes
only dreaming so late in life. We, however,
derive dreams from God. Why, then, did not
the Atlantes receive the dreaming faculty from
God, because there is really no nation which
is now a stranger to God, since the gospel
flashes its glorious light through the world to
the ends of the earth ? Could it then be that
rumour deceived Aristotle, or is this caprice
still the way of demons ? (Let us take any
view of the case), only do not let it be im-
agined that any soul is by its natural constitu-
tion exempt from dreams.

CHAP. L. THE ABSURD OPINION OF EPICURUS

AND THE PROFANE CONCEITS OF THE HERETIC
MENANDER ON DEATH. EVEN ENOCH AND
ELIJAH RESERVED FOR DEATH.

We have by this time said enough about
sleep, the mirror and image of death; and
likewise about the occupations of sleep, even
dreams. Let us now go on to consider the
cause of our departure hence — that is, the ap-
pointment and course of death — because, we
must not leave even it unquestioned and un-
examined, although it is itself the very end of
all questions and investigations. According
to the general sentiment of the human race,
we declare death to be " the debt of nature."
So much has been settled by the voice of
God; 3 such is the contract with everything
which is born: so that even from this the
frigid conceit of Epicurus is refuted, who says
that no such debt is due from us; and no^
only so, but the insane opinion of the Samari-


1 Who mentions this story of the A tlantes in iv. 184.

2 In ch. xliv. p. 223.

3 Gen. ii. 17. [Not ex natura, but as penalty]


tan heretic Menander is also rejected, who
will have it that death has not only nothing to
do with his disciples, but in fact never reaches
them. He pretends to have received such a
commission from the secret power of One
above, that all who partake of his baptism
become immortal, incorruptible and instanta-
neously invested with resurrection-life. We
read, no doubt, of very many wonderful kinds
of waters: how, for instance, the vinous qual-
ity of the stream intoxicates people who drink
of the Lyncestis; how at Colophon the waters
of an oracle-inspiring fountain* affect men
with madness; how Alexander was killed by
the poisonous water from Mount Nonacris in
Arcadia. Then, again, there was in Judea
before the time of Christ a pool of medicinal
virtue. It is well known how the poet has
commemorated the marshy Styx as preserving
men from death; although Thetis had, in
spite of the preservative, to lament her son.
And for the matter of that, were Menander
himself to take a plunge into this famous Styx,
he would certainly have to die after all; for
you must come to the Styx, placed as it is by
all accounts in the regions of the dead. Well,
but what and where are those blessed and
charming waters which not even John Baptist
ever used in his preministrations, nor Christ
after him ever revealed to His disciples ?
What was this wondrous bath of Menander ?
He is a comical fellow, I ween.s But why
(was such a font) so seldom in request, so ob-
scure, one to which so very few ever resorted
for their cleansing? I really see something
to suspect in so rare an occurrence of a sacra-
ment to which is attached so very much se-
curity and safety, and which dispenses with
the ordinary law of dying even in the service
of God Himself, when, on the contrary, all
nations have " to ascend to the mount of the
Lord and to the house of the God of Jacob,"
who demands of His saints in martyrdom that
death which He exacted even of His Christ.
No one will ascribe to magic such influence
as shall exempt from death, or which shall
refresh and vivify life, like the vine by the
renewal of its condition. Such power was
not accorded to the great Medea herself —
over a human being at any rate, if allowed
her over a silly sheep. Enoch no doubt was
translated,^ and so was Elijah; ^ nor did they
experience death: it was postponed, (and only
postponed,) most certainly: they are reserved
for the suffering of death, that by their blood


4ScaturiKO daemonica.

5 It is difficult to say what Tertullian means by his " comicum
credo." Is it a playful parody on the heretic's name, the same as
the comic poet's (Menander) ?

6 Gen. V. 24 ; Heb. xi. 5.

7 2 Kings ii. 11.


228


A TREATISE ON THE SOUL.


[chap. LI.


they may extinguish Antichrist.' Even John
underwent death, although concerning him
there had prevailed an ungrounded expecta-
tion that he would remain alive until the com-
ing of the Lord.' Heresies, indeed, for the
most part spring hurriedly into existence, from
examples furnished by ourselves: they pro-
cure their defensive armour- from the very
place which they attack. The whole question
resolves itself, in short, into this challenge:
Where are to be found the men whom Me-
nander himself has baptized ? whom he has
plunged into his Styx ? Let them come forth
and stand before us — those apostles of his
whom he has made immortal ? Let my
(doubting) Thomas see them, let him hear
them, let him handle them — and he is con-
vinced.

CHAP. LI. DEATH ENTIRELY SEPARATES THE

SOUL FROM THE BODY.

But the operation of death is plain and ob-
vious: it is the separation of body and soul.
Some, however, in reference to the soul's im-
mortality, on which they have so feeble a hold
through not being taught of God, maintain it
with such beggarly arguments, that they would
fain have it supposed that certain souls cleave
to the body even after death. It is indeed in
this sense that Plato, although he despatches
at once to heaven such souls as he pleases, ^
yet in his Republic*' exhibits to us the corpse
of an unburied person, which was preserved
a long time without corruption, by reason of
the soul remaining, as he says, unseparated
from the body. To the same purport also
Democritus remarks on the growth for a con-
siderable while of the human nails and hair
in the grave. Now, it is quite possible that
the nature of the atmosphere tended to the
preservation of the above-mentioned corpse.
What if the air were particularly dry, and the
ground of a saline nature ? What, too, if the
substance of the body itself were unusually
dry and arid ? What, moreover, if the mode
of the death had already eliminated from the
corpse all corrupting matter? As for the
nails, since they are the commencement of
the nerves, they may well seem to be pro-
longed, owing to the nerves themselves being
relaxed and extended, and to be protruded
more and more as the flesh fails. The hair,
again, is nourished from the brain, which
would cause it endure for a long time as its
secret aliment and defence. Indeed, in the
case of living persons themselves, the whole
head of hair is copious or scanty in proportion


* Rev. xi. 3.
» John xxi. 23.

3 See below, ch. liv.

4 Ch. X. p. 614.


to the exuberance of the brain. You have
medical men (to attest the fact). But not a
particle of the soul can possibly remain in the
body, which is itself destined to disappear
when time shall have abolished the entire
scene on which the body has played its part.
And yet even this partial survival of the soul
finds a place in the opinions of some men;
and on this account they will not have the
body consumed at its funeral by fire, because
they would spare the small residue of the soul.
There is, however, another way of accounting
for this pious treatment, not as if it meant to
favour the relics of the soul, but as if it would
avert a cruel custom in the interest even of
the body; since, being human, it is itself un-
deserving of an end which is also inflicted
upon murderers. The truth is, the soul is
indivisible, because it is immortal; (and this
fact) compels us to believe that death itself is
an indivisible process, accruing indivisibly to
the soul, not indeed because it is immortal,
but because it is indivisible. Death, however,
would have to be divided in its operation, if
the soul were divisible into particles, any one
of which has to be reserved for a later stage
of death. At this rate, a part of death will
have to stay behind for a portion of the soul.
I am not ignorant that some vestige of this
opinion still exists. I have found it out from
one of my own people. I am acquainted with
the case of a woman, the daughter of Chris-
tian parents, 5 who in the very flower of her age
and beauty slept peacefully (in Jesus), after
a singularly happy though brief married life.
Before they laid her in her grave, and when
the priest began the appointed office, at the
very first breath of his prayer she withdrew
her hands from her side, placed them in an
attitude of devotion, and after the holy ser-
vice was concluded restored them to their
lateral position. Then, again, there is that
well-known story among our own people, that
a body voluntarily made way in a certain ceme-
tery, to afford room for another body to be
placed near to it. If, as is the case, similar
stories are told amongst the heathen, (we can
only conclude that) God everywhere manifests
signs of His own power — to His own people
for their comfort, to strangers for a testimony
unto them. I would indeed much rather
suppose that a portent of this kind happened
form the direct agency of God than from any
relics of the soul: for if there were a residue
of these, they would be certain to move the
other limbs; and even if they moved the
liands, this still would not have been for the
purpose of a prayer. Nor would the corpse
hav been simply content to have made way


5 Vernaculam ecclesiu.


I


CHAP. LIII.]


A TREATISE ON THE SOUL.


229


for its neighbour: it would, besides, have
benefited its own self also by the change of its
position. But from whatever cause proceeded
these phenomena, which you must put down
amongst signs and portents, it is impossible
that they should regulate nature. Death, if it
once falls short of totality in operation, is not
death. If any fraction of the soul remain, it
makes a living state. Death 'will no more
mix with life, than will night with day.

CHAP. LII. ALL KINDS OF DEATH A VIOLENCE

TO NATURE, ARISING FROM SIN. SIN AN IN-
TRUSION UPON NATURE AS GOD CREATED IT.

Such, then, is the work of death — the sepa-
ration of the soul from the body. Putting
out of the question fates and fortuitous cir-
cumstances, it has been, according to men's
views, distinguished in a twofold form — the
ordinary and the extraordinary. The ordinary
they ascribe to nature, exercising its quiet in-
fluence in the case of each individual decease;
the extraordinary is said to be contrary to
nature, happening in every violent death. As
for our own views, indeed, we know what was
man's origin, and we boldly assert and per-
sistently maintain that death happens not by
way of natural consequence to man, but owing
to a fault and defect which is not itself natu-
ral; although it is easy enough, no doubt, to
apply the term natural to faults and circum-
stances which seem to have been (though from
the emergence of an external cause ') insepa-
rable to us from our very birth. If man had
been directly appointed to die as the condition
of his creation,^ then of course death must be
imputed to nature. Now, that he was not
thus appointed to die, is proved by the very
law which made his condition depend on a
warning, and death result from man's arbitrary
choice. Indeed, if he had not sinned, he cer-
tainly would not have died. That cannot be
nature which happens by the exercise of voli-
tion after an alternative has been proposed to
it, and not by necessity — the result of an in-
flexible and unalterable condition. Conse-
quently, although death has various issues, in-
asmuch as its causes are manifold, we cannot
say that the easiest death is so gentle as not
to happen by violence (to our nature). The
very law which produces death, simple though
it be, is yet violence. How can it be other-
wise, when so close a companionship of soul
and body, so inseparable a growth together
from their very conception of two sister sub-
stances, is sundered and divided ? For al-
though a man may breathe his last for joy.


' Ex accidentia.

2 In mortem directo institutus est. [See p. 227, supra.']


like the Spartan Chilon, while embracing his
son who had just conquered in the Olympic
games; or for glory, like the Athenian Clide-
mus, while receiving a crown of gold for the
excellence of his historical writings; or in a
dream, like Plato; or in a fit of laughter, like
Publius Crassus, — yet death is much too vio-
lent, coming as it does upon us by strange and
alien means, expelling the soul by a method
all its own, calling on us to die at a moment
when one might live a jocund life in joy and
honour, in peace and pleasure. That is still
a violence to ships : although far away from
the Capharean rocks, assailed by no storms,
without a billow to shatter them, with favour-
ing gale, in gliding course, with merry crews,
they founder amidst entire security, suddenly,
owing to some internal shock. Not dissimilar
are the shipwrecks of life, — the issues of even
a tranquil death. It matters not whether the
vessel of the human body goes with unbroken
timbers or shattered with storms, if the navi-
gation of the soul be overthrown.

CHAP. LIII. THE ENTIRE SOUL BEING INDI-
VISIBLE REMAINS TO THE LAST ACT OF VITAL-
ITY; NEVER PARTIALLY OR FRACTIONALLY
WITHDRAWN FROM THE BODY.

But where at last will the soul have to lodge,
when it is bare and divested of the body ? We
must certainly not hesitate to follow it thither,
in the order of our inquiry. We must, how-
ever, first of all fully state what belongs to the
topic before us, in order that no one, because
we have mentioned the various issues of death,
may expect from us a special description of
these, which ought rather to be left to medical
men, who are the proper judges of the inci-
dents which appertain to death, or its causes,
and the actual conditions of the human body.
Of course, with the view of preserving the
truth of the soul's immortality, whilst treating
this topic, I shall have, on mentioning death,
to introduce phrases about dissolution of such
a purport as seems to intimate that the soul
escapes by degrees, and piece by piece; for it
withdraws (from the body) with all the circum-
stances of a decline, seeming to suffer con-
sumption, and suggests to us the idea of being
annihilated by the slow process of its depart-
ure. But the entire reason of this phenome-
non is in the body, and arises from the body.
For whatever be the kind of death (which
operates on man), it undoubtedly produces the
destruction either of the matter, or of the re-
gion, or of the passages of vitality: of the
matter, such as the gall and the blood; of
the region, such as the heart and the liver;
of the passages, such as the veins and the ar-


2.^0


A TREATISE ON THE SOUL.


[chap. liv.


teries. Inasmuch, then, as these parts of the
body are severally devastated by an injury
proper to each of them, even to the very last
ruin and annulling of the vital powers — in
other words, of the ends, the sites, and the
functions of nature — it must needs come to
pass, amidst the gradual decay of its instru-
ments, domiciles, and spaces, that the soul
also itself, being driven to abandon each suc-
cessive part, assumes the appearance of being
lessened to nothing; in some such manner as
a charioteer is assumed to have himself failed,
when his horses, through fatigue, withdraw
from him their energies. But this assumption
applies only to the circumstances of the de-
spoiled person, not to any real condition of
suffering. Likewise the body's charioteer,
the animal spirit, fails on account of the fail-
ure of its vehicle, not of itself — abandoning
its work, but not its vigour — languishing in
operation, but not in essential condition —
bankrupt in solvency, not in substance — be-
cause ceasing to put in an appearance, but
not ceasing to exist. Thus every rapid death
— such as a decapitation, or a breaking of the
neck,' which opens at once a vast outlet for
the soul; or a sudden ruin, which at a stroke
crushes every vital action, like that inner ruin
apoplexy — retards not the soul's escape, nor
painfully separates its departure into succes-
sive moments. Where, however, the death is
a lingering one, the soul abandons its position
in the way in which it is itself abandoned.
And yet it is not by this process severed in
fractions: it is slowly drawn out; and whilst
thus extracted, it causes the last remnant to
seem to be but a part of itself. No portion,
however, must be deemed separable, because
it is the last; nor, because it is a small one,
must it be regarded as susceptible of dissolu-
tion. Accordant with a series is its end, and
the middle is prolonged to the extremes; and
the remnants cohere to the mass, and are
waited for, but never abandoned by it. And
I will even venture to say, that the last of a
whole is the whole; because while it is less,
and the latest, it yet belongs to the whole,
and completes it. Hence, indeed, many
times it happens that the soul in its actual
separation is more powerfully agitated with a
more anxious gaze, and a quickened loquacity;
whilst from the loftier and freer position in
which it is now placed, it enunciates, by
means of its last remnant still lingering in the
flesh, what it sees, what it hears, and what it
is beginning to know. In Platonic phrase,
indeed, the body is a prison," but in the apos-


' We have made Tertullian's " cervicum messis
these modes of instantaneous death.
^Pherdo, p. 62, c. 6.


include both


tie's it is "the temple of God," 3 because it is
in Christ. Still, (as must be admitted,) by
reason of its enclosure it obstructs and ob-
scures the soul, and sullies it by the concre-
tion of the flesh; whence it happens that the
light which illumines objects comes in upon
the soul in a more confused manner, as if
through a window of horn. Undoubtedly,
when the soul, by the power of death, is re-
leased from its concretion with the flesh, it is
by the very release cleansed and purified: it
is, moreover, certain that it escapes from the
veil of the flesh into open space, to its clear,
and pure, and intrinsic light; and then finds
itself enjoying its enfranchisement from mat-
ter, and by virtue of its liberty it recovers its
divinity, as one who awakes out of sleep passes
from images to verities. Then it tells out
what it sees; then it exults or it fears, accord-
ing as it finds what lodging is prepared for it,
as soon as it sees the very angel's face, that
arraigner of souls, the Mercury of the poets.

CHAP. LIV. WHITHER DOES THE SOUL RETIRE

WHEN IT QUITS THE BODY? OPINIONS OF
PHILOSOPHERS ALL MORE OR LESS ABSURD.
THE HADES OF PLATO.

To the question, therefore, whither the soul
is withdrawn, we now give an answer. Al-
most all the philosophers, who hold the soul's
immortality, notwithstanding their special
views on the subject, still claim for it this
(eternal condition), as Pythagoras, and Em-
pedocles, and Plato, and as they who indulge
it with some delay from the time of its quit-
ting the flesh to the conflagration of all things,
and as the Stoics, who place only their own
souls, that is, the souls of the wise, in the
mansions above. Plato, it is true, does not
allow this destination to all the souls, indis-
criminately, of even all the philosophers, but
only of those who have cultivated their phi-
losophy out of love to boys. So great is the
privilege which impurity obtains at the hands
of philosophers ! In his system, then, the
souls of the wise are carried up on high into
the ether: according to Arius,^ into thQ air:
according to the Stoics, into the moon. I
wonder, indeed, that they abandon to the
earth the souls of the unwise, when they affirm
that even these are instructed by the wise, so
much their superiors. For where is the school
where they can have been instructed in the
vast space which divides them ? By what
means can the pupil-souls have resorted to
their teachers, when they are parted from
each other by so distant an interval ? What


3 I Cor. iii. i6, vi. 19 ; 3 Cor. vi. 16.
An Alexandrian philosopher in great repute with the Em-
peror Augustus.


CHAP. LVI.]


A TREATISE ON THE SOUL.


231


profit, too, can any instruction afford tiiem
at all in their posthumous state, when they
are on the brink of perdition by the universal
fire ? All other souls they thrust down to
Hades, which Plato, in his PhtedOy' describes
as the bosom of the earth, where all the filth
of the world accumulates, settles, and exhales,
and where every separate draught of air only
renders denser still the impurities of the seeth-
ing mass.

CHAP. LV. THE CHRISTIAN IDEA OF THE POSI-
TION OF hades; THE BLESSEDNESS OF PAR-
ADISE IMMEDIATELY AFTER DEATH. THE
PRIVILEGE OF THE MARTYRS.

By ourselves the lower regions (of Hades)
are not supposed to be a bare cavity, nor some
subterranean sewer of the world, but a vast
deep space in the interior of the earth, and a
concealed recess in its very bowels; inasmuch
as we read that Christ in His death spent
three days in the heart of the earth, ^ that is,
in the secret inner recess which is hidden in
the earth, and enclosed by the earth, and
superimposed on the abysmal depths which
lie still lower down. Now although Christ is
God, yet, being also man, " He died ac-
cording to the Scriptures," 3 and "accord-
ing to the same Scriptures was buried."''
With the same law of His being He fully
complied, by remaining in Hades in the form
and condition of a dead man; nor did He as-
cend into the heights of heaven before de-
scending into the lower parts of the earth, that
He might there make the patriarchs and
prophets partakers of Himself.^ (This being
the case), you must suppose Hades to be a
subterranean region, and keep at arm's length
those who are too proud to believe that the
souls of the faithful deserve a place in the
lower regions.^ These persons, who are " ser-
vants above their Lord, and disciples above
their Master," ^ would no doubt spurn to re-
ceive the comfort of the resurrection, if they
must expect it in Abraham's bosom. But it
was for this purpose, say they, that Christ
descended into hell, that we might not our-
selves have to descend thither. Well, then,
what difference is there between heathens and
Christians, if the same prison awaits them all
when dead ? How, indeed, shall the soul
mount up to heaven, where Christ is already
sitting at the Father's right hand, when as
yet the archangel's trumpet has not been heard


^ Phcedo, pp. 112-114.

2 Matt. xii. 40.

3 1 Cor. XV. 7.

4 Ver. 4.

5 1 Pet. iii. 19.

^See Irenaeus, adv. Harei, v.
7 Matt. X, 24.


[Vol. I. p. 566, this Series.]


by the command of God," — when as yet those
whom the coming of the Lord is to find on
the earth, have not been caught up into the
air to meet Him at His coming,' in company
with the dead in Christ, who shall be the first
to arise ?'° To no one is heaven opened; the
earth is still safe for him, I would not say it is
.shut against him. When the world, indeed,
shall pass away, then the kingdom of heaven
shall be opened. Shall we then have to
sleep high up in ether, with the boy-loving
worthies of Plato; or in the air with Arius; or
around the moon with the Endymions of the
Stoics? No, but in Paradise, you tell me,
whither already the patriarchs and prophets
have removed from Hades in the retinue of
the Lord's resurrection. How is it, then,
that the region of Paradise, which as revealed
to John in the Spirit lay under the altar," dis-
plays no other souls as in it besides the souls
of the martyrs? How is it that the most
heroic martyr Perpetua on the day of her pas-
sion saw only her fellow-martyrs there, in the
revelation which she received of Paradise, if
it were not that the sword which guarded the
entrance permitted none to go in thereat, ex- •
cept those who had died in Christ and not
in Adam ? A new death for God, even the
extraordinary one for Christ, is admitted into
the reception-room of mortality, specially
altered and adapted to receive the new-comer.
Observe, then, the difference between a
heathen and a Christian in their death: if
you have to lay down your life for God, as
the Comforter '^^ counsels, it is not in gentle
fevers and on soft beds, but in the sharp pains
of martyrdom: you must take up the cross
and bear it after your Master, as He has Him-
self instructed you.'^ The sole key to unlock
Paradise is your own life's blood.'* You have
a treatise by us,'s (on Paradise), in which we
have established the position that every soul
is detained in safe keeping in Hades until the
day of the Lord.

CHAP. LVI. REFUTATION OF THE HOMERIC

VIEW OF THE soul's DETENTION FROM HADES
OWING TO THE BODY's BEING UNBURIED.
THAT SOULS PREMATURELY SEPARATED FROM
THE BODY HAD TO WAIT FOR ADMISSION INTO
HADES ALSO REFUTED.

There arises the question, whether this
takes place immediately after the soul's de-


8 1 Cor. XV. 52 and i Thess. iv. 16.

9 1 Thess, iv. 17.
10 Ver. 16.
»i Rev. vi. 9.
12 Paracletus.
'3 Matt. xvi. 24.

M The souls of the martyrs were, according to Tertullian, at
once removed to Paradise (Bp. Kaye, p. 249).

^SDe Faradiso, [Compare, p. 216, note 9, supra.'\


A TREATISE ON THE SOUL.


[chap. lvi.


parture from the body; whether some souls
are detained for special reasons in the mean-
time here on earth ; and whether it is permitted
them of their own accord, or by the interven-
tion of authority, to be removed from Hades '
at some subsequent time ? Even such opin-
ions as these are not by any means lacking
persons to advance them with confidence. It
was believed that the unburied dead were not
admitted into the infernal regions before they
had received a proper sepulture; as in the
case of Homer's Patroclus, who earnestly
asks for a burial of Achilles in a dream, on
the ground that he could not enter Hades
through any other portal, since the souJs of
the sepulchred dead kept thrusting him away.=
We know that Homer exhibited more than a
poetic licence here; he had in view the rights
of the dead. Proportioned, indeed, to his
care for the just honours of the tomb, was
his censure of that delay of burial which was
injurious to souls. (It was also his purpose
to add a warning), that no man should, by
detaining in his house the corpse of a friend,
only expose himself, along with the deceased,
to increased injury and trouble, by the irreg-
ularity 3 of the consolation which he nourishes
with pain and grief. He has accordingly kept
a twofold object in view in picturing the com-
plaints of an unburied soul: he wished to
maintain honour to the dead by promptly at-
tending to their funeral, as well as to moderate
the feelings of grief which their memory ex-
cited. But, after all, how vain is it to suppose
that the soul could bear the rites and require-
ments of the body, or carry any of them away
to the infernal regions ! And how much vainer
still is it, if injury be supposed to accrue to
the soul from that neglect of burial which it
ought to receive rather as a favour ! For
surely the soul which had no willingness to
die might well prefer as tardy a removal to
Hades as possible. It will love the undutiful
heir, by whose means it still enjoys the light.
If, however, it is certain that injury accrues
to the soul from a tardy interment of the body
— and the gist of the injury lies in the neglect
of the burial — it is yet in the highest degree
unfair, that that should receive all the injury
to which the faulty delay could not possibly
be imputed, for of course all the fault rests
on the nearest relations of the dead. They
also say that those souls which are taken away
by a premature death wander about hither and
thither until they have completed the residue
of the years which they would have lived
through, had it not been for their untimely


' Ab inferis.

'///orf, xxiii. 72, etc.

3 Enormitate.


fate. Now either their days are appointed to
all men severally, and if so appointed, I can-
not suppose them capable of being shortened;
or if, notwithstanding such appointment, they
may be shortened by the will of God, or some
other powerful influence, then (I say) such
shortening is of no validity, if they still may
be accomplished in some other way. If, on
the other hand, they are not appointed, there
cannot be any residue to be fulfilled for un-
appointed periods. I have another remark to
make. Suppose it be an infant that dies yet
hanging on the breast; or it may be an im-
mature boy; or it may be, once more, a youth
arrived at puberty: suppose, moreover, that
the life in each case ought to have reached
full eighty years, how is it possible that the
soul of either could spend the whole of the
shortened years here on earth after losing the
body by death ? One's age cannot be passed
without one's body, it being by help of the body
that the period of life has its duties and labours
transacted. Let our own people, moreover,
bear this in mind, that souls are to receive
back at the resurrection the self-same bodies
in which they died. Therefore our bodies
must be expected to resume the same condi-
tions and the same ages, for it is these "par-
ticulars which impart to bodies their especial
modes. By what means, then, can the soul
of an infant so spend on earth its residue of
years, that it should be able at the resurrec-
tion to assume the state of an octogenarian,
although it had barely lived a month ? Or if
it shall be necessary that the appointed days
of life be fulfilled here on earth, must the same
course of life in all its vicissitudes, which has
been itself ordained to accompany the ap-
pointed days, be also passed through by the
soul along with the days ? Must it employ
itself in school studies in its passage from in-
fancy to boyhood; play the soldier in the ex-
citement and vigour of youth and earlier man-
hood; and encounter serious and judicial
responsibilities in the graver years between
ripe manhood and old age ? Must it ply trade
for profit, turn up the soil with hoe and plough,
go to sea, bring actions at law, get married,
toil and labour, undergo illnesses, and what-
ever casualties of weal and woe await it in the
lapse of years ? Well, but how are all these
transactions to be managed without one's
body ? Life (spent) without life ? But (you
will tell me) tiie destined period in question
is to be bare of all incident whatever, only to
be accomplished by merely elapsing. What,
then, is to prevent its being fulfilled in Hades,
where there is absolutely no use to which you
can apply it? We therefore maintain that
every soul, whatever be its age on quitting the


CHAP. LVII.]


A TREATISE ON THE SOUL.


233


body, remains unchanged in the same, until
the time shall come when the promised per-
fection shall be realized in a state duly tem-
pered to the measure of the peerless angels.
Hence those souls must be accounted as pass-
ing an exile in Hades, which people are apt to
regard as carried off by violence, especially
by cruel tortures, such as those of the cross,
and the axe, and the sword, and the lion; but
we do not account those to be violent deaths
which justice awards, that avenger of violence.
So then, you will say, it is all the wicked souls
that are banished in Hades. (Not quite so
fast, is my answer.) I must compel you to
determine (what you mean by Hades), which
of its two regions, the region of the good or
of the bad. If you mean the bad, (all I can say
is, that) even now the souls of the wicked de-
serve to be consigned to those abodes; if you
mean the good why should you judge to be
unworthy of such a restmg-place the souls of
infants and of virgins, and ^ those which, by
reason of their condition in life were pure and
innocent ?

CHAP. LVII. MAGIC AND SORCERY ONLY APPAR-
ENT IN THEIR EFFECTS. GOD ALONE CAN
RAISE THE DEAD.

It is either a very fine thing to be detained
in these infernal regions with the Aori, or
souls which were prematurely hurried away;
or else a very bad thing indeed to be there
associated with the Biaeothanati, who suffered
violent deaths. I may be permitted to use
the actual words and terms with which magic
rings again, that inventor of all these odd
opinions — with its Ostanes, and Typhon, and
Dardanus, and Damigeron, and Nectabis, and
Berenice. There is a well-known popular bit
of writing, = which undertakes to summon up
from the abode of Hades the souls which have
actually slept out their full age, and had passed
away by an honourable death, and had even
been buried with full rites and proper cere-
mony. What after this shall we say about
magic ? Say, to be sure, what almost every-
body says of it — that it is an imposture. But
it is not we Christians only whose notice this
system of imposture does not escape. We, it
is true, have discovered these spirits of evil,
not, to be sure, by a complicity with them, but
by a certain knowledge which is hostile to
them; nor is it by any procedure which is at-
tractive to them, but by a power which subju-
gates them that we handle (their wretched
system) — that manifold pest of the mind of


'We have treated this particle as la conjunction • but it may
only be an intensive particle introducing an explanatory clause :
'V7'<?« those which were pure," etc. [a better rendering.]

2 Litteratura.


man, that artificer of all error, that destroyer
of our salvation and our soul at one swoop. ^
In this way, even by magic, which is indeed
only a second idolatry, wherein they pretend
that after death they become demons, just as
they were supposed in the first and literal idola-
try to become gods (and why not ? since the
gods are but dead things), the before-mentioned
Aori Biaeothanati are actually invoked, — and
not unfairly,'^ if one grounds his faith on this
principle, that it is clearly credible for those
souls to be beyond all others addicted to vio-
lence and wrong, which with violence and
wrong have been hurried away by a cruel and
premature death and which would have a keen
appetite for reprisals. Under cover, however,
of these souls, demons operate, especially such
as used to dwell in them when they were in
life, and who had driven them, in fact, to the
fate which had at last carried them off. For,
as we have already suggested, s there is hardly
a human being who is unattended by a demon;
and it is well known to many, that premature
and violent deaths, which men ascribe to ac-
cidents, are in fact brought about by demons.
This imposture of the evil spirit lying con-
cealed in the persons of the dead, we are able,
if I mistake not, to prove by actual facts, when
in cases of exorcism (the evil spirit) affirms
himself sometimes to be one of the relatives*
of the person possessed by him, sometimes a
gladiator or a bestiariiis^'' and sometimes even
a god; always making it one of his chief
cares to extinguish the very truth which we
are proclaiming, that men may not readily be-
lieve that all souls remove to Hades, and that
they may overthrow faith in the resurrection
and the judgment. And yet for all that, the
demon, after trying to circumvent the by-
standers, is vanquished by the pressure of
divine grace, and sorely against his will con-
fesses all the truth. So also in that other kind
of magic, which is supposed to bring up from
Hades the souls now resting there, and to ex-
hibit them to public view, there is no other
expedient of imposture ever resorted to which
operates more powerfully. Of course, why a
phantom becomes visible, is because a body is
also attached to it; and it is no difficult matter
to delude the external vision of a man whose
mental eye it is so easy to blind. The ser-
pents which emerged from the magicians'
rods, certainly appeared to Pharaoh and to
the Egyptians as bodily substances. It is true


3 Oehler takes these descriptive clauses as meant of Satan^ in-
stead of being synonymes of magic^ as the context seems to re-
quire.

4iEque.

S Above, inch, xxxix. p. 219.

^Aliquem ex parentibus.

7 One who fought with wild bea.sts in the public games, only
without the weapons allowed to the gladiator.


234


A TREATISE ON THE SOUL.


[chap. LVill,


that the verity of Moses swallowed up their
lying deceit/ Many attempts were also
wrought against the apostles by the sorcerers
Simon and Elymas,' but the blindness which
struck (them) was no enchanter's trick. What
novelty is there in the effort of an unclean
spirit to counterfeit the truth ? At this very
time, even, the heretical dupes of this same
Simon (Magus) are so much elated by the ex-
travagant pretensions of their art, that they
undertake to bring up from Hades the souls
of the prophets themselves. And I suppose
that they can do so under cover of a lying
wonder. For, indeed, it was no less than this
that was anciently permitted to the Pythonic
(or ventriloquistic) spirit ^ — even to represent
the soul of Samuel, when Saul consulted the
dead, after (losing the living) God.^ God
forbid, however, that we should suppose that
the soul of any saint, much less of a prophet,
can be dragged out of (its resting-place in
Hades) by a demon. We know that " Satan
himself is transformed into an angel of light " s
— much more into a man of light — and that
at last he will " show himself to be even
God,"* and will exhibit "great signs and
wonders, insomuch that, if it were possible,
he shall deceive the very elect. ' ' ^ He hardly ^
hesitated on the before-mentioned occasion
to affirm himself to be a prophet of God, and
especially to Saul, in whom he was then act-
ually dwelling. You must not imagine that
he who produced the phantom was one, and
he who consulted it was another; but that it
was one and the same spirit, both in the sor-
ceress and in the apostate (king), which easily
pretended an apparition of that which it had
already prepared them to believe as real —
(even the spirit) through whose evil influence
Saul's heart was fixed where his treasure was,
and where certainly God was not. Therefore
it came about, that he saw him through whose
aid he believed that he was going to see, be-
cause he believed him through whose help he
saw. But we are met with the objection, that
in visions of the night dead persons are not
unfrequently seen, and that for a set purpose. '
For instance, the Nasamones consult private
oracles by frequent and lengthened visits to
the sepulchres of their relatives, as one may
find in Heraclides, or Nymphodorus, or He-
rodotus;'° and the Celts, for the same purpose,
stay away all night at the tombs of their brave


' Ex. vii. 12.

= Acts viii. Q, xiii. 8.

3 See above in ch. xxviii.

* I Sam. xxviii. 6-i6.

5 2 Cor. xi. 14.

^2 Thess. ii. 4.

7 Matt. xxiv. 24.

8 Si forte.
PM'on frustra.

»oIn iv. 172.


p. 209, supra.


chieftains, as Nicander affirms. Well, we
admit apparitions of dead persons in dreams
to be not more really true than those of living
persons; but we apply the same estimate to
all alike — to the dead and to the living, and
indeed to all the phenomena which are seen.
Now things are not true because they appear
to be so, but because they are fully proved to
be so. The truth of dreams is declared from
the realization, not the aspect. Moreover,
the fact that Hades is not in any case opened
for (the escape of) any soul, has been firmly
established by the Lord in the person of
Abraham, in His representation of the poor
man at rest and the rich man in torment." No
one, (he said,) could possibly be despatched
from those abodes to report to us how matters
went in the nether regions, — a purpose which,
(if any could be,) might have been allowable
on such an occasion, to persuade a belief in
Moses and the prophets. The power of God
has, no doubt, sometimes recalled men's souls
to their bodies, as a proof of His own trans-
cendent rights; but there must never be, be-
cause of this fact, any agreement supposed
to be possible between the divine faith and the
arrogant pretensions of sorcerers, and the im-
posture of dreams, and the licence of poets.
But yet in all cases of a true resurrection,
when the power of God recalls souls to their
bodies, either by the agency of prophets, or
of Christ, or of apostles, a complete presump-
tion is afforded us, by the solid, palpable, and
ascertained reality (of the revived body), that
its true form must be such as to compel one's
belief of the fraudulence of every incorporeal
apparition of dead persons.

CHAP. LVIII. CONCLUSION. POINTS POST-
PONED. ALL SOULS ARE KEPT IN HADES
UNTIL THE RESURRECTION, ANTICIPATING
THEIR ULTIMATE MISERY OR BLISS.

All souls, therefore, are shut up within
Hades : do you admit this ? (It is true,
whether) you say yes or no: moreover, there
are already experienced there punishments
and consolations ; and there you have a poor
man and a rich. And now, having postponed
some stray questions " for this part of my work,
I will notice them in this suitable place, and
then come to a close. Why, then, cannot you
suppose that the soul undergoes punishment
and consolation in Hades in the interval,
while it awaits its alternative of judgment, in
a certain anticipation either of gloom or of
glory ? You reply : Because in the judgment
of God its matter ought to be sure and safe.


I' Luke xvi. 26. [Compare note 15. p. 23i, supra.
>2 Ncscio quid.


I


CHAP. LVIII.]


A TREATISE ON THE SOUL.


235


nor should there be any inkling beforehand
of the award of His sentence; and also because
(the soul) ought to be covered first by its
vestment ' of the restored flesh, which, as the
partner of its actions, should be also a sharer
in its recompense. What, then, is to take
place in that interval ? Shall we sleep ?
But souls do not sleep even when men are
alive : it is indeed the business of bodies to
sleep, to which also belongs death itsejf, no
less than its mirror and counterfeit sleep. Or
will you have it, that nothing is there done
whither the whole human race is attracted,
and whither all man's expectation is postponed
for safe keeping? Do you think this state
is a foretaste of judgment, or its actual com-
mencement? a premature encroachment on
it, or the first course in its full ministration ?
Now really, would it not be the highest possi-
ble injustice, even ^ in Hades, if all were to be
still well with the guilty even there, and not
well with the righteous even yet? What,
would you have hope be still more confused
after death ? would you have it mock us still
more with uncertain expectation ? or shall it
now become a review of past life, and an ar-
ranging of judgment, with the inevitable feel-
ing of a trembling fear ? But, again, must the
soul always tarry for the body, in order to ex-
perience sorrow or joy ? Is it not sufficient,
even of itself, to suffer both one and the
other of these sensations ? How often, with-
out any pain to the body, is the soul alone tor-
tured by ill-temper, and anger, and fatigue,
and very often unconsciously, even to itself?
How often, too, on the other hand, amidst
bodily suffering, does the soul seek out for
itself some furtive joy, and withdraw for the
moment from the body's importunate society ?
I am mistaken if the soul is not in the habit,
indeed, solitary and alone, of rejoicing and
glorying over the very tortures of the body.
Look for instance, at the soul of Mutius Sccb-
vola as he melts his right hand over the fire ;
look also at Zeno's, as the torments of Dio-
nysius pass over it.^ The bites of wild beasts
are a glory to young heroes, as on Cyrus were
the scars of the bear.-* Full well, then, does
the soul even in Hades know how to joy and
to sorrow even without the body; since when
in the flesh it feek pain when it likes, though
the body is unhurt; and when it likes it feels
joy though the body is in pain. Now if such
sensations occur at its will during life, how


^ " Operienda " is Oehler's text ; another reading gives
" opperienda," q.d. " the soul must -wait for the restored body."

2 This " etiam " is " otium " in the Agobardine MS., a good
reading ; q.d. " a most iniquitous indifference to justice," etc.

3 Comp. The Apology^ last chapter.
4Xeu. Cyropced. p. 6.


much rather may they not happen after death
by the judicial appointment of God ! More-
over, the soul executes not all its operations
with the ministration of the flesh; for the judg-
ment of God pursues even simple cogitations
and the merest volitions. " Whosoever look-
eth on a woman to lust after her, hath com-
mitted adultery with her already in his heart. ' 's
Therefore, even for this cause it is most fitting
that the soul, without at all waiting for the
flesh, should be punished for what it has done
without the partnership of the flesh. So, on
the same principle, in return for the pious
and kindly thoughts in which it shared not
the help of the flesh, shall it without the flesh
receive its consolation. Nay more,^ even in
matters done through the flesh the soul is the
first to conceive them, the first to arrange
them, the first to authorize them, the first to
precipitate them into acts. And even if it is
sometimes unwilling to act, it is still the first
to treat the object which it means to effect by
help of the body. In no ca«e, indeed, can
an accomplished fact be prior to the mental
conception 7 thereof. It is therefore quite in
keeping with this order of things, that that
part of our nature should be the first to have
the recompense and reward to which they are
due on account of its priority. In short, inas-
much as we understand " the prison " pointed
out in the Gospel to be Hades,^ and as we also
interpret " the uttermost farthing " ' to mean
the very smallest offence which has to be
recompensed there before the resurrection,'"
no one will hesitate to believe that the soul
undergoes in Hades some compensatory dis-
cipline, without prejudice to the full process
of the resurrection, when the recompense will
be administered through the flesh besides.
This point the Paraclete has also pressed
home on our attention in most frequent ad-
monitions, whenever any of us has admitted
the force of His words from a knowledge
of His promised spiritual disclosures." And
now at last having, as I believe, encountered
every human opinion concerning the soul, and
tried its character by the teaching of (our holy
faith,) we have satisfied the curiosity which is
simply a reasonable and necessary one. As
for that which is extravagant and idle, there
will evermore be as great a defect in its in-
formation, as there has been exaggeration
and self-will in its researches.


5 Matt. V. 28.

6 Quid nunc si.

7 Conscientia.

8 Matt. V. 25.

9 Ver. 26.

10 Mora resurrectionis. See above, on this opinion of Tertullian,
in ch. XXXV.

" [A symptom of Montainism.]


TERTULLIAN,


PART SECOND.


I


INTRODUCTION, BY THE AMERICAN EDITOR.

The Second Class of Tertullian's works, according to the logical method I have endeavoured
to carry out, is that which includes his treatises against the heresies of his times. In these,
the genius of our author is brilliantly illustrated, while, in melancholy fact, he is demon-
strating the folly of his own final lapse and the wickedness of that schism and heresy into
which he fell away from Truth. Were it not that history abounds in like examples of the
frailty of the human intellect and of the insufficiency of "man that walketh to direct his
steps," we should be forced to a theory of mental decay to account for inconsistencies so
gross and for delusions so besotted, " Genius to madness is /W<^^^ allied," and who knows but
something like that imbecility which closed the career of Swift ' may have been the fate of this
splendid wit and versatile man of parts ? Charity, admiration and love force this inquiry
upon my own mind continually, as I explore his fascinating pages. And the order in which
the student will find them in this series, will lead, I think, to similar reflections on the part of
many readers. We observe a natural bent and turn of mind, even in his Catholic writings,
which indicate his perils. These are more and more apparent in his recent works, as his
enthusiasm heats itself into a frenzy which at last becomes a rage. He breaks down by
degrees, as in orthodoxy so also in force and in character. It is almost like the collapse of
Solomon or of Bacon. And though our own times have produced no example of stars of equal
magnitude, to become falling-stars, we have seen illustrations the most humiliating, of those
calm words of Bishop Kaye: " Human nature often presents the curious phenomenon of an
union of the most opposite qualities in the same mind; of vigour, acuteness and discrimina-
tion on some subjects, with imbecility, dulness and bigotry on others." Milton, himself
another example of his own threnode, breaks forth in this splendid utterance of lyrical con-
fession:

" God of our fathers what is man ?

Nor do I name of men the common rout,
That, wandering loose about,

Grow up and perish as the summer fly,

Heads without name, no more remembered.

But such as thou hast solemnly elected,

With gifts and graces eminently adorned,

To some great work, thy glory

An6. y^^o^Aq's sdAtiy, which in part they effect."

And here, I must venture a remark on the ambiguity of the expressions concerning our
author's Montanism. In the treatise against Marcion, written late in his career, Tertullian
identifies himself with the Church and strenuously defends its faith and its apostolic order.
In only rare instances does his weakness for the " new prophecy " crop out, and then, it is
only as one identifies himself with a school within the church. Precisely so Fenelon main-
tained his milder Montanism, without a thought of deserting the Latin Church. Afterwards
Fenelon drew back, but at last poor Tertullian fell away. So with the Jansenists. They
credited the miracles and the convulsio?is (or ecstasies) of their school,' and condemned those

I " From Marlboro's eyes the tears of dotage flow,
And Swift expires a driveller and a show."
= See the story of the Abbe Paris, Guettee, Histoire de f Eglise de France^ Tom. xii. p. 12. Also, Parton, Voltaire, Vol. i. pp.

236, 261, etc.


240 INTRODUCTORY NOTE.


who rejected them, as Tertullian condemns the Psychics. The great expounder of the Nicene
Faith (Bp. Bull) does indeed speak very decidedly of Tertullian as a lapser^ even when he
v/rote his first book against Marcion. His semi-schismatic position must be allowed. But,
was it a formal lapse at that time ? The English non-jurors were long in communion with
the Church, even while they denounced their brethren and the " Erastianizing '' clergy, much
as Tertullian does the Psychics. St. Augustine speaks of Tertullianists ' with great moderation,
and notes the final downfall of our author as something distinct from Tertullianism. When we
reflect, therefore, that only four of all his varied writings (now extant) are proofs of an
accomplished lapse, ought we not carefully to maintain the distinction between the Montan-
istic Tertullian and Tertullian the Montanist? Bishop Bull, it seems to me would not object
to this way of putting it, when we consider his own discrimination in the following weighty
words. He says:

*' A clear distinction must be made between those works which Tertullian, when already a
Montanist, wrote specifically in defence of Montanism against the church, and those which'
he composed, as a Montanist indeed, yet not in defence of Montatiism against the churchy but
rather, in defence of the conwio^i doctrifies of the church — and of Montanus, in opposition to
other heretics."

Now in arranging the works of this second class, the Prescription comes logically first,
because, written in Orthodoxy, it forcibly upholds the Scriptural Rule of Faith, the Catholic
touchstone of all professed verity. It is also a necessary Introduction to the great work
against Marcion which I have placed next in order; giving it the precedence to which it is
entitled in part on chronological ground, in part because of the general purity of its material
with the exhibition it presents of the author's mental processes and of his very gradual de-
cline from Truth.

Very fortunate were the Edinburgh Editors in securing for this work and some others,
the valuable labours of Dr. Holmes, of whom I have elsewhere given some biographical par-
ticulars. The merit and fulness of his annotations are so marked, that I have been spared
a great deal of work, such as I was forced to bestow on the former volumes of this American
Edition. But on the other hand these pages have given me much patient study and toil as
an editor, because of the "shreds and patches" in which Tertullian comes to us, in the
Edinburgh Series; and because of some typographical peculiarities, exceptional in that Series
itself, and presenting complications, when transferred to a new form of mechanical arrange-
ment. For example, apart from some valuable material which belongs to the General Preface,
and which I have transferred accordingly, the following dislocations confronted me to begin
with: The Marcion is presented to us in Volume VII. apart from the other writings of Ter-
tullian. At the close of Vol. XI. we reach the Ad Nationes^ of which Dr. Holmes is the
translator, another hand (Mr. Thelwall's) having been employed on former pages of that vol-
ume. It is not till we reach Volume XV. that Tertullian again appears, but this volume is
wholly the work of Dr. Holmes. Finally, in Volume XVIII., we meet Tertullian again,
(Mr. Thelwall the able translator), but, here is placed the '* Introduction " to all the works of
Tertullian, which, of course, I have, transferred to its proper place. I make these explana-
tions by no means censoriously, but to point out at once the nature of my own task, and
the advantage that accrues to the reader, by the order in which the works of the great Ter-
tullian appear in this edition, enabling him to compare different or parallel passages, all
methodically arranged in consecutive pages, without a minute's search, or delay.

Now, as to typographical difficulties to which I have referred, Dr. Holmes marks all his
multiplied and useful notes with brackets^ which are almost always superfluous, and which in

* See opp. Tom. viii. p. 46, Ed. Migne.


INTRODUCTORY NOTE. 241


this American Edition are used to designate my own contributions, when printed with the
text, or apart from Preface and Elucidations. These, therefore, I have removed necessarily
and with no appreciable loss to the work, but great gain to the beauty of the page. But,
again. Dr. Holmes' translations are all so heavily bracketed as to become an eyesore, and the
disfigured pages have been often complained of as afflictive to the reader. Many words
strictly implied by the original Latin, and which should therefore be ummarked, are yet put
between brackets. Even minute words (and, or to wit, or again,) when, in the nature of the
case the English idiom requires them, are thus marked. I have not retained these blemishes;
but when an inconsiderable word or a repetition does add to the sense, or qualify it, I have
italicized such words, throwing more important interpolations into parenthetical marks, which
are less painful to the sight than brackets. I have found them quite as serviceable to denote
the auxiliary word or phrase; and where the author himself uses a parenthesis, I have
observed very few instances in which a sensible reader would confound it with the translator's
efforts to eke out the sense. Sometimes, an awkward interpolation has been thrown into a
footnote. Occasionally the crabbed sentences of the great Carthaginian are so obscure that
Dr. Holmes has been unable to make them lucid, although, with the original in hand, he
probably felt a force in his own rendering which the mere English reader must fail to per-
ceive. In a few such instances, noting the fact in the margin, I have tried to bring out the
sense, by slight modifications of punctuation and arrangement. Occasionally too I have
dropped a superfluous interpolation (such e.g. as to conclude, or let me say again,) when I
have found that it only served to clog and overcharge a sentence. Last of all. Dr. Holmes'
headings have sometimes been condensed, to avoid phrases and sentences immediately recur-
ring in the chapter.' These purely mechanical parts require a terse form of statement, like
those in the English Bible, and I have frequently reduced them on that model, dropping
redundant adverbs and adjectives to bring out the catchwords.

J Take e. g. the heading to chapter xxiv. of the De Prascriptione. It reads thus : " St. Peter' s further vindication. St. Paul
was not at all superior to St. Peter in teaching Nothing was imparted to the former., in the " third heaven^' to enable him
to add to the faith — however foolishly the heretics may boast of him as if they had, forsooth, been favoured with some of the
secrets so itnparted to him in paradise.'^ If the reader will turn to the chaf)ter referred to, he will observe an instance of conden-
sation by which nothing is forfeited that is requisite to a heading, though redundancies are dropped. ,
16


I


THE PRESCRIPTION AGAINST HERETICS,


[TRANSLATED BY THE REV. PETER HOLMES, D.D., F.R.A.S., ETC., ETC.]


CHAP. L — INTRODUCTORY. HERESIES MUST
EXIST, AND EVEN ABOUND; THEY ARE A
PROBATION TO FAITH.

The character of the times in which we live
is such as to call forth from us even this ad-
monition, that we ought not to be astonished
at the heresies (which abound)^ neither ought
their existence to surprise us, for it was fore-
told that they should come to pass;^ nor the
fact that they subvert the faith of some, for
their final cause is, by affording a trial to faith,
to give it also the opportunity of being
" approved. "-^ Groundless, therefore, and in-
considerate is the offence of the many s who
are scandalized by the very fact that heresies
prevail to such a degree. How great (might
their offence have been) if they had not
existed.^ When it has been determined that
a thing must by all means be, it receives the
(final) cause for which it has its being. This
secures the power through which it exists, in
such a way that it is impossible for it not to
have existence.


I Of the various forms of the title of this treatise, de Preescrip-
tione Hareticorutn, de Prascriptionibus Hareticorunt, de
Prascriptionibus adversus Hcereticos, the first is adopted by
Oehier after the oldest authorities, such as the Liber Agobardinus
and the Codex Paterniacensis (or Seletstadiensis), and the Editio
Princeps of Rhenanus. The term prtescriptio is a legal one,
meaning a deimtrrer, or formal objection. The genitive ha--
reticorum is used in an objective sense, as if adversus Iteereticos.
Tertullian himself, in de Came Christi, ii. says, " Sed plenius
ejusmodi pra;scriptionibus adversus omnes haereses alibi jam usi
sumus. The title therefore means, " On the Church's Prescriptive
Rule against Heresies of all kinds." [Elucidation I.]

2lstas.

3 Matt. vii. 15, xxiv. 4, 11, 24 ; i Tim. iv. 1-3 ; 2 Pet. ii. i.

4 1 Cor. xi. 19.
SPlerique, "the majority."

* The Holy Ghost having foretold that they should exist.
<Rigalt.)


CHAP. II. ANALOGY BETWEEN FEVERS AND

HERESIES. HERESIES NOT TO BE WONDERED
at: their STRENGTH DERIVED FROM WEAK-
NESS OF men's FAITH. THEY HAVE NOT THE
TRUTH. SIMILE OF PUGILISTS AND GLADIA-
TORS IN ILLUSTRATION.

Taking the similar case ' of fever, which is
appointed a place amongst all other deadly
and excruciating issues (of life) for destroying
man: we are not surprised either that it exists,
for there it is, or that it consumes man, for
that is the purpose of its existence. In like
manner, with respect to heresies, which are
produced for the weakening and the extinction
of faith, since we feel a dread because they
have this power, we should first dread the fact
of their existence ; for as long as they exist,
they have they have their power ; and as long
as they have their power, they have their ex-
istence. But still fever, as being an evil both
in its cause ^ and in its power, as all know,
we rather loathe than wonder at, and to the
best of our power guard against, not having its
extirpation in our power. Some men prefer
wondering at heresies, however, which bring
with them eternal death and the heat of a
stronger fire, for possessing this power, in-
stead of avoiding their power when they
have the means of escape: but heresies would
have no power, if (men) would cease to wonder
that they have such power. For it either
happens that, while men wonder, they fall
into a snare, or, because they are ensnared,
they cherish their surprise, as if heresies


7 Denique has in Tertullian sometimes the meaning oi proinde.
^ Causam " purpose," " final cause.".


244


ON PRESCRIPTION AGAINST HERETICS.


[chap. IV.


were so powerful because of some truth which
belonged to them. It would no doubt be a
wonderful thing that evil should have any
force of its own, were it not that heresies are
strong in those persons who are not strong in
faith. In a combat of boxers and gladiators,
generally speaking, it is not because a man is
strong that he gains the victory, or loses it
because he is not strong, but because he who
is vanquished was a man of no strength ; and
indeed this very conqueror, when afterwards
matched against a really powerful man, act-
ually retires crest-fallen from the contest.
In precisely the same way, heresies derive
such strength as they have from the infirmi-
ties of individuals — having no strength when-
ever they encounter a really powerful faith.

CH.\P. III. — WEAK PEOPLE FALL AN EASY PREY
TO HERESY, WHICH DERIVES STRENGTH FROM
THE GENERAL FRAILTY OF MANKIND. EMI-
NENT MEN HAVE FALLEN FROM FAITH: SAUL,
DAVID, SOLOxMON. THE CONSTANCY OF

CHRIST.

It is usual, indeed, with persons of a
weaker character, to be so built up (in con-
fidence) by certain individuals who are caught
by heresy, as to topple over into ruin them-
selves. How comes it to pass, (they ask),
that this woman or that man, who were the
most faithful, the most prudent, and the most
approved ^ in the church, have gone over to
the other side ? Who that asks such a ques-
tion does not in fact reply to it himself, to the
effect that men whom heresies have been able
to pervert "^ ought never to have been esteemed
prudent, or faithful, or approved ? This again
is, I suppose, an extraordinary thing, that
one who has been approved should afterwards
fall back ? Saul, who was good beyond all
others, is afterwards subverted by envy.^
David, a good man "after the Lord's own
heart,"* is guilty afterwards of murder and
adultery. 5 Solomon, endowed by the Lord
with all grace and wisdom, is led into idolatry
by women. ^ For to the Son of God alone was
it reserved to persevere to the last without sin.'
But what if a bishop, if a deacon, if a widow,
if a virgin, if a doctor, if even a martyr,^ have
fallen from the rule (of faith), will heresies on
that account appear to possess » the truth?


I Usitatissimi, " most experienced."
s Demutare.

3 1 Sam. xyiii. 8, 9.

4 I Sam. xiii. 14.

5 2 Sain. xi.

^ I Kings xi. 4.

7Heb. iv. 15. [See p. 221, supra."]

8 [Here the word martyr means no more than a witness or
confessor, and may account for what are called exaggerated
statements as to the number of primitive martyrs. See Kaye p.
128.]

9 Obtinere.


Do we prove the faith '° by the persons, or the
persons by the faith ? No one is wise, no one
is faithful, no one excels in dignity," but the
Christian ; and no one is a Christian but he
who perseveres even to the end." You, as a
man, know any other man from the outside
appearance. You think as you see. And you
see as far only as you have eyes. But says
(the Scripture), "the eyes of the Lord are
lofty." '3 " Man looketh at the outward appear-
ance, but God looketh at the heart." '•• " The
Lord (beholdeth and) knoweth them that are
His;" '5 and "the plant which (my heavenly
Father) hath not planted. He rooteth up; " '^
and "the first shall," as He shows, "be
last ;" '7 and He carries " His fan in His hand
to purge His threshing-floor. ' ' '^ Let the chaff
of a fickle faith fly off as much as it will at
every blast of temptation, all the purer will be
that heap of corn which shall be laid up in the
garner of the Lord. Did not certain of the
disciples turn back from the Lord Himself,''
when they were offended ? Yet the rest did
not therefore think that they must turn away
from following Him,^ but because they knew
that He was the Word of Life, and was come
from God,^^ they continued in His company to
the very last, after He had gently inquired of
them whether they also would go away." It
is a comparatively small thing,''^ that certain
men, like Phygellus, and Hermogenes, and
Philetus, and Hymenseus, deserted His apos-
tle:^* the betrayer of Christ was himself one of
the apostles. We are surprised at seeing His
churches forsaken by some men, although the
things which we suffer after the example of
Christ Himself, show us to be Christians.
" They went out from us," says (St. John,)
" but they were not of us. If they had been
of us, they would no doubt have continued
with us." 's

CHAP. IV. WARNINGS AGAINST HERESY GIVEN

US IN THE NEW TESTAMENT. SUNDRY PASS-
AGES ADDUCED. THESE IMPLY THE POSSI-
BILITY OF FALLING INTO HERESY.

But let US rather be mindful of the sayings
of the Lord, and of the letters of the apostles;


»o Fidem, *' The Creed."

" Major.

»2 Matt. X. 22.

'3 Jer. xxxii. 19.

14 I Sam. xvi. 7.

>5 2 Tim. ii. 19,

'6 Matt. XV. 13.

»7 Matt. XX. 16.

*8 Matt. iii. 12.

»9 John vi. 66.

«> A vestigiis ejus.

« John i. I, vi. 68, and xvi. 30.

=" John vi. 67.

23 Minus.

24 2 Tim. i. 15, ii. 17 ; i Tim. i. 20.
»S I John ii. i9. [i.e., with the Apostolic Churches. See Cap.

XX. tn/ra.'\


CHAP. VI.]


ON PRESCRIPTION AGAINST HERETICS.


245


for they have both told us beforehand that
there shall be heresies, and have given us, in
anticipation, warnings to avoid them; and in-
asmuch as we are not alarmed because they
exist, so we ought not to wonder that they are
capaljle of doing that, on account of which
they must be shunned. The Lord teaches us
that many " ravening wolves shall come in
sheep's clothing." ' Now, what are these
sheep's clothings, but the external surface of
the Christian profession ? Who are the raven-
ing wolves but those deceitful senses and
spirits which are lurking within to waste the
fiock of Christ ? Who are the false prophets
but deceptive predictors of the future ? Who
are the false apostles but the preachers of a
spurious gospel ? ' Who also are the Anti-
christs, both now and evermore, but the men
who rebel against Christ ?3 Heresies, at the
present time, will no less rend the church by
their perversion of doctrine, than will Anti-
christ persecute her at that day by the cruelty
of his attacks,'^ except that persecution makes
even martyrs, (but) heresy only apostates.
And therefore "heresies must needs be in
order that they which are approved might be
made manifest, ^ both those who remained
stedfast under persecution, and those who did
not wander out of their way^ into heresy.
For the apostle does not mean^ that those
persons should be deemed approved v^\\o ex-
change their creed for heresy; although they
contrariously interpret his words to their own
side, when he says in another passage, " Prove
all things; hold fast that which is good; " ^ as
if, after proving all things amiss, one might
not through error make a determined choice
of some evil thing.

CHAP. V. HERESY, AS WELL AS SCHISM AND

DISSENSION, DISAPPROVED BY ST. PAUL, WHO
SPEAKS OF THE NECESSITY OF HERESIES, NOT
AS A GOOD, BUT, BY THE WILL OF GOD, SALU-
TARY TRIALS FOR TRAINING AND APPROVING
THE FAITH OF CHRISTIANS.

Moreover, when he blames dissensions and
schisms, which undoubtedly are evils, he im-
mediately adds heresies likewise. Now, that
which he subjoins to evil things, he of course
confesses to be itself an evil; and all the
greater, indeed, because he tells us that his
belief of their schisms and dissensions was


^ Matt. vii. 15.

2 Adulter! evangelizatores, the spurious preachers of the gos-
pel. [Galat. i. 8, 9, an example of Apostolic prajscription.]

3 Hoc scil. " tempore."

4 Oehler's " persecutionem " ought of course to be " perse-
cutionum."

5 1 Cor. xi. 19.

6 Exorbitaverint.

7 Juvat.

8 I Thess. V. 21. [But Truth is to be demonstrated as a theorem,
not treated as & problem of which we must seek the solution.]


grounded on his knowledge that '* there must
be heresies also."^ For he shows us that it
was owing to the prospect of the greater evil
that he readily believed the existence of the
lighter ones; and so far indeed was he from
believing, in respect of evils (of such a kind),
that heresies were good, that his object was
Bo forewarn us that we ought not to be sur-
prised at temptations of even a worse stamp,
since (he said) they tended "to make mani-
fest all such as were approved;"" in other
words, those whom they were unable to per-
vert." In short, since the whole passage"
points to the maintenance of unity and the
checking of divisions, inasmuch as heresies
sever men from unity no less than schisms
and dissensions, no doubt he classes heresies
under the same head of censure as he does
schisms also and dissensions. And by so do-
ing, he makes those to be " not approved,"
who have fallen into heresies; more especially
when with reproofs he exhorts '^ men to turn
away from such, teaching them that they
should "all speak and think the selfsame
thing," '4 the very object which heresies do not
permit.

CHAP. VI. — HERETICS ARE SELF-CONDEMNED.
HERESY IS SELF-WILL, WHILST FAITH IS SUB-
MISSION OF OUR WILL TO THE DIVINE AUTHOR-
ITY. THE HERESY OF APELLES.

On this point, however, we dwell no longer,
since it is the same Paul who, in his Epistle
to the Galatians, counts "heresies" among
" the sins of the flesh," 's who also intimates
to Titus, that " a man who is a heretic " must
be "rejected after the first admonition," on
the ground that " he that is such is perverted,
and . committeth sin, as a self-condemned
man."'^ Indeed, in almost every epistle,
when enjoining on us (the duty) of avoiding
false doctrines, he sharply condemns '^ here-
sies. Of these the practical effects '^ are false
doctrines, called in Greek heresies j"^ a word
used in the sense of that //^<?/V;^_ which a man
makes when he either teaches them (to others)*
or takes up with them (for himself). =' For this
reason it is that he calls the heretic self-
cofidemned^"" because he has himself chosen that


9 I Cor. xi. 19.
10 1 Cor. xi. 18.
" Depravare.
i*Capitulum.
13 Objurget.
M I Cor. i. 10.
15 Gal. V. 20.
'6 Tit. iii. 10, II.

17 Taxat.

18 Opera.

=0 Instituendas.

21 Suscipiendas.

2^ [A remarkable word is subjoined by the Apostle (efearpairrai)
which signifies turned inside out, and so self-condemned, as ex-
hibiting bis inward contentiousness and pravity.


246


ON PRESCRIPTION AGAINST HERETICS.


[chap. VII.


for which he is condemned. We, however,
are not permitted to cherish any object ' after
our own will, nor yet to make choice of that
which another has introduced of his private
fancy. In the Lord's apostles we possess our
authority; for even they did not of themselves
choose to introduce anything, but faithfully
delivered to the nations (of mankind) the
doctrine ' which they had received from Christ.
If, therefore, even "an angel from heaven
should preach any other gospel " (than theirs),
he would be called accursed^ by us. The
Holy Ghost had even then foreseen that there
would be in a certain virgin (called) Philu-
mene* an angel of deceit, " transformed into
an angel of light," ^ by whose miracles and il-
lusions ^ Apelles was led (when) he introduced
his new heresy.

CHAP. VII. PAGAN PHILOSOPHY THE PARENT

OF HERESIES. THE CONNECTION BETWEEN
DEFLECTIONS FROM CHRISTIAN FAITH AND
THE OLD SYSTEMS OF PAGAN PHILOSOPHY.

These are "the doctrines" of men and
" of demons " ^ produced for itching ears of
the spirit of this world's wisdom: this the
Lord called " foolishness," ^ and " chose the
foolish things of the world " to confound even
philosophy itself. For (philosophy) it is which
is the material of the wor'ld's wisdom, the rash
interpreter of the nature and the dispensation
of God. Indeed 9 heresies are themselves in-
stigated '° by philosophy. From this source
came the ^ons, and I known not what infinite
forms," and the trinity of man "in the system
of Valentinus, who was of Plato's school.
From the same source came Marcion's better
god, with all his tranquillity; he came of the
Stoics. Then, again, the opinion that the
soul dies is held by the Epicureans; while the
denial of the restoration of the body is taken
from the aggregate school of all the philoso-
phers; also, when matter is made equal to
God, then you have the teaching of Zeno; and
when any doctrine is alleged touching a god of
fire, then Heraclitus comes in. The same
subject-matter is discussed over and over


^ Nihil, any doctrine.

'Disciplinam, including both the principles and practice of the
Christian religion.

3 Anathema. See Gal. i. 8.

4 Concerning Philumene, see below, chap. xxv. ; Eusebius,
Hist. Eccl. V. 13 ; Augustine, de Htrres. chap. xlii'. ; Jerome'
Epist. adv. Ctesiph. (Works, ed. Ben.) iv. 477, and in his Com-
mentary on Galatians, ii. See also Tertullian, Against Marcion
p. 139. Edinb. Edition. '

5 2 Cor. xi. 14.

6 Praestigiis.

7 I Tim. iv. I.

8 I Cor. iii. 18 and 25.

9 Denique.

1° Subornantur.
" Formae, '■'^ Idea" (Oehler),

" See Tertullian's treatises, adversus I'aletttinuttt, xxv., and
de Anima, xxi. ; also Epiphanius, //<yr. xxxi. 21.


again '3 by the heretics and the philosophers;
the same arguments'* are involved. Whence
comes evil ? Why is it permitted ? What is
the origin of man ? and in what way does he
come? Besides the question which Valenti-
nus has very lately proposed — Whence comes
God ? Which he settles with the answer:
From enthymesis and ectroma.^^ Unhappy
Aristotle ! who invented for these men dialec-
tics, the art of building up and pulling down;
an art so evasive in its propositions,'^ so far-
fetched in its conjectures, so harsh, in its
arguments, so productive of contentions —
embarrassing '^ even to itself, retracting every-
thing, and really treating of'^ nothing!
Whence spring those " fables and endless
genealogies," '9 and "unprofitable ques-
tions,"^ and "words which spread like a
cancer ? " " From all these, when the apostle
would restrain us, he expressly names philoso-
phy as that which he would have us be on our
guard against. Writing to the Colossians, he
says, "See that no one beguile you through
philosophy and vain deceit, after the tradition
of men, and contrary to the wisdom of the
Holy Ghost." " He had been at Athens, and
had in his interviews (with its philosophers)
become acquainted with that human wisdom
which pretends to know the truth, whilst it
only corrupts it, and is itself divided into its
own manifold heresies, by the variety of its
mutually repugnant sects. What indeed has
Athens to do with Jerusalem ? What concord
is there between the Academy and the Church ?
what between heretics and Christians ? Our
instruction comes from "the porch of Solo-
mon," =3 who had himself taught that "the
Lord should be sought in simplicity of heart. ' ' »*
Away with =5 all attempts to produce a mottled
Christianity of Stoic, Platonic, and dialectic
composition ! We want no curious disputa-
tion after possessing Christ Jesus, no inquisi-
tion after enjoying the gospel ! With our
faith, we desire no further belief. For this
is our palmary faith, that there is nothing
which we ought to believe besides.


'3 Volutatur.

'4 Retractatus.

IS " Deenthymesi-" for this word Tertullian sxvts animationent
(in his tract against Valentinus, ix.), which seems to mean, " the
mind in operation." (See the same treatise, x. xi.) With regard
to the other word, Jerome (on Amos, iii.) adduces Valentinus as
calling Christ tKrpwua, that is, abortion.

i6 Sententiis.

17 Molestam.

»8 Tractaverit, in the sen.se of conclusively settling.

*9 I Tim. i. 4.


20 Tit. ii


■.9-


21 2 Tim. ii. 17.

"Col. ii. 8. The last clause, " praeter providentiam Spiritus
Sancti," is either Tertiillian's reading, or his gloss of the apostle's
ov Kara Xpto-TOf — " not after Christ.

23 Because in the beginning of the church the apostles taught in
Solomon's porch. Acts iii. ^.

'A Wisdom of Solomon, i, i.

as Viderint.


y


CHAP. IX.]


ON PRESCRIPTION AGAINST HERETICS.


247


CHAP. Vlll. CHRIST'S WORD, SEEK, AND YE

SHALL FIND, NO WARRANT FOR HERETICAL
DEVIATIONS FROM THE FAITH. ALL CHRIST'S
WORDS TO THE JEWS ARE FOR US, NOT INDEED
AS SPECIFIC COMMANDS, BUT AS PRINCIPLES
TO BE APPLIED.

I come now to the point which (is urged
both by our own brethren and by the heretics).
Our brethren adduce it as a pretext for en-
tering on curious inquiries,' and the heretics
insist on it for importing the scrupulosity (of
their unbelief).^ It is written, they say,
" Seek, and ye shall find." ^ Let us remem-
ber at what time the Lord said this. I think
it was at the very outset of His teaching, when
there was still a doubt felt by all whether He
were the Christ, and when even Peter had not
yet declared Him to be the Son of God, and
John (Baptist) had actually ceased to feel as-
surance about Him.-^ With good reason,
therefore, was it then said, "Seek, and ye
shall find," when inquiry was still be to made
of Him who was not yet become known. Be-
sides, this 7vas said in respect of the Jews.
For it is to them that the whole matter s of
this reproof^ pertains, seeing that they had
(a revelation) where they might seek Christ.
"They have," says He, " Moses and Elias," ^
— in other words, the law and the prophets,
which preach Christ; as also in another place
He says plainly, " Search the Scriptures, in
which ye expect (to find) salvation; for they
testify of me;"^ which will be the meaning
of " Seek, and ye shall find." For it is clear
that the next words also apply to the Jews:
" Knock, and it shall be opened unto you." «
The Jews had formerly been in covenant with'°
God; but being afterwards cast off on account
of their sins,they began to be" without God.
The Gentiles, on the contrary, had never been
in covenant with God; they were only as "a
drop from a bucket," and " as dust from the
threshing-floor," " and were ever outside the
door. Now, how shall he who was always
outside knock at the place where he never
was ? What door does , he know of, when he
has passed through none, either by entrance
or ejection ? Is it not rather he who is aware
that he once lived within and was thrust out,
that (probably) found the door and knocked
thereat ? In like manner, " Ask, and ye shall


^ Curiositatem.

2 Scrupulositatem, " hair-splitting."

3 Matt. vii. 7.

4 See our translation of the Anti-Marcion^ iv. 18 (infra), and
Tertullian's treatise, de Bapt. x.

5 Sermo.

^ Suggillationis.

7 Luke xvi. 29.

8 John V. 39,

9 'NIatt. vii. 7.
1° Penes.

" Or, "were for the first time."
i^'Isa. xl. 15.


receive," '' is suitably said'* to one who was
aware from whom he ought to ask, — by whom
also some promise had been given; that is to
say, "the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of
Jacob." Now, the Gentiles knew nothing
either of Him, or of any of His promises.
Therefore it was to Israel that he spake when
He said, " I am not sent but to the lost sheep
of the house of Israel." 's Not yet had He
" cast to the dogs the children's bread; " '* not
yet did He charge them to "go into the way
of the Gentiles." '^ It is only at the last that
He instructs them to "go and teach all na-
tions, and baptize them," '^when they were so
soon to receive "the Holy Ghost, the Com-
forter, who should guide them into all the
truth." '9 And this, too, makes towards the
the same conclusion. If the apostles, who
were ordained =" to be teachers to the Gentiles,
were themselves to have the Comforter for
their teacher, far more needless =" was it to say
to us, "Seek, and ye shall find," to whom
was to come, without research, ==* our instruc-
tion =3 by the apostles, and to the apostles
themselves by the Holy Ghost. All the Lord's
sayings, indeed, are set forth for all men;
through the ears of the Jews have they passed
on to us. Still most of them were addressed
\.o Jewish persons; ^-^ they therefore did not
constitute instruction properly designed 's for
ourselves, but rather an example. "*

CHAP. IX. THE RESEARCH AFTER DEFINITE

TRUTH ENJOINED ON US. WHEN WE HAVE
DISCOVERED THIS, WE SHOULD BE CONTENT.

I now purposely ^7 relinquish this ground of
argument. Let it be granted, that the words,
" Seek, and ye shall find," were addressed to
all men (equally). Yet even here one's aim
is =^ carefully to determine ^ the sense of the
words3° consistently with3'(that reason), ^^ which
is the guiding principle ^3 in all interpretation.
(Now) no divine saying is so unconnected 3*


13 Matt. vii. 7.

14 Competit.

15 Matt. XV. 24.

16 Ver. 26.

17 Matt. X. 5.

'8 Matt, xxviii. 19.

19 John xvi. 13.

2oDestinati.

21 Multo magis vacabat,

» Ultro.

23 Doctrina.

24 In personas, i.e. Judeeorum (Oehler).

25 Proprietatem admonitionis.

26 " That is, not a specific command " primarily meant for us,
but a principle " to be applied by us " (Dodgson).

27 Sponte.

28 Expetit.

29 Certare.

30 Sensus.

31 Cum.

32 See Oehler* s note.

33 Gubernaculo. See Irenaeus, ii. 46, for a similar view (Rigalt.).
Surely Dodgson's version, if intelligible in itself even, incorrectly
represents Tertullian's sense.

34 Dissoluta.


248


ON PRESCRIPTION AGAINST HERETICS.


[chap. XI.


and diffuse, that its words only are to be in-
sisted' on, and their connection left undeter-
mined. But at the outset I lay down (this
position) that there is some one, and there-
fore definite, thing taught by Christ, which
the Gentiles are by all means bound to be-
lieve, and for that purpose to "seek," in
order that they may be able, when they have
" found " it, to believe. However,' there can
be no indefinite seeking for that which has been
taught as one only definite thing. You must
" seek " until you " find," and believe when
you have found; nor have you anything further
to do but to keep what you have believed,
provided you believe this besides, that nothing
else is to be believed, and therefore nothing
else is to be sought, after you have found and
believed what has been taught by Him who
charges you to seek no other thing than that
which He has taught.' When, indeed, any
man doubts about this, proof will be forthcom-
ing,3 that we have in our possession* that
which was taught by Christ. Meanwhile,
such is my confidence in our proof, that I
anticipate it, in the shape of an admonition
to certain persons, not " to seek " anything
beyond what they have believed — that this is
what they ought to have sought, how to avoid s
interpreting, " Seek, and ye shall find," with-
out regard to the rule of reason.

CHAP. X. ONE HAS SUCCEEDED IN FINDING

DEFINITE TRUTHjWHEN HE BELIEVES. HERET-
ICAL WITS ARE ALWAYS OFFERING MANY
THINGS FOR VAIN DISCUSSION, BUT WE ARE
NOT TO BE ALWAYS SEEKING.

Now the reason of this saying is comprised
in three points: in the matter, in the time, in
the limit. ^ In the matter, so that you must
consider ivhat it is you have to seek; in the
time, ivhcfi you have to seek; in the limit, how
lofig. What you have "to seek," then, is
that which Christ has taught,^ (and you must
go on seeking) of course for such time as you
fail to find,^ — until indeed you find' it. But
you have succeeded in finding '° when you have
believed. For you would not have believed
if you had not found; as neither would you
have sought except with a view to find. Your
object, therefore, in seeking 7uas to find; and


iPorro.

' [Not to be contented with Truth, once known, is a sin preced-
ing that against the Holy Spirit, and this state of mind explains
the judicial blindness inflicted on Lapsers, as asserted bv St. Paul,
2 Thess. ii. lo, 13, where note— '* they received not the Ifive of
the truth." They had it and were not content with it.]

3 Constabit.
Penes nos.

SNe.

6 In modo.

7 This is, " the mai/er.^'
8 "The time."

9 "The limit."
w Invenisti.


your object in finding 7vas to believe. All
further delay for seeking and finding you
have prevented " by believing. The very fruit
of your seeking has determined for you this
limit. This boundary " has He set for you
Himself, who is unwilling that you should be-
lieve anything else than what He has taught,
or, therefore, even seek for it. If, however,
because so many other things have been
taught by one and another, we are on that ac-
count bound to go on seeking, so long as we
are able to find anything, we must (at that
rate) be ever seeking, and never believe any-
thing at all. For where shall be the end of
seeking? where the stop'^ in believing? where
the completion in finding ? (Shall it be) with
Marcion ? But even Valentinus proposes (to
us the) maxim, "Seek, and ye shall find."
(Then shall it be) with Valentinus ? Well,
but Apelles, too, will assail me with the same
quotation; Hebion also, and Simon, and all
in turn, have no other argument wherewithal
to entice me, and draw me over to their
side. Thus I shall be nowhere, and still be
encountering'* (that challenge), "Seek, and
ye shall find," precisely as if I had no resting-
place; 's as if (indeed) I had never found that
which Christ has taught — that which ought'*
to be sought, that which must needs '^ be be-
lieved.

CHAP. XI. AFTER WE HAVE BELIEVED, SEARCH

SHOULD cease; OTHERWISE IT MUST END IN
A DENIAL OF WHAT WE HAVE BELIEVED. NO
OTHER OBJECT PROPOSED FOR OUR FAITH.

There is impunity in erring, if there is no
delinquency; although indeed to err it is itself
an act of delinquency.'^ With impunity, I
repeat, does a man ramble, '^ when he (pur-
posely) deserts nothing. But yet, if I have
believed what I was bound to believe, and
then afterwards think that there is something
new to be sought after, I of course expect
that there is something else to be found, al-
though I should by no means entertain such


" Fixisti, " determined.''
'2 Fossam.

13 Statio, " resting-place."

14 Dum convenero.

'5 This is the rendering of Oehler's text, " et velut si nusquam.
There are other readings of this obscure passage, of which we add
the two most intelligible. The Codex Agohardinus has, " et
velim si nunquam ;" that is, " and I would that I were nowhere,"
with no fixed belief— in such wise as never to have had the truth ;
not, as must now be, to have forfeited it. (Dodgson). This seems
far-fetched, and inferior to the reading of Pamelius and his mss :
" et velint me sic esse nusquam"— or (as Semler puts it) " velint
sic nusquam ;" i.e., "and they (the heretics) would wish me to be
nowhere "—without the fixed faith of the Catholic. This makes
good sense. [Semler is here mentioned, and if anybody wishes to
understand what sort of editor he was, he may be greatly amused
by Kaye's examination of some of his positions, pp. 64-84. Eluci-
dation II.]

i6 0portet.

'7 Necesse est. Observe these degrees of obligation.

18 Ouamvis et errare delinquere est.

'9 Vagatur.


CHAP. XIV.]


ON PRESCRIPTION AGAINST HERETICS.


249


expectation, unless it were because I either
had not believed, although I apparently had
become a believer, or else have ceased to be-
lieve. If I thus desert my faith, I am found
to be a denier thereof. Once for all I would
say. No man seeks, except him who either
never possessed, or else has lost (what he
sought). The old woman (in the Gospel) '
had lost one of her ten pieces of silver, and
therefore she sought it;^ when, however, she
found it, she ceased to look for it. The
neighbour was without bread, and therefore
he knocked; but as soon as the door was
opened to him, and he received the bread,
he discontinued knocking. ^ The widow kept
asking to be heard by the judge, because she
was not admitted; but when her suit was
heard, thenceforth she was silent.^ So that
there is a limit both to seeking, and to knock-
ing, and to asking. " For to every one that
asketh," says He, " it shall be given, and to
him that knocketh it shall be opened, and by
him that seeketh it shall be found." s Away
with the man ^ who is ever seeking because
he never finds; for he seeks there where noth-
ing can be found. Away with him who is
always knocking because it will never be
opened to him; for he knocks where there is
none (to open). Away with him who is always
asking because he will never be heard; for he
asks of one who does not hear. /

CHAP. XII. A PROPER SEEKING AFTER DIVINE

KNOWLEDGE, WHICH W^LL NEVER BE OUT OF
PLACE OR EXCESSIVE, IS ALWAYS WITHIN THE
RULE OF FAITH.

As for us, although we must still seek, and
■that always, yet where ought our search to be
made ? Amongst the heretics, where all
things are foreign ? and opposed to our own
verity, and to whom we are forbidden to draw
near? What slave looks for food from a
stranger, not to say an enemy of his master ?
What soldier expects to get bounty and pay
from kings who are unallied, I might almost
say hostile — unless forsooth he be a deserter,
and a runaway, and a rebel ? Even that old
woman ^ searched for the piece of silver within
her own house. It was also at his neighbour's
door that the persevering assailant kept knock-
ing. Nor was it to a hostile judge, although
a severe one, that the widow made her appeal.
No man gets instructions' from that which


1 Anus ilia.

2 Luke XV. 8.

3 Luke xi. 5.

4 Luke xyiii. 2, 3.

5 Luke xi. o.
eViderit.

7 Extranea.

8 Although Tertullian calls her " anus," St. Luke's word is
-yvv^, not -ypavs.

9 Instrui potest.


tends to destruction.'" No man receives illu-
mination from a quarter where all is* dark-
ness. Let our " seeking," therefore be in
that which is our own, and from those who are
our own. and concerning that which is our
own, — that, and only that," which can become
an object of inquiry without impairing the
rule of faith.

CHAP. XIH. — SUMMARY OF THE CREED, OR RULE ,
OF FAITH. NO QUESTIONS EVER RAISED V
ABOUT IT BY BELIEVERS. HERETICS EN-
COURAGE AND PERPETUATE THOUGHT IN-
DEPENDENT OF Christ's teaching.

Now, with regard to this rule of faith — that
we may from this point" acknowledge what it
is which we defend — it is, you must know,
that which prescribes the belief that there is
one only God, and that He is none other than
the Creator of the world, who produced all
things out of nothing through His own Word,
first of all sent forth; '3 that this Word is called
His Son, and^ under the name of God, was.
seen " in diverse manners " by the patriarchs,
heard at all times in the prophets; at last
brought down by the Spirit and Power of the
Father into the Virgin Mary, was made flesh
in her womb, and, being born of her, went
forth as Jesus Christ; thenceforth He preached
the new law and the new promise of the king-
dom of heaven, worked miracles; having been
crucified. He rose again the third day; (then)
having ascended '"^ into the heavens. He sat at
the right hand of the Father; sent instead of
Himself 's the Power of the Holy Ghost to lead
such as believe; will come with glory to take
the saints to the enjoyment of everlasting life
and of the heavenly promises, and to condemn
the wicked to everlasting fire, after the resur-
rection of both these classes shall have hap-
pened, together with the restoration of their
flesh. This rule, as it will be proved, was
taught by Christ, and raises amongst ourselves
no other questions than those which heresies
introduce, and which make men heretics.'^

CHAP. XIV. — CURIOSITY OUGHT NOT RANGE BE-
YOND THE RULE OF FAITH. RESTLESS CURI-
OSITY, THE FEATURE OF HERESY.

So long, however, as its form exists in its
proper order, you may seek and discuss as


10 Unde destruitur.

11 Idque durataxat.

12 Jam hinc.

^ i3pnmo omnium demissum. Literally, " sent down." See on
this procession of the Son of God to create the world, Bishop
Bull s Defence of the Nicene Creed, etc., by the translator of
this work, pp. 445 and following.

14 Ereptum, having been taken away.

15 Vicariam. [Scott's Christian Life, Vol. III. p. 64.]

16 [See Bunsen (Hippol. III. Notes, etc., p. 129.) for a castigated
form of the Latin Creed, as used in Rome. Observe it lacks the
word Catholic. But a much better study of these formulas may
be found in Dupin's comparative Table. First Cent. pp. 9-12.]


250


ON PRESCRIPTION AGAINST HERETICS.


[chap. XV.


much as you please, and give full rein to'
your curiosity, in whatever seems to you to
hang in doubt, or to be shrouded in obscurity.
You have at hand, no doubt, some learned'
brother gifted with the grace of knowledge,
some one of the experienced class, some one
of your close acquaintance who is curious like
yourself; although with yourself, a seeker,
he will, after all,^ be quite aware -^ that it
is better for you to remain in ignorance,
lest you should come to know what you
ought not, because you have acquired the
knowledge of what you ought to know.s
*^Thy-iaith," He says, " hath saved thee " ^
not observe your skill ^ in the Scriptures^ Now,
faith has been deposited in the rulej it has a
law, and (in the, observance thereof) salva-
tion^. SkSl,^ however ^xonsistsin curious art,
having for its glory simply tbex^adinessJihat
comes from knack. ^ Let such curious art
give place to faith; let such glory yield to sal-
vation. At any rate, let them either relinquish
their noisiness,' or else be quiet. To know
nothing in opposition to the rule (of faith), is
to know all things. (Suppose) that heretics
were not enemies to the truth, so that we were
not forewarned to avoid them, what, sort of
conduct would it be to agree with men who do
themselves confess that they are still seek-
ing? For if they are still seeking, they have
not as yet found anything amounting to cer-
tainty; and therefore, whatever they seem for
a while ^ to hold, they betray their own scep-
ticism," whilst they continue seeking. You
therefore, who seek after their fashion, look-
ing to those who are themselves ever seeking,
a doubter to doubters, a waverer to waverers,
must needs be "led, blindly by the blind,
down into the ditch."" But when, for the
sake of deceiving us, they pretend that they
are still seeking, in order that they may palm '^
their essays^ upon us by the suggestion of an
anxious sympathy,'^ — when, in short (after
gaining an access to us), they proceed at once


» Omnem libidinem efTundas, " pour out the whole desire for."

= Doctor, literally, " teacher." See Eph. iv. ii ; also above ;
chap. iii. p. 244. •

3 This seems to be the more probable meaning of nornssime in
this rather obscure sentence. Oehler treats it adverbially as
" postremOj*' and refersto a similar use of the word below in chap.
XXX. Dr. Routh ^and, after him, the translator in The Library
o/the Fathers, lertullian, p. 448) makes the word a noun, " thou
newest of novices," and refers to Tcrtullian's work, against Pra.v-
eas, chap, xxvii., for a like use. This seems to us too harsh for
the present context.

4Sciet.

5 See 1 Cor. xii. 8.

6 Luke xviii. 42.

7 Exercitatio.

8 De pentiae studio.

9 Non obstrepant.
10 Interim.

" Dubitationem.

12 Matt. XV. 14.

13 Insinuent.
u Tractatus.

15 Or, " by instilling an anxiety into us " (Dodgson).


to insist on the necessity of our inquiring
into such points as they were in the habit of
advancing, theniLishiglilime_fQrji5_injnoral
obligation '^ to repel '^ them, sf^ that they may
know that it is not Christ, but themselves,
whom we disavow. For since they are still
seekers, they have no fixed tenets yet;'^ and
being -not fixed in fpnef^ they hnvp npt yft ^^^ -
lieved; and being not yet believers, they are
not Christians. But even though they have
their tenets and their belief, they still say that
inquiry is necessary in order to discussion.'*
Previous, however, to the discussion, they
deny what they confess not yet to have be-
lieved, so long as they keep it an object of
inquiry. When men, therefore, are not Chris-
tians even on their own admission, =* how much
more (do they fail to appear such) to us !
What sort of truth is that which they patron-
ize,'' when they commend it to us with a lie ?
Well, but they actually " treat of the Scriptures
and recommend (their opinions) out of the
Scriptures! To be sure they do. =3 From what
other source could they derive arguments con-
cerning the things of the faith, except from
the records of the faith ?


CHAP. XV. HERETICS NOT TO BE ALLOWED TO

ARGUE OUT OF THE SCRIPTURES. THE SCRIP-
TURES, IN FACT, DO NOT BELONG TO THEM."*

We are therefore come to (the gist of) our
position; for at this point we were aiming,
and for this we were preparing in the pream-
ble of our address (which we have just com-
pleted),— so that we may now join issue on
the contention to which our adversaries chal-
lenge us. They put forward =^5 the Scriptures,
and by this insolence "^ of theirs they at once
influence some. In the encounter itself, how-
ever, they weary the strong, they catch the
weak, and dismiss waverers with a doubt. Ac-
cordingly, we oppose to them this step above
all others, of not admitting them to any dis-
cussion of the Scriptures. =^

If in these lie their resources, before they
can use them, it ought to be clearly seen to
whom belongs the possession of the Scriptures,
that none may be admitted to the use thereof
who has no title at all to the privilege.


i<5 Jam debemus.

'7 Refutare.

^^ Nondum tenent.

19 Ut defendant.

20 Nee sibi sunt.
2' Patrocinantur.
22 Ipsi.

=3 Scilicet.

^♦rSee Marciotiy B. I. Cap. xxii. in/ray note.]

=5 Obtendunt.

26 Audacia.

27 De Scripturis. Rut as this preposition is often the sign of
the instrument in Tertullian. this phrase may mean ^^out o/," or
" i>y means o/the Scriptures. See the last chapter.


CHAP. XIX.]


ON PRESCRIPTION AGAINST HERETICS.


251


CHAP. XVI. — APOSTOLIC SANCTION TO THIS EX-
CLUSION OF HERETICS FROM THE USE OF THE
SCRIPTURES. HERETICS, ACCORDING TO THE
APOSTLE, ARE NOT TO BE DISPUTED WITH,
BUT TO BE ADMONISHED.

I might be thought to have laid down this
position to remedy distrust in my case,^ or
from a desire of entering on the contest ^^ in
some other way, were there not reasons on
my side, especially this, that our faith owes
deference ^ to the apostle, who forbids us to
enter on "questions," or to lend our ears to
new-fangled statements, -^ or to consort with a
heretic "after the first and second admoni-
tion," s not, (be it observed,) after discussion.
Discussion he has inhibited in this way, by
designating admonition as the purpose of deal-
ing with a heretic, and the first one too, be-
cause he is not a Christian; in order that he
might not, after the manner of a Christian,
seem to require correction again and again,
and " before two or three witnesses," ^ seeing
that he ought to be corrected, for the very
reason that he is not to be disputed with; and
in the next place, because a controversy over
the Scriptures can, clearly,^ produce no other
effect than help to upset either the stomach
or the brain.

CHAP. XVII. HERETICS, IN FACT, DO NOT USE,

BUT ONLY ABUSE, SCRIPTURE. NO COMMON
GROUND BETWEEN THEM AND YOU.

Now this heresy of yours ^ does not receive
certain Scriptures; and whichever of them it
does receive, it perverts by means of additions
and diminutions, for the accomplishment of
it own purpose; and such as it does receive,
it receives not in their entirety; but even when
it does receive any up to a certain point ^ as
entire, it nevertheless perverts even these by
the contrivance of diverse interpretations.
Truth is just as much opposed by an adultera-
tion of its meaning as it is by a corruption of
its text.'° Their vain presumptions must
needs refuse to acknowledge the (writings)
whereby they are refuted. They rely on
those which they have falsely put together,
and which they have selected, because of"
their ambiguity. Though most skilled '=* in
the Scriptures, you will make no progress, '^
when everything which you maintain is denied


I De consilio diffidentiae.

2 Constitutionis, "prima causarum conflictio," — a term of the
law courts.

3 Obsequium.

4 I Tim. vi. 3, 4.

5 Tit. iii. 10.

6 Matt, xviii. 16.

7 Plane, ironical.

8 Ista hseresis.

9 Aliquatenus.
10 Stilus.

" " De " has often the sense of " propter " in our author.
"Literally, "O most skilled.
'3 Quid promovebis.


on the other side, and whatever you deny is
(by them) maintained. As for yourself, in-
deed, you will lose nothing but your breath,
and gain nothing but vexation from their blas-
phemy.

CHAP. XVIII. — GREAT EVIL ENSUES TO THE
WEAK IN FAITH, FROM ANY DISCUSSION OUT
OF THE SCRIPTURES. CONVICTION NEVER
COMES TO THE HERETIC FROM SUCH A PRO-
CESS.

But with respect to the man for whose sake
you enter on the discussion of the Scriptures,'*
with the view of strengthening him when af-
flicted with doubts, (let me ask) will it be to
the truth, or rather to heretical opinions that
he will lean ? Influenced by the very fact that
he sees you have made no progress, whilst the
other side is on an equal footing 's (with your-
self) in denying and in defence, or at any rate
on a like standing'^ he will go away confirmed
in his uncertainty'' by the discussion, not
knowing which side to adjudge heretical.
For, no doubt, they too are able '^ to retort
these things on us. It is indeed a necessary
consequence that they should go so far as to
say that adulterations of the Scriptures, and
false expositions thereof, are rather introduced
by ourselves, inasmuch as they, no less than
we '9 maintain that truth is on their side.

CHAP. XIX. APPEAL, IN DISCUSSION OF HERESY,
LIES NOT TO THE SCRIPTURES. THE SCRIP-
TURES BELONG ONLY TO THOSE WHO HAVE.
THE RULE OF FAITH

Our appeal, therefore, must not be made to
the Scriptures; nor must controversy be ad-
mitted on points in which victory will either
be impossible,^ or uncertain, or not certain
enough.^' But even if a discussion from the
Scriptures ^"^ should not turn out in such a way
as to place both sides on a par, (yet) the nat-
ural order of things would require that this
point should be first proposed, which is now
the only one which we must discuss: "With
whom lies that very faith to which the Scrip-
tures belong. ="3 From what and through whom,
and when, and to whom, has been handed
down that rule,=* by which men become Chris-
tians ? " For wherever it shall be manifest
that the true Christian rule and faith shall be,


14 Or, " from the Scriptures,"
'S ^quo gradu.
'6 Statu certe pari.

17 Incertior.

18 Habent.

19 Proinde.

20 Nulla.

21 Parum carta.

22Conlatio scripturarum, or, "a polemical comparison of the
Scriptures."

23 Quibus competat fides ipsa cujus sint Scripturae.

24 Disciplina [or, where was the guide-post set ?]


:)-'


ON PRESCRIPTION AGAINST HERETICS.


[chap. XXI.


there will likewise be the true Scriptures and
expositions thereof, and all the Christian tra-
ditions,

CHAP. XX. CHRIST FIRST DELIVERED THE

FAITH. THE APOSTLES SPREAD IT ; THEY
FOUNDED CHURCHES AS THE DEPOSITORIES
THEREOF. THAT FAITH, THEREFORE, IS
APOSTOLIC, WHICH DESCENDED FROM THE
APOSTLES, THROUGH APOSTOLIC CHURCHES.

Christ Jesus our Lord (may He bear with
me a moment in thus expressing myself!),
whosoever He is, of what God soever He is
the Son, of what substance soever He is man
and God, of what faith soever He is the
teacher, of what reward soever He is the
Promiser, did, whilst He lived on earth. Him-
self declare what He was, what He had been,
what the Father's will was which He was ad-
ministering, what the duty of man was which
He was prescribing; (and this declaration He
made,) either openly to the people, or privately
to His disciples, of whom He had chosen the
twelve chief ones to be at His side," and whom
He destined to be the teachers of the nations.
Accordingly, after one of these had been
struck off. He commanded the eleven others,
on His departure to the Father, to "go and
teach all nations, who were to be baptized
into the Father, and into the Son, and into
the Holy Ghost." = Immediately, therefore,
so did the apostles, whom this designation in-
dicates as ''''the sent.'' Having, on the au-
thority of a prophecy, which occurs in a psalm
of David, 3 chosen Matthias by lot as the
twelfth, into the place of Judas, theyobtained
the promised power of the Holy Ghost for the
gift of miracles and of utterance; and after
first bearing witness to the faith in Jesus
Christ throughout Judaea, and founding
churches (there), they next went forth into
the world and preached the same doctrine of
the same faith to the nations. They then in
like manner founded churches in every city,
from which all the other churches, one after
another, derived the tradition of the faith,'*
and the seeds of doctrine, and are every day
deriving them,5 that they may become
churches. Indeed, it is on this account only
that they will be able to deem themselves
apostolic, as being the offspring of apostolic
churches. Every sort of thing "^ must neces-
sarily revert to its original for its classifica-
tion.^ Therefore the churches, although they
are so many and so great, comprise but the

» Mark iv. 3^.

2 Matt, xxviii. 19.

3 Ps. cix. 8 ; comp. with Acts 1. 15-20.

4 Traducem fidei.

5 Mutuantur, " borrowing."

6 Onine genus.

7 Censeatur or, " for its origin."


one primitive church, (founded) by the apos-
tles, from which they all (spring). In this
way all are primitive, and all are apostolic,
whilst they are all proved to be one, in (un-
broken) unity, by their peaceful communion,^
and title of brotherhood, and bond ' of hospi-
tality,— privileges '° which no other rule directs
than the one tradition of the selfsame mystery."

CHAP. XXI. ALL DOCTRINE TRUE WHICH COMES

THROUGH THE CHURCH FROM THE APOSTLES,
WHO WERE TAUGHT BY GOD THROUGH CHRIST.
ALL OPINION WHICH HAS NO SUCH DIVINE
ORIGIN AND APOSTOLIC TRADITION TO SHOW,
IS IPSO FACTO FALSE.

From this, therefore, do we draw up our
rule. Since the Lord Jesus Christ sent the
apostles to preach, (our rule is) that no others
ought to be received as preachers than those
whom Christ appointed; for " no man know-
eth the Father save the Son, and he to whom-
soever the Son will reveal Him." " Nor does
the Son seem to have revealed Him to any
other than the apostles, whom He sent forth
to preach — that, of course, which He revealed
to them. Now, what that was which they
preached — in other words, what it was which
Christ revealed to them — can, as I must here
likewise prescribe, properly be proved in no
other way than by those very churches which
the apostles founded in person, by declaring
the gospel to them directly themselves, both
viva voce, as the phrase is, and subsequently
by their epistles. If, then, these things are
so, it is in the same degree '^ manifest that all
doctrine which agrees with the apostolic
churches — those moulds '•* and original sources
of the faith must be reckoned for truth, as
undoubtedly containing that which the (said)
churches received from the apostles, the apos-
tles from Christ, Christ from God. Whereas
all doctrine must be prejudged 's as false '*
which savours of contrariety to the truth of the
churches and apostles of Christ and God. It
remains, then, that we demonstrate whether
this doctrine of ours, of which we have now
given the rule, has its origin '^ in the tradition
of the apostles, and whether all other doc-
trines do not ipso facto^^ proceed from false-
hood. We hold communion with the apostolic
churches because our doctrine is in no respect


8 Communicatio pads.

9 Contesseratio. [III. John 8.]
10 Jura, " rights."

" That is, of the faith, or Christian creed.

12 Matt. xi. 27.

13 Perinde.

M Matricibus.

»S Praejudicandara. [This then is Prascrif>tion.'\

»6 De mendacio.

»7 Censeatur.

"^8 Ex hoc ipso, " from this very circumstance."


CHAP. XXIII.]


ON PRESCRIPTION AGAINST HERETICS.


253


different from theirs.
truth.


This is our witness of


CHAP. XXII. — ATTEMPT TO INVALIDATE THIS
RULE OF FAITH REBUTTED. THE APOSTLES
SAFE TRANSMITTERS OF THE TRUTH. SUFFI-
CIENTLY TAUGHT AT FIRST, AND FAITHFUL
IN THE TRANSMISSION.

But inasmuch as the proof is so near at
hand,' that if it were at once produced there
would be nothing left to be dealt with, let us
give way for a while to the opposite side, if
they think that they can find some means of
invalidating this rule, just as if no proof were
forthcoming from us. They usually tell us
that the apostles did not know all things: (but
herein) they are impelled by the same mad-
ness, whereby they turn round to the very
opposite point, ^ and declare that the apostles
certainly knew all things, but did not deliver
all things to all persons, — in either case ex-
posing Christ to blame for having sent forth
apostles who had either too much ignorance,
or too little simplicity. What man, then, of
sound mind can possibly suppose that they
were ignorant of anything, whom the Lord
ordained to be masters (or teachers), ^ keeping
them, as He did, inseparable (from Himself)
in their attendance, in their discipleship, in
their society, to whom, "when they were
alone. He used to expound ' ' all things "> which
were obscure, telling them that "to them it
was given to know those mysteries," ^ which it
was not permitted the people to understand ?
Was anything withheld from the knowledge
of Peter, who is called " the rock on which the
church should be built," ^ who also obtained
'* the keys of the kingdom of heaven," ^ with
the power of " loosing and binding in heaven
and on earth ?" ^ Was anything, again, con-
cealed from John, the Lord's most beloved
disciple, who used to lean on His breast ' to
whom alone the Lord pointed Judas out as
the traitor,'° whom He commended to Mary as
a son in His own stead ? " Of what could He
have meant those to be ignorant, to whom He
even exhibited His own glory with Moses and
Elias, and the Father's voice moreover, from
heaven ? '= Not as if He thus disapproved '^ of
all the rest, but because " by three witnesses


' Expedita.

= Susum riirsus convertun

3 Magistros.


4 Mark iv.


34-


8. [See Kaye p. 222, also Elucidation II.]


5 Matt. xiii.

6 Matt, xvi,

7 Ver. ig.

8 Ver. 19

9 John xxi. 20.

10 John xiii. 25. [N.B. loco suo.]
''John xix. 2^.
"Matt. xvii. 1-8.
'3 Reprobans.


must every word be established." '* After the
same fashion, 's too, (I suppose,) were they ig-
norant to whom, after His resurrection also.
He vouchsafed, as they were journeying to-
gether, " to expound all the Scriptures."'*
No doubt '7 He had once said, "I have yet
many things to say unto you, but ye cannot
hear them now;" but even then He added,
" When He, the Spirit of truth, shall come. He
will lead you into all truth. ' ' '^ He (thus) shows
that there was nothing of which they were ig-
norant, to whom He had promised the future
attainment of all truth by help of the Spirit
of truth. And assuredly He fulfilled His
promise, since it is proved in the Acts of the
Apostles that the Holy Ghost did come down.
Now they who reject that Scripture '' can
neither belong to the Holy Spirit, seeing that
they cannot acknowledge that the Holy Ghost
has been sent as yet to the disciples, nor can
they presume to claim to be a church them-
selves ^ who positively have no means of prov-
ing when, and with what swaddling-clothes'''
this body was established. Of so much im-
portance is it to them not to have any proofs
for the things which they maintain, lest along
with them there be introduced damaging ex-
posures ""^ of those things which they menda-
ciously devise.

CHAP. XXIII. THE APOSTLES NOT IGNORANT.

THE HERETICAL PRETENCE OF ST. PETER's
IMPERFECTION BECAUSE HE WAS REBUKED BY
ST. PAUL. ST. PETER NOT REBUKED FOR
ERROR IN TEACHING.

Now, with the view of branding "^ the apos-
tles with some mark of ignorance, they put
forth the case of Peter and them that were
with him having been rebuked by Paul.
"Something therefore," they say, "was
wanting in them." (This they allege,) in
order that they may from this construct that
other position of theirs, that a fuller knowledge
may possibly have afterwards come over (the
apostles,) such as fell to the share of Paul
when he rebuked those who preceded him. I
may here say to those who reject The Acts of
the Apostles: "It is first necessary that you
shows us who this Paul was, — both what he
was before he was an apostle, and how he be-
came an apostle," — so very great is the use
which they make of him in respect of other


'4 Deut. xix. r^, and 2 Cor. xiii. x.
15 Itaque, ironical.
'6 Luke xxiv. 27.

17 Plane.

18 John xvi. 12, II.

19 See Tertullian^ Anti-Marcion, iv. 5, and v. 2 {Trans, pp.
187 and 377.

20 Nee ecclesiam se dicant defendere.

21 Incunabulis, infant nursing.

22 Traductiones.
=3 Suggillandam.


254


ON PRESCRIPTION AGAINST HERETICS.


[chap. XXV.


questions also. It is true that he tells us
himself that he was a persecutor before he
became an apostle,' still this is not enough for
any man who examines before he believes,
since even the Lord Himself did not bear wit-
ness of Himself.' But let them believe with-
out the Scriptures, if their object is to believe
contrary to the Scriptures. ' Still they should
show, from the circumstance which they allege
of Peter's being rebuked by Paul, that Paul
added yet another form of the gospel besides
that which Peter and the rest had previously
set forth. But the fact is,* having been con-
verted from a persecutor to a preacher, he is
introduced as one of the brethren to brethren,
by brethren — to them, indeed, by men who
had put on faith from the apostles' hands.
Afterwards, as he himself narrates, he "went
up to Jerusalem for the purpose of seeing
Peter," s because of his office, no doubt,* and
by right of a common belief and preaching.
Now they certainly would not have been sur-
prised at his having become a preacher instead
of a persecutor, if his preaching were of some-
thing contrary; nor, moreover, would they
have *' glorified the Lord," ^ because Paul had
presented himself as an adversary to Him.
They accordingly even gave him " the right
hand of fellowship," ^ as a sign of their agree-
ment with him, and arranged amongst them-
selves a distribution of office, not a diversity
of gospel, so that they should severally preach
not a different gospel, but (the same), to dif-
ferent persons,' Peter to the circumcision,
Paul to the Gentiles. Forasmuch, then, as
Peter was rebuked because, after he had lived
with the Gentiles, he proceeded to separate
himself from their company out of respect for
persons, the fault surely was one of conversa-
tion, not of preaching.'" For it does not ap-
pear from this, that any other God than the
Creator, or any other Christ than (the son) of
Many, or any other hope than the resurrec-
tion, was (by him) announced.

CHAP. XXIV. — ST. Peter's further vindica-
tion. ST. PAUL NOT SUPERIOR TO ST. PETER
IN TEACHING. NOTHING IMPARfED TO THE
FORMER IN THE THIRD HEAVEN ENABLED HIM
TO ADD TO THE FAITH. HERETICS BOAST AS
IF FAVOURED WITH SOME OF THE SECRETS
IMPARTED TO HIM.

I have not the good fortune," or, as I must


» Gal. i. 13.

2 John V. 31.

3 Ut credunt contra Scripturas.

4 Atquin.

5 Gal. i. 18.

6 Scilicet.

7 Gal. i. 24.
SGal-ii. 9.

9 The same verse. [Note Peter's restriction to Jews.]
10 Vers. 12, 13. See also Anti-Marcion, iv. 3 (Trans, p.
" Non mihi tam bene est.


182).


rather say," I have not the unenviable task,'^
of setting apostles by the ears.'* But, inas-
much as our very perverse cavillers obtrude the
rebuke in question for the set purpose of bring-
ing the earlier '5 doctrine into suspicion, I will
put in a defence, as it were, for Peter, to the
effect that even Paul said that he was '* made
all things to all men — to the Jews a Jew," to
those who were not Jews as one who was not
a Jew — " that he might gain all." '* Therefore
it was according to times and persons and
causes that they used to censure certain prac-
tices, which they would not hesitate themselves
to pursue, in like conformity to times and
persons and causes. Just {e.g.) as if Peter
too had censured Paul, because, whilst for-
bidding circumcision, he actually circumcised
Timothy himself. Never mind '^ those who
pass sentence on apostles ! It is a happy fact
that Peter is on the same level with Paul in
the very glory '^ of martyrdom. Now, although
Paul was carried away even to the third heaven,
and was caught up to paradise,'^ and heard
certain revelations there^ yet these cannot pos-
sibly seem to have qualified him for (teaching)
another doctrine, seeing that their very nature
was such as to render them communicable to
no human being. ^ If, however, that unspeak-
able mystery =' did leak out,=^ and become
known to any man, and if any heresy affirms
that it does itself follow the same, (then) either
Paul must be charged with having betrayed
the secret, or some other man must actually =^3
be shown to have been afterwards " caught up
into paradise," who had permission to speak
out plainly what Paul was not allowed (even)
to mutter.

CHAP. XXV. THE APOSTLES DID NOT KEEP BACK

ANY OF THE DEPOSIT OF DOCTRINE WHICH
CHRIST HAD ENTRUSTED TO THEM. ST.
PAUL OPENLY COMMITTED HIS WHOLE DOC-
TRINE TO TIMOTHY.

But here is, as we have said,"* the same
madness, in their allowing indeed that the
apostles were ignorant of nothing, and
preached not any (doctrines) which contra-
dicted one another, but at the same time in-
sisting that they did not reveal all to all men,
for that they proclaimed some openly and to


'^Immo.

»3 Non mihi tam male est.

u Ut committam.

'5 Superiorem, " that which Peter had preached."

i6 I Cor. ix. 20, 22.

17 Viderint.

'8 Et in martyrio.

'9 2 Cor. xii. 4.

soNuUi hominum.

=1 Nescio quid illud.

" Emanavit.

23 Et.

24 Above, in chap. xxii. [Note the Gnostic madness of such
a plea. Kaye, p. 235 and Elucidation IV.]


CHAP. XXVI.]


ON PRESCRIPTION AGAINST HERETICS.


255


all the world, whilst they disclosed others
(only) in secret and to a few, because Paul
addressed even this expression to Timothy:
" O Timothy, guard that which is entrusted
to thee;"' and again: "That good thing
which was committed unto thee keep."^
What is this deposit ? Is it so secret as to be
supposed to characterize 3 a new doctrine? or
is it a part of that charge of which he says,
*' This charge I commit unto thee, son Timo-
thy ? " * and also of that precept of which he
says, " I charge thee in the sight of God, who
quickeneth all things, and before Jesus Christ,
who witnessed a good confession under Pon-
tius Pilate, that thou keep this command-
ment ? " 5 Now, what is (this) commandment,
and what is (this) charge ? From the preced-
ing and the succeeding contexts, it will be
manifest that there is no mysterious^ hint
darkly suggested in this expression about
(some) far-fetched 7 doctrine, but that a
warning is rather given against receiving any
other (doctrine) than that which Timothy had
heard from himself, as I take it publicly:
"Before many witnesess " is his phrase.^
Now, if they refuse to allow that the church
is meant by these ' ' many witnesses, ' ' it matters
nothing, since nothing could have been secret
which was produced " before many witness-
es." Nor, again, must the circumstance of
his having wished him to " commit these
things to faithful men, who should be able to
teach others also," ^ be construed into a proof
of there being some occult gospel. For, when
he says " these things," he refers to the things
of which he is writing at the moment. In
reference, however, to occult subjects, he
would have called them, as being absent, those
things, not these thi?igs, to one who had a joint
knowledge of them with himself. '°

CHAP. XXVI. THE APOSTLES DID IN ALL CASES

TEACH THE WHOLE TRUTH TO THE WHOLE
CHURCH. NO RESERVATION, NOR PARTIAL
COMMUNICATION TO FAVOURITE FRIENDS.

Besides which, it must have followed, that,
for the man to whom he committed the minis-
tration of the gospel, he would add the injunc-


^ I Tim. vi. 20.

2 2 Tim. i. 14.

3 Ut alterius doctrinse deputetur.

4 I Tim. i. 18.

5 1 Tim. vi. 13.
^Nescis quid.

7 Remotiore.

82 Tim. ii. 2.

9 2 Tim. ii. 2.

'° Apud conscientiam. [Clement of Alexandria is to be inter-
preted by 'J'ertullian, w\ih. whom he does not essentially differ.
For Clement's Esoteric Doctrine (See Vol. II. pp. 302, 313, etc.) is
defined as perfecting the type of the Christian by the strong
meat of Truth, of which the entire deposit is presupposed as
common to all Christians. We must not blame Clement for the
abuse of his teaching by perverters of Truth itself.]


tion that it be not ministered in all places,"
and without respect to persons," in accordance
with the Lord's saying, "Not to cast one's
pearls before swine, nor that which is holy
unto dogs." '3 Openly did the Lord speak,'*
without any intimation of a hidden mystery.
He had Himself commanded that, "whatso-
ever they had heard in darkness" and in
secret, they should " declare in the light and
on the house-tops." 's He had Himself fore-
shown, by means of a parable, that they should
not keep back in secret, fruitless of interest,'^
a single pound, that is, one word of His. He
used Himself to tell them that a candle was
not usually " pushed away under a bushel,
but placed on a candlestick," in order to
" give light to all who are in the house." "'
These things the apostles either neglected, or
failed to understand, if they fulfilled them
not, by concealing any portion of the light,
that is, of the word of God and the mystery
of Christ. Of no man, I am quite sure, were
they afraid, — neither of Jews nor of Gentiles
in their violence;'^ with all the greater free-
dom, then, would they certainly preach in the
church, who held not their tongue in syna-
gogues and public places. Indeed they would
have found it impossible either to convert Jews
or to bring in Gentiles, unless they " set forth
in order " '^ that which they would have them
believe. Much less, when churches were ad-
vanced in the faith, would they liave with-
drawn from them anything for the purpose of
committing it separately to some few others.
Although, even supposing that among inti-
mate friends, ^° so to speak, they did hold cer-
tain discussions, yet it is incredible that these
could have been such as to bring in some other
rule of faith, differing from and contrary to
that which they were proclaiming through the
Catholic churches," — as if they spoke of one
God in the Church, (and) another at home,
and described one substance of Christ, pub-
licly, (and) another secretly, and announced
one hope of the resurrection before all men,
(and) another before the few; although they
themselves, in their epistles, besought men
that they would all speak one and the same
thing, and that there should be no divisions
and dissensions in the church, =" seeing that


11 Passim.

12 Inconsiderate.

13 Matt. vii. 6.
'4 John xviii. 20.

15 Matt. X. 27.

16 Luke xix. 20-24. -^

17 Matt. V. 15.

18 Literally, " the violence of neither Jew nor Gentile."

19 Luke i. I.

20 Domesticos. [All this interprets Clement and utterly deprives
the Trent System of its appeal to a secret doctrine, against our
PreBscriptionJ]

21 Catholice, or, " which they were bringing before the public
in a catholic way."

22 I Cor. i. 10.


256


ON PRESCRIPTION AGAINST HERETICS.


[chap. XXIX.


they, whether Paul or others, preached the
same things. Moreover, they remembered (the
words): "Let your communication be yea,
yea; nay, nay; for whatsoever is more than
this cometh of evil; " ' so that they were not to
handle the gospel in a diversity of treatment.

CHAP. XXVII. GRANTED THAT THE APOSTLES

TRANSMITTED THE WHOLE DOCTRINE OF
TRUTH, MAY NOT THE CHURCHES HAVE
BEEN UNFAITHFUL IN HANDING IT ON ?
INCONCEIVABLE THAT THIS CAN HAVE BEEN
THE CASE.

Since, therefore, it is incredible that the
apostles were either ignorant of the whole
scope of the message which they had to de-
clare,' or failed to make known to all men the
entire rule of faith, let us see whether, while
the apostles proclaimed it, perhaps, simply
and fully, the churches, through their own
fault, set it forth otherwise than the apostles
had done. All these suggestions of distrust 3
you may find put forward by the heretics. They
bear in mind how the churches were rebuked
by the apostle: "O foolish Galatians, who
hath bewitched you ? " -* and, " Ye did run so
well; who hath hindered you ? " s and how the
epistle actually begins: *' I marvel that ye are
so soon removed from Him, who hath called
you as His own in grace, to another gospel." *
That they likewise (remember), what was
written to the Corinthians, that they "were
yet carnal," who "required to be fed with
milk," being as yet " unable to bear strong
meat; " ' who also " thought that they knew
somewhat, whereas they knew not yet any-
thing, as they ought to know. ' ' ^ When they
raise the objection that the churches were
rebuked, let them suppose that they were also
corrected; let them also remember those
(churches), concerning whose faith and knowl-
edge and conversation the apostle " rejoices
and gives thanks to God," which nevertheless,
even at this day, unite with those which were
rebuked in the privileges of one and the same
institution.

CHAP. XXVIII. THE ONE TRADITION OF THE

FAITH, WHICH IS SUBSTANTIALLY ALIKE IN
THE CHURCHES EVERYWHERE, A GOOD PROOF
THAT THE TRANSMISSION HAS BEEN TRUE
AND HONEST IN THE MAIN.

Grant, then, that all have erred; that the
apostle was mistaken in giving his testimony;
that the Holy Ghost had no such respect to


any one (church) as to lead it into truth, al-
though sent with this view by Christ, ^ and for
this asked of the Father that He might be the
teacher of truth; '° grant, also,that He, the Stew-
ard of God, the Vicar of Christ," neglected His
office, permitting the churches for a time to
understand differently, (and) to believe differ-
ently, what He Himself was preaching by the
apostles, — is it likely that so many churches,
and they so great, should have gone astray
into one and the same faith? No casualty
distributed among many men issues in one
and the same result. Error of doctrine in
the churches must necessarily have pro-
duced various issues. When, however, that
which is deposited among many is found to
be one and the same, it is not the result of
error, but of tradition. Can any one, then, be
reckless" enough to say that they were in
error who handed on the tradition ?

CHAP. XXIX. — THE TRUTH NOT INDEBTED TO
THE CARE OF THE HERETICS; IT HAD FREE
COURSE BEFORE THEY APPEARED. PRIORITY
OF THE church's DOCTRINE A MARK OF
ITS TRUTH.

In whatever manner error came, it reigned
of course ^^ only as long as there was an absence
of heresies ? Truth had to wait for certain
Marcionites and Valentinians to set it free.
During the interval the gospel was wrongly '*
preached; men wrongly believed; so many
thousands were wrongly baptized; so many
works of faith were wrongly wrought; so many
miraculous gifts, 's so many spiritual endow-
ments,'^ were wrongly set in operation; so
many priestly functions, so many ministries, '^
were wrongly executed; and, to sum up the
whole, so many martyrs wrongly received
their crowns ! Else, if not wrongly done, and
to no purpose, how comes it to pass that the
things of God were on their course before it
was known to what God they belonged ? that
there were Christians before Christ was found ?
that there were heresies before true doctrine ?
Not so; for in all cases truth precedes its
copy, the likeness succeeds the reality. Ab-
surd enough, however, is it, that heresy should
be deemed to have preceded its own prior
doctrine, even on this account, because it is
that (doctrine) itself which foretold that there


^ Matt. V. 37.

3 Plenitudihem prsedicationis.

3 Scrupulositatis.

4Gal. lii. I.

S Gal. V. 7.

6Gal. i. 6.

7 1 Cor. iii. i, and following verses.

8 I Cor. viii. 2.


9 John xiv. 26.

1° John XV. 26.

" [TertuUian knows no other Vicar of Christ than the Holy
Spirit. They who attribute infallibility to any mortal man be-
come Montanists ; they attribute the Paraclete's voice to their
oracle.]

" Audeat.

»3 Utique, ironical.

14 Perperam.

'S Virtutes, " potestatem edendi miracula " (Oehler),

»6 Charismata.

'7 Ministeria. Another reading has tnysteria, " mysteries " or
'• sacraments."


CHAP. XXX.]


ON PRESCRIPTION AGAINST HERETICS.


257


should be heresies against which men would
have to guard ! To a church which possessed
this doctrine, it was written — yea, the doctrine
itself writes to its own church — " Though an
angel from heaven preach any other gospel
than that which we have preached, let him be
accursed." '

CHAP. XXX. COMPARATIVE LATENESS OF HER-
ESIES, marcion's heresy, some personal

FACTS ABOUT HIM. THE HERESY OF APELLES.
CHARACTER OF THIS MAN; PHILUMENE;
VALENTINUS; NIGIDIUS, AND HERMOGENES.

Where was Marcion thcti^ that shipmaster
of Pontus, the zealous student of Stoicism ?
Where was Valentinus thcti^ the disciple of Pla-
tonism ? For it is evident that those menlived
not so long ago, — in the reign of Antoninus,
for the most part, = — and that they at first were
believers in the doctrine of the Catholic
Church, in the church of Rome under the epis-
copate of the blessed Eleutherus, 3 until on ac-
count of their ever restless curiosity, with which
they even infected the brethren, they were
more than once expelled. Marcion, indeed,
[went] with the two hundred sesterces which
which he had brought into the church, and,*
when banished at last to a permanent excom-
munication, they scattered abroad the poisons
of their doctrines. Afterwards, it is true, Mar-
cion professed repentance, and agreed to the
conditions granted to him — that he should re-
ceive reconciliation if he restored to the church
all the others whom he had been training for
perdition: he was prevented, however, by
death. It was indeed s necessary that there
\ should be heresies;^ and yet it does not fol-
\ low from that necessity, that heresies are a
good thing. As if it has not been necessary
also that there should be evil 1 It was even
necessary that the Lord should be betrayed;
but woe to the traitor ! ^ So that no man may
from this defend heresies. If we must like-
wise touch the descent^ of Apelles, he is far
from being " one of the old school," ^ like his
instructor and moulder, Marcion; he rather
forsook the continence of Marcion, by resort-
ing to the company of a woman, and withdrew
to Alexandria, out of sight of his most abstemi-
ous '° master. Returning therefrom, after some
years, unimproved, except that he was no


^ Gal. i. 8. [In this chapter (xxix.) the principle of Prescrip-
tion is condensed and brought to the needle-point — Quod semper.
If you can't show that your doctrine was always taught, it is
false : and this is " Prescription."]

2 Fere.


3 [Kaye, p. 226.]

4 Se


see adv. Marcion, iv. 4 infra.
SEnim, profecto (Oehler).
^ I Cor. xi. 19.
7 Mark xiv. 21.

SStemma. The reading of the Cod. Agobard. is "stigma,"
which gives very good sense.
9 Vetus.

'° Sanctissirai. This may be an ironical allusion to Marcion's
repudiation of marriage.


longer a Marcionite, he clave " to another
woman, the maiden Philumene (whom we
have already" mentioned), who herself after-
wards became an enormous prostitute. Hav-
ing been imposed on by her vigorous spirit,''
he committed to writing the revelations which
he had learned of her. Persons are still liv-
ing who remember them, — their own actual
disciples and successors, — who cannot there-
fore deny the lateness of their date. But, in
fact, by their own works they are convicted,
even as the Lord said.'* For since Marcion
separated the New Testament from the Old,
he is (necessarily) subsequent to that which
he separated, inasmuch as it was only in his
power to separate what was (previously) united.
Having then been united previous to its sepa-
ration, the fact of its subsequent separation
proves the subsequence also of the man who
effected the separation. In like manner Val-
entinus, by his different expositions and
acknowledged 's emendations, makes these
changes on the express ground of previous
faultiness, and therefore demonstrates the
difference '* of the documents. These cor-
rupters of the truth we mention as being more
notorious and more public'^ than others.
There is, however, a certain man'^ named
Nigidius, and Hermogenes, and several others,
who still pursue the course '' of perverting the
ways of the Lord. Let them show me by
what authority they come ! If it be some
other God they preach, how comes it that they
employ the things and he writings and the
names of that God against whom they preach ?
If it be the same God, why treat Him in some
other way? Let them prove themselves to
be new apostles ! =~ Let them maintain that
Christ has come down a second time, taught
in person a second time, has been twice cru-
cified, twice dead, twice raised ! For thus
has the apostle described (the order of events
in the life of Christ); for thus, too, is He"
accustomed to make His apostles — to give
them, (that is), power besides of working the
same miracles which He worked Himself."
I would therefore have their mighty deeds also
brought forward; except that I allow their


" Impegit.

12 In chap. vi. p. 246 above.

13 Energemate. Oehler defines this word, " vis et efficacia dac-
monum, quibus agebatur." [But see Lardner, Credib. viii. p. 540.]

14 Matt. vii. 16.

15 Sine dubio.

i^Alterius fuisse. One reading is anterius : i.e., "demon-
strates the priority " of the book he alters.
17 Frequentiores.
»8 Nescio qui.
'9 Ambulant.
=0 Compare de Came Christi, chap. ii. [Elucidation IV.]

21 Christ ; so Routh.

22 We add Oehler's reading of this obscure passage : " Sic enim
apostolus descripsit, sic enim apostolos solet facere, dare praeterea
illis virtutem eadem signa edendi quae et ipse." [" It is worthy
of remark" (says Kaye, p. 95), "that he does not appeal to any
instance of the exercise of miraculous powers in his own day."]


258


ON PRESCRIPTION AGAINST HERETICS.


[chap. XXXIII.


mightiest deed to be that by which they per-
versely vie with the apostles. For whilst they
used to raise men to life from the dead, these
consign men to death from their living state.

CHAP. XXXI. — TRUTH FIRST, FALSEHOOD AFTER-
WARDS, AS ITS PERVERSION. CHRIST'S PAR-
ABLE PUTS THE SOWING OF THE GOOD
SEED BEFORE THE USELESS TARES.

Let me return, however, from this digres-
sion ' to discuss ' the priority of truth, and the
comparative lateness ^ of falsehood, deriving
support for my argument even from that para-
ble which puts in the first place the sowing by
the Lord of the good seed of the wheat, but
introduces at a later stage the adulteration of
the crop by its enemy the devil with the use-
less weed of the wild oats. For herein is figu-
ratively described the difference of doctrines,
since in other passages also the word of God
is likened unto seed. From the actual order,
therefore, it becomes clear, that that which
was first delivered is of the Lord and is true,
whilst that is strange and false which was after-
wards introduced. This sentence will keep
its ground in opposition to all later heresies,
which have no consistent quality of kindred
knowledge* inherent in them — to claim the
truth as on their side.

CHAP. XXXII. NONE OF THE HERETICS CLAIM

SUCCESSION FROM THE APOSTLES. NEW
CHURCHES STILL APOSTOLIC, BECAUSE THEIR
FAITH IS THAT WHICH THE APOSTLES TAUGHT
AND HANDED DOWN. THE HERETICS CHAL-
LENGED TO SHOW ANY APOSTOLIC CREDEN-
TIALS.

But if there be any (heresies) which are
bold enough to plant themselves in the midst
of the apostolic age, that they may thereby
seem to have been handed down by the apos-
tles, because they existed in the time of the
apostles, we can say: Let them produce the
original records 5 of their churches; let them
unfold the roll of their bishops, running down
in due succession from the beginning in such
a manner that [that first bishop of theirs**]
bishop shall be able to show for his ordainer
and predecessor some one of the apostles or
of apostolic men, — a man, moreover, who
continued stedfast with the apostles. For this
is the manner in which the apostolic churches


' Ab excessu.

'Disputandam. Another reading has de/>utandam, i.e., "to
attribute."

3 Posteritatem.

4 Nulla constantia de conscientia, '* no conscientious ground of
confidence " (Dodgson).

5 Origines, " the originals " (Dodgson).

6Ille. A touch of irony occurs in the phrase "primus ille
episcopus."


transmit 7 their registers:^ as the church of
Smyrna, which records that Polycarp was
placed therein by John; as also the church of
Rome, which makes Clement to have been
ordained in like manner by Peter,' In ex-
actly the same way the other churches like-
wise exhibit (their several worthies), whom,
as having been appointed to their episcopal
places by apostles, they regard as transmitters
of the apostolic seed. Let the heretics contrive'"
something of the same kind. For after, their
blasphemy, what is there that is unlawful for
them (to attempt) ? But should they even
effect the contrivance, they will not advance
a step. For their very doctrine, after com-
parison with that of the apostles, will declare,
by its own diversity and contrariety, that it had
for its author neither an apostle nor an apos-
tolic man ; because, as the apostles would never
have taught things which were self-contradic-
tory, so the apostolic men would not have in-
culcated teaching different from the apostles,
unless they who received their instruction from
the apostles went and preached in a contrary
manner. To this test, therefore will they
be submitted for proof" by those churches,
who, although they derive not their founder
from apostles or apostolic men (as being of
much later date, for they are in fact being
founded daily), yet, since they agree in the
same faith, they are accounted as not less
apostolic because they are akin in doctrine."
Then let all the heresies, when challenged to
these two '^ tests by our apostolic church, offer
their proof of how they deem themselves to be
apostolic. But in truth they neither are so,
nor are they able to prove themselves to be
what they are not. Nor are they admitted to
peaceful relations and communion by such
churches as are in any way connected with
apostles, inasmuch as they are in no sense
themselves apostolic because of their diversity
as to the mysteries of the faith.'*

CHAP. XXXIII. PRESENT HERESIES (SEEDLINGS

OF THE TARES NOTED BY THE SACRED WRIT-
ERS) ALREADY CONDEMNED IN SCRIPTURE.
THIS DESCENT OF LATER HERESY FROM THI
EARLIER TRACED IN SEVERAL INSTANCES.

Besides all this, I add a review of the doc-'
trines themselves, which, existing as they did


7 Deferunt.

8 Fastos.

9 [Linus and Cletus must have died, or been martyred, there-l
fore, almost as soon as appointed. Our author had seen the
registers, no doubt.]

'9 Confingant.

" Probabuntur. Another reading \^ provocabuntur, "will be
challenged." [Not to one particular See, but to all the Apostolic
churches : Quod ubique.']

'2pro consanguinitate doctrinae.

»3That is, the succession of bishops from the apostles, and the
identity of doctrine with the apostolic.

'4 Sacramenti.


CHAP. XXXIV.]


ON PRESCRIPTION AGAINST HERETICS.


259


in the days of the apostles, were both exposed
and denounced by the said apostles. For by
this method they will be more easily reproba-
ted,' when they are detected to have been even
then in existence, or at any rate to have been
seedlings^ of the (tares) which then were.
Paul, in his first epistle to the Corinthians,
sets his mark on certain who denied and
doubted the resurrection. ^ This opinion was
the especial property of the Sadducees.'*
A part of it, however, is maintained by
Marcion and Apelles and Valentinus, and all
other impugners of the resurrection. Writing
also to the Galatians, he inveighs against such
men as observed and defend circumcision and
the (Mosaic) law.s Thus runs Hebion's
heresy. Such also as *' forbid to marry " he
reproaches in his instructions to Timothy.^
Now, this is the teaching of Marcion and his
follower Apelles. (The apostle) directs a simi-
lar blow 7 against those who said that *'the
resurrection was past already."^ Such an
opinion did the Valentinians assert of them-
selves. When again he mentions "endless
genealogies," 9 one also recognises Valenti-
nus, in whose system a certain ^on, whoso-
ever he be,'° of a new name, and that not one
only, generates of his own grace " Sense and
Truth ; and these in like manner produce of
themselves Word " and Life, while these again
afterwards beget Man and the Church.
From these primary eight '^ ten other ^^ons
after them spring, and then the twelve others
arise with their wonderful names, to complete
the mere story of the thirty ^ons. The same
apostle, when disapproving of those who are
" in bondage to elements, "'^ points us to some
dogma of Hermogenes, who introduces matter
as having no beginning, 's and then compares
it with God, who has no beginning.'^ By thus
making the mother of the elements a goddess,
he has it in his power "to be in bondage"
to a being which he puts on a par with '^ God.
John, however, in the Apocalypse is charged
to chastise those "who eat things sacrificed
to idols," and "who commit fornication."'^
There are even now another sort of Nicolaitans.


^ Traducentur.

2 Semina sumpsisse.

3 I Cor. XV. 12.

4 Comp. TertuU. de Resur. Carnis. xxxvi.

5 Gal. V. 2.

6 I Tim. iv. 3.

7 iflque tangit.

8 2 Tim. ii. 3.

9 I Tim. i. 4.
10 Nescio qui.
'' Charite.

'2 Sermonem.

i3Dequa prima ogdoade, [See Irenaeus, Vol. I. p. 316, etc
this Series.]
'4 Gal. iv. 9.

'S Non natam, literally, "as being unbegotten."
I* Deo non nato.
'7 Comparat.
^8 Rev. ii. 14.


Theirs is called the Gaian '' heresy. But in
his epistle he especially designates those as
" Antichrists " who " denied that Christ was
come in the flesh,"*' and who refused to think
that Jesus was the Son of God. The one
dogma Marcion maintained; the other, He-
bion.^"' The doctrine, however, of Simon's
sorcery, which inculcated the worship of an-
gels," was itself actually reckoned amongst
idolatries and condemned by the Apostle
Peter in Simon's own person.

CHAP. XXXIV. NO EARLY CONTROVERSY RE-
SPECTING THE DIVINE creator; NO SECOND
GOD INTRODUCED AT FIRST. HERESIES CON-
DEMNED ALIKE BY THE SENTENCE AND THE
SILENCE OF HOLY SCRIPTURE.

These are, as I suppose, the different kinds
of spurious doctrines, which (as we are in-
formed by the apostles themselves) existed
in their own day. And yet we find amongst
so many various perversions of truth, not one
schoop3 which raised any controversy concern-
ing God as the Creator of all things. No
man was bold enough to surmise a second
god. More readily was doubt felt about the
Son than about the Father, until Marcion in-
troduced, in addition to the Creator, another
god of goodness only. Apelles made the
Creator of some nondescript^* glorious angel,
who belonged to the superior God, the god
(according to him,) of the law and of Israel,
affirming that he was fire. =5 Valentinus dis-
seminated his ^ons, and traced the sin of
one ^on"^ to the production of God the
Creator. To none, forsooth, except these,
nor prior to these, was revealed the truth of
the Divine Nature; and they obtained this
especial honour and fuller favour from the
devil, we cannot doubt,'^ because he wished
even in this respect to rival God, that he
might succeed, by the poison of his doctrines,
in doing himself what the Lord said could
not be done — making " the disciples above
their Master." ""^ Let the entire mass=^ of
heresies choose, therefore, for themselves the
times when they should appear, provided that
the wheti be an unimportant point; allowing,
too, that they be not of the truth, and (as a
matter of course 3°) that such as had no exist-


19 Gaiana. So Oehler ; the common reading being " Caiana."

2° I John iv. 3.

" Comp. Epiphanius, i. 30.

22 Referred to perhaps in Col. ii. 18.

33 Institutionem.

24 Nescio quem.

25 Igneum, " consisted of fire."

26 "The ectrotna, or fall of Sophia from the Pleroma, from
whom the Creator was fabled to be descended " (Dodgson).

27 Scilicet.

28 Luke vi. 40.

29 Universae.
3° Utique.


26o


ON PRESCRIPTION AGAINST HERETICS.


[chap. XXXVI.


ence in the time of the apostles could not
possibly have had any connection with the
apostles. If indeed they had then existed,
their names would be extant,' with a view to
their own repression likewise. Those (here-
sies) indeed which did exist in the days of the
apostles, are condemned in their very men-
tion.' If it be true, then, that those heresies,
which in the apostolic times were in a rude
form, are now found to be the same, only in
a much more polished shape, they derive their
condemnation from this very circumstance.
Or if they were not the same, but arose after-
wards in a different form, and merely assumed
from them certain tenets, then, by sharing
with them an agreement in their teaching,^
they must needs partake in their condemna-
tion, by reason of the above-mentioned defi-
nition,* of lateness of date, which meets us on
the very threshold. s Even if they were free
from any participation in condemned doctrine,
they would stand already judged ^ on . the
mere ground of time, being all the more spu-
rious because they were not even named by
the apostles. Whence we have the firmer as-
surance, that these were (the heresies) which
even then,' were announced as about to arise.

CHAP, XXXV. — LET HERETICS MAINTAIN THEIR
CLAIMS BY A DEFINITE AND INTELLIGIBLE
EVIDENCE. THIS THE ONLY METHOD OF
SOLVING THEIR QUESTIONS. CATHOLICS AP-
PEAL ALWAYS TO EVIDENCE TRACEABLE TO
APOSTOLIC SOURCES.

Challenged and refuted by us, according to
these definitions, let all the heresies boldly on
their part also advance similar rules to these
against our doctrine, whether they be later
than the apostles or contemporary with the
apostles, provided they be different from them;
provided also they were, by either a general
or a specific censure, precondemned by them.
For since they deny the truth of (our doctrine),
they ought to prove that it also is heresy, re-
futable by the same rule as that by which they
are themselves refuted; and at the same time
to show us where we must seek the truth,
which it is by this time evident has no exist-
ence amongst them. Our system ^ is not be-
hind any in date; on the contrary, it is earlier
than all; and this fact will be the evidence of
that truth which everywhere occupies the first
place. The apostles, again, nowhere con-


I Nominarentur et ipsae,

= Nominatione, i.e. by the apostles.

3 Praedicationis.

4 Fine.

5 Praecedente.

6Praejudicarentur. [i.e. by Praescription.]

7 i.e., in the days of the apostles, and by their mouth.

8 Res.


demn it; they rather defend it, — a fact which
will show that it comes from themselves. ' For
that doctrine which they refrain from con-
demning, when they have condemned every
strange opinion, they show to be their own,
and on that ground too they defend it.

CHAP. XXXVI. THE APOSTOLIC CHURCHES THE

VOICE OF THE APOSTLES. LET THE HERETICS
EXAMINE THEIR APOSTOLIC CLAIMS, IN EACH
CASE, INDISPUTABLE. THE CHURCH OF ROME
DOUBLY APOSTOLIC; ITS EARLY EMINENCE
AND EXCELLENCE. HERESY, AS PERVERTING
THE TRUTH, IS CONNECTED THEREWITH.

Come now, you who would indulge a better
curiosity, if you would apply it to the business
of your salvation, run over the apostolic
churches, in which the very thrones '° of the
apostles are still pre-eminent in their places,"
in which their own authentic writings" are
read, uttering the voice and representing the
face of each of them severally. Achaia is
very near you, (in which) you find Corinth.
Since you are not far from Macedonia, you
have Philippi; (and there too) you have the
Thessalonians. Since you are able to cross
to Asia, you get Ephesus. Since, moreover,
you are close upon Italy,'^ you have Rome,
from which there comes even into our own
hands the very authority (of apostles them-
selves).'-* How happy is its church, on which
apostles poured forth all their doctrine along
with their blood ! where Peter endures a pas-
sion like his Lord's ! where Paul wins his
crown in a death like John's !'s where the
Apostle John was first plungad, unhurt, into
boiling oil, and thence remitted to his island-
exile ! See what she has learned, what taught,
what fellowship has had with even (our)
churches in Africa ! '* One Lord God does she
acknowledge, the Creator of the universe, and
Christ Jesus (born) of the Virgin Mary, the
Son of God the Creator; and the Resurrection
of the flesh; the law and the prophets she
unites '^ in one volume with the writings of
evangelists and apostles, from which she
drinks in her faith.. This she seals with the
water (of baptism), arrays with the Holy


9 Indicium proprietatis, a proof of its being their own.

10 Cathedrae.

" Suis locis praesident.

" Authenticae. This much disputed phrase may refer to the
autographs or the Greek originals (rather than the Latin trans-
lations), or full unmutilated copies as opposed to the garbled
ones of the heretics. The second sense is probably the correct one.

'3 [Note, those near by may resort to this ancient and glorious
church ; not as any better than Corinth, or Philippi, or having
any higher Apostolic throne. See Irenaeus, Vol. I. p. 418, (note)
and Elucid. p. 460,]

>4 Compare our Anti~Marcion, iv. 5, p. 186.

15 The Baptist's.

16 [Observe — " even with us in Africa." If this implies note-
worthy love, it proves that there was no organic relation requir-
ing such particular fellowship, even in the West.]

17 Miscet.


CHAP. XXXVIII.]


ON PRESCRIPTION AGAINST HERETICS.


26:


Ghost, feeds with the Eucharist, cheers with
martyrdom,' and against such a discipline thus
(maintained) she admits no gainsayer. This
is the discipHne which I no longer say foretold
that heresies should come, but from' which
they proceeded. However, they were not of
her, because they were opposed to her. 3 Even
the rough wild-olive arises from the germ '* of
the fruitful, rich, and genuine s olive; also
from the seed ^ of the mellowest and sweetest
fig there springs the empty and useless wild-
fig. In the same way heresies, too, come from
our plant,7 although not of our kind; (they
come) from the grain of truth, ^ but, owing to
their falsehood, they have only wild leaves to
show.'

CHAP. XXXVII. HERETICS NOT BEING CHRIS-
TIANS, BUT RATHER PERVERTERS OF CHRIST'S
TEACHING, MAY NOT CLAIM THE CHRISTIAN
SCRIPTURES. THESE ARE A DEPOSIT, COM-
MITTED TO AND CAREFULLY KEPT BY THE
CHURCH.

Since this is the case, in order that the truth
may be adjudged to belong to us, " as many
as walk according to the rule," which the
church has handed down from the apostles,
the apostles from Christ, a7id Christ from
God, the reason of our position is clear, when
it determines that heretics ought not to be al-
lowed to challenge an appeal to the Scriptures,
since we, without the Scriptures, prove that
they have nothing to do with the Scriptures.
For as they are heretics, they cannot be true
Christians, because it is not from Christ that
they get that which they pursue of their own
mere choice, and from the pursuit incur and
admit the name of heretics.'" Thus, not being
Christians, they have acquired " no right to the
Christian Scriptures; and it maybe very fairly
said to them, "Who are you? When and
whence did you come ? As you are none of
mine, what have you to do with that which is
mine? Indeed, Marcion, by what right do
you hew my wood ? By whose permission,
Valentinus, are you diverting the streams of


I We have taken Oehler's hint in favour of " martyrio.'' The
usual reading " martyrium " (meaning "she exhorts to martyr-
dom ") is stiff, and unsuited to the context.

'^^^■

3 Or, " they were not of ?V, because they were opposed to zV,"
i.e., the discipline or teaching.

4 Nucleo.

5 Necessariae.

^Papavere. " Ego cum sX\\s, papaver ficus interpretor de semi-
naHbus ficus, non de ipso fructu " (Oehler).

7 Frutice.

8 We again follow Oehler's hint, who would like to read " de
grano veritatis." The texts are obscure, and vary much here.

9 Silvestres.

w " That is, in following out their own choice (aipeo-is) of
opinions, they both receive and admit the name of heretics^^
aiperiKot, "self-choosers" (Dodgson). [In Theology, techni-
cally^ one must be a baptized Christian in order to be a heretic.
The Mohammedans, e. g., are not hereiicshut pagans. But, our
author speaks rhetorically.]

^» Capiunt.


my fountain? By what power, Apelles, are
you removing my landmarks ? This is my
property. Why are you, the rest, sowing and
feeding here at your own pleasure ? This (I
say) is my property. I have long possessed
it; I possessed it before you. I hold sure
title-deeds from the original owners them-
selves, to whom the estate belonged. I am
the heir of the apostles. Just as they care-
fully prepared their will and testament, and
committed it to a trust, and adjured (the
trustees to be faithful to their charge),'^ even
so do I hold it. As for you, they have, it is
certain, always held you as disinherited, and
rejected you as strangers — as enemies. But
on what ground are heretics strangers and ene-
mies to the apostles, if it be not from the
difference of their teaching, which each individ-
ual of his own mere will has either advanced or
received in opposition to the apostles ? "

CHAP. XXXVIII. — HARMONY OF THE CHURCH
AND THE SCRIPTURES. HERETICS HAVE
TAMPERED WITH THE SCRIPTURES, AND MU-
TILATED, AND ALTERED THEM. CATHOLICS
NEVER CHANGE THE SCRIPTURES, WHICH
ALWAYS TESTIFY FOR THEM.

Where diversity of doctrine is found,
fherey then, must the corruption both of the
Scriptures and the expositions thereof be re-
garded as existing. On those whose purpose
it was to teach differently, lay the necessity
of differently arranging the instruments of
doctrine. '3 They could not possibly have ef-
fected their diversity of teaching in any other
way than by having a difference in the means
whereby they taught. As in their case, cor-
ruption in doctrine could not possibly have
succeeded without a corruption also of its in-
struments, so to ourselves also integrity of
doctrine could not have accrued, without in-
tegrity in those means by which doctrine is
managed. Now, what is there in our Scrip-
tures which is contrary to us ? '^ What of our
own have we introduced, that we should have
to take it away again, or else add to it, or
alter it, in order to restore to its natural
soundness anything which is contrary to it,
and contained in the Scriptures ? 's What we
are ourselves, that also the Scriptures are.
(and have bfeen) from the beginning.'* Of


12 Compare i Tim. v. 21, and vi. it ; 2 Tim. ii. 14, and iv. 1-4.

13 By the instrutnenta doctrines he here means the writings of
the New Testament.

M [Our author insists on the precise agreement of Catholic Tra-
dition with Holy Scripture. See valuable remarks on Schleier-
macher, in Kaye, pp. 279-284.J

15 We add the original of this sentence, which is obscured by its
terseness: " Quid de proprio intulimus, ut aliquid contrarium ei
et in Scripturis deprehensum detractione vel adjectione vel trans-
mutatione remediaremus ?"

16 That is, teaching the same faith and conversation (De la
Cerda).


262


ON PRESCRIPTION AGAINST HERETICS.


[chap. XL.


them we have our being, before there was any
other way, before they were interpolated by
you. Now, inasmuch as all interpolation
must be believed to be a later process, for the
express reason that it proceeds from rivalry
which is never in any case previous to nor
home-born ' with that which it emulates, it is
as incredible to every man of sense that we
should seem to have introduced any corrupt
text into the Scriptures, existing, as we have
been, from the very first, and being the first,
as it is that they have not in fact introduced it,
who are both later in date and opposed (to
the Scriptures). One man perverj:s the Scrip-
tures with his hand, another their meaning
by his exposition. For although Valentinus
seems to use the entire volume,' he has none
the less laid violent hands on the truth only
with a more cunning mind and skill ^ than
Marcion. Marcion expressly and openly used
the knife, not the pen, since he made such an
excision of the Scriptures as suited his own
subject-matter.-* Valentinus, however, ab-
stained from such excision, because he did
not invent Scriptures to square with his own
subject-matter, but adapted his matter to the
Scriptures; and yet he took away more, and
added more, by removing the proper meaning
of every particular word, and adding fantastic
arrangements of things which have no real
existence. 5

CHAP. XXXIX. WHAT ST. PAUL CALLS SPIRIT-
UAL WICKEDNESSES DISPLAYED BY PAGAN
AUTHORS, AND BY HERETICS, IN NO DIS-
SIMILAR MANNER. HOLY SCRIPTURE ES-
PECIALLY LIABLE TO HERETICAL MANIPULA-
TION. AFFORDS MATERIAL FOR HERESIES,
JUST AS VIRGIL HAS BEEN THE GROUND-
WORK OF LITERARY PLAGIARISMS, DIFFERENT
IN PURPORT FROM THE ORIGINAL.

These were the ingenious arts of *' spiritual
wickednesses,"*' wherewith we also, my
brethren, may fairly expect to have '* to
wrestle," as necessary for faith, that the elect
may be made manifest, (and) that the repro-
bate may be discovered. And therefore they
possess influence, and a facility in thinking
out and fabricating ^ errors, which ought not
to be wondered at as if it were a difficult and
inexplicable process, seeing that in profane


I Domestica.

' Integro instrumento.

sCallidiore ingenio.

4 That is, cutting out whatever did not fall in with it (Dodg-
son).

SNon comparentium rerum. [Note, he says above " of ^/5!<f;«,
the Scriptures, we, Catholics, have our being.^^ Prescription
does not undervalue Scripture as the food and life of the Church,
but supplies a short and decisive method with innovaters.]

6 See Eph. vi. 12, and i Cor. xi. 18.

7 Instruendis.


writings also an example comes ready to hand
of a similar facility. You see in our own day,
composed out of Virgil,^ a story of a wholly
different character, the subject-matter being
arranged according to the verse, and the verse
according to the subject-matter. In short,*
Hosidius Geta has most completely pilfered
his tragedy of Medea from Virgil. A near
relative of my own, among some leisure pro-
ductions '° of his pen, has composed out of the
same poet The Table of Cebes. On the same
principle, thost poetasters are commonly called
Homerocentones^ " collectors of Homeric odds
and ends," who stitch into one piece, patch-
work fashion, works of their own from the
lines of Homer, out of many scraps put to-
gether from this passage and from that (in
miscellaneous confusion). Now, unquestion-
ably, the Divine Scriptures are more fruitful
in resources of all kinds for this sort of facility.
Nor do I risk contradiction in saying " that the
very Scriptures were even arranged by the
will of God in such a manner as to furnish
materials for heretics, inasmuch as I read that
" there must be heresies," " which there can-
not be without the Scriptures.

CHAP. XL. NO DIFFERENCE IN THE SPIRIT OF

IDOLATRY AND OF HERESY. IN THE RITES
OF IDOLATRY, SATAN IMITATED AND DIS-
TORTED THE DIVINE INSTITUTIONS OF THE-
OLDER SCRIPTURES. THE CHRISTIAN SCRIP-
TURES CORRUPTED BY HIM IN THE PERVER-
SIONS OF THE VARIOUS HERETICS.

The question will arise. By whom is to be
interpreted '^ the sense of the passages which
make for heresies ? By the devil, of course,
to whom pertain those wiles which pervert the
truth, and who, by the mystic rites of his idols,
vies even with the essential portions'* of the
sacraments of God.'s He, too, baptizes some
— that is, his own believers and faithful fol-
lowers ;*7 he promises the putting away '^ of sins
by a laver (of his own); and if my memory
still serves me, Mithra there, (in the kingdom
of Satan,) sets his marks on the foreheads of
his soldiers; celebrates also the oblation of
bread, and introduces an image of a resurrec-


8 Oehler reads ex Vergilio, although the Codex Agobard. ha*
ex Virgilio.

9 Denique. [" Getica lyra."]
»o Otis.

II Nee periclitor dicere. [Truly, a Tertullianic paradox; but
compare 2 Pet, iii. 16. n.b. Scripture the test of heresy.]
12 1 Cor. xi. 19.

13 " Interpretur " is here a passive verb.

14 Res.

15 Sacramentorum divinorura. The form, however, of ••lis
phrase seems to point not only to the specific sacraments of the
gospel, but to the general mysteries of our religion.

'o Compare Tertullian's treatises, de Bapt. v. and de Corona^
last chapter.
17 Expositionem.


I


CHAP. XLII.]


ON PRESCRIPTION AGAINST HERETICS.


26


tion, and before a sword wreathes a crown.'
What also must we say to (Satan's) limiting
his chief priest^ to a single marriage? He,
too, has his virgins; he, too, has his proficients
in continence. 3 Suppose now we revolve in
our minds the superstitions of Numa Pompil-
ius, and consider his priestly offices and
badges and privileges, his sacrificial services,
too, and the instruments and vessels of the
sacrifices themselves, and the curious rites of
his expiations and vows: is it not clear to us
that the devil imitated the well-known* mo-
roseness of the Jewish law ? Since, therefore,
he has shown such emulation in his great aim
of expressing, in the concerns of his idolatry,
those very things of which consists the ad-
ministration of Christ's sacraments, it follows,
of course, that the same being, possessing
still the same genius, both set his heart upon,^
and succeeded in, adapting^ to his profane
and rival creed the very documents of divine
things and of the Christian saints ^ — his inter-
pretation from, their interpretations, his words
from their words, his parables from their para-
bles. • For this reason, then, no one ought to
doubt, either that "spiritual wickednesses,"
from which also heresies come, have been in-
troduced by the devil, or that there is any
real difference between heresies and idolatry,
seeing that they appertain both to the same
author and the same work that idolatry does.
They either pretend that there is another god
in opposition to the Creator, or, even if they
acknowledge that the Creator is the one only
God, they treat of Him as a different being
from what He is in truth. The consequence
is, that every lie which they speak of God is
in a certain sense a sort of idolatry

CHAP. XLI. THE CONDUCT OF HERETICS: ITS

FRIVOLITY, WORLDLINESS, AND IRREGULAR-
ITY. THE NOTORIOUS WANTONNESS OF THEIR
WOMEN.

I must not omit an account of the conduct ^
also of the heretics — how frivolous it is, how
worldly, how merely human, without serious-
ness, without authority, without discipline, as
suits their creed. To begin with, it is doubt-
ful who is a catechumen, and who a believer;


' " Et sub gladio redimit coronam " is the text of this obscure
sentence, which seems to allude to a pretended martyrdom. Com-
pare Tertullian's tract, de Corona, last chapter.

'The Fiamen Dialis. See Tertullian's tract, ad Uxorem, i. 7.

'i\Corruptio optimi pessivia. Compare the surprising parallels
of M. Hue between debased Christianity and the Paganism of
Thibet, etc. Souvenirs d'un voyage, etc. Hazlitt's translation,


1867.]

4Morositatem Illam. [He refers to the minute and vexatious
ordinances complained of by St. Peter (Acts otwr. to,) which Latin
Christianity has ten-folded, in his name.] XV

SGestiit.

^Attemperare.

7 i.e., the Scriptures of the New Testament.

8 Conversationis.


they have all access alike, they hear alike, they
pray alike — even heathens, if any such happen
to come among them. " That which is holy
they will cast to the dogs, and their pearls,"
although (to be sure) they are not real ones,
" they will fling to the swine. "» Simplicity
they will have to consist in the overthrow of
discipline, attention to which on our part they
call brothelry." Peace also they huddle up"
anyhow with all comers; for it matters not to
them, however different be their treatment of
subjects, provided only they can conspire to-
gether to storm the citadel of the one only
Truth. All are puffed up, all offer you knowl-
edge. Their catechumens are perfect before
they are full-taught." The very women of these
heretics, how wanton they are ! For they are
bold enough to teach, to dispute, to enact ex-
orcisms, to undertake '^ cures — it may be even
to baptize."* Their ordinations, are carelessly
administered, 's capricious, changeable.'^ At
one time they put novices in office; at another
time, men who are bound to some secular em-
ployment; '7 at another, persons who have apos-
tatized from us, to bind them by vainglory,
since they cannot by the truth. Nowhere is
promotion easier than in the camp of rebels,
where the mere fact of being there is a fore-
most service.'^ And so it comes to pass that
to-day one man is their bishop, to-morrow
another; to-day he is a deacon who to-morrow
is a reader; to-day he is a presbyter who to-
morrow is a layman. For even on laymen do
they impose the functions of priesthood.

CHAP. XLII. HERETICS WORK TO PULL DOWN

AND TO DESTROY, NOT TO EDIFY AND ELE-
• VATE. HERETICS DO NOT ADHERE EVEN TO
THEIR OWN TRADITIONS, BUT HARBOUR DIS-
SENT EVEN FROM THEIR OWN FOUNDERS.

But what shall I say concerning the minis-
try of the word, since they make it their busi-
ness not to convert the heathen, but to subvert
our people ? This is rather the glory which
they catch at, to compass the fall of those who
stand, not the raising of those who are down.
Accordingly, since the very work which they
purpose to themselves comes not from the
building up of their own society, but from the
demolition of the truth, they undermine our
edifices, that they may erect their own. Only


9 See Matt. vii. 6.

10 Lenocinium. " Pandering " is Archdeacon Dodgson's word.
" Miscent.
"2 Edocti.
'3 Repromittere.

14 Compare Tertullian's tract, de Bapt. i. and^^ Veland. Virg.
viii. [Also, Epiphan. iv. p. 453, Ed. Oehler.]

15 Temerariae.

16 They were constantly changing their ministers. It was a say-
ing of the heretics, " Alius hodie episcopus, eras alius " (RigaJt.).

'7 Saeculo obstrictos.
18 Promereri est.


264


ON PRESCRIPTION AGAINST HERETICS.


[chap. xliv.


deprive them of the law of Moses, and the
prophets, and the divinity of the Creator, and
they have not another objection to talk about.
The consequence is, that they more easily ac-
complish the ruin of standing houses than the
erection of fallen ruins. It is only when they
have such objects in view that they show them-
selves humble and bland and respectful.
Otherwise they know no respect even for their
own leaders. Hence it is [supposed] that
schisms seldom happen among heretics, be-
cause, even when they exist, they are not
obvious.' Their very unity, however,' is
schism. I am greatly in error if they do not
amongst themselves swerve even from their
own regulations, forasmuch as every man, just
as it suits his own temper, modifies the tradi-
tions he has received after the same fashion
as the man who handed them down did, when
he moulded them according to his own will.
The progress of the matter is an acknowledg-
ment at once of its character and of the man-
ner of its birth. That was allowable to the
Valentinians which had been allowed to Val-
entinus; that was also fair for the Marcionites
which had been done by Marcion — even to
innovate on the faith, as was agreeable to their
own pleasure. In short, all heresies, when
throughly looked into, are detected harbour-
ing dissent in many particulars even from
their own founders. The majority of them
have not even churches. ^ Motherless, house-
less, creedless, outcasts, they wander about in
their own essential worthlessness.-*

CHAP. XLIII. LOOSE COMPANY PREFERRED BY

HERETICS. UNGODLINESS THE EFFECT OF
THEIR TEACHING THE VERY OPPOSITE OF
CATHOLIC TRUTH, WHICH PROMOTES THE
FEAR OF GOD, BOTH IN RELIGIOUS ORDI-
NANCES AND PRACTICAL LIFE.

It has also been a subject of remark, how
extremely frequent is the intercourse which
heretics hold with magicians, with mounte-
banks, with astrologers, with philosophers;
and the reason is,s that they are men who de-
vote themselves to curious questions. ' ' Seek,
and ye shall find," is everywhere in their
minds. Thus, from the very nature of their
conduct, may be estimated the quality of their
faith. In their discipline we have an index
of their doctrine. They say that God is not
to be feared; therefore all things are in their


1 Non parent.

2 Eniin. [E.g. The Trent system of Unity, alas ! is of this sort.]

3 Hence the saying, " Wasps make combs, so Marcionites make
churches" (see our Ant I'-Marc ion, p. 187) ; describing the strange-
ness and uselessness of the societies, not (as Gibbon said) their
number (Dodgson).

4 Sua in vilitate. Another reading, pronounced corrupt by Oeh-
ler, has " quasi sibi latae vagantur,'^ g.d. " All for themselves, as
it were, they wander " etc. (Dodgson).

5 Scilicet.


view free and unchecked. Where, however
is God not feared, except where He is not?
Where God is not, there truth also is not.
Where there is no truth, then, naturally
enough, there is also such a discipline as
theirs. But where God is, there exists " the
fear of God, which is the beginning of wis-
dom."* Where the fear of God is, there is
seriousness, an honourable and yet thought-
ful' diligence, as well as an anxious careful-
ness and a well-considered admission (to the
sacred ministry) ^ and a safely-guarded ^ com-
munion, and promotion after good service,
and a scrupulous submission (to authority),
and a devout attendance,'" and a modest gait,
and a united church, and God in all things.

CHAP. XLIV. HERESY LOWERS RESPECT FOR

CHRIST, AND DESTROYS ' ALL FEAR OF
HIS GREAT JUDGMENT. THE TENDENCY OF
HERETICAL TEACHING ON THIS SOLEMN
ARTICLE OF THE FAITH. THE PRESENT
TREATISE AN INTRODUCTION TO CERTAIN
OTHER ANTI-HERETICAL WORKS OF OUR
AUTHOR.

These evidences, then, of a stricter disci-
pline existing among us, are an additional proof
of truth, from which no man can safely turn
aside, who bears in mind that future judg-
ment, when " we must all stand before the
judgment-seat of Christ," "to render an ac-
count of our faith itself before all things.
What, then, will they say who shall have de-
filed it, even the virgin which Christ com-
mitted to them with the adultery of heretics ?
I suppose they will allege that no injunction
was ever addre.ssed to them by Him or by
His apostles concerning depraved " and per-
verse doctrines assailing them,'^ or about their
avoiding and abhorring the same. (He and
His apostles, perhaps,) will acknowledge '* that
the blame rather lies with themselves and
their disciples, in not having given us previ-
ous warning and instruction ! They 's will, be-
sides, add a good deal respecting the liigh
authority of each doctor of heresy, — how that
these mightily strengthened belief in their
own doctrine; how that they raised the dead,


•5 Ps. cxi. 10 ; Prov. i. 7.

7 Attonita, as if in fear that it might go wrong (Rigalt.).

8 In contrast to the opposite fault of the heresies exposed above.

9 Deliberata, where the character was 7ve// iveighed previous to
admission to the eucharist.

'o Apparitio, the duty and office of an apparitor, or attendant
on men of higher rank, whether in church or state.
" 2 Cor. v. 10.
'2 Scaevis.

13 Futuris.

14 It seems to us, that this is the force of the strong irony, indi-
cated by the " credo," which pervades this otherwise unintelligible
passage. Dodgson's version seems untenable : " Let them (the
heretics) acknowledge that the fault is with themselves rather than
with those who prepared us so long beforehand."

'5 Christ and His apostles, as before, in continuation of the
strong irony.


CHAP. XLIV.]


ON PRESCRIPTION AGAINST HERETICS.


265


restored the sick, foretold the future, that so
they might deservedly be regarded as apostles.
As if this caution were not also in the written
record: that many should come who were to
work even the greatest miracles, in defence of
the deceit of their corrupt preaching. So, for-
sooth, they will deserve to be forgiven! If,
however, any, being mindful of the writings
and the denunciations of the Lord and the
apostles, shall have stood firm in the integrity
of the faith, I suppose they will run great risk
of missing pardon, when the Lord answers:" I
plainly forewarned you that there should be
teachers of false doctrine in my name, as well
as that of the prophets and apostles also; and
to my own disciples did I give a charge, that
they should preach the same things to you.
But as for you, it was not, of course, to be
supposed ^ that you would believe me ! I once
gave the gospel and the doctrine of the said
rule (of life and faith) to my apostles; but
afterwards it was my pleasure to make con-
siderable changes in it ! I had promised a
resurrection, even of the flesh; but, on second
thoughts, it struck me ^ that I might not be
able to keep my promise ! I had shown my-


» This must be the force of a sentence which is steeped in irony :
" Scilicet cum vos non crederetis.," We are indebted to Oehler
for restoring the sentence thus.

' Recogitavi.


self to have been born of a virgin; but this
seemed to me afterwards to be a discreditable
thing. 3 I had said that He was my Father,
who is the Maker of the sun and the showers;
but another and better father has adopted me !
I had forbidden you to lend an ear to heretics;
but in this I erred !'// Such (blasphemies), it
is possible,'* do enter the minds of those who
go out of the right path,s and who do not de-
fend ^ the true faith from the danger which
besets it. On the present occasion, indeed,
our treatise has rather taken up a general
position against heresies, (showing that they
must) all be refuted on definite, equitable,
and necessary rules, without ' any comparison
with the Scriptures. For the rest, if God in
His grace permit, we shall prepare answers to
certain of these heresies in separate treatises.^
To those who may devote their leisure in read-
ing through these (pages), in the belief of the
truth, be peace, and the grace of our God
Jesus Christ for ever.^


3 Turpe.

4 Capit.

5 Exorbitant.

6 Cavent.

7 This sense comes from the " repellendas " and the " a col-
latione Scripturarum."

8 Specialiter. He did this, indeed, in his treatises against Mar-
cion, Hermogenes, the Valentinians, Praxeas, and others. [These
are to follow in this Series. Kaye (p. 47) justly considered this
sentence as proving the De Preescript, a preface to all his treat-
ises against particular heresies.]

9 Elucidation V.


ELUCIDATIONS.


(Prescription, Chap. I., p. 243, Supra.)

In adopting this expression from the Roman Law, Tertullian has simply puzzled beginners
to get at his idea. Nor do they learn much when it is called a demurrer., which, if I compre-
hend the word as used in law-cases, is a rejoinder to the testimony of the other parts, amount-
ing to — " Well, what of it? It does not prove your case." Something like this is indeed
in Tertullian's use of the ttrm prcescriptionj but Dr. Holmes furnishes what seems to me the
best explanation, (though he only half renders it,) " the Prescriptive Rule against Heresies."
In word, it means ""the Rule of Faith asserted against Heresies." And his practical point is,
it is useless to discuss Scripture with convicted (Titus, iii. lo, ii,) heretics; every one of
them is ready with " his psalm, his doctrine, his interpretation," and you may argue fruitlessly
till Doomsday. But bring them to the test of {Quod Semper, etc.), the dL\iOstoY\c pmscriptiofi,
(I. Cor. xi. 16). — We have no such custom neither the Churches of God. State this jRule of
Faith, viz. Holy Scripture, as interpreted from the apostolic day, proves the doctrine or cus-
tom a novelty; then it has no foundation, and even if it be harmless, it cannot be innocently
professed against the order and peace of the churches.


266 ELUCIDATIONS.


II.

(Semler, cap. x., note 15, p. 248.)

The extent to which Bp. Kaye has stretched his notice of this critic is to be accounted
for by the fact that, for a time, the German School of the last century exerted a sad influence
in England. In early life Dr. Pusey came near to being led away by it, and Hugh James
Rose was raised up to resist it. Semler lived (at Halle and elsewhere) from a.d. 1725 to
1 791. Kahnis in his invaluable manual, named below, thus speaks of his Patristic theories:
*' The history of the Kingdom of God became, under his hands, a world of atoms, which
crossed each other as chaotically as the masses of notes which lay heaped up in the memory
of Semler. . . . Under his pragmatical touches the halo of the martyrs faded, etc.''
Internal Hist, of Gertna7i Protestantism (since circa 1750,) by Ch. Fred. Aug. Kahnis, D.D.
(Lutheran) Professor at Leipzig. Translated. T. and F. Clark, Edinburgh, 1856.

III.

(Peter, cap. xxii. note 6, p. 253.)

In the treatise of Cyprian, De Unitate, we shall have occasion- to speak fully on this
interesting point. The reference to Kaye may suffice, here. But, since the inveterate con-
fusion of all that is said of Peter with all that is claimed by a modern bishop for himself
promotes a false view of this passage, it may be well to note (i) that St. Peter's name is
expounded by himself (I. Peter, ii. 4, 5,) so as to make Christ the Rock and all believers
" lively stones " — or Peters — by faith in Him. St. Peter is often called the rocky most justly,
in this sense, by a rhetorical play on his name: Christ the Rock and all believers '"''lively
stones,'' being cemented with Him by the Spirit. But, (2.) this specialty of St. Peter, as
such, belongs to him (Cephas) only. (3.) So far as transmitted it belongs to no particular
See. (4.) The claim of Rome is disproved by Prcescriptio7i. (5.) Were it otherwise, it
would not justify that See in making new articles of Faith. (6.) Nor in its Schism with the
East. (7.) When it restores St. Peter's Doctrine arid Holiness, to the Latin Churches, there
will be no quarrel about pre-eminence. Meantime, '^oxa^' % fallibility is expressly taught in
Romans xi. 18-21.

IV.

(The Apostles, cap. xxv. p. 254.)

Nothing less than a new incarnation of Christ and a new commission to new apostles can
give us anything new in religion. This prcBscriptiofi is our Catholic answer to the Vatican
oracles of our own time. These give us a new revelation, prefacing the Gospels (i) by defining
the immaculate conception of Mary in the womb of her mother; and (2) adding a new chapter
to the Acts of the Apostles, in defining the infallibility of a single bishop.

Clearly, had Tertullian known anything of this last dogma of Latin Novelty, he would not
have taken the trouble to write this treatise. He would have said to heretics. We can neither
discuss Scripture nor Antiquity with you. Rome is the touchstone of dogma, and to its
bishop we refer you.

V.

(Truth and Peace, cap. xHv. p. 265.)
The famous appeal of Bishop Jewel, known as *' the Challenge at Paul's Cross," which he
made in a sermon preached thereon Passion Sunday, a.d. 1560, is an instance of " Praescrip-
tion against heresies," well worthy of being recalled, in a day which has seen Truth and
Peace newly sacrificed to the ceaseless innovations of Rome. It is as follows: — '* If any
learned man of all our adversaries, or, if all the learned men that be alive, be able to bring


ELUCIDATIONS 267


any ofte sufficient sentence out of any old Catholic doctor or father; or out of any old general
Council; or out of the Holy Scriptures of God; ' or, any one example of the primitive Church,
whereby it may be clearly and plainly proved, that — i. There was any private mass in the whole
world at that time, for the space of six hundred years after Christ; or that — 2. There was
then any communion ministered unto the people under one kind; or that — 3. The people
had their common prayers, then, in a strange tongue that they understood not; or that —
4. The bishop of Rome was then called an universal bishop, or the head of the universal
Church; or that — 5. The people was then taught to believe that Christ's body is really, sub-
stantially, corporally, carnally or naturally in the Sacrament; or that — 6. His body is, or may
be, in a thousand places or more, at one time ; or that — 7 . The priest did then hold up the Sacra-
ment over his head; or that — 8. The people did then fall down and worship it with godly honour;
or that — 9. The Sacrament was then, or now ought to be, hanged up under a canopy; or that
— 10. In the Sacrament after the words of consecration there remaineth only the accidents
and shews, without the substance of bread and wine; or that — 11. The priest then divided the
Sacrament in three parts and afterwards received himself, alone; or that — 12. Whosoever had
said the Sacrament is a pledge, a token, or a remembrance of Christ's body, had therefore
been judged a heretic; or that — 13. It was lawful, then, to have thirty, twenty, fifteen, ten,
or five masses said in one Church, in one day; or that — 14. Images were then set up in
churches to the intent the people might worship them; or that — 15. The lay people was then
forbidden to read the word of God, in their own tongue:

" If any man alive be able to prove any of these articles, by any one clear or plain clause
or sentence, either of the Scriptures, or of the old doctors, or of any old General Council, or
by any Example of the Primitive Church; I promise, then, that I will give over and sub-
scribe unto him."

All this went far beyond tht concession oi prcescription which makes little of any one saying
of any one Father^ and demands the general consent of Antiquity; but, it is needless to say
that Jewel's challenge has remained unanswered for more than three hundred years, and so
it will be to all Eternity

With great erudition Jewel enlarged his propositions and maintained all his points. See
his works, vol. I., p. 20 et seqq. Cambridge University Press, 1845.

I It must be remembered that an appeal to Scripture lies behind Tertullian's Preescription : only he will not discuss Holy Scrip-
ture with heretics.


I


II.


THE FIVE BOOKS AGAINST MARCION

[TRANSLATED BY DR. HOLMES.]


DEDICATION.

To THE Right Rev. the Lord Bishop of

Chester.
My Dear Lord,

I am gratified to have your permission to
dedicate this volume to your Lordship. It is
the fruit of some two years' leisure labour.
Every man's occupation spares to him some
M^ava xp^vov; and thirty years ago you taught
me, at Oxford, how to husband these opportu-
nities in the pleasant studies of Biblical and
Theological Science. For that and many
other kindnesses I cannot cease to be thankful
to you.

But, besides this private motive, I have in
your Lordship's own past course an additional
incentive for resorting to you on this occasion.
You, until lately, presided over the theological
studies of our great University; and you have
given great encouragement to patristic litera-
ture by your excellent edition of the Apostolic
Fathers.^ To whom could I more becomingly
present this humble effort to make more gene-
rally known the great merits of perhaps the
greatest work of the first of the Latin Fathers
than to yourself ?

I remain, with much respect,
My dear Lord,

Very faithfully yours,
Peter Holmes.
Mannamead, Plymouth, =
March, 1868.


* [The name of Bishop Jacobson was often introduced in our
first volume, in notes to the Apostolic Fathers. He, has recently
" fallen asleep," after a life of exemplary labour " with good re-
port of all men and of the Truth itself." His learning and piety
were adorned by a profound humility, which gave a primitive cast
to his character. At the Lambeth Conference, having the honour
to sit at his side, I observed his extreme modesty. He rarely rose
to speak, though he sometimes honoured me with words in a whis-

Ser, which the whole assembly would have rejoiced to hear. Like
is great predecessor, Pearson, in many respects, the mere filings
and clippings of his thought were gold-dust.]

= [Dr. Holmes is described, in the Edinburgh Edition, as " Do-
mestic Chaplain to the Rt. Hon. the Countess of Rothes." He
wasB. A. (Oxon.) in 1840, and took orders that year. Was Head-
Master of Plymouth Grammar School at one time, and among his
very valuable and learned works should be mentioned, as very
useful to the reader of this series, his Translation of Bull's Defen-
sio Fidei Niccence (two vols. 8vo. Oxford, 18m), and of the same
great &Vith.oT's Judicium Ecclesice Catholicee, Svo. Oxford, 1855.]


PREFACE BY THE TRANSLAT0R.3

The reader has, in this volume a translation
(attempted for the first time in English) of the
largest of the extant works of the earliest Latin
Fathers. The most important of Tertullian's
writings have always been highly valued in
the church, although, as was natural from
their varied character, for different reasons.
Thus his two best-known treatises. The Apology
and The Prescription against Heretics, have
divided between them for more than sixteen
centuries the admiration of all intelligent
readers, — the one for its masterly defence of
the Christian religion against its heathen per-
secutors, and the other for its lucid vindication
of the church's rule of faith against its hereti-
cal assailants. The present work has equal
claims on the reader's appreciation, in respect
of those qualities of vigorous thought, close
reasoning, terse expression, and earnest pur-
pose, enlivened by sparkling wit and impas-
sioned eloquence, which have always secured
for TertuUian, in spite of many drawbacks, the
esteem which is given to a great and favourite
author. If these books against Marcion have
received, as indeed it must be allowed they
have, less attention from the general reader
than their intrinsic merit deserves, the neg-
lect is mainly due to the fact that the interest-
ing character of their contents is concealed by
the usual title-page, which points only to a
heresy supposed to be extinct and inapplicable,
whether in the materials of its defence or con-
futation, to any modern circumstances. But
many treatises of great authors, which have
outlived their literal occasion, retain a value
from their collateral arguments, which is not
inferior to that effected by their primary sub-
ject. Such is the case with the work before
us. If Marcionism is in the letter obsolete,
there is its spirit still left in the church, which
in more ways than one develops its ancient


3 [This preface and the frequent annotations of our author re-
lieve the American editor, save very sparingly, from adding notes
of his own.]


2 70


PREFACE BY THE TRANSLATOR.


[book I.


characteristics. Wiiat these were, the reader
will soon discover in this volume; but refer-
ence may be made even here, in passing, to
that prominent aim of the heresy which gave
Tertullian his opportunity of proving the es-
sential coherence of the Old and the New
Testaments, and of exhibiting both his great
knowledge of the details of Holy Scripture,
and his fine intelligence of the progressive
nature of God's revelation as a whole. This
constitutes the charm of the present volume,
which might almost be designated a Treatise
ofi the Confiectiofi betiveeen the Jeivish and the
Christian Scriptures. How interesting this
subject is to earnest men of the present age,
is proved by the frequent treatment of it in
our religious literature.' In order to assist
the reader to a more efficient use of this vol-
ume, in reference to its copiousness of Scrip-
ture illustration, a full J7idex of Scriptural
Passages has been drawn up. Another satis-
factory result will, it is believed, accompany
the reading of this volume, in the evidence
which it affords of the venerable catholicity
of that system of biblical and dogmatic truth
which constitutes the behef of what is called
the '* orthodox " Christian of the present day.
Orthodoxy has been impugned of late, as if
it had suffered much deterioration in its trans-
mission to us; and an advanced school of
thinkers has demanded its reform by a ma-
nipulation which they have called " free hand-
ling." To such readers, then, as prize the
deposit of the Christian creed which they have
received, in the light of St. Jude's description,
as ' ' the faith once for all delivered to the saints, ' '
it cannot but prove satisfactory to be able to
trace in Tertullian, writing more than sixteen
centuries ago, the outlines of their own cher-
ished convictions — held by one who cannot
be charged with too great an obsequiousness
to traditional authority, and who at the same
time possessed honesty, earnestness, and in-
telligence enough to make him an unexcep-
tionable witness to facts of such a kind. The
translator would only add, that he has, in com-
pliance with the wise canon laid down by the
editors of this series, endeavoured always to
present to the reader the meaning of the
— «

I Two works are worth mentioning in connection with this topic
for their succinct and handy form, as well as satisfactory treat-
ment of their argument : Mr. Perowne's Norrisian prize essay, en-
titled The Essential Coherence of the Old and New Testaments
(1858), and Sir William Page Wood's recent work, The Continuity
of Scripture, &■& declared by the testimony of our Lord, and of
the evangelists and apostles.


author in readable English, keeping as near
as idiomatic rules allowed to the sense and
even style of the original. Amidst the many
well-known difficulties of Tertullian's writings
(and his Anti-Marcion is not exempt from
any of these difficulties,') the translator cannot
hope that he has accomplished his labour with-
out mistakes, for which he would beg the
reader's indulgence. He has, however, en-
deavoured to obviate the inconvenience of
faulty translation by quoting in foot-notes all
words, phrases, and passages which appeared
to him difficult. 3 He has also added such
notes as seemed necessary to illustrate the
author's argument, or to explain any obscure
allusions. The translation has been made
always from Oehler's edition, with the aid of
his scholary Index Verborum. Use has also
been made of Semler's edition, and the vari-
orum reprint of the Abbe Migne, the chief
result of which recension has been to convince
the translator of the great superiority and
general excellence of Oehler's edition. When
he had completed two-thirds of his work, he
happened to meet with the French translation
of Tertullian by Mon^. Denain, in Genoude's
series, Les Fires de I'Eglise, published some
twenty-five years ago. This version, which
runs in fluent language always, is very unequal
in its relation to the original: sometimes it
has the brevity of an abridgment, sometimes
the fulness of a paraphrase. Often does it
miss the author's point, and never does it keep
his style. The Abbe Migne correctly describes
it: *' Elegans potius quam fidissimus interpres,
qui Africanse loquelae asperitatem splendenti
ornavit sermone, egregiaque interdum et ad
vivum expressa interpretatione recreavit. ' '


2 Bishop Kaye says of Tertullian (page 62) : " He is indeed the
harshest and most obscure of writers, and the least capable of
being accurately represented in a translation ;" and he quotes the
learned Ruhnken's sentence of our author : " Latinitatis certi
pessimum auctorem esse aio et confirmo." This is surely much
too sweeping. To the careful student Tertullian's style com-
mends itself, by and by, as suited exactly to his subject — as the
terse and vigorous expression of terse and vigorous thought. Bish-
op Butler has been often censured for an awkward style ; where-
as it is a fairer criticism to say, that the arguments of the Analogy
and the Sertnons on Human Nature have been delivered in the
language best suited to their character. This adaptation of style
to matter is probably in all great authors a real characteristic of
genius. A more just and favourable view is taken of Tertullian's
T^tin by Niebuhr, Hist. Rom. (Schmitz), vol. v. p. 271, and his
Lectures on Ancient Hist. (Schmitz), vol. ii. p. 54.

3 He has also, as the reader will observe, endeavoured to dis-
tinguish, by the help of type, between the true God and Marcion's
god J printing the initials of the former, and of the pronouns re-
fernng to Him, in capitals, and those of the latter in .small letters.
To do this was not always an easy matter, for \n many passages
the argument amalgamates the two. Moreover, in the earlier
portion of the work the translator fears that he may have occa-
sionally neglected to make the distinction.


THE FIVE BOOKS- AGAINST MARCION.

Book 1/

WHEREIN IS DESCRIBED THE GOD OF MARCION. HE IS SHOWN TO BE
UTTERLY WANTING IN ALL THE ATTRIBUTES OF THE TRUE GOD.


CHAP. I. PREFACE. REASON FOR A NEW WORK.

PONTUS LENDS ITS ROUGH CHARACTER TO
THE HERETIC MARCION, A NATIVE. HIS
HERESY CHARACTERIZED IN A BRIEF INVEC-
TIVE.

Whatever in times past ' we have wrought
in opposition to Marcion, is from the present
moment no longer to be accounted of.-^ It is
a new work which we are undertaking in Heu
of the old one.^ My original tract, as too
hurriedly composed, I had subsequently
superseded by a fuller treatise. This latter
I lost, before it was completely published, by
the fraud of a person who was thenabrother,5
but became afterwards an apostate. He, as
it happened, had transcribed a portion of it,
full of mistakes, and then published it. The
necessity thus arose for an amended work;
and the occasion of the new edition induced
me to make a considerable addition to the
treatise. This present text,^ therefore, of my
work — which is the third as superseding ' the
second, but henceforward to be considered
the first instead of the third — renders a pref-
ace necessary to this issue of the tract itself
that no reader maybe perplexed, if he should
by chance fall in with the various forms of it
which are scattered about.

The Euxine Sea, as it is called, is self-con-
tradictory in its nature, and deceptive in its
name.^ As you would not account it hospita-
ble from its situation, so is it severed from


* [Written a.d. 207. See Chapter xv. in/ra. In cap. xxix.
the token of Montanisra which denotes his impending lapse.!
= Retro. 6 1- J

3 Jam hinc viderit.

4 Ex vetere.

5 Fratris.

6 Stilus.
7De.

8[Euxine=hospitable. One recalls Shakspeare:
— " Like to the Pontick Sea
Whose icy current and compulsive force
Ne'er feels retiring ebb."— (9///^/.]


our more civilised waters by a certain stigma
which attaches to its barbarous character.
The fiercest nations inhabit it, if indeed it can
be called habitation, when life is passed in
waggons. They have no fixed abode; their
life has» no germ of civilisation; they indulge
their libidinous desires without restraint, and
for the most part naked. Moreover, when
they gratify secret lust, they hang up their
quivers on their car-yokes, '° to warn off the curi-
ous and rash observer. Thus without a blush
do they prostitute their weapons of war. The
dead bodies of their parents they cut up with
their sheep, and devour at their feasts. They
who have not died so as to become food for
others, are thought to have died an accursed
death. Their women are not by their sex
softened to modesty. They uncover the
breast, from which they suspend their battle-
axes, and prefer warfare to marriage. In
their climate, too, there is the same rude
nature." The day-time is never clear, the
sun never cheerful;" the sky is uniformly
cloudy; the whole year is wintry; the only
wind that blows is the angry North. Waters
melt only by fires; their rivers flow not by
reason of the ice; their mountains are covered '^
with heaps of snow. All things are torpid,
all stiff with cold. Nothing there has the
glow"* of Hfe, but that ferocity which has
given to scenic plays their stories of the sac-
rifices 's of the Taurians, and the loves '* of the
Colchians, and the torments '^ of the Caucasus.
Nothing, however, in Pontus is so barbarous


9 Cruda.

10 De jugo. See Strabo (Bohn's trans.), vol. ii, p. 247.
" Duritia.

12 Libens.

13 Exaggerantur.
u Calet.

"^iUphigenia of Euripides.]

16 [See the Medea of Euripides.]

»7 \Prometheus of ^schylus.]


2/2


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book I.


and sad as the fact that Marcion was born
there, fouler than any Scythian, more roving
than the waggon-life' of the Sarmatian, more
inhuman than the Massagete, more auda-
cious than an Amazon, darker than the cloud,"
(of Pontus) colder than its winter, more brittle
than its ice, more deceitful than the Ister,
more craggy than Caucasus. Nay^ more, the
true Prometheus, Almighty God, is mangled*
by Marcion's blasphemies. Marcion is more
savage than even the beasts of that barbarous
region. For what beaver was ever a greater
emasculators than he who has abolished the
nuptial bond ? What Pontic mouse ever had
such gnawing powers as he who has gnawed
the Gospels to pieces? Verily, O Euxine,
thou hast produced a monster more credible
to philosophers than to Christians. For the
cynic Diogenes used to go about, lantern in
hand, at mid-day to find a man; whereas Mar-
cion has quenched the light of his faith, and
so lost the God whom he had found. His
disciples will not deny that his first faith he
held along with ourselves; a letter of his own ^
proves this; so that for the future ^ a heretic
may from his case ^ be designated as one who,
forsaking that which was prior, afterwards
chose out for himself that which was not in
times past. 9 For in as far as what was de-
livered in times past and from the beginning
will be held as truth, in so far will that be ac-
counted heresy which is brought in later. But
another brief treatise '° will maintain this posi-
tion against heretics, who ought to be refuted
even without a consideration of their doc-
trines, on the ground that they are heretical
by reason of the novelty of their opinions.
Now, so far as any controversy is to be ad-
mitted, I will for the time" (lest our compen-
dious principle of novelty, being called in on
all occasions to our aid, should be imputed to
want of confidence) begin with setting forth
our adversary's rule of belief, that it may es-
cape no one what our main contention is to
be.


» Hamaxobio. This Sarmatian clan received its name 'Ajuajd/Sioi
from its gypsy kind of life.

= [I fancy there is point in this singular, the sky of Pontus
being always overcast. Cowper says :

*' There is but one cloud in the sky *
But that doth the welkin invest," etc.

3 Quidni.

* Lancinatur.

5 Castrator carnis. See Pliny, A^. H. viii. 47 (Bohn's trans,
vol. ii. p. 297).

^Ipsius htteris.

7 Jam.

SHinc.

9 Retro.

^o He alludes to his book De Prascriptione Hareticorum.
[Was this work then already written ? Dr. Allix thinks not. But
see Kaye, p. 47.]

»i Interdum. [Can it be that when all this was written (speak-
ing of ourselves) our author had fully lapsed from Communion
with the Catholic Church ?]


CHAP. II. MARCION, AIDED BY CERDON,

TEACHES A DUALITY OF GODS; HOW HE

CONSTRUCTED THIS (HERESY OF AN EVIL ^

AND A GOOD GOD. f

The heretic of Pontus introduces two
Gods, like the twin Symplegades of his own
shipwreck: One whom it was impossible to
deny, i.e. our Creator; and one whom he will
never be able to prove, i.e. his own god. The
unhappy man gained" the first idea'^ of his
conceit from the simple passage of our Lord's
saying, which has reference to human beings
and not divine ones, wherein He disposes of
those examples of a good tree and a corrupt
one;'* how that "the good tree bringeth not
forth corrupt fruit, neither the corrupt tree
good fruit." Which means, that an honest
mind and good faith cannot produce evil
deeds, any more than an evil disposition can
produce good deeds. Now (like many other
persons now-a-days, especially those who have
an heretical proclivity), while morbidly brood-
ing's over the question of the origin of evil,
his perception became blunted by the very
irregularity of his researches; and when he
found the Creator declaring, " I am He that \j
createth evil," 'inasmuch as he had already-
concluded from other arguments, which are
satisfactory to every perverted mind, that
God is the author of evil, so he now applied
to the Creator the figure of the corrupt tree
bringing forth evij fruit, that is, moral evil,'^
and then presumed that there ought to be an-
other god, after the analogy of the good tree
producing its good fruit. Accordingly, find-
ing in Christ a different disposition, as it
were — one of a simple and pure benevolence '*
— differing from the Creator, he readily argued
that in his Christ had been revealed a new and
strange '^ divinity; and then with a little leaven
he leavened the whole lump of the faith^
flavouring it with the acidity of his own heresy.

He had, moreover, in one "^ Cerdon an
abettor of this blasphemy, — a circumstance
which made them the more readily think that
they saw most clearly their two gods, blind
though they were; for, in truth, they had not
seen the one God with soundness of faith."
To men of diseased vision even one lamp
looks like many. One of his gods, therefore,
whom he was obliged to acknowledge, he
destroyed by defaming his attributes in the


»2 Passus.
'3 Instinctum.
»4St. Luke, vi. 43 sq.
'S Languens.
»Ma&. xlv. 7.
"TMala.

'8 [This purely good or goodish divinity is an idea of the Stoics.
De Preescript. chap. 7.]
19 Hospitam.

aoQuendam. [See Irenaeus, Vol. I. p. 352, this Seri«s.]
=1 Integre.


CHAP. IV.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


273


matter of evil; the other, whom he laboured
so hard to devise, he constructed, laying his
foundation' in the principle of good. In
what articles "" he arranged these natures, we
show by our own refutations of them.

CHAP. III. — THE UNITY OF GOD. HE IS THE
SUPREME BEING, AND THERE CANNOT BE A
SECOND SUPREME.

The principal, and indeed^ the whole, con-
tention lies in the point of number: whether
two Gods may be admitted, by poetic licence
(if they must be),-* or pictorial fancy, or by
the third process, as we must now add,s of
heretical pravity. But the Christian verity
has distinctly declared this principle, "God
is not, if He is not one; " because we more
properly believe that that has no existence
which is not as it ought to be. In order, how-
ever, that you may know that God is one, ask
what God is, and you will find Him to be not
otherwise than one. So far as a human being
can form a definition of God, I adduce one
which the conscience of all men will also
acknowledge, — that God is the great Supreme,
existing in eternity, unbegotten, unmade,
without beginning, without end. For such
a condition as this must needs be ascribed to
that eternity which makes God to be the great
Supreme, because for such a purpose as this
is this very attribute^ in God; and so on as
to the other qualities: so that God is the great
Supreme in form and in reason, and in might
and in power. ^ Now, since all are agreed on
this point (because nobody will deny that God
is in some sense ^ the great Supreme, except
the man who shall be able to pronounce the
opposite opinion, that God is but some inferior
being, in order that he may deny God by rob-
bing Him of an attribute of God), what must
be the condition of the great Supreme Him-
self ? Surely it must be that nothing is equal
to Him, i.e. that there is no other great su-
preme; because, if there were, He would have
an equal; and if He had an equal. He would
be no longer the great Supreme, now that the
condition and (so to say) our law, which per-
mits nothing to be equal to the great Supreme,
is subverted. That Being, then, which is the
great Supreme, must needs be tmique,^ by
having no equal, and so not ceasing to be


1 Praestruendo.

2 Or sections.

3 Et exinde.

4 Si Forte.

5 Jam.

6 Of eternity.

7 We subjoin the original of this difficult passage : Hunc enim
Statum seternitati censendum, quae summum magnum deum effi-
ciat, dum hoc est in deo ipsa, atque ita et cetera, ut sit deus sum-
mum magnum et forma et ratione et vi et potestate.

^Ouid.

9 Unicus. [Alone of His kind.]

18


the great Supreme. Therefore He will not
otherwise exist than by the condition whereby
He has His being; that is, by His absolute
uniqueness. Since, then, God is the great
Supreme, our Christian verity has rightly de-
clared," " God is not, if He is not one." Not
as if we doubted His being God, by saying.
He is not, if He is not one; but because we
define Him, in whose being we thoroughly
believe, to be that without which He is not
God; that is to say, the great Supreme. But
then" the great Supreme must needs be
unique. This Unique Being, therefore, will
be God — not otherwise God than as the great
Supreme; and not otherwise the great Supreme
than as having no equal; and not otherwise
having no equal than as being Unique. What-
ever other god, then, you may introduce, you
will at least be unable to maintain his divinity
under any other guise," than by ascribing
to him too the property of Godhead — both
eternity and supremacy over all. How, there-
fore, can two great Supremes co-exist, when
this is the attribute of the Supreme Being, to
have no equal, — an attribute which belongs
to One alone, and can by no means exist in
two? ■

CHAP. IV. DEFENCE OF THE DIVINE UNITY

AGAINST OBJECTION. NO ANALOGY BE-
TWEEN HUMAN POWERS AND GOD's SOV-
EREIGNTY. THE OBJECTION OTHERWISE UN-
TENABLE, FOR WHY STOP AT TWO GODS ?

But some one may contend that two great
Supremes may exist, distinct and separate in
their own departments; and may even adduce,
as an example, the kingdoms of the world,
which, though they are so many in number,
are yet supreme in their several regions. Such
a man will suppose that human circumstances
are always comparable with divine ones. Now,
if this mode of reasoning be at all tolerable,
what is to prevent our introducing, I will not
say a third god or a fourth, but as many as
there are kings of the earth ? Now it is God
that is in question, whose main property it is
to admit of no comparison with Himself.
Nature itself, therefore, if not an Isaiah, or
rather God speaking by Isaiah, will deprecat-
ingly ask, "To whom will ye liken me ? " "^
Human circumstances may perhaps be com-
pared with divine ones, but they may not be
with God. God is one thing, and what belongs
to God is another thing. Once more:'* you
who apply the example of a king, as a great


10 As its first principle.
" Porro.

12 Forma.

13 Isa. xl. 18, 25.

14 Denique.


2 74


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[hook I.


supreme, take care that you can use it prop-
erly. For although a king is supreme on his
throne next to God, he is still inferior to God;
and when he is compared with God, he will be
dislodged ' from that great supremacy which
is transferred to God. Now, this being the
case, how will you employ in a comparison
with God an object as your example, which
fails' in all the purposes which belong to a
comparison? Why, when supreme power
among kings cannot evidently be multifarious,
but only unique and singular, is an exception
made in the case of Him (of all others) ^ who
is King of kings, and (from the exceeding
greatness of His power, and the subjection of
all other ranks* to Him) the very summit,^ as
it were, of dominion ? But even in the case
of rulers of that other form of government,
where they one bv one preside in a union of
authority, if with tlieir petty ^ prerogatives of
royalty, so to say, they be brought on all
points 7 into such a comparison with one an-
other as shall make it clear which of them is
superior in the essential features® and powers
of royalty, it must needs follow that the su-
preme majesty will redound ' to one alone, —
all the others being gradually, by the issue of
the comparison, removed and excluded from
the supreme authority. Thus, although, when
spread out in several hands, supreme author-
ity seems to be multifarious, yet in its own
powers, nature, and condition, it is unique.
It follows, then, that if two gods are compared,
as two kings and two supreme authorities, the
concentration of authority must necessarily,
according to the meaning of the comparison,
be conceded to one of the two; because it is
clear from his own superiority that he is the
supreme, his rival being now vanquished, and
proved to be not the greater, however great.
Now, from this failure of his rival, the other
is unique in power, possessing a certain soli-
tude, as it were, in his singular pre-eminence.
The inevitable conclusion at which we arrive,
then, on this point is this: either we must
deny that God is the great Supreme, which no
wise man will allow himself to do; or say that
God has no one else with whom to share His
power.


» Excidet.

'Amittittir. " Tertullian " (who thinks lightly of the analogy of
earthly monarchs) " ought rather to have contended that the illus-
tration strengthened his argument. In each kingdom there is
only one supreme power ; but the universe is God's kingdom :
there is therefore only one Supreme Power in the universe. — Bp.
Kaye, On the iVritings of Tertullian^ Third edition, p. 453,
note 2.

3 Scilicet.

4 Graduum.
SCulmen.

6 Minutalibus regnis.
7Undique.
**Substantiis.
9 Eliquetur.


chap. v. — the dual principle falls to the
ground; plurality of gods, of whatever
number, more consistent. absurdity
and injury to piety resulting from mar-
cion's duality.

But on what principle did Marcion confine
his supreme powers to hvo ? I would first ask, ^
If there be two, why not more ? Because if
munber be compatible with the substance of
Deity, the richer you make it in number the
better. Valentinus was more consistent and
more liberal; for he, having once imagined
two deities, Bythos and Sige,'° poured forth a
swarm of divine essences, a brood of no less
than thirty ^^^ons, like the sow of >4^^neas."
Now, whatever principle refuses to admit sev-
eral supreme begins, the same must reject
even two, for there is plurality in the very
lowest number after one. After unity, fiumber
commences. So, again, the same principle
which could admit two could admit more.
After two, multitude begins, now that one is
exceeded. In short, we feel that reason her-
self expressly " forbids the belief in more gods
than one, because the self-same rule lays down
one God and not two, which declares that God
must be a Being to which, as the great Su-
preme, nothing is equal; and that Being to
which nothing is equal must, moreover, be
unique. But further, what can be the use or
advantage in supposing two supreme beings,
two co-ordinate '^ powers ? What numerical
difference could there be when two equals
differ not from one ? For that thing which is
the same in two is one. Even if there were
several equals, all would be just as much one,
because, as equals, they would not differ one
from another. So, if of two beings neither
differs from the other, since both of them are
on the supposition "* supreme, both being gods,
neither of them is more excellent than the
other; and so, having no pre-eminence, their
numerical distinction '^ has no reason in it.
Number, moreover, in the Deity ought to be
consistent with the highest reason, or else His
worship would be brought into doubt. For
consider'* now, if, when I saw two Gods be-
fore me (who, being both Supreme Beings,
were equal to each other), I were to worship
them both, what should I be doing ? I should
be much afraid that the abundance of my
homage would be deemed superstition rather
than piety. Because, as both of them are so
equal and are both included in either of the


10 Depth and silence.

" See Virgil, /Eneid^ viii. 43, etc.

'2 Ipso termino.

»3 Paria.

14 Jam.

'SNumeri sui.

16 Ecce.


CHAP. VII.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


275


two, I might serve them both acceptably in
only one; and by this very means I should
attest their equality and unity, provided that
I worshipped them mutually the one in the
other, because in the one both are present to
me. If I were to worship one of the two, I
should be equally conscious of seeming to pour
contempt on the uselessness of a numerical
distinction, which was superfluous, because it
indicated no difference; in other words, I
should think it the safer course to worship
neither of these two Gods than one of them
with some scruple of conscience, or both of
them to none effect.

CHAP. VI. — MARCION UNTRUE TO HIS THEORY.
HE PRETENDS THAT HIS GODS ARE EQUAL,
BUT HE REALLY MAKES THEM DIVERSE. THEN,
ALLOWING THEIR DIVINITY, DENIES THIS DI-
VERSITY.

Thus far our discussion seems to imply that
Marcion makes his two gods equal. For
while we have been maintaining that God
ought to be believed as the one only great
Supreme Being, excluding from Him every
possibility' of equality, we have treated of
these topics on the assumption of two equal
Gods; but nevertheless, by teaching that tio
equals can exist according to the law "" of the
Supreme Being, we have sufficiently affirmed
the impossibility that two equals should exist.
For the rest, however,^ we know full well'*
-that Marcion makes his gods unequal: one
judicial, harsh, mighty in war; the other mild,
placid, and simply s good and excellent. Let
^ys with similar care consider also this aspect
of the question, whether diversity (in the God-
head) can at any rate contain two, since equal-
ity therein failed to do so. Here again the
same rule about the great Supreme will protect
us, inasmuch as it settles^ the entire condition
of the Godhead. Now, challenging, and in a
certain sense arresting ^ the meaning of our
adversary, who does not deny that the Creator
is God, I most fairly object^ against him that
he has no room for any diversity in his gods,
because, having once confessed that they are
on a par, 9 he cannot now pronounce them dif-
ferent; not indeed that human beings may
not be very different under the same designa-
tion, be because the Divine Being can be
neither said nor believed to be God, except as
the great Supreme. Since, therefore, he is


1 Parilitatem.

2 Formam.

3 Alioquin.
4Certi (sumus).
S Tantummodo.
^Vindicet.

7 Injecta manu detinens.

8 Praescribo.

9 Ex aequo deos conf essus.


obliged to acknowledge that the God whom
he does not deny is the great Supreme, it is
inadmissible that he should predicate of the
Supreme Being such a diminution as should
subject Him to another Supreme Being. For
He ceases (to be Supreme), if He becomes
subject to any. Besides, it is not the charac-
teristic of God to cease from any attribute '" of
His divinity — say, from His supremacy. For
at this rate the supremacy would be endan-
gered even in Marcion' s more powerful god,
if it were capable of depreciation in the Cre-
ator. When, therefore, two gods are pro-
nounced to be two great Supremes, it must
needs follow that neither of them is greater
or less than the other, neither of them loftier
or lowlier than the other. If you deny" him
to be God whom you call inferior, you deny "
the supremacy of this inferior being. But
when you confessed both gods to be divine,
you confessed then both to be supreme.
Nothing will you be able to take away from
either of them; nothing will you be able to
add. By allowing their divinity, you have
denied their diversity.

CHAP. VII. OTHER BEINGS BESIDES GOD ARE

IN SCRIPTURE CALLED GOD. THIS OBJECTION
FRIVOLOUS, FOR IT IS NOT A QUESTION OF
NAMES. THE DIVINE ESSENCE IS THE THING
AT ISSUE. HERESY, IN ITS GENERAL TERMS,
THUS FAR TREATED.

But this argument you will try to shake
with an objection from the name of God, by
alleging that that name is a vague " one, and
applied to other beings also; as it is written,
"God standeth in the congregation of the
mighty; '3 He judgeth among the gods." And
again, "I have said. Ye are gods."'* As
therefore the attribute of supremacy would be
inappropriate to these, although they are called
gods, so is it to the Creator. This is a foolish
objection; and my answer to it is, that its au-
thor fails to consider that quite as strong an
objection might be urged against the (su-
perior) god of Marcion: he too is called god,
but is n6t on that account proved to be divine,
as neither are angels nor men, the Creator's
handiwork. If an identity of names affords
a presumption in support of equality of con-
dition, how often do worthless menials strut
insolently in the names of kings — your Alex-
anders, Caesars, and Pompeys ! 's This fact,


JO De statu suo.
" Nega.

12 Passive.

'^bSTnS^p- Tertullian's version is: In ecclcsia deorum.

The Vulgate : In synagoga deorum.
•4 Ps. Ixxxii. 1,6.

13 The now less obvious nicknames of '
femes," are in the text.


Alex. Darius and Olo-


276


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book


however, does not detract from the real attri-
butes of the royal persons. Nay more, the
very idols of the Gentiles are called gods.
Yet not one of them is divine because he is
called a god. It is not, therefore, for the
name of god, for its sound or its written form,
that I am claiming the supremacy in the Cre-
ator, but for the essence ' to which the name
belongs; and when I find that essence alone is
unbegotten and unmade — alone eternal, and
the maker of all things — it is not to its name,
but its state, not to its designation, but its
condition, that I ascribe and appropriate the
attribute of the supremacy. And so, because
the essence to which I ascribe it has come * to
be called god, you suppose that I ascribe it
to the name, because I must needs use a name
to express the essence, of which indeed that
Being consists who is called God, and who is
accounted the great Supreme because of His
essence, not from His name. In short, Mar-
cion himself, when he imputes this character
to his god, imputes it to the nature, ^ not to
the word. That supremacy, then, which we
ascribe to God in consideration of His essence,
and not because of His name, ought, as we
maintain, to be equal* in both the beings who
consist of that substance for which the name
of God is given; because, in as far as they
are called gods \i.e. supreme beings, on the
strength, of course, of their unbegotten and
eternal, and therefore great and supreme es-
sence), in so far the attribute of being the
great Supreme cannot be regarded as less or
worse in one than in another great Supreme.
If the happiness, and sublimity, and perfec-
tion s of the Supreme Being shall hold good
of Marcion's god, it will equally so of ours;
and if not of ours, it will equally not hold of
Marcion's. Therefore two sufeme beings
will be neither equal nor Unequal: not equal,
because the principle which we have just ex-
pounded, that the Surpeme Being admits of
no comparison with Himself, forbids it; not
unequal, because another principle meets us
respecting the Supreme Being, that He is
capable of no diminution. So, Marcion, you
are caught^ in the midst of your own Pontic
tide. The waves of truth overwhelm you on
every side. You can neither set up equal
gods nor unequal ones. For there are not
two; so far as the question of number is prop-
erly concerned. Although the whole matter
of the two gods is at issue, we have yet con-
fined our discussion to certain bounds, within


I Substantiae.
sVocari obtinuit.
3Statiim.
4 Ex pari.
5lnte><ritas.
6 Haesisti.


which we shall now have to contend about
separate peculiarities.

CHAP. VIII. SPECIFIC POINTS. THE NOVELTY

OF marcion's god fatal to his preten-
sions. GOD is from everlasting, HE CAN-
NOT BE IN ANY WISE NEW.

In the first place, how arrogantly do the
Marcionites build up their stupid system, ^
bringing forward a new god, as if we were
ashamed of the old one ! So schoolboys are
proud of their new shoes, but their old master
beats their strutting vanity out of them. Now
when I hear of a new god,^ who, in the old
world and in the old time and under the old
god was unknown and unheard of; whom, {ac-
counted as no one through such long centu-
ries back, and ancient in men's very ignorance
of him), 9 a certain " Jesus Christ," and none
else revealed; whom Christ xt\it^\tdy they say
— Christ himself new, according to thejn, even,
in ancient names — I feel grateful for this con-
ceit '° of theirs. For by its help I shall at once
be able to prove the heresy of their tenet of
a new deity. It will turn out to be such a
novelty " as has made gods even for the hea-
then by some new and yet again and ever new
title " for each several deification. What new
god is there, except a false one ? Not even
Saturn will be proved to be a god by all his
ancient fame, because it was a novel pretence
which some time or other produced even him,
when it first gave him godship.'^ On the con-
trary, living and perfect ''♦ Deity has its origin '^
neither in novelty nor in antiquity, but in its
own true nature. Eternity has no time. It
is itself all time. It acts; it cannot then suf-
fer. It cannot be born, therefore it lacks age.
God, if old, forfeits the eternity that is to
come; if new, the eternity which is past.'* The
newness bears witness to a beginning; the
oldness threatens an end. God, moreover,
is as independent of beginning and end as
He is of time, which is only the arbiter and
measurer of a beginning and an end.


7 Stuporem suum.

8 [Cap. xix. /«y>-rt.]

9 The original of this obscure passage is : " Novum igitur au-
diens deum, in vetere mundo et in vetere a:vo et sub vctere dec
inauditum quern tantis retro seculis neminem, et ipsa ij<norantia
antiquum, quidam Jesus Christus, et ille in veteribus nominibus
novus, reveiaverit, nee alius antehac." The harsh expression,
" quidam Jesus Christus," bears, of course, a sarcastic reference
to the capricious and inconsistent novelty which Marcion broached
in his heresy about Christ. [By some slight change in punctuation
and arrangement, I have endeavoured to make it a little clearer.]

10 Gloriac. [Qu. boast ?]

" Haec erit novitas quae.

"Novo semper ac novotitulo.

*3Consecravit.

»4 Germana.

'5 Censetur. A frequent meaning in Tertullian. See Apol. 7
and 12.

'6 We cannot preserve the terseness of the I>atin • Deus, si est
vetus, non erit ; si est novus, non fuit.


CHAP. IX.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


277


CHAP. IX. — MARCION's GNOSTIC PRETENSIONS
VAIN, FOR THE TRUE GOD IS NEITHER UN-
KNOWN NOR UNCERTAIN. THE CREATOR,
WHOM HE OWNS TO BE GOD, ALONE SUPPLIES
AN INDUCTION, BY WHICH TO JUDGE OF THE
TRUE GOD.

Now I know full well by what perceptive
faculty they boast of their new god; even
their knowledge.' It is, however, this very
discovery of a novel thing — so striking to
common minds — as well as the natural grati-
fication which is inherent in novelty, that I
wanted to refute, and thence further to chal-
lenge a proof of this unknown god. For him
whom by their knowledge ^ they present to
us as new, they prove to have been unknown
previous to that knowledge. Let us keep
within the strict limits and measure of our
argument. Convince me there could have
been an unknown god. I find, no doubt, ^
that altars have been lavished on unknown
gods; that, however, is the idolatry of Athens.
And on uncertain gods; but that, too, is only
Roman superstition. Furthermore, uncertain
gods are not well known, because no certainty
about them exists; and because of this un-
certainty they are therefore unknown. Now,
which of these two titles shall we carve for
*Marcion's god? Both, I suppose, as for a
being who is still zmccrtain, and was formerly
nnknmim. For inasmuch as the Creator, being
a known God, caused him to be unknown; so,
as being a certain God, he itiade him to be
uncertain. But I will not go so far out of my
way, as to say:^ If God was unknown and
concealed. He was overshadowed in such a
region of darkness, as must have been itself
new and unknown, and be even now likewise
uncertain — some immense region indeed, one
undoubtedly greater than the God whom it
concealed. But I will briefly state my sub-
ject, and afterwards most fully pursue it, pre-
mising that God neither could have been, nor
ought to have been, unknown. Could not
have been, because of His greatness; ought.
not to have been, because of His goodness,
especially as He is (supposed, by Marcion)
more excellent in both these attributes than
our Creator. Since, however, I observe that
in some points the proof of every new and
heretofore unknown god ought, for its test,^ to
be compared to the form of the Creator, it
will be my duty^ first of all to show that this
very course is adopted by me in a settled


' Agnitione. The distinctive term of the Gnostic pretension
was the Greek equivalent Tj'wo-is.

2 Asnitione.

3 Plane.

* Non evagabor, ut dicam. ,

5 Provocari.

6 Debebo,


plan, 7 such as I might with greater confidence '
use in support of my argument. Before every
other consideration, (let me ask) how it hap-
pens that you, 9 who acknowledge '° the Creator
to be God, and from your knowledge confess
Him to be prior in existence, do not know
that the other ^^^ should be examined by you
in exactly the same course of investigation
which has taught you how to find out a god
in the first case ? Every prior thing has fur-
nished the rule for the latter. In the present
question two gods are propounded, the un-
known and the known. Concerning the known
there is no " question. It is plain that He ex-
ists, else He would not be known. The dis-
pute is concerning the unknown god. Possi-
bly he has no existence; because, if he had,
he would have been known. Now that which,
so long as it is unknown, is an object to be
questioned, is an uncertainty so long as it re-
mains thus questionable; and all the while it
is in this state of uncertainty, it possibly has no
existence at all. You have a god who is so far
certain, as he is known; and uncertain, as un-
known. This being the case, does it appear
to you to be justly defensible, that uncertain-
ties should be submitted for proof to the rule,
and form, and standard of certainties ? Now,
if to the subject before us, which is in itself
full of uncertainty thus far, there be applied
also arguments '^ derived from uncertainties,
we shall be involved in such a series of ques-
tions arising out of our treatment of these
same uncertain arguments, as shall by reason
of their uncertainty be dangerous to the faith,
and we shall drift into those insoluble ques-
tions which the apostle has no affection for.
If, again, '3 in things wherein there is found a
diversity of condition, they shall prejudge,
as no doubt they will,''* uncertain, doubtful,
and intricate points, by the certain, undoubt-
ed, and clear sides 's of their rule, it will prob-
ably happen that'^ (those points) will not be
submitted to the standard of certainties for
determination, as being freed by the diversity
of their essential condition '^ from the applica-
tion of such a standard in all other respects.
As, therefore, it is two gods which are the
subject of our proposition, their essential con-
dition must be the same in both. For, as
concerns their divinity, they are both unbe-
gotten, unmade, eternal. This will be their
essential condition. All ^^ther points Marcion


7 Ratione.

SConstantius.

9 Quale est ut,
10 Agnoscis.
" Vacat.
i^Argumenta :
13 Sin.
u Plane.

15 Regulae partibus.
1* Kortasse an.
'7 Status principalis


proofs."


278


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book I.


himself seems to have made Hght of,' for he
has placed them in a different' category.
They are subsequent in the order of treat-
ment; indeed, they will not have to be brought
into the discussion, ^ since on the essential
condition there is no dispute. Now there is
this absence of our dispute, because they are
both of them gods. Those things, therefore,
whose community of condition is evident, will,
when brought to a test on the ground of that
common condition,* have to be submitted,
although they are uncertain, to the standard s
of those certainties with which they are classed
in the community of their essential condition,
so as on this account to share also in their
manner of proof. I shall therefore contend '^
with the greatest confidence that he is not
God who is to-day uncertain, because he has
been hitherto unknown; for of whomsoever it
is evident that he is God, from this very fact
it is (equally) evident, that he never has
been unknown, and therefore never uncertain.

CHAP. X. — THE CREATOR WAS KNOWN AS THE
TRUE GOD FROM THE FIRST BY HIS CREATION.
ACKNOWLEDGED BY THE SOUL AND CON-
SCIENCE OF MAN BEFORE HE WAS REVEALED
BY MOSES.

For indeed, as the Creator of all things. He
was from the beginning discovered equally
with them, they having been themselves mani-
fested that He might become known as God.
For although Moses, some long while after-
wards, seems to have been the first to intro-
duce the knowledge of ^ the God of the uni-
verse in the temple of his writings, yet the
birthday of that knowledge must not on that
account be reckoned from the Pentateuch.
For the volume of Moses does not at all ini-
tiate ^ the knowledge of the Creator, but from
the first gives out that it is to be traced from
Paradise and Adam, not from Egypt and
Moses. The greater part, therefore, ^ of the
human race, although they knew not even the
name of Moses, much less his writings, yet
knew the God of Moses; and even when idol-
atry overshadowed the world with its extreme
prevalence, men still spoke of Him separately
by His own name as God, and the God of
gods, and said, "If God grant," and, "As
God pleases," and, "I commend you to
God."" Reflect, then, whether they knew


» Viderit.

2 In diversitate. ^

3 Nee admittentur.

4 Sub CO.

5 Formam.

6 Diri^am.

7 Dedicasse.
SInstituat.
9 Denique.

loSee also De test, anim. 2, and De attima, 41. [Bp. Kaye
refers (p. 166.) to Profr. Andrews Norton of Harvard, with great
respect : specially to a Note on this usage of the Heathen, in his
Evidences, etc. I'ol. IIIJ]


Him, of whom they testify that He can do all
things. To none of the writings of Moses
do they owe this. The soul was before proph-
ecy." From the beginning the knowledge of
God is the dowry of the soul, one and the
same amongst the Egyptians, and the Syrians,
and the tribes of Pontus. For their souls
call the God of the Jews their God. Do not,
O barbarian heretic, put Abraham before thie
world. Even if the Creator had been the
God of one family. He was yet not later than
your god; even in Pontus was He known be-
fore him. Take then your standard from
Him who came first: from the Certain (must
be judged) the uncertain; from the Known
the unknown. Never shall God be hidden,
never shall God be wanting. Always shall
He be understood, always be heard, nay even
seen, in whatsoever way He shall wish. God
has for His witnesses this whole being of ours,
and this universe wherein we dwell. He is
thus, because not unknown, proved to be both
God and the only One, although another still
tries hard to make out his claim.

CHAP. XI. THE EVIDENCE FOR GOD EXTERNAL

• TO him; BUT THE EXTERNAL CREATION
WHICH YIELDS THIS EVIDENCE IS REALLY NOT
EXTRANEOUS, FOR ALL THINGS ARE GOD's.
MARCION's god, HAVING NOTHING TO SHOW
FOR HIMSELF, NO GOD AT ALL. MARCION's
SCHEME ABSURDLY DEFECTIVE, NOT FURNISH-
ING EVIDENCE FOR HIS NEW GOD'S EXISTENCE,
WHICH SHOULD AT LEAST BE ABLE TO COM-
PETE WITH THE FULL EVIDENCE OF THE
CREATOR.

And justly so, they say. For who is there
that is less well known by his own (inherent)
qualities than by strange " ones ? No one.
Well, I keep to this statement. How could
anything be strange '- to God, to whom, if He
were personally existent, nothing would be
strange? For this is the attribute of God,
that all things are His, and all things belong
to Him; or else this question would not so
readily be heard from us: What has He to do
with things strange to Him ? — a point which
will be more fully noticed in its proper place.
It is now sufficient to observe, that no one is
proved to exist to whom nothing is proved to
belong. For as the Creator is shown to be
God, God without any doubt, from the fact
that all things are His, and nothing is strange
to Him; so the rival'* god is seen to be no
god, from the circumstance that nothing is
his, and all things are therefore strange to


»' Prophetia, inspired Scripture.
'2 Extraneous.
'3 Extraneum.
»4 Alius.


CHAr. XII.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


2/9


him. Since, then, the universe belongs to the
Creator, I see no room for any other god.
All things are full of their Author, and occu-
pied by Him. If in created beings there be
any portion of space anywhere void of Deity,
the void will be of a false deity clearly.' By
falsehood the truth is made clear. Why can-
not the vast crowd of false gods somewhere
find room for Marcion's god? This, there-
fore, I insist upon, from the character ^^ of the
Creator, that God must have been known
from the works of some world peculiarly His
own, both in its human constituents, and the
rest of its organic life;^ when even the error
of the world has presumed to call gods those
men whom it sometimes acknowledges, on the
ground that in every such case something is
seen which provides for the uses and advan-
tages of life.'* Accordingly, this also was be-
lieved from the character of God to be a divine
function; namely, to teach or point out what
is convenient and needful in human concerns.
So completely has the authority which has
given influence to a false divinity been bor-
rowed from that source, whence it had previ-
ously flowed forth to the true one. One stray
vegetable 5 at least Marcion's god ought to
have produced as his own; so might he be
preached up as a new Triptolemus.^ Or else
state some reason which shall be worthy of a
God, why he, supposing him to exist, created
nothing; because he must, on supposition of
his existence, have been a creator, on that
very principle on which it is clear to us that
our God is no otherwise existent, than as hav-
ing been the Creator of this universe of ours.
For, once for all, the rule ^ will hold good,
that they cannot both acknowledge the Creator
to be God, and also prove him divine whom
they wish to be equally believed in as God,
except they adjust him to the standard of
Him whom they and all men hold to be God;
which is this, that whereas no one doubts the
Creator to be God on the express ground of
His having made the universe, so, on the self-
same ground, no one ought to believe that he
also is God who has made nothing — except, in-
deed, some good reason be forthcoming. And
this must needs be limited to one of two: he
was either imwilli7ig to create, or else imable.
There is no third reason.^ Now, that he was
unable, is a reason unworthy of God. Whether
to have been unwilling to be a worthy one, I
want to inquire. Tell me, Marcion, did your


' Plane falsae vacabit.

2 Forma.

3 Proprii sui mundi, et hominis et saeculi.

4 [Kaye, p. 206.]

5 Cicerculam.

^ [— " uncique puer monstrator aratri," Virg. Georg. i. 19, and
see Heyne's note.]

7 Praescriptio.

8 Tertium cessat.


god wish himself to be recognised at any time
or not ? With what other purpose did he come
down from heaven, and preach, and having
suffered rise again from the dead, if it were
not that he might be acknowledged ? And,
doubtless, since he was acknowledged, he
willed it. For no circumstance could have
happened to him, if he had been unwilling.
What indeed tended so gredtly to the knowl-
edge of himself, as his appearing in the hu-
miliation of the flesh, — a degradation all the
lower indeed if the flesh were only illusory?'
For it was all the more shameful if he, who
brought on himself the Creator's curse by
hanging on a tree, only pretended the assump-
tion of a bodily substance. A far nobler foun-
dation might he have laid for the knowledge
of himself in some evidences of a creation of
his own, especially when he had to become
known in opposition to Him in whose terri-
tory '° he had remained unknown by any works
from the beginning. For how happens it
that the Creator, although unaware, as the
Marcionites aver, of any god being above
Himself, and who used to declare even with
an oath that He existed alone, should have
guarded by such mighty works the knowledge
of Himself, about which, on the assumption
of His being alone without a rival. He might
have spared Himself all care; while the Supe-
rior God, knowing all the while how well fur-
nished in power His inferior rival was, should
have made no provision at all towards getting
Himself acknowledged ? Whereas He ought
to have produced works more illustrious and
exalted still, in order that He might, after the
Creator's standard, both be acknowledged as
God from His works, and even by nobler
deeds show Himself to be more potent and
more gracious than the Creator.

CHAP. XII. IMPOSSIBILITY OF ACKNOWLEDGING

GOD WITHOUT THIS EXTERNAL EVIDENCE " OF
HIS EXISTENCE. MARCION's REJECTION OF
SUCH EVIDENCE FOR HIS GOD SAVOURS OF
IMPUDENCE AND MALIGNITY. ,

But even if we were able to allow that he
exists, we should yet be bound to argue that
he is without a cause." For he who had noth-
ing (to show for himself as proof of his ex-
istence),would be without a cause, since (such)
proof" is the whole cause that there exists


9 Falsse. An allusion to the Docetisin of Marcion.

10 Apud quern.

" The word cause throughout this chapter is used in the popu-
lar, inaccurate sense, which almost confounds it with effect^ the
" causa cognoscendi," as distinguished from the " causa essendi,"
the strict cause.

12 The word " res" is throughout this argument used strictly by
TertuUian ; it refers to " the thing'' made by God— that product
of His creative energy which affords to us evidence of His exist-
ence. We have translated it '■'^ proof'' for want of a better word.


28o


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book I.


some person to whom the proof belongs.
Now, in as far as nothing ought to be without
a cause, that is, without a proof (because if
it be without a cause, it is all one as if it be
not, not having the very proof which is the
cause of a thing), in so far shall I more worthily
believe that God does not exist, than that He
exists without a cause. For he is without a
cause who has not a cause by reason of not
having a proof. God, however, ought not to
be without a cause, that is to say, without a
proof. Thus, as often as I show that He ex-
ists without a cause, although (I allow' that)
He exists, I do really determine this, that He
does not exist; because, if He had existed.
He could not have existed altogether without
a cause.' So, too, even in regard to faith
itself, I say that he^ seeks to obtain it^ with
out cause from man, who is otherwise accus-
tomed to believe in God from the idea he gets
of Him from the testimony of His works :s
(without cause, I repeat,) because he has pro-
vided no such proof as that whereby man
has acquired the knowledge of God. For
although most persons believe in Him, they
do not believe at once by unaided reason,^
without having some token of Deity in works
worthy of God. And so upon this ground of
inactivity and lack of works he^ is guilty both
of impudence and malignity: of impudence,
in aspiring after a belief which is not due to
him, and for which he has provided no foun-
dation ; ^ of malignity, in having brought many
persons under the charge of unbelief by fur-
nishing to them no groundwork for their faith.

CHAP. XIII. — THE MARCIONITES DEPRECIATE
THE CREATION, WHICH, HOWEVER, IS A WOR-
THY WITNESS OF GOD. THIS WORTHINESS
ILLUSTRATED BY REFERENCES TO THE HEA-
THEN PHILOSOPHERS, WHO WERE APT TO IN-
VEST THE SEVERAL PARTS OF CREATION WITH
DIVINE ATTRIBUTES.

While we are expelling from this rank (of
Deity) a god who has no evidence to show for
himself which is so proper and God-worthy as
the testimony of the Creator, Marcion's most
shameless followers with haughty imperti-
nence fall upon the Creator's works to de-
stroy them. To be sure, say they, the world
is a grand work, worthy of a God.s* Then is
the Creator not at all a God ? By all means


' The " tanquam sit," in its subjunctive form, seems to refer to
the concession indicated at the outset of the chapter.
= Omnino sine causa.
3 Ilium, i.e., Marcion's god.
4Captare.

5 Deum ex operum auctoritate formatum.

6 Non statim ratione, on a priori grounds.

7 i.e., Marcion's god.

8 Compare Rom. i. 20, a passage which is quite subversive of
Marcion's theory.

9 This is an ironical concession from the Marcionite side


He is God.'° Therefore " the world is not un-
worthy of God, for God has made nothing
unworthy of Himself; although it was for man,
and not for Himself, that He made the world,
(and) although every work is less than its
maker. And yet, if to have been the author
of our creation, such as it is, be unworthy of
God, how much more unworthy of Him is it
to have created absolutely nothing at all ! —
not even a production which, although un-
worthy, might yet have encouraged the hope
of some better attempt. To say somewhat,
then, concerning the alleged " unworthiness of
this world's fabric, to which among the Greeks
also is assigned a name of ornament and
grace, '3 not of sordidness, those very profess-
ors of wisdom,'* from whose genius every
heresy derives its spirit, '^ called the said un-
worthy elements divine; as Thales did water,-
Heraclitus fire, Anaximenes air, Anaximander
all the heavenly bodies, Strato the sky and
earth, Zeno the air and ether, and Plato the
stars, which he calls a fiery kind of gods;
whilst concerning the world, when they con-
sidered indeed its magnitude, and strength,
and power, and honour, and glory, — the abun-
dance, too, the regularity, and law of those
individual elements which contribute to the
production, the nourishment, the ripening, and
the reproduction of all things, — the majority
of the philosophers hesitated '^ to assign a be-
ginning and an end to the said world, lest
its constituent elements, '^ great as they un-
doubtedly are, should fail to be regarded as
divine,'^ which are objects of worshsip with
the Persian magi, the Egyptian hierophants,
and the Indian gymnosophists. The very
superstition of the crowd, inspired by the
common idolatry, when ashamed of the names
and fables of their ancient dead borne by
their idols, has recourse to the interpretation
of natural objects, and so with much ingenuity
cloaks its own disgrace, figuratively reducing
Jupiter to a heated substance, and Juno to
an aerial one (according to the literal sense of
the Greek words); '' Vesta, in like manner, to
fire, and the Muses to waters, and the Great
Mother =" to the earth, mowed as to its crops,
ploughed up with lusty arms, and watered


^o Another concession.
»» Tertullian's rejoinder.
" De isto.

13 They called it ico<r|uio?.

14 By sapientia pro/essores he means the heathen philosophers ;
see De Pro-script. Hceret. c. 7.

»5 In his book adv. Hermogenem, c. 8, Tertullian calls the
philosophers " hacreticorum patriarchs. "
»6 Formidaverint.

17 Substantise.

18 Dei.

'9 The Greek name of Jupiter, Zeus, is here derived from ^ew,
ferveo, I glow. Juno's name,'Hpa, Tertullian connects with a.i\p,
the air ; n^apa to ai7p Ka.^' uirepeeo-iv'Hpa. These names of the two
great deities suggest a connection with fire and air.

»i.e., Cybele.


CHAP. XV.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


281


with baths.' Thus Osiris also, whenever he
is buried, and looked for to come to life again,
and with joy recovered, is an emblem of the
regularity wherewith the fruits of the ground
return, and the elements recover life, and
the year comes round; as also the lions of
Mithras^ are philosophical sacraments of arid
and scorched nature. It is, indeed, enough
for me that natural elements, foremost in site
and state, should have been more readily re-
garded as divine than as unworthy of God. I
will, however, come down to^ humbler ob-
jects. A single floweret from the hedgerow, I
say not from the meadows; a single little shell-
fish from any sea, I say not from the Red
Sea; a single stray wing of a moorfowl, I say
nothing of the peacock, — will, I presume,
prove to you that the Creator was but a sorry *
artificer !

CHAP. XIV. ALL PORTIONS OF CREATION AT-
TEST THE EXCELLENCE OF THE CREATOR,
WHOM MARCION VILIFIES. HIS INCONSISTENCY
HEREIN EXPOSED. MARCION's OWN GOD DID
NOT HESITATE TO USE THE CREATOR'S WORKS
IN INSTITUTING HIS OWN RELIGION.

Now, when you make merry with those
minuter animals, which their glorious Maker
has purposely endued with a profusion of in-
stincts and resources, s — thereby teaching us
that greatness has its proofs in lowliness, just
as (according to the apostle) there is power
even in infirmity,^ — imitate, if you can, the
cdls of the bee, the hills of the ant, the webs
of the spider, and the threads of the silk-
worm; endure, too, if you know how, those
very creatures ^ which infest your couch and
house, the poisonous ejections of the blister-
beetle,^ the spikes of the fly, and the gnat's
sheath and sting. What of the greater ani-
mals, when the small ones so affect you with
pleasure or pain, that you cannot even in their
case despise their Creator? Finally, take a
circuit round your own self; survey man with-
in and without. Even this handiwork of our
God will be pleasing to you, inasmuch as your
own lord, that better god, loved it so well,^
and for your sake was at the pains '° of descend-
ing from the third heaven to these poverty-


^ The earth's irrigations, and the washings of the image of Cy-
bele every year in the river Almo by her priests, are here con-
fusedly alluded to. For references to the pagan custom, see
White and Riddle's large Lai. Diet. s. v. Almo.

2 Mithras, the Persian sun-god, wras symbolized by the image of
a lion. The sun entering the zodiacal sign Leo amidst summer
heat may be glanced at.

3 Deficiam ad.

4Sordidum. [Well and nobly said.]

5 De industria ingeniis aut viribus ampliavit.

6 2 Cor. xii. 5.

7 Tertullian, it should be remembered, lived in Africa.
^Cantharidis.

9 Adamavit.
^° Laboravit.


stricken " elements, and for the same reason
was actually crucified in this sorry " apartment
of the Creator. Indeed, up to the present
time, he has not disdained the water which
the Creator made wherewith he washes his
people ; nor the oil with which he anoints them ;
nor that union of honey and milk wherewithal
he gives them the nourishment '^ of children;
nor the bread by which he represents his own
proper body, thus requiring in his very sacra-
ments the "beggarly"* elements" of the
Creator. You, however, are a disciple above
his master, and a servant above his lord; you
have a higher reach of discernment than his;
you destroy what he requires. I wish to ex-
amine whether you are at least honest in this,
so as to have no longing for those things which
you destroy. You are an enemy to the sky,
and yet you are glad to catch its freshness in
your houses. You disparage the earth, al-
though the elemental parent's of your own
flesh, as if it were your undoubted enemy,
and yet you extract from it all its fatness '^ for
your food. The sea, too, you reprobate, but
are continually using its produce, which you
account the more sacred diet.'^ If I should
offer you a rose, you will not disdain its
Maker. You hypocrite, however much of
abstinence you use to show yourself a Mar-
cionite, that is, a repudiator of your Maker (for
if the world displeased you, such abstinence
ought to have been affected by you as a mar-
tyrdom), you will have to associate yourself
with'^ the Creator's material production, into
what element soever you shall be dissolved.
How hard is this obstinacy of yours ! You
vilify the things in which you both live and
die.

CHAP. XV. — THE LATENESS OF THE REVELATION
OF MARCION's GOD. THE QUESTION OF THE
PLACE OCCUPIED BY THE RIVAL DEITIES.
INSTEAD OF TWO GODS, MARCION REALLY
(ALTHOUGH, AS IT WOULD SEEM, UNCON-
SCIOUSLY) HAD NINE GODS IN HIS SYSTEM.

After all, or, if you like,'^ before all, since
you have said that he has a creation ^ of his
own, and his own world, and his own sky; we
shall see," indeed, about that third heaven,
when we come to discuss even your own apos-


11 Paupertina. This and all such phrases are, of course, in imi-
tation of Marcion's contemptuous view of the Creator's work.

12 Cellula.
i3lnfantat.

14 Mendicitatibus.

15 Matricem.

16 Medullas.

17 [The use of fish for fasting-days has no better warrant than
Marcion's example.]

iS.Uteris.

i9Vel.

20 Conditionem.

^^ Adv. Marcionem, v. 12.


282


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book I,


tie.' Meanwhile, whatever is the (created)
substance, it ought at any rate to have made its
appearance in company with its own god. But
now, how happens it that the Lord has been
revealed since the twelfth year of Tiberius
Csesar, while no creation of His at all has been
discovered up to the fifteenth of the Emperor
Severus;' although, as being more excellent
than the paltry works ^ of the Creator, it should
certainly have ceased to conceal itself, when
its lord and author no longer lies hid ? I ask,
therefore,* if it was unable to manifest itself
in this world, how did its Lord appear in this
world ? If this world received its Lord, why
was it not able to receive the created sub-
stance, unless perchance it was greater than
its Lord ? But now there arises a question
about place, having reference both to the
world above and to the God thereof. For,
behold, if he^ has his own world beneath him,
above the Creator, he has certainly fixed it in
a position, the space of which was empty be-
tween his own feet and the Creator's head.
Therefore God both Himself occupied local
space, and caused the world to occupy local
space; and this local space, too, will be greater
than God and the world together. For in no
case is that which contains not greater than that
which is contained. And indeed we must look
well to it that no small patches^ be left here
and there vacant, in which some third god also
may be able with a world of his own to foist
himself in.^ Now, begin to reckon up your
gods. There will be local splice for a god,
not only as being greater than God, but as
being also unbegotten and unmade, and there-
fore eternal, and equal to God, in which God
has ever been. Then, inasmuch as He too
has fabricated ^ a world out of some underlying
material which is unbegotten, and unmade,
and contemporaneous with God, just as Mar-
cion holds of the Creator, you reduce this like-
wise to the dignity of that local space which
has enclosed two gods, both God and matter.
For matter also is a god according to the rule
of Deity, being (to be sure) unbegotten, and
unmade, and eternal. If, however, it was out
of nothing that he made his world, this also


' For Marcion's exclusive use, and consequent abuse, of St.
Paul, see Neander's Antignostikiis (Bohn), vol. ii. pp. 491, 505,
506.

2 [This date not merely settles the time of our author's work
against Marcion, but supplies us with evidence that his total lapse
must have been very late in life. For the five books, written at
intervals and marked by progressive tokens of his spiritual decline,
are as a whole, only slightly offensive to Orthodo.xy. This should
be borne in mind-]

3 Frivolis. Again in reference to Marcion undervaluing the
creation as the work of the Demiurge.

4 Et ideo.

Sin this and the following sentences, the reader will observe
the distinction which is drawn between the .Supreme and good
God of Marcion and his " Creator," or Demiurge.

'Subsiciva.

7Stipare se.

8 Molitus est.


(our heretic) will be obliged to predicate ' of
the Creator, to whom he subordinates '^ matter
in the substance of the world. But it will be
only right that he " too should have made his
world out of matter, because the same process
occurred to him as God which lay before the
Creator as equally God. And thus you may,
if you please, reckon up so far,'3 three gods as
Marcion's, — the Maker, local space, and
matter. Furthermore, '^ he in like manner
makes the Creator a god in local space,
which is itself to be appraised on a precisely
identical scale of dignity; and to Him as its
lord he subordinates matter, which is notwith-
standing unbegotten, and unmade, and by
reason hereof eternal. With this matter he
further associates evil, an unbegotten princi-
ple with an unbegotten object, an unmade with
an unmade, and an eternal with an eternal;
so here he makes a fourth God. Accordingly
you have three substances of Deity in the
higher instances, and in the lower ones four.
When to these are added their Christs — the
one which appeared in the time of Tiberius,
the other which is promised by the Creator —
Marcion suffers a manifest wrong from those
persons who assume that he holds two gods,
whereas he implies'* no less than nine,'^
though he knows it not.

CHAP. XVI. MARCION ASSUMES THE EXISTENCE

OF TWO GODS FROM THE ANTITHESIS BETWEEN
THINGS VISIBLE AND THINGS INVISIBLE. THIS
ANTITHETICAL PRINCIPLE IN FACT CHARAC-
TERISTIC OF THE WORKS OF THE CREATOR,
THE ONE GOD — MAKER OF ALL THINGS VISI-
BLE AND INVISIBLE.

Since^ then, that other world does not ap-
pear, nor its god either, the only resource left '<*
to them is to divide things into the two classes
of visible and invisible, with two gods for their
authors, and so to claim '^ the invisible for their
own, (the supreme) God. But who, except an
heretical spirit, could ever bring his mind to
believe that the invisible part of creation be-
longs to him who had previously displayed no
visible thing, rather than to Him who, by His
operation on the visible world, produced a
belief in the invisible also, since it is far more


9 Sentire.

'° Subicit.

" The Supreme and good God. Tertullian here gives it as one
of Marcion's tenets, that the Demiurge created the World out of
pre-existcnt matter.

12 Interim.

'3 Proinde et.

14 Assignet.

•5 Namely, (1) the supreme and good God ; (2) His Christ ; (3)
the sj>acc in which He dwells ; (4) the matter of His creation ; {5)
the Demiurge (or Marcion's "Creator ") ; (6) his promised Christ ;
(7) the .f/at:^ which contains him ; (8) this world, his creation ; (9)
evil, inherent in it.

'^Consequens est ut.

17 Defendant.


CHAP. XVII.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


2S3


reasonable to give one's assent after some
samples (of a work) than after none ? We
shall see to what author even (your favourite)
apostle attributes ' the invisible creation, when
we come to examine him. At present (we
withhold his testimony), for= we are for the
most part engaged in preparing the way, by
means of common sense and fair arguments,
for a belief in the future support of the Scrip-
tures also. We affirm, then, that this diversity
of things visible and invisible must on this
ground be attributed to the Creator, even be-
cause the whole of His work consists of di-
versities— of things corporeal and incorporeal;
of animate and inanimate; of vocal and mute;
of moveable and stationary; of productive and
sterile; of arid and moist; of hot and cold.
Man, too, is himself similarly tempered with
diversity, both in his body and in his sensa-
tion. Some of his members are strong, others
weak; some comely, others uncomely; some
twofold, others unique; some like, others un-
like. In like manner there is diversity also
in his sensation: now joy, then anxiety; now
love, then hatred; now anger, then calmness.
Since this is the case, inasmuch as the whole
of this creation of ours has been fashioned |
with a reciprocal rivalry amongst its several
parts, the invisible ones are due to the visible,
and not to be ascribed to any other author
than Him to whom their counterparts are im-
puted, marking as they do diversity in the
Creator Himself, who orders what He forbade,
and forbids what He ordered; who also strikes
and heals. Why do they take Him to be uni-
form in one class of things alone, as the Cre-
ator of visible things, and only them; whereas
He ought to be believed to have created both
the visible and the invisible, in just the same
way as life and death, or as evil things and
peace?'* And verily, if the invisible creatures
are greater than the visible, which are in their
own sphere great, so also is it fitting that the
greater should be His to whom the great be-
long; because neither the great, nor indeed
the greater, can be suitable property for one
who seems to possess not even the smallest
things.

CHAP. XVII. — NOT ENOUGH, AS THE MARCION-
ITES PRETEND, THAT THE SUPREME GOD
SHOULD RESCUE MAN; HE MUST ALSO HAVE
CREATED HIM. THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
PROVED BY HIS CREATION, A PRIOR CONSID-
ERATION TO HIS CHARACTER.

Pressed by these arguments, they exclaim:
One work is sufficient for our god; he has de-


' Col. i. 16.

2 Nunc enim. The elliptical vvv yap of Greek argumentation.

3 Modulata.

4" I make peace, and create evil," Isa. xlv. 7.


livered man by his supreme and most excel-
lent goodness, which is preferable to (the
creation of) all the locusts. s What superior
god is this, of whom it has not been possible
to find any work so great as f/ie man of the
lesser god! Now without doubt the first thing
you have to do is to prove that he exists, after
the same manner that the existence of God
must ordinarily be proved — by his works; and
only after that by his good deeds. For the
first question is. Whether he exists ? and then,
What is his character ? The former is to be
tested ^ by his works, the other by the benefi-
cence of them. It does not simply follow that
he exists, because he is said to have wrought
deliverance for man; but only after it shall
have been settled that he exists, will there be
room for saying that he has affected this lib-
eration. And even this point also must have
its own evidence, because it may be quite
possible both that he has existence, and yet
has not wrought the alleged deliverance. Now
in that section of our work which concerned
the question of the unknown god, two points
were made clear enough — both that he had
created nothing, and that he ought to have
been a creator, in order to be known by his
works; because, if he had existed, he ought
to have been known, and that too from the
beginning of things; for it was not fit that God
should have lain hid. It will be necessary
that I should revert to the very trunk of that
question of the unknown god, that I may
strike off into some of its other branches also.
For it will be first of all proper to inquire,
Why he, who afterwards brought himself into
notice, did so — so late, and not at the very
first ? From creatures, with which as God he
was indeed so closely connected (and the
closer this connection was,^ the greater was
his goodness), he ought never to have been
hidden. For it cannot be pretended that
there was not either any means of arriving at
the knowledge of God, or a good reason for
it, when from the beginning man was in the
world, for whom the deliverance is now come;
as was also that malevolence of the Creator, in
opposition to which the good God has wrought
the deliverance. He was therefore either ig-
norant of the good reason for and means of
his own necessary manifestation, or doubted
them; or else was either unable or unwilling
to encounter them. All these alternatives
are unworthy of God, especially the supreme


5 To depreciate the Creator's work the more, Marcion (and
Valentinus too) used to attribute to Him the formation of all the
lower creatures — worms, locusts, etc. — reserving the mightier
things to the good and supreme God. See St. Jerome's Proem,
in Epist. ad Pkilem. [See, Stier, Words 0/ Jesus, Vol. vi. p. 81.]

6 Dinoscetur.

7 Quo necessarior.


284


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book I.


and best. This topic,' however, we shall
afterwards " more fully treat, with a condemna-
tion of the tardy manifestation; we at present
simply point it out.

CHAP. XVIII. — NOTWITHSTANDING THEIR CON-
CEITS, THE GOD OF THE MARCIONITES
FAILS IN THE VOUCHERS BOTH OF CREATED
EVIDENCE AND OF ADEQUATE REVELATION.

Well, then, 3 he has now advanced into
notice, just when he willed, when he could,
when the destined hour arrived. For perhaps
he was hindered hitherto by his leading star,*
or some weird malignants, or Saturn in
quadrature,sor Mars at the trine. ^ The Mar-
cionites are very strongly addicted to as-
trology; nor do they blush to get their liveli-
hood by help of the very stars which were
made by the Creator (whom they depreciate).
We must here also treat of the quality ^ of the
(new) revelation; whether Marcion's supreme
god has become known in a way 7vorthy of
him, so as to secure the proof of his existence;
and in the 7vay of truth, so that he may be be-
lieved to be the very being who had been al-
ready proved to have been revealed in a
manner worthy of his character. For things
which are worthy of God will prove the exist-
ence of God. We maintain^ that God must
first be known 5 from nature, and afterwards
authenticated '° by instruction: from nature,
by His works; by instruction," through His
revealed announcements." Now, in a case
where nature is excluded, no natural means
(of knowledge) are furnished. He ought,
therefore, to have carefully supplied '3 a revela-
tion of himself, even by announcements, es-
pecially as he had to be revealed in opposition
to One who, after so many and so great works,
both of creation and revealed announcement,
had with difficulty succeeded in satisfying'*
men's faith. In what manner, therefore, has
the revelation been made ? If by man's con-
jectural guesses, do not say that God can pos-
sibly become known in any other way than by
Himself, and appeal not only to the standard
of the Creator, but to the conditions both of
God's greatness and man's littleness; so that


» Locum.

2 In chap. xxii.

3 Age.

4Anabibazon. The afa^i^a^wv was the most critical point
in the ecliptic, in the old astrology, for the calculation of stellar
influences.

5 Quadratus.

6 Trigonus. Saturn and Mars were supposed to be malignant
planets. See Smith, Greek ami Rom. A nt. p. 144, c. 2.

7 Qualitate.

8 Definimus.

9 Cognoscendum.
10 Recognoscendum.
" Doctrina.

«Ex prjedicationibus.

»3 0perari.

'4 Vix impleverat.


man seem not by any possibility to be greater
than God, by having somehow drawn Him
out into public recognition, when He was
Himself unwilling to become known by His
own energies, although man's littleness has
been able, according to experiments all over
the world, more easily to fashion for itself
gods, than to follow the true God whom men
now understand by nature. As for the rest,'*
if man shall be thus able to devise a god, — as
Romulus did Consus, and Tatius Cloacina,
and Hostilius Fear, and Metellus Alburnus,
and a certain authority '* some time since An-
tinous, — the same accomplishment may be
allowed to others. As for us, we have found
our pilot in Marcion, although not a king nor
an emperor.

chap. xix. jesus christ, the revealer of

the creator, could not be the same as
marcion's god, who was only made \
known by the heretic some cxv. years j
after christ, and that, too, on a prin- j
ciple utterly unsuited to the teaching '
of jesus christ, i.e., the opposition be-
tween the law and the gospels.

Well, but our god, say the Marcionites, al-
though he did not manifest himself from the
beginning and by means of the creation, has
yet revealed himself in Christ Jesus. A book
will be devoted '^ to Christ, treating of His
entire state; for it is desirable that these sub-
ject-matters should be distinguished one from
another, in order that they may receive a
fuller and more methodical treatment. Mean-
while it will be sufficient if, at this stage of
the question, I show — and that but briefly —
that Christ Jesus is the revealer '^ of none other
god but the Creator. In the fifteenth year
of Tiberius,'" Christ Jesus vouchsafed to come
down from heaven, as the spirit of saving
health. =~ I cared not to inquire, indeed, in
what particular year of the elder Antoninus.
He who had so gracious a purpose did rather,
like a pestilential sirocco,^' exhale this health
or salvation, which Marcion teaches from his
Pontus. Of this teacher there is no doubt
that he is a heretic of the Antonine period,
impious under the pious. Now, from Tiberius
to Antoninus Pius, there are about 115 years
and dYz months. Just such an interval do
they place between Christ and Marcion. In-
asmuch, then, as Marcion, as we have shown,


IS Alioquin.

»6 He means the Emperor Hadrian ; comp. Apolog. c. 13.

«7 The third of these books against Marcion.

»8Circumlatorem.

>9 The author says this, not as his own, but as Marcion's ojjin-
ion ; as is clear from his own words in his fourth book against
Marcion, c. 7, (Pamelius).

20 Spiritus salutaris.

2» Aura canicularis.


ClIAl'. XX.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


285


first introduced this god to notice in the time
of Antoninus, the matter becomes at once
clear, if you are a shrewd observer. The dates
already decide the case, that he who came to
light for the first time' in the reign of Antoni-
nus, did not appear in that of Tiberius; in
other words, that the God of the Antonine
period was not the God of the Tiberian; and
consequently, that he whom Marcion has
plainly preached for the first time^ was not
revealed by Christ (who announced His revela-
tion as early as the reign of Tiberius). Now,
to prove clearly what remains of the argument,
I shall draw materials from my very adversa-
ries. Marcion's special and principal work is
the separation of the law and the gospel; and
his disciples will not deny that in this point
they have their very best pretext for initiating
and confirming themselves in his heresy.
These are Marcion's Antitheses ^ or contradic-
tory propositions, which aim at committing
the gospel to a variance with the law, in order
that from the diversity of the two documents
which contain them,^ they may contend for a
diversity of gods also. Since, therefore, it is
this very opposition between the law and the
gospel which has suggested that the God of
the gospel is different from the God of the
law, it is clear that, before the said separation,
that god could not have been known who be-
came known ^ from the argument of the sepa-
ration itself. He therefore could not have
been revealed by Christ, who came before
the separation, but must have been devised
by Marcion, the author of the breach of peace
between the gospel and the law. Now this
peace, which had remained unhurt and un-
shaken from Christ's appearance to the time
of Marcion's audacious doctrine, was no doubt
maintained by that way of thinking, which
firmly held that the God of both law and gos-
pel was none other than the Creator, against
whom after so long a time a separation has
been introduced by the heretic of Pontus.

CHAP. XX. — MARCION, JUSTIFYING HIS ANTITH-
ESIS BETWEEN THE LAW AND THE GOSPEL BY
THE CONTENTION OF ST. PAUL WITH ST.
PETER, SHOWN TO HAVE MISTAKEN ST. PAUL's
POSITION AND ARGUMENT. MARCION's DOC-
TRINE CONFUTED OUT OF ST. PAUL's TEACH-
ING, WHICH AGREES WHOLLY WITH THE CRE-
ATOR'S DECREES.

This most patent conclusion requires to be
defended by us against the clamours of the
opposite side. For they allege that Marcion


'Primum processit.
^Utriusque instrumenti.
3 Innotuit.


did not so much innovate on the rule (of faith)
by his separation of the law and the gospel, as
restore it after it had been previously adulter-
ated. O Christ,* most enduring Lord, who
didst bear so many years with this interference
with Thy revelation, until Marcion forsooth
came to Thy rescue ! Now the.y adduce the
case of Peter himself, and the others, who
were pillars of the apostolate, as having been
blamed by Paul for not walking uprightly, ac-
cording to the truth of the gospel — that very
Paul indeed, who, being yet in the mere rudi-
ments of grace, and trembling, in short, lest he
should have run or were still running in vain,
then for the first time held intercourse with
those who were apostles before himself.
Therefore because, in the eagerness of his
zeal against Judaism as a neophyte, bethought
that there was something to be blamed in their
conduct — even the promiscuousness of their
conversation s — but afterwards was himself to
become in his practice all things to all men,
that he might gain all, — to the Jews, as a Jew,
and to them that were under the law, as under
the law, — you would have his censure, which
was merely directed against conduct destined
to become acceptable even to their accuser,
suspected of prevarication against God on a
point of public doctrine. ** Touching their
public doctrine, however, they had, as we have
already said, joined hands in perfect concord,
and had agreed also in the division of their
labour in their fellowship of the gospel, as they
had indeed in all other respects: ^ "Whether
it were I or they, so we preach."^ When,
again, he mentioned "certain false brethren
as having crept in unawares," who wished to
remove the Galatians into another gospel, ' he
himself shows that that adulteration of the
gospel was not meant to transfer them to the
faith of another god and christ, but rather to
perpetuate the teaching of the law; because
he blames them for maintaining circumcision,
and observing times, and days, and months,
and years, according to those Jewish cere-
monies which they ought to have known
were now abrogated, according to the new
dispensation purposed by the Creator Him-
self, who of old foretold this very thing by
His prophets. Thus He says by Isaiah: Old
things have passed away. " Behold, I will
do a new thing." "^ And in another passage:
" I will make a new covenant, not according
to the covenant that I made with their fathers,
when I brought them out of the land of


4 Tertullian's indignant reply.

5 Passivum scilicet convictum.

6 Praedicationis. [Largely ad hovtincm^ this argument.]

7 Et alibi.

81 Cor. XV. 11.
9 See Gal. i. 6, 7, and ii. 4.
^olsa. xliii. 19.


286


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION


[book I.


Egypt."' In like manner by Jeremiah:
Make to yourselves a new covenant, " circum-
cise yourselves to the Lord, and take away the
foreskins of your heart." ' It is this circum-
cision, therefore, and this renewal, which the
apostle insisted on, when he forbade those an-
cient ceremonies concerning which their very
founder announced that they were one day to
cease ; thus by Hosea : " I will also cause all
her mirth to cease, her feast-days, her new
moons, and her Sabbaths, and all her solemn
feasts." 3 So likewise by Isaiah : *' The new
moons, and Sabbaths, the calling of assem-
blies, I cannot away with ; your holy days,
and fasts, and feast-days, my soul hateth."*
Now, if even the Creator had so long before
discarded all these things, and the apostle was
now proclaiming them to be worthy of renun-
ciation, the very agreement of the apostle's
meaning with the decrees of the Creator proves
that none other God was preached by the
apostle than He whose purposes he now wished
to have recognised, branding as false both
apostles and brethren, for the express reason
that they were pushing back the gospel of
Christ the Creator from the new condition
which the Creator had foretold, to the old one
which He had discarded.

CHAP. XXI. ST. PAUL PREACHED NO NEW GOD,

WHEN HE ANNOUNCED- THE REPEAL OF SOME
OE GOD.'S ANCIENT ORDINANCES. NEVER ANY
HESITATION ABOUT BELIEF IN THE CREATOR,
AS THE GOD WHOM CHRIST REVEALED, UNTIL
MARCION 'S HERESY.

Now if it was with the view of preaching a
new god that he was eager to abrogate the law
of the old God, how is it that he prescribes
no rule about s the new god, but solely about
the old law, if it be not because faith in the
Creator^ was still to continue, and His law
alone was to come to an end?^ — just as the
Psalmist had declared: "Let us break their
bands asunder, and cast away their cords
from us. Why do the heathen rage, and the
people imagine a vain thing ? The kings of
the earth stand up, and the rulers take counsel
together against the Lord, and against His
Anointed."^ And, indeed, if another god
were preached by Paul, there could be no
doubt about the law, whether it were to be
kept or not, because of course it would not
belong to the new lord, the enemy » of the law.
The very newness and difference of the god


» This quotation, however, is from Jer. xxxi. 32.
2 Ter. iv. 4.
3Hos. ii. II.

4 Slightly altered from Isa. i. 13, 14.

5 Nihil prxscribit de.

* I.e., *' the old God," as he has just called Him.
7Concessare debebat.
8Ps, ii. 3, I, 2.
9^mulum.


would take away not only all question about
the old and alien law, but even all mention of
it. But the whole question, as it then stood,
was this, that although the God of the law
was the same as was preached in Christ, yet
there was a disparagement '° of His law. Per-
manent still, therefore, stood faith in the
Creator and in His Christ; manner of life and
discipline alone fluctuated." Some disputed
about eating idol sacrifices, others about the
veiled dress of women, others again about
marriage and divorce, and some even about
the hope of the resurrection; but about God
no one disputed. Now, if this question also
had entered into dispute, surely it would be
found in the apostle, and that too as a great
and vital point. No doubt, after the time of
the apostles, the truth respecting the belief
of God suffered corruption, but it is equally
certain that during the life of the apostles
their teaching on this great article did not
suffer at all; so that no other teaching will
have the right of bejng received as apostolic
than that which is 'at the present day pro-
claimed in the churches of apostolic founda-
tion. You will, however, find no church of
apostolic origin " but such as reposes its Chris-
tian faith in the Creator. '^ But if the churches
shall prove to have been corrupt from the be-
ginning, where shall the pure ones be found ?
Will it be amongst th^ adversaries of the
Creator ? Show us, then, one of your churches,
tracing its descent from an apostle, and you
will have gained the day.'-* Forasmuch then
as it is on all accounts evident that there was
from Christ down to Marcion's time no other
God in the rule of sacred truth 's than the
Creator, the proof of our argument is suffi-
ciently established, in which we have shown
that the god of our heretic first became known
by his separation of the gospel and the law.
Our previous position'^ is accordingly made
good, that no god is to be believed whom any
man has devised out of his own conceits; ex-
cept indeed the man be a prophet,'^ and then
his own conceits would not be concerned in
the matter. If Marcion, however, shall be
able to lay claim to this inspired character,
it will be necessary for it to be shown. There
must be no doubt or paltering.'^ For all
heresy is thrust out by this wedge of the truth,
that Christ is proved to be the revealer of no
God else but the Creator. '^


JO Derogaretur.

" Nutabat,

'2 Census.

'3 In Creatore christianizet.

14 Obduxeris. For this sense of the word, see Apol. i. sub init

sed obducimur," etc.

'5 Sacramenti.

'6 Definitio.

'7 That is, " inspired."

»8 Nihil retractare oportebat.

»9 [Kaye, p. 274.]


I


CHAP. XXII.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


287


CHAP. XXII. — GOD S ATTRIBUTE OF GOODNESS
CONSIDERED AS NATURAL; THE GOD OF MAR-
CION FOUND WANTING HEREIN. IT CAME
NOT TO man's RESCUE WHEN FIRST WANTED.

But how shall (this) Antichrist be fully over-
thrown unless we relax our defence by mere
prescription/ and give ourselves scope for
rebutting all his other attacks ? Let us there-
fore next take the very person of God Him-
self, or rather His shadow or phantom/ as we
have it in Christ, and let Him be examined
by that condition which makes Him superior
to the Creator. And undoubtedly there will
come to hand unmistakeable rules for examin-
ing God's goodness. My first point, however,
is to. discover and apprehend the attribute,
and then to draw it out into rules. Now, when
I survey the subject in its aspects of time, I
nowhere descry it^ from the beginning of
material existences, or at the commencement
of those causes, with which it ought to have
been found, proceeding thence to do'* what-
ever had to be done. For there was death
already, and sin the sting of death, and that
malignity too of the Creator, against which
the goodness of the other god should have
been ready to bring relief; falling in with this
as the primary rule of the divine goodness
(if it were to prove itself a natural agency), at
once coming as a succour when the cause for
it began. For in God all things should be
natural and inbred, just like His own condi-
tion indeed, in order that they may be eter-
nal, and so not be accounted casual ^ and ex-
traneous, and thereby temporary and wanting
in eternity. In God, therefore, goodness is
required to be both perpetual and unbroken,^
such as, being stored up and kept ready in
the treasures of His natural properties, might
precede its own causes and material develop-
ments; and if thus preceding, might under lie''
every first material cause, instead of looking
at it from a distance,^ and standing aloof from
it. 9 In short, here too I must inquire. Why
his '° goodness did not operate from the begin-
ning ? no less pointedly than when we inquired
concerning himself. Why he was not revealed
from the very first ? Why, then, did it not ?
since he had to be revealed by his goodness


}\n his book, De Preescrip. Heeret., [cap. xv.] Tertullian had
enjoined that heretics ought not to be argued with, but to be met
with the authoritative rule of the faith. He here proposes to fore-
go that course.

_ 2 Marcion's Docetic doctrine of Christ as having only appeared
in human shape, without an actual incarnation, is indignantly
confuted by Tertullian in his De Came Ckristt, c. v.

3 That is, the principle in question— the bonitas Dei.

■» Exinde agens.

5 Obvenientia.

*J,ugis.

7 Susciperet.

8 Despiceret.

9 Destitueret.

'=' That is, Marcion's god's.


if he had any existence. That God should at
all fail in power must not be thought, much
less that He should not discharge all His natu-
ral functions; for if these were restrained from
running their course, they would cease to be
natural. Moreover, the nature of God Him-
self knows nothing of inactivity. Hence (His
goodness) is reckoned as having a beginning,"
if it acts. It will thus be evident that He had
no unwillingness to exercise His goodness at
anytime on account of His nature. Indeed,
it is impossible that He should be unwilling
because of His nature, since that so directs
itself that it would no longer exist if it ceased
to act. In Marcion's god, however, goodness
ceased from operation at some time or other.
A goodness, therefore, which could thus at
any time have ceased its action was not natu-
ral, because with natural properties such ces-
sation is incompatible. And if it shall not
prove to be natural, it must no longer be be-
lieved to be eternal nor competent to Deity;
because it cannot be eternal so long as, fail-
ing to be natural, it neither provides from the
past nor guarantees for the future any means
of perpetuating itself. Now as a fact ifex-
isted not from the beginning, and, doubtless,
will not endure to the end. For it is possible
for it to fail in existence some future " time or
other, as it has failed in some past'^ period.
Forasmuch, then, as-the goodness of Mar-
cion's god failed in the beginning (for he did
not from the first deliver man), this failure
must have been the effect of will rather than
of infirmity. Now a wilful suppression of
goodness will be found to have a malignant
end in view. For what malignity is so great
as to be unwilling to do good when one can,
or to thwart'-* what is useful, or to permit in-
jury? The whole description, therefore, of
Marcion's Creator will have to be transferred *s
to his new god, who helped on the ruthless'^
proceedings of the former by the retardation
of his own goodness. For whosoever has it
in his power to prevent the happening of a
thing, is accounted responsible for it if it
should occur. Man is condemned to death
for tasting the fruit of one poor tree,''' and
thence proceed sins with their penalties; and
now all are perishing who yet never saw a
single sod of Paradise. And all this your
better god either is ignorant of, or else
brooks. Is it that'^ he might on this account
be deemed the better, and the Creator be re-


11 Censetur.

12 Quandoque.

13 Aliquando.

14 Cruciare.

'5 Rescribetur.

16 Saevitias.

17 Arbusculse.
'8 Si ut?


288


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book I.


garded as all that the worse ? Even if this
were his purpose he would be malicious
enough, for both wishing to aggravate his
rival's obloquy by permitting His (evil)
works to be done, and by keeping the world
harrassed by the wrong. What would you
think of a physician who should encourage a
disease by withholding the remedy, and pro-
long the danger by delaying his- prescription,
in order that his cure might be more costly
and more renowned ? Such must be the sen-
tence to be pronounced against Marcion's
god: tolerant of evil, encouraging wrong,
wheedling about his grace, prevaricating in
his goodness, which he did not exhibit simply
on its own account, but which he must mean
to exhibit purely, if he is good by nature and
not by acquisition,' if he is supremely good
in attribute ^^ and not by discipline, if he is
God from eternity and not from Tiberius, nay
(to speak more truly), from Cerdon only and
Marcion. As the case now stands, ^ however,
such a god as we are considering would have
been more fit for Tiberius, that the goodness
of the Divine Being might be inaugurated in
the world under his imperial sway !

CHAP. XXIII. — god's attribute OF GOODNESS
CONSIDERED AS RATIONAL. MARCION's GOD
DEFECTIVE HERE ALSO; HIS GOODNESS IRRA-
TIONAL AND MISAPPLIED.

Here is another rule for him. All the prop-
erties of God ought to be as rational as they
are natural. I require reason in His good
ness, because nothing else can properly be
accounted good than that which is rationally
good; much less can goodness itself be de-
tected in any irrationality. More easily will
an evil thing which has something rational be-
longing to it be accounted good, than that a
good thing bereft of all reasonable quality
should escape being regarded as evil. Now
I deny that the goodness of Marcion's god is
rational, on this account first, because it pro-
ceeded to the salvation of a human creature
which was alien to him. I am aware of the
plea which they will adduce, that that is rather *
a primary and perfect goodness which is shed
voluntarily and freely upon strangers without
any obligation of friendship, s on the principle
that we are bidden to love even our enemies,
such as are also on that very account strangers
to us. Now, inasmuch as from the first he
had no regard for man, a stranger to him from
the first, he settled beforehand, by this neg-
lect of his, that he had nothing to do with an


I Accessione.
'Ingenio.

3 Nunc. [Comp. chapter xv. supra, p. 282.]

4 Atqiiin.

5 Familiaritatis.


alien creature. Besides, the rule of loving a
stranger or enemy is preceded by the precept
of your loving your neighbour as yourself;
and this precept, although coming from the
Creator's law, even you ought to receive, be-
cause, so far from being abrogated by Christ,
it has rather been confirmed by Him. For
you are bidden to love your enemy and the
stranger, in order that you may love your
neighbour the better. The requirement of
the undue is an augmentation of the due be-
nevolence. But the due precedes the undue,
as the principal quality, and more worthy of
the other, for its attendant and companion.*
Since, therefore, the first step in the reasonable-
ness of the divine goodness is that it displays
itself on its proper object Mn righteousness,
and only at its second stage on an alien ob-
ject by a redundant righteousness over and
above that of scribes and Pharisees, how
comes it to pass that the second is attributed
to him who fails in the first, not having man
for his proper object, and who makes his good-
ness on this very account defective ? More-
over, how could a defective benevolence,
which had no proper object whereon to ex-
pend itself, overflow^ on an alien one? Clear
up the first step, and then vindicate the next.
Nothing can be claimed as rational without
order, much less can reason itself ' dispense
with order in any one. Suppose now the
divine goodness begin at the second stage of
its rational operation, that is to say, on the
stranger, this second stage will not be con-
sistent in rationality if it be impaired in any
way else.'° For only then will even the second
stage of goodness, that which is displayed
towards the stranger, be accounted rational,
when it operates without wrong to him who
has the first claim." It is righteousness "which
before everything else makes all goodness
rational. It will thus be rational in its prin-
cipal stage, when manifested on its proper
object, if it be righteous. And thus, in like
manner, it will be able to appear rational,
when displayed towards the stranger, if it be
not unrighteous. But what sort of goodness
is that which is manifested in wrong, and that


f> This is the sense of the passage as read by Oehler : " Ante-
cedit autem debita indebitam, ut principalis, ut dignior ministra et
comite sua, id est indebita." Fr. Junius, however, added the
word "prior" which begins the next sentence to these words,
making the last clause run thus : " ut dignior ministra, et comite
sua, id est indebita, prior "— " as bein§ more worthy of an atten-
dant, and as being prior to its companion, that is, the undue be-
nevolence." It is difRcult to find any good use of the " prior " in
the next sentence, " Prior ijjitur cum prima bonitatis ratio sit,"
etc., as Oehler and others point it.

7 In rem suam.

8 Redundavit.

9 Ratio ipsa, i.e., rationality, or the character of reasonableness,
which he is now vindicating.

10 Alio modo destructus.
" Cujus est res.

"Justitia, r/^A< as opposed to the a/r<»«^ (injuria) of the pre-
ceding sentence.


I

I

I


CHAP. XXIV.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


289


in behalf of an alien creature ? For perad-
venture a benevolence, even when operating
injuriously, might be deemed to some extent
rational, if exerted for one of our own house
and home/ By what rule, however, can an
unjust benevolence, displayed on behalf of a
stranger, to whom not even an honest one is
legitimately due, be defended as a rational
one ? For what is more unrighteous, more
unjust, more dishonest, than so to benefit an
alien slave as to take him away from his mas-
ter, claim him as the property of another, and
suborn him against his master's life; and all
this, to make the matter more iniquitous still,
whilst he is yet living in his master's house,
and on his master's garner, and still trembling
beneath his stripes ? Such a deliverer,^ I had
almost said 3 kidnapper,'^ would even meet
with condemnation in the world. Now, no
other than this is the character of Marcion's
god, swooping upon an alien world, snatching
away man from his God,s the son from his
father, the pupil from his tutor, the servant
from his master — to make him impious to his
God, undutiful to his father, ungrateful to
his tutor, worthless to his master. If, now,
the rational benevolence makes man such,
what sort of being prithee ^ would the irrational
make of him? None I should think more
shameless than him who is baptized to his ^
god in water which belongs to another, who
stretches out his hands ^ to his god towards a
heaven which is another's, who kneels to his
god on ground which is another's, offers his
thanksgivings to his god over bread which be-
longs to another,^ and distributes '" by way of
alms and charity, for the sake of his god, gifts
which belong to another God. Who, then, is
that so good a god of theirs, that man through
him becomes evil; so propitious, too, as to
incense against man that other God who is,
indeed, his own proper Lord ?


'Pro domestico, opposed to the /ro extraneo^ the alienor
stranger of the preceding and succeeding context.
2 Assertor.
3Nedum.
4 Plagiator.
Si.e., the Creator.

6 Oro te.

7 Alii Deo. The strength of this phrase is remarkable by the
side of the oft-repeated aliena.

8 Therefore Christians used to lift their hands and arms to-
wards heaven in prayer. Compare The Apology, chap. 30, (where
the manibus expansis betokens the open hand, not merely as the
heathen tendens ad sidera palmas). See also De Orat. c. 13, and
other passages from different writers referred to in the " Tertul-
lian " of the Oxford Library of the Fathers, p. 70. [See the
figures in the Catacombs as represented by Parker, Marriott and
others.]

9 To the same effect Irenseus had said : " How will it be con-
sistent in them to hold that the bread on which thanks are given is
the body of their Lord, and that the cup is His blood, if they do
not acknowledge that He is the Son of the Creator of the world,
that is, the Word of God ? " (Rigalt.) [The consecrated bread is
still bread, in Patristic theology.]

'° Operatur, a not unfrequent use of the word. Thus Prudentius
{Psychom. 5J2) opposes operatio to avaritia.
19


CHAP. XXIV. — THE GOODNESS OF MARCION'S
GOD ONLY IMPERFECTLY MANIFESTED; IT
SAVES BUT FEW, AND THE SOULS MERELY OF
THESE. marcion's CONTEMPT OF THE BODY
ABSURD.

But as God is eternal and rational, so, I
think. He is perfect in all things. *' Be ye
perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven
is perfect." " Prove, then, that the goodness
of your god also is a perfect one. That it is
indeed imperfect has been already sufficiently
shown, since it is found to be neither natural
nor rational. The same conclusion, however,
shall now be made clear '= by another method;
it is not simply '^ imperfect, but actually '* fee-
ble, weak, and exhausted, failing to embrace
the full number 's of its material objects, and
not manifesting itself in them all. For all
are not put into a state of salvation '^ by it;
but the Creator's subjects, both Jew and Chris-
tian, are all excepted. '^ Now, when the greater
part thus perish, how can that goodness be
defended as a perfect one which is inoperative
in most cases, is somewhat only in few, naught
in many, succumbs to perdition, and is a
partner with destruction?'^ And if so many
shall miss salvation, it will not be with good-
ness, but with malignity, that the greater per-
fection will lie. For as it is the operation of
goodness which brings salvation, so is it ma-
levolence which thwarts it.'' Since, however,
this goodness) saves but few, and so rather
leans to the alternative of not saving, it will
show itself to greater perfection by not inter-
posing help than by helping. Now, you will
not be able to attribute goodness (to your
god) in reference to the Creator, (if accom-
panied with) failure towards all. For whom-
soever you call in to judge the question, it is
as a dispenser of goodness, if so be such a
title can be made out,^ and not as a squanderer
thereof, as you claim your god to be, that
you must submit the divine character for de-
termination. So long, then, as you prefer
your god to the Creator on the simple ground
of his goodness, and since he professes to
have this attribute as solely and wholly his
own, he ought not to have been wanting in it
to any one. However, I do not now wish to
prove that Marcion's god is imperfect in
goodness because of the perdition of the
greater number. I am content to illustrate


" Matt. V. 48.

12 Traducetur.

13 Nee jam.

14 Immo.

'5 Minor numero.

"5Non flunt salvi. [Kaye, p. 347-]
17 Pauciores.
•8 Partiaria exitii.
'9 Non facit salvos.

20 Si forte {i.e. ei riixoi eiTrep o.f>a., with a touch of irony,— a fre-
quent phrase in Tertullian.)


290


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book I.


this imperfection by the fact that even those
whom he saves are found to possess but an
imperfect salvation — that is, they are saved
only so far as the soul is concerned,' but lost
in their body, which, according to him, does
not rise again. Now, whence comes this halv-
ing of salvation, if not from a failure of good-
ness ? What could have been a better proof
of a perfect goodness, than the recovery of
the whole man to salvation ? Totally damned
by the Creator, he should have been totally
restored by the most merciful god. I rather
think that by Marcion's rule the body is bap-
tized, is deprived of marriage, = is cruelly tor-
tured in confession. But although sins are
attributed to the body, yet they are preceded
by the guilty concupiscence of the soul; nay,
the first motion of sin must be ascribed to
the soul, to which the flesh acts in the capacity
of a servant. By and by, when freed from
the soul, the flesh sins no more.^ So that in
this matter goodness is unjust, and likewise
imperfect, in that it leaves to destruction the
more harmless substance, which sins rather
by compliance than in will. Now, although
Christ put not on the verity of the flesh, as
your heresy is pleased to assume, He still
vouchsafed to take upon Him the semblance
thereof. Surely, therefore, some regard was
due to it from Him, because of this His feigned
assumption of it. Besides, what else is man
than flesh, since no doubt it was the corporeal
rather than the spiritual element from which
the Author of man's nature gave him his
designation? 5 "And the Lord God made
man of the dust of the ground," not of spirit-
ual essence; this afterwards came from the
divine afflatus: "and man became a living
soul." What, then, is man? Made, no doubt
of it, of the dust; and God placed him in
paradise, because He moulded him, not
breathed him, into being — a fabric of flesh,
not of spirit. Now, this being the case, with
what face will you contend for the perfect
character of that goodness which did not fail
in some one particular only of man's deliver-
ance, but in its general capacity? If that is
a plenary grace and a substantial mercy which
brings salvation to the soul alone, this were
the better life which we now enjoy whole and
entire; whereas to rise again but in part will
be a chastisement, not a liberation. The


» Anima tenus. Comp. De Prascr. Htrr. 33, where Marcion, as
■well as Apelles, Valentinus, and others, are cnarjfed with the Sad-
ducean denial of the resurrection of the flesh, which is censured
by St. Paul, 1 Cor. xv. 12.

2 Compare De Priescr. Htrr. 33, where Marcion and Apelles
are brought under St. Paul's reproach in i Tim. iv. 3.

sHactenus. [Kaye, p. 260.]

4 Animalis (from anima, the vital principle, " the breath of
life ") is here opposed to corporal is.

5 C"l8n. ''"""<', from niOnXni humus, the ground; see the

Hebrew of Gen. ii. 7.


proof of the perfect goodness is, that man,
after his rescue, should be delivered from the
domicile and power of the malignant deity
unto the protection of the most good and
merciful God. Poor dupe of Marcion, fever "^
is hard upon you; and your painful flesh
produces a crop of all sorts of briers and
thorns. Nor is it only to the Creator's thun-
derbolts that you lie exposed, or to wars, and
pestilences, and His other heavier strokes,
but even to His creeping insects. In what
respect do you suppose yourself liberated from
His kingdom when His flies are still creeping
upon your face? If your deliverance lies in
the future, why not also in the present, that it
may be perfectly wrought ? Far different is
our condition in the sight of Him who is the
Author, the Judge, the injured ^ Head of our
race ! You display Him as a merely good
God; but you are unable to prove that He is
perfectly good, because you are not by Him
perfectly delivered.

CHAP. XXV. GOD IS NOT A BEING OF SIMPLE

GOODNESS ; OTHER ATTRIBUTES BELONG TO
HIM. MARCION SHOWS INCONSISTENCY IN
THE PORTRAITURE OF HIS SIMPLY GOOD AND
EMOTIONLESS GOD.

As touching this question of goodness, we
have in these outlines of our argument shown
it to be in no way compatible with Deity, — as


nor rational, nor per-
unjust, and unworthy


being neither natural,
feet, but wrong,' and

of the very name of goodness, — because, as
far as the congruity of the divine character is
concerned, it cannot indeed be fitting that that
Being should be regarded as God who is al-
leged to have sttch a goodness, and that not
in a modified way, but simply and solely. For
it is, furthermore, at this point quite open to
discussion, whether God ought to be regarded
as a Being of simple goodness, to the exclusion
of all those other attributes,'" sensations, and
affections, which the Marcionites indeed trans-
fer from their god to the Creator, and which
we acknowledge to be worthy characteristics
of the Creator too, but only because we con-
sider Him to be God. Well, then, on this
ground we shall deny him to be God in whom
all things are not to be found which befit the
Divine Being. If (Marcion) chose" to take
any one of the school of Epicurus, and entitle
him God in the name of Christ, on the ground


Febricitas. *

7 OfTensum, probably in respect of the Marcionite treatment of
His attributes.

8 Ingenitam. In chap. xxii. this word seems to be synonymous
with naturalem. Comp. book ii. 3, where it has this sense in the
phrase " Deo ingenita."

9 Improbam.

'" Appendicibus.
" Aflectavit.


I


CHAP. XXVI.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


291


that what is happy and incorruptible can bring
no trouble either on itself or anything else
(for Marcion, while poring over' this opinion
of the divine indifference, has removed from
him all the severity and energy of the judicial '^
character), it was his duty to have developed
his conceptions into some imperturbable and
listless god (and then what could he have had
in common with Christ, who occasioned trouble
both to the Jews by what He taught, and to
Himself by what He felt?), or else to have
admitted that he was possessed of the same
emotions as others ^ (and in such case what
would he have had to do with Epicurus, who
was no friend -^ to either him or Christians?).
For that a being who in ages past^ was in a
■quiescent state, not caring to communicate
any knowledge of himself by any work all the
while, should ,come after so long a time to
entertain a concern for man's salvation, of
course by his own will, — did he not by this
very fact become susceptible of the impulse^
of a new volition, so as palpably to be open to
all other emotions ? But what volition is un-
accompanied with the spur of desire ?7 Who
wishes fpr what he desires not? Moreover,
care will be another companion of the will.
For who will wish for any object and desire
to have it, without also caring to obtain it ?
When, therefore, (Marcion's god) felt both a
will and a desire for man's salvation, he cer-
tainly occasioned some concern and trouble
both to himself and others. This Marcion's
theory suggests, though Epicurus demurs.
For he^ raised up an adversary against him-
self in that very thing against which his will,
and desire, and care were directed, — whether
it were sin or death, — and more especially in
their Tyrant and Lord, the Creator of man.
Again,9 nothing will ever run its course with-
out hostile rivalry, '° which shall not (itself) be
without a hostile aspect. In fact," when will-
ing, desiring, and caring to deliver man, (Mar-
cion's god) already in the very act encounters
a rival, both in Him from whom He effects
the deliverance (for of course " he means the
liberation to be an opposition to Him), and
also in those things from which the deliverance
is wrought (the intended liberation being to
the advantage of some other things). For
it must needs be, that upon rivalry its own


' Ruminans.

= Judiciarias vires.

3 De ceteris motibus.

^ Nee necessario.

5 Retro.

' Concussibilis.

7 Concupiscentiae.

^(i.e., Marcion's god.)

9 Porro.

'° ^mulatione.
^* Denique.
" Scilicet.


ancillary passions '^ will be in attendance,
against whatever objects its emulation is di-
rected: anger, discord, hatred, disdain, indig-
nation, spleen, loathing, displeasure. Now,
since all these emotions are present to rivalry;
since, moreover, the rivalry which arises in
liberating man excites them; and since, again,
this deliverance of man is an operation of
goodness, it follows that this goodness avails
nothing without its endowments,'* that is to
say, without those sensations and affections
whereby it carries out its purpose 's against the
Creator; so that it cannot even in this be
ruled '*^ to be irrational, as if it were wanting
in proper sensations and affections. These
points we shall have to insist on '^ much more
fully, when we come to plead the cause of the
Creator, where they will also incur our con-
demnation.

CHAP. XXVI. IN THE ATTRIBUTE OF JUSTICE,

marcion's god IS HOPELESSLY WEAK AND
UNGODLIKE. HE DISLIKES EVIL, BUT DOES
NOT PUNISH ITS PERPETRATION.

But it is here sufficient that the extreme
perversity of their god is proved from the
mere exposition of his lonely goodness, in
which they refuse to ascribe to him such emo-
tions of mind as they censure in the Creator.
Now, if he is susceptible of no feeling of ri-
valry, or anger, or damage, or injury, as one
who refrains from exercising judicial power,
I cannot tell how any system of discipline —
and that, too, a plenary one — can be consistent
in him. For how is it possible that he should
issue commands, if he does not mean to exe-
cute them; or forbid sins, if he intends not to
punish them, but rather to decline the func-
tions of the judge, as being a stranger to all
notions of severity and judicial chastisement ?
For why does he forbid the commission of
that which he punishes not when perpetrated ?
It would have been far more right, if he had
not forbidden what he meant not to punish,
than that he should punish what he had not
forbidden. Nay, it was his duty even to have
permitted what he was about to prohibit in so
unreasonable a way, as to annex no penalty to
the offence.'^ For even now that is tacitly
permitted which is forbidden without any in-
fliction of vengeance. Besides, he only for-
bids the commission of that which he does not
like to have done. Most listless, therefore,
is he, since he takes no offence at the doing
of what he dislikes to be done, although dis-


13 Officiales suae.

14 Suis dotibus.

15 Administratur.

16 Praescribatur.
'7 Defendemus.

18 Ut non defensurus.
for other instances.


Defendo = vindico. See Oehler's note


292


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION


[book 1.


pleasure ought to be the companion of his
violated will. Now, if he is offended, he ought
to be angry; if angry, he ought to inflict pun-
ishment. For such infliction is the just fruit
of anger, and anger is the debt of displeasure,
and displeasure (as I have said) is the com-
panion of a violated will. However, he inflicts
no punishment; therefore he takes no offence.
He takes no offence, therefore his will is
not wronged, although that is done which he
was unwilling to have done; and the trans-
gression is now committed with the acquies-
cence of his will, because whatever offends
not the will is not committed against the will.
Now, if this is to be the principle of the divine
virtue or goodness, to be unwilling indeed
that a thing be done and to prohibit it, and
yet not be moved by its commission, we then
allege that he has been moved already when
he declared his unwillingness; and that it is
vain for him not to be moved by the accom-
plishment of a thing after being moved at the
possibility thereof, when he willed it not to
be done. For he prohibitied it by his not
willing it. Did he not therefore do a judicial
act, when he declared his unwillingness, and
consequent prohibition of it? For he judged
that it ought not to be done, and he deliber-
ately declared =" that it should be forbidden.
Consequently by this time even he performs
the part of a judge. If it is unbecoming for
God to discharge a judicial function, or at
least only so far becoming that He may merely
declare His unwillingness, and pronounce His
prohibition, then He may not even punish
for an offence when it is committed. Now,
nothing is so unworthy of the Divine Being as
not to execute retribution on what He has
disliked and forbidden. First, He owes the
infliction of chastisement to whatever sentence
or law He promulges, for the vindication of
His authority and the maintenance of sub-
mission to it; secondly, because hostile opposi-
tion is inevitable to what He has disliked to
be done, and by that dislike forbidden. More-
over, it would be a more unworthy course for
God to spare the evil-doer than to punish him,
especially in the most good and holy God,
who is not otherwise fully good than as the
enemy of evil, and that to such a degree as
to display His love of good by the hatred of
evil, and to fulfil His defence of the former
by the extirpation of the latter.

CHAP. XXVII. — DANGEROUS EFFECTS TO RELIG-
ION AND MORALITY OF THE DOCTRINE OF SO
WEAK A GOD.

Again, he plainly judges evil by not willing

» Secundum.
~ Pronunciavit.


it, and condemns it by prohibiting it; while,
on the other hand, he acquits it by not aveng-
ing it, and lets it go free by not punishing it.
What a prevaricator of truth is such a god !
What a dissembler with his own decision !
Afraid to condemn what he really condemns,
afraid to hate what he does not love, permitting
that to be done which he does not allow,
choosing to indicate what he dislikes rather
than deeply examine it ! This will turn out
an imaginary goodness, a phantom of disci-
pline, perfunctory in duty, careless in sin.
Listen, ye sinners; and ye who have not yet
come to this, hear, that you may attain to such
a pass ! A better god has been discovered,
who never takes offence, is never angry, never
inflicts punishment, who has prepared no fire
in hell, no gnashing of teeth in the outer
darkness ! He is purely and simply good.
He indeed forbids all delinquency, but only
in word. He is in you, if you are willing to
pay him homage, ^ for the sake of appearances,
that you may seem to honour God; for your
fear he does not want. And so satisfied are
the Marcionites with such pretences, that they
have no fear of their god at all. They say it
is only a bad man who will be feared, a good
man will be loved. Foolish man, do you say
that he whom you call Lord ought not to be
feared, whilst the very title you give him indi-
cates a power which must itself be feared ? But
how are you going to love, without some fear
that you do not love ? Surely (such a god) is
neither your Father, towards whom your love
for duty's sake should be consistent with fear
because of His power; nor your proper*
Lord, whom you should love for His human-
ity and fear as your teacher. s Kidnappers *
indeed are loved after this fashion, but they
are not feared. For power will not be feared,
except it be just and regular, although it may
possibly be loved even when corrupt: for it
is by allurement that it stands, not by au-j
thority; by flattery, not by proper influence.
And what can be more direct flattery than not
to punish sins? Come, then, if you do not
fear God as being good, why do you not boil
over into every kind of lust, and so realize
that which is, I believe, the main enjoyment
of life to all who fear not God ? Why do you
not frequent the customary pleasures of the
maddening circus, the bloodthirsty arena, and


I


3 Obsecjuium subsignare.

4 Legitimus.

5 Propter disciplinam.
^Plagiarii. The Plagiarius is the afSpoTroSio-Trj? or the

^vxayuifo^ of Alex. Greek. This " man-stealing" profession was
often accompanied with agreeable external accomplishments.
Nempe i//i»xay«oyot', quia blandis et mellitis verbis servos alienos
sollicitant, et ad se alliciunt. Clemens Alex. Strom, i. Avkoi
oipTrayt; TrpopaTiov Kui&iois iyKfKpvfifxivot, avSpanoSiiTToi re Kat
xpvxayoiyol fvy\io<Taoi, KKgnTovrf^ fxiv aifiaviof , k.t.A. — Desid.
Herald. AninnK^. ad Arnof>ium, p. loi.


CHAP. XXIX.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


293


the lascivious theatre ? ' Why in persecutions
also do you not, when the censer is presented,
at once redeem your life by the denial of your
faith? God forbid, you say with redoubled ^^
emphasis. So you do fear sin, and by your
fear prove that He is an object of fear Who
forbids the sin. This is quite a different
matter from that obsequious homage you pay
to the god whom you do not fear, which is
identical in perversity indeed to is own con-
duct, in prohibiting a thing without annexing
the sanction of punishment. Still more vainly
do they act, who when asked, What is to be-
come of every sinner in that great day ? reply,
that he is to be cast away out of sight. Is
not even this a question of judicial determina-
tion ? He is adjudged to deserve rejection,
and that by a sentence of condemnation; un-
less the sinner is cast away forsooth for his
salvation, that even a leniency like this may
fall in consistently with the character of your
mo«t good and excellent god ! And what will
it be to be cast away, but to lose that which
a man was in the way of obtaining, were it
not for his rejection — that is, his salvation ?
Therefore his being cast away will involve the
forfeiture of salvation; and this sentence can-
not possibly be passed upon him, except by
an angry and offended authority, who is also
the punisher of sin — that is, by a judge.

CHAP. XXVIII. THIS PERVERSE DOCTRINE DE-
PRIVES BAPTISM OF ALL ITS GRACE. IF MAR-
CION BE RIGHT, THE SACRAMENT WOULD CON-
FER NO REMISSION OF SINS, NO REGENERATION,
NO GIFT OF THE SPIRIT.

And what will happen to him after he is
cast away ? He will, they say, be thrown into
the Creator's fire. Then has no remedial
provision been made (by their god) for the
purpose of banishing those that sin against
him, without resorting to the cruel measure
of delivering them over to the Creator ? And
what will the Creator then do ? I suppose He
will prepare for them a hell doubly charged
with brimstone,^ as for blasphemers against
Himself; except indeed their god in his zeal,
as perhaps might happen, should show clem-
ency to his rival's revolted subjects. Oh,
what a god is this ! everywhere perverse; no-
where rational; in all cases vain; and there-
fore a nonentity ! "^ — in whose state, and con-
dition, and nature, and every appointment,
I see no coherence and consistency; no, not
even in the very sacrament of his faith ! For


' Comp. Apology^ 38.
_ 2 Absit, inquis, absit. [i.e., the throwing of a grain of incense
into the censer, before the Emperor's image or that of a heathen


god


3Sulphuratiorem gehennam.
4 Ita neminem.


what end does baptism serve, according to
him ? If the remission of sins, how will he
make it evident that he remits sins, when he
affords no evidence that he retains them?
Because he would retain them, if he performed
the functions of a judge. If deliverance from
death, how could he deliver from death, who
has not delivered to death ? For he must have
delivered the sinner to death, if he had from
the beginning condemned sin. If the re-
generation of man, how can he regenerate,
who has never generated ? For the repetition
of an act is impossible to him, by whom
nothing anytime has been ever done. If the
bestowal of the Holy Ghost, how will he be-
stow the Spirit, who did not at first impart the
life ? For the life is in a sense the supple-
ment s of the Spirit. He therefore seals man,
who had never been unsealed^ in respect of
him ; ^ washes man, who had never been de-
filed so far as he was concerned ;7 and into
this sacrament of salvation wholly plunges
that flesh which is beyond the pale of salva-
tion ! ^ No farmer will irrigate ground that
will yield him no fruit in return, except he be
as stupid as Marcion's god. Why then impose
sanctity upon our most infirm and most un-
worthy flesh, either as a burden or as a glory?
What shall I say, too, of the uselessness of a
discipline which sanctifies what is already
sanctified ? Why burden the infirm, or glorify
the unworthy ? Why not remunerate with sal-
vation what it burdens or else glorifies ? Why
keep back from a work its due reward, by not
recompensing the flesh with salvation ? Why
even permit the honour of sanctity in it to die ?

CHAP. XXIX. — MARCION FORBIDS MARRIAGE.
TERTULLIAN ELOQUENTLY DEFENDS IT AS
HOLY, AND CAREFULLY DISCRIMINATES BE-
TWEEN MARCION's DOCTRINE AND HIS OWN

MONTANISM.

The flesh is not, according to Marcion, im-
mersed in the water of the sacrament, unless
it be 9 in virginity, widowhood, or celibacy,
or has purchased by divorce a title to baptism,
as if even generative impotents '° did not all
receive their flesh from nuptial union. Now,
such a scheme as this must no doubt involve
the proscription of marriage. Let us see,
then, whether it be a just one: not as if we


5 Suffectura. A something whereon the Spirit may operate ;
so that the Spirit has a prafectura over the anima. [Kaye, p.
179-1

6 Resignatum. Tertullian here yields to his love of antithesis,
and makes almost nonsense of signo and resigno. The latter
verb has the meaning violate (in opposition to st'gno, in the phrase
Virgo signaia, a pure unviolated virgin).

7 Apud se.

8 Exsortem salutis.

9 Free from all matrimonial impurity.

1° Spadonibus. This word is more general in sense than eunuch,
embracing such as are impotent both by nature and by castration.
White and Riddle's Lat. Diet. s. v.


294


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book I.


aimed at destroying the happiness of sanctity,
as do certain Nicolaitans in their maintenance
of lust and luxury, but as those who have come
to the knowledge of sanctity, and pursue it
and prefer it, without detriment, however, to
marriage; not as if we superseded a bad thing
by a good, but only a good thing by a better.
For we do not reject marriage, but simply re-
frain from it.' Nor do we prescribe sanctity"
as the rule, but only recommend it, observing
it as a good, yea, even the better state, if each
man uses it carefully ^ according to his ability;
but at the same time earnestly vindicating
marriage, whenever hostile attacks are made
^gainst it is a polluted thing, to the disparage-
lent of the Creator. For He bestowed His
blessing on matrimony also, as on an honour-
able estate, for the increase of the human race;
He did indeed on the whole of His crea-
fion,* for wholesome and good uses. Meats
and drinks are not on this account to be con-
demned, because, when served up with too
exquisite a daintiness, they conduce to glut-
tony; nor is raiment to be blamed, because,
when too costlily adorned, it becomes inflated
with vanity and pride. So, on the same prin-
ciple, the estate of matrimony is not to be re-
fused, because, when enjoyed without modera-
tion, it is fanned into a voluptuous flame.
There is a great difference between a cause
and a fault, ^ between a state and its excess.
Consequently it is not an institution of this
nature that is to be blamed, but the extrava-
gant use of it; according to the judgment of
its founder Himself, who not only said, *' Be
fruitful, and multiply,"^ but also, *'Thou
shalt not commit adultery," and, *' Thou
shalt not covet thy neighbour's wife; " ' and
who threatened with death the unchaste, sac-
rilegious, and monstrous abomination both
of adultery and unnatural sin with man and
beast. ^ Now, if any limitation is set to mar-
rying— such as the spiritual rule,^ which pre-
scribes but one marriage under the Christian
obedience,'" maintained by the authority of
the Paraclete," — it will be His prerogative to
fix the limit Who had once been diffuse in His
permission; His to gather. Who once scat-
tered; His to cut down the tree, Who planted


* Tertullian's Montanism appears here.

'i.e., abstinence from marriage.

3Sectando. [This, indeed, seems to be a fair statement of
Patristic doctrine concerning marriage. As to our author's vari-
ations see Kaye, p. 378.]

4Univer8um conditionis.

5 Causa in its proper sense is, " that through which anything
takes place ;" its just and normal state, therefore. Culpa is the
derangement of the causa ; some flaw in it.

6 Gen. i. 28.

7 Ex. XX. 14, 17.

8 Lev. XX. 10, 13, 15.

9 Ratio.

»o In fide. Tertullian uses {De Pud. 18) " ante fidem " as sy-
nonymous with ante baptismutn ; similarly " post fidem."

i» [Bad as this is, does it argue the lapse of our author as at
this time complete ?]


it; His to reap the harvest. Who sowed the
seed; His to declare, *' It remaineth that they
who have wives be as though they had none, ' ' '*
Who once said, *' Be fruitful, and multiply; "
His the end to Whom belonged the begin-
ning. Nevertheless, the tree is not cut down
as if it deserved blame ; nor is the corn reaped,
as if it were to be condemned, — but simply
because their time is come. So likewise the
state of matrimony does not require the h(X)k
and scythe of sanctity, as if it were evil; but
as being ripe for its discharge, and in readi-
ness for that sanctity which will in the long
run bring it a plenteous crop by its reaping.
For this leads me to remark of Marcion's god^
that in reproaching marriage as an evil and un-
chaste thing, he is really prejudicing the cause
of that very sanctity which he seems to serve.
For he destroys the material on which it sub-
sists; if there is to be no marriage, there is
no sanctity. All proof of abstinence is lost
when excess is impossible; for sundry things
have thus their evidence in their contraries.
Just as " strength is made perfect in weak-
ness," '3 so likewise is continence made mani-
fest by the permission to marry. Who indeed
will be called continent, if that be taken away
which gives him the opportunity of pursuing
a life of continence ? What room for tem-
perance in appetite does famine give ? What
repudiation of ambitious projects does poverty
afford ? What bridling of lust can the eunuch
merit ? To put a complete stop, however, to
the sowing of the human race, may, for aught
I know, be quite consistent for Marcion's
most good and excellent god. For how could
he desire the salvation of man, whom he for-
bids to be born, when he takes away that in-
stitution from which his birth arises ? How
will he find any one on whom to set the mark
of his goodness, when he suffers him not to
come into existence ? How is it possible to
love him whose origin he hates ? Perhaps he
is afraid of a redundant population, lest he
should be weary in liberating so many; lest
he should have to make many heretics; lest
Marcionite parents should produce too many
noble disciples of Marcion. The cruelty of
Pharaoh, which slew its victims at their birth,
will not prove to be more inhuman in com-
parison."* For while he destroyed lives, our
heretic's god refuses to give them: the one
removes from life, the other admits none to
it. There is no difference in either as to their
homicide — man is slain by both of them; by
the former just after birth, by the latter as yet
unborn. Thanks should we owe thee, thou


»3 I Cor. vij. 29.

»3 2 Cor. xii. 9.

>4 This is the force of the erit instead of the past tense.


CHAP. XXIX.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


295


god of our heretic, hadst thou only checked '
the dispensation of the Creator in uniting male
and female; for from such a union indeed has
thy Marcion been born ! Enough, however,
of Marcion 's god, who is shown to have abso-
lutely no existence at all, both by our defini-
tions =" of the one only Godhead, and the con-


' Isses in, i.e., obstitisses, check or resist, for then Marcion
would, of course, not have been born : the common text has esses


dition of his attributes.' The whole course,
however, of this little work aims directly at
this conclusion. If, therefore, we seem to
anybody to have achieved but little result as
yet, let him reserve his expectations, until we
examine the very Scripture which Marcion
quotes.


2 Tertullian has discussed these " definitions " in chap. ii. vii,,
and the " conditions" from chap. viii. onward. He will " exam-
ine the Scripture " passages in books iv. and v. Fr. Junius.

3 Statuum.


li'


THE FIVE BOOKS AGAINST MARCION.

Book 11/

WHEREIN TERTULLIAN SHOWS THAT THE CREATOR, OR DEMIURGE,
WHOM MARCION CALUMNIATED, IS THE TRUE AND GOOD GOD.


CHAP. I. THE METHODS OF MARCION'S ARGU-
MENT INCORRECT AND ABSURD. THE PROPER
COURSE OF THE ARGUMENT.

The occasion of reproducing this little
work, the fortunes of which we noticed in
the preface of our first book, has furnished us
with the opportunity of distinguishing, in our
treatment of the subject of two Gods in oppo-
sition to Marcion, each of them with a descrip-
tion and section of his own, according to the
division of the subject-matter, defining one
of the gods to have no existence at all, and
maintaining of the Other that He is rightly =
God; thus far keeping pace with the heretic
of Pontus, who has been pleased to admit
one unto, and exclude the other. ^ For he
could not build up his mendacious scheme
without pulling down the system of truth.
He found it necessary to demolish^ some
other thing, in order to biiild up the theory
which he wished. This process, however,
is like constructing a house without preparing
suitable materials. s The discussion ought to
have been directed to this point alone, that he
is no god who supersedes the Creator. Then,
when the false god had been excluded by cer-
tain rules which prescriptively settle what is
the character of the One only perfect Divinity,
there could have remained no longer any
question as to the true God. The proof of
His existence would have been clear, and
that, too, amid the failure of all evidence in
support of any other god; and still clearer^


' [Contains no marks of Montanisra of a decisive nature. Kaye
P- 54-]
- Digne.

3 From the dignity of the supreme Godhead.
■* Snbruere.
5 Propria paratura.
^With the ^an^o (


7 Cura in.

8 Inciderat.
With the ianio (answering to the previous quanto) should be 9 Fluitantibus oculis.

understood tnagis, a frequent omission in our author. | 'o Quern videat non videt.


would have seemed the point as to the hon-
our in which He ought without controversy
to be held: that He ought to be worshipped
rather than judged; served reverentially rather
than handled critically, or even dreaded for
His severity. For what was more fuMy needed
by man than a careful estimate of ^ the true
God, on whom, so to speak, he had alighted,^
because there was no other god ?

CHAP. II. — THE TRUE DOCTRINE OF GOD THE
CREATOR. THE HERETICS PRETENDED TO A
KNOWLEDGE OF THE DIVINE BEING, OPPOSED
TO AND SUBVERSIVE OF REVELATION. GOD'S

• NATURE AND WAYS PAST HU.MAN DISCOVERY.
ADAM'S HERESY.

We have now, then, cleared our way to the
contemplation of the Almighty God, the
Lord and Maker of the universe. His great-
ness, as I think, is shown in this, that from
the beginning He made Himself known: He
never hid Himself, but always shone out
brightly, even before the time of Romulus,
to say nothing of that of Tiberius; with the
exception indeed that the heretics, and they
alone, know Him not, although they take
such pains about Him. They on this account
suppose that another god must be assumed
to exist, because they are more able to cen-
sure than deny Him whose existence is so
evident, deriving all their thoughts about
God from the deductions of sense; just as if
some blind man, or a man of imperfect vis-
ion,' chose to assume some other sun of milder
and healthier ray, because he sees not that
which is the object of sight.'" There is, O


298


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book II.


man, but one sun which rules' this world;
and even when you think otherwise of him,
he is best and useful; and although to you
he may seem too fierce and baneful, or else,
it may be, too sordid and corrupt, he yet is
true to the laws of his own existence. Un-
able as you are to see through those laws,
you would be equally impotent to bear the
rays of any other sun, were there one, how-
ever great and good. Now, you whose sight
is defective'' in respect of the inferior god,
what is your view of the sublimer One ?
Really you are too lenient "^ to your weakness;
and set not yourself to the proof "> of things,
holding God to be certainly, undoubtedly,
and therefore sufficiently known, the very
moment you have discovered Him to exist,
though you know Him not except on the side
where He has willed His proofs to lie. But
you do not even deny God intelligently, s you
treat of Him ignorantly; *^ nay, you accuse
Him with a semblance of intelligence, ^ whom
if you did but know Him, you would never
accuse, nay, never treat of.^ You give Him
His name indeed, but you deny the essential
truth of that name, that is, the greatness
which is called God; not acknowledging it to
be such as, were it possible for it to have been
known to man in every respect,' would not be
greatness. Isaiah even so early, with the
clearness of an apostle, foreseeing the
thoughts of heretical hearts, asked, "Who
hath known the mind of the Lord ? or who
hath been His counsellor? With whom took
He counsel ? ... or who taught Him
knowledge, and showed to Him the way of
understanding ?" '° With whom the apostle
agreeing exclaims, "Oh the depth of the riches
both of the wisdom and knowledge of God !
how unsearchable are His judgments, and
His ways past finding out ! " " " His judg-
ments unsearchable," as being those of God
the Judge; and " His ways past finding out,"
as comprising an understanding and knowl-
edge which no man has ever shown to Him,
except it may be those critics of the Divine
Being, who say, God ought not to have been
this," and He ought rather to have been that;
as if any one knew what is in God, except
the Spirit of God.'' Moreover, having the


' Tempcrat.
^Cacutis.

3 Quin potius parcis.

4 In periculum extenderis.

5 Ut sciens.
^Ut nesciens.

7 Quasi sciens.

8 Ketractares.

9 Omnifariam.

JO Comp. Isa. xl. 13, 14, with Rom. xi. 34.
" Rom. xi. 33.

»2 Sic non debuit Deus. This perhaps may mean, God ought
not to have done this, etc.
13 I Cor. ii. II.


spirit of the world, and "in the wisdom of
God by wisdom knowing not GcvJ,"''' they
seem to themselves to be wiser 's than God;
because, as the wisdom of the world is fool-
ishness with God, so also the wisdom of God
is folly in the world's esteem. We, how-
ever, know that "the foolishness of God is
wiser than men, and the weakness of God
is stronger than men."'^ Accordingly, God
is then especially great, when He is small '^ to
man; then especially good, when not good in
man's judgment; then especially unique,
when He seems to man to be two or more.
Now, if from the very first " the natural man,
not receiving the things of the Spirit of
God," '^ has deemed God's law to be foolish-
ness, and has therefore neglected to observe
it; and as a further consequence, by his not
having faith, "even that which he seemeth
to have hath been taken from him " '' — such
as the grace of paradise and the friendship of
God, by means of which he might have known
all things of God, if he had continued in his
obedience — what wonder is it, if he,=~ reduced
to his material nature, and banished to the
toil of tilling the ground, has in his very
labour, downcast and earth-gravitating as it
was, handed on that earth-derived spirit of
the world to his entire race, wholly natural "
and heretical as it is, and not receiving the
things which belong to God ? Or who will
hesitate to declare the great sin of Adam to
have been heresy, when he committed it by
the choice "" of his own will rather than of
God's? Except that Adam never said to his
fig-tree, Why hast thou made me thus ? He
confessed that he was led astray; and he did
not conceal the seducer. He was a very rude
heretic. He was disobedient; but yet he did
not blaspheme his Creator, nor blame that
Author of his being. Whom from the begin-
ning of his life he had found to be so good
and excellent, and Whom he had perhaps "^
made his own judge from the very first.

CHAP. III. — GOD KNOWN BY HIS WORKS. HIS
GOODNESS SHOWN IN HIS CREATIVE ENERGY;
BUT EVERLASTING IN ITS NATURE; INHERENT
IN GOD, PREVIOUS TO ALL EXHIBITION OF IT.
THE FIRST STAGE OF THIS GOODNESS PRIOR TO
MAN.

It will therefore be right for us, as we enter


I


»4Cor. i. 21.
15 Consultiores.
»6 I Cor. i. 25.
»7 Piisillus.
'8 I Cor. ii. 14.

19 Luke viii. 18 ; comp. Matt. xiii. 12.

20 That is, the natural man, the ^v\*.k6<;.
2' Animali = <^\>\\.Kia.

=a Elcctionem. By this word our author translates the Greek
aip<(nc. Comp. Dc Pr<escr, Her, 6, p. 245, supra.
=3 Si forte.


CHAP. IV.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


299


the question arises, in what condition He is
known to us, to begin with His works, which
are prior to man; so that His goodness, being
discovered immediately along with Himself,
and then constituted and prescriptively set-
tled, may suggest to us some sense whereby
we may understand how the subsequent order
of things came about. The disciples of Mar-
cion, moreover, may possibly be able, while
recognising the goodness of our God, to learn
how worthy it is likewise of the Divine Being,
on those very grounds whereby we have proved
it to be unworthy in the case of their god.
Now this very point,' which is a material one
in their scheme,* Marcion did not find in any
other god, but eliminated it for himself out
of his own god. The first goodness, then,^
was that of the Creator, whereby God was
unwilling to remain hidden for ever; in other
words, (unwilling) that there should not be a
something by which God should become
known. For what, indeed, is so good as the
knowledge and fruition *• of God ? Now, al-
though it did not transpire ^ that this was
good, because as yet there existed nothing to
which it could transpire, yet God foreknew
what good would eventually transpire, and
therefore He set Himself about developing^
His own perfect goodness, for the accomplish-
ment of the good which was to transpire; not,
indeed, a sudden goodness issuing in some
accidental boon^ or in some excited impulse,^
such as must be dated simply from the mo-
ment when it began to operate. For if it did
itself produce its own beginning when it began
to operate, it had not, in fact, a beginning
itself when it acted. When, however, an
initial act had been once done by it, the
scheme of temporal seasons began, for dis-
tinguishing and noting which, the stars and
luminaries of heaven were arranged in their
order. " Let them be," says God, " for sea-
sons, and for days, and years." ^ Previous,
then, to this temporal course, (the goodness)
which created time had not time; nor before
that beginning which the same goodness orig-
inated, had it a beginning. Being therefore
without all order of a beginning, and all mode
of time, it will be reckoned to possess an age,
measureless in extent" and endless in dura-
tion;" nor will it be possible to regard it as a
sudden or adventitious or impulsive emotion,


* That is, " the goodness " of God.
2 Agnitionis, their Gnostic scheme.

3Denique. This particle refers back to the argument previous
to its interruption by the allusion to Marcion and his followers.

4 Fructus, the enjoyment of (iod's works.

5 Apparebat. [Was not manifest.]

6 Commisit in.

7 Obventicise bonitatis.

8 ProvocaticiK animationis.

9 Gen. i. 14.
'° Immensa.

I' Interminabili.


because it has nothing to occasion such an
estimate of itself; in other words, no sort of
temporal sequence. It must therefore be ac-
counted an eternal attribute, inbred in God,"
and everlasting, '3 and on this account worthy
of the Divine Being, putting to shame for
ever"* the benevolence of Marcion's god, sub-
sequent as he is to (I will not say) all begin-
nings and times, but to the very malignity
of the Creator, if indeed malignity could pos-
sibly have been found in goodness.

CHAP. IV. THE NEXT STAGE OCCURS IN THE

CREATION OF MAN BY THE ETERNAL WORD.
SPIRITUAL AS WELL AS PHYSICAL GIFTS TO
MAN. THE BLESSINGS OF MAN's FREE-WILL.

The goodness of God having, therefore, pro-
vided man for the pursuit of the knowledge of
Himself,added this to itsoriginal notification, '5
that it first prepared a habitation for him, the
vast fabric (of the world) to begin with, and
then afterwards '^ the vaster one (of a higher
world, '7) that he might on a great as well as
on a smaller stage practise and advance in
his probation, and so be promoted from the
^^^^ which God had given him, that is, from
his high position, to God's best; that is, to
some higher abode. '^ In this good work 6^^^
employs a most excellent minister, even His
own Word. "My heart" He says, "hath
emitted my most excellent Word."'' Let
Marcion take hence his first lesson on the
noble fruit of this truly most excellent tree.
But, like a most clumsy clown, he has grafted
a good branch on a bad stock. The sapling,
however, of his blasphemy shall be never
strong: it shall wither with its planter, and
thus shall be manifested the nature of the
good tree. Look at the total result: how
fruitful was the Word ! God issued His fiat,
and it was done: God also saw that it was


12 Deo ingenita " Natural to," or " inherent in."
isPerpetua. ^Truly, a sublime Theodicy.]

14 Sutfundens jam hinc.

15 Prseconio suo.

16 Postmodum . . . postmodum.

17 See Bp. Bull on The State of Man be/ore the Fall. Works,
ii. 73-81.

18 Habitaculum majus.

19 " Eructavit cor. meum Sermonem optimum " is Tertullian't
reading of Ps. xlv. i, " My heart is inditing a good matter," A. V.,
which the Vulgate, Ps. xliv. i, renders bv " Kructavit cor meum ^''
verbum bonum," and the Septuagint by 'Efrj/xvfaTo 17 xapSia fiov
\6yov ayaOov. This is a tolerably literal rendering of the original
words, 2lu 15^ '*5'' ii'i^T- ^" these words the Fathers used to

descry an adumbration of the mystery of the Son's eternal gener-
ation from the Father, and His coming forth in time to create the
world. See Bellarmine, On the Psalms (Paris ed. 1861), vol. i.
292. The Psalm is no doubt eminently Messianic, as both Jewish
and Christian writers have ever held. ,See Perowne, 'J'he Psalms,
vol. i. p. 216. Bishop Bull reviews at length the theological opin-
ions of Tertullian, and shows that he held the eternity of the Son
of God, whom he calls " Sermo " or "Verbum Dei." See De-
fcnsio Fidei Niccetia (translation in the "^Oxford Library of the
Fathers," by the translator of this work) vol. ii. 509-545. In the
same volume, p. 482, the passage from the Psalm before us is simi-
larly applied by Novatian: " Sic Dei Verbum processit, de quo
dictum t!st, Eructavit cor meutn Verbum bonutn.'' [See vol. ii.
p. 98, this series: and Kaye, p. 515.]


300


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[hook II.


good ; ' not as if He were ignorant of the good
until He saw it; but because it was good, He
therefore saw it, and honoured it, and set His
seal upon it; and consummated Uhe- goodness
of His works by His vouchsafing to them that
contemplation. Thus God blessed what He
made good, in order that He might commend
Himself to you as whole and perfect, good
both in word and act.^ As yet the Word knew
no malediction, because He was a stranger to
malefaction.-* We shall see what reasons re-
quired this also of God. Meanwhile the world
consisted of all things good, plainly foreshow-
ing how much good was preparing for him for
whom all this was provided. Who indeed
was so worthy of dwelling amongst the works
of God, as he who was His own image and
likeness ? That image was wrought out by a
goodness even more operative than its wont,^
with no imperious word, but with friendly
hand preceded by an almost affable ^ utterance :
"Let us make man in our image, after our
likeness." 7 Goodness spake the word; Good-
ness formed man of the dust of the ground
into so great a substance of the flesh, built up
out of one material with so many qualities;
Goodness breathed into him a soul, not dead,
but living. Goodness gave him dominion ^
over all things, which he was to enjoy and rule
over, and even give names to. In addition
to this. Goodness annexed pleasures ^ to man;
so that, while master of the whole world, '° he
might tarry among higher delights, being
translated into paradise, out of the world into
the Church." The self-same Goodness pro-
vided also a help meet for him, that there
might be nothing in his lot that was not good.
For, said He, that the man be alone is not
good." He knew full well what a blessing to
him would be the sex of Mary,'^ and also of
the Church. The law, however, which you
find fault with,"* and wrest into a subject of
contention, was imposed on man by Goodness,
aiming at his happiness, that he might cleave
to God, and so not show himself an abject


»Gcn. i.

= Dispunjfcns, i.e., examinans ct probans et ita quasi consum-
raan.4 (Oehler).

3 This twofold virtue is very tersely expressed: " Sic et bene-
dicebnt qusc hene/aciebat."

4 This, the translator fears, is only a clumsv way of represent-
ing the terseness of our author's " malediccre and " malefacere."

5 Honitas et quidem operantior.

6 Rlandiente.

7 Gen. i. 26.
sPracfecit.
9 Delicias.

»o Totius orbis possidens.

" There is a profound thought here; in his tract, De Painit.
10, he says, " Where ontr or two are, is the church, and the church
is Christ." Hence what he here calls Adam's " higher delights,"
even spiritual blessings in Christ with Eve. [Important note in
Kaye, p. 304.]

i-'See Gen. ii. 18.

».^ Sexum Mariae. For the Virgin Mary gave birth to Christ,
the Saviour of men; and the virgin mother the Church, the spouse
of Christ, gives birth to Christians (Rigalt.).

'4 Arguis.


creature rather than a free one, nor reduce
himself to the level of the other animals, his
subjects, which were free from God, and ex-
empt from all tedious subjection; 's but might,
as the sole human being, boast that he alone
was worthy of receiving laws from God; and
as a rational being, capable of intelligence
and knowledge, be restrained within the
bounds of rational liberty, subject to Him
who had subjected all things unto him. To
secure the observance of this law. Goodness
likewise took counsel by help of this sanction:
" In the day that thou eatest thereof, thou
shalt surely die." '^ For it was a most benig-
nant act of His thus to point out the issues
of transgression, lest ignorance of the danger
should encourage a neglect of obedience.
Now, since '^ it was given as a reason previous
to the imposition of the law, it also amounted
to a motive for subsequently observing it,
thac a penalty was annexed to its transgres-
sion; a penalty, indeed, which He who pro-
posed it was still unwilling that it should be
incurred. Learn then the goodness of our
God amidst these things and up to this point;
learn it from His excellent works, from His
kindly blessings, from His indulgent boun-
ties, from His gracious providences, from His
laws and warnings, so good and merciful.

CHAP. V. MARCION's CAVILS CONSIDERED.

HIS OBJECTION REFUTED, I.E., MAN's FALL
SHOWED FAILURE IN GOD. THE PERFECTION
OF man's BEING LAY IN HIS LIBERTY, WHICH
GOD PURPOSELY BESTOWED ON HIM. THE
FALL IMPUTABLE TO MAN's OWN CHOICE.

Now then, ye dogs, whom the apostle puts
outside,'^ and who yelp at the God of truth,
let us come to your various questions. These
are the bones of contention, which you are
perpetually gnawing ! If God is good, and
prescient of the future, and able to avert evil,
why did He permit man, the very image and
likeness of Himself, and, by the origin of his
soul. His own substance too, to be deceived
by the devil, and fall from obedience of the
law into death ? For if He had been good,
and so unwilling that such a catastrophe
should happen, and prescient, so as not to be
ignorant of what was to come to pass, and
powerful enough to hinder its occurrence,
that issue would never have come about,
which should be impossible under these three
conditions of the divine greatness. Since,
however, it has occurred, the contrary prop-
osition is most certainly true, that (rod must


'S Ex fastidio liberis.

'6 Gen. ii. 17.

»7 Porro si.

18 Rev. xxii. i^;.


CHAP. VI.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


301


be deemed neither good, nor prescient, nor
powerful. For as no such issue could have
happened had God been such as He is re-
puted— good, and prescient, and mighty — so
has this issue actually happened, because He
is not such a God. In reply, we must first
vindicate those attributes in the Creator which
are called in question — namely, His goodness
and foreknowledge, and power. But I shall
not linger long over this point' for Christ's
own definition^ comes to our aid at once.
From works must proofs be obtained. The
Creator's works testify at once to His good-
ness, since they are good, as we have shown,
and to His power, since they are mighty, and
spring indeed out of nothing. And even if
they were made out of some (previous) matter,
as some ^ will have it, they are even thus out
of nothing, because they were not what they
are. In short, both they are great because
they are good; and^ God is likewise mighty,
because all things are His own, whence He is
almighty. But what shall I say of His pre-
science, which has for its witnesses as many
prophets as it inspired ? After all,s what title
to prescience do we look for in the Author of
the universe, since it was by this very attri-
bute that He foreknew all things when He ap-
pointed them their places, and appointed them
their places when He foreknew them ? There
is sin itself. If He had not foreknown this.
He would not have proclaimed a caution
against it under the penalty of death. Now,
if there were in God such attributes as must
have rendered it both impossible and improper
for any evil to have happened to man,^ and
yet evil did occur, let us consider man's con-
dition also — whether //were not, in fact, rather
the cause why that came to pass which could
not have happened through God. I find, then,
that man was by God constituted free, master
of his own will and power; indicating the
presence of God's image and likeness in him
by nothing so well as by this constitution of
his nature. For it was not by his face, and
by the lineaments of his body, though they
were so varied in his human nature, that he
expressed his likeness to the form of God;
but he showed his stamps in that essence
which he derived from God Himself (that is,
the spiritual,^ which answered to the form of
God), and in the freedom and power of his
will. This his state was confirmed even by
the very law which God then imposed upon


* Articulo.

2 Tuhn X. 25.

3 He refers to Hermogenes • see Adv. Hermog;. chap, xxxii.
4Vel . . . vel.

SQuanquam.

6 As the Marcionites alleged.

7 Sisnatus est.

8 Anima;.


him. For a law would not be imposed upon
one who had it not in his power to render
that obedience which is due to law; nor
again, would the penalty of death be threat-
ened against sin, if a contempt of the law
were impossible to man in the liberty of
his will. So in the Creator's subsequent
laws also you will find, when He sets be-
fore man good and evil, life and death, that
the entire course of discipline is arranged in
precepts by God's calling men from sin, and
threatening and exhorting them; and this on
no other ground than' that man is free, with
a will either for obedience or resistance.


CHAP. VI. THIS LIBERTY VINDICATED IN R^E-

SPECT OF ITS ORIGINAL CREATION; SUITABLE
ALSO FOR EXHIBITING THE GOODNESS AND
THE PURPOSE OF GOD. REWARD AND PUN-
ISHMENT IMPOSSIBLE IF MAN WERE GOOD OR
EVIL THROUGH NECESSITY AND NOT CHOICE.

But although we shall be understood, from
our argument, to be only so affirming man's
unshackled power over his will, that what hap-
pens to him should be laid to his own charge,
and not to God's, yet that you may not object,
even now, that he ought not to have been so
constituted, since his liberty and power of will
might turn out to be injurious, I will first of
all maintain that he was rightly so constituted,
that I may with the greater confidence com-
mend both his actual constitution, and the ad-
ditional fact of its being worthy of the Divine
Being; the cause which led to man's being
created with such a constitution being show^n
to be the better one. Moreover, man thus
constituted will be protected by both the
goodness of God and by His purpose,*" both
of which are always found in concert in our
God. For His purpose is no purpose without
goodness; nor is His goodness goodness with-
out a purpose, except forsooth in the case of
Marcion's god, who is purposelessly" good,
as we have shown." Well, then, it was proper
that God should be known; it was no doubt '3
a good and reasonable '•* thing. Proper also
was it that there should be something worthy
of knowing God. What could be found so
worthy as the image and likeness of God ?
This also was undoubtedly good and reason-
able. Therefore it was proper that (he who
is) the image and likeness of God should be
formed with a free will and a mastery of him-


9 Nee alias nisi.

10 Ratio, or, "His reason." We have used both words, which
are equally suitable to the Divine Being, as seemed most conven-
ient.

" Irrationaliter, or^ "irrationally."

'2 See above, book i. chap, xxiii. p. 288.

13 Utiqiie.

'4 Rationale, or, " consistent with His purpose."


302


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book II.


self;' so that this very thing — namely, free-
dom of will and self-command — might be
reckoned as the image and likeness of God in
him. For this purpose such an essence ' was
adapted 3 to man as suited this, character,*
even the afflatus of the Deity, Himself free
and uncontrolled. s But if you will take some
other view of the case,^ how came it to pass ">
that man, when in possession of the whole
world, did not above all things reign in self-
possession ^ — a master over others, a slave to
himself? The goodness of God, then, you
can learn from His gracious gift ' to man, and
His purpose from His disposal of all things. '°
At present, let God's good?iess alone occupy
our attention, that which gave so large a gift
to man, even the liberty of his will. God's
purpose claims some other opportunity of
treatment, offering as it does instruction of
like import. Now, God alone is good by na-
ture. For He, who has that which is without
beginning, has it not by creation," but by
nature. Man, however, who exists entirely
by creation, having a beginning, along with
that beginning obtained the form in which he
exists; and thus he is not by nature disposed
to good, but by creation, not having it as his
own attribute to be good, because, (as we have
said,) it is not by nature, but by creation,
that he is disposed to good, according to the
appointment of his good Creator, even the
Author of all good. In order, therefore, that
man might have a goodness of his own," be-
stowed '3 on him by God, and there might be
henceforth in man a property, and in a certain
sense a natural attribute of goodness, there
was assigned to him in the constitution of his
nature, as a formal witness '■* of the goodness
which God bestowed upon him, freedom and
power of the will, such as should cause good
to be performed spontaneously by man, as a
property of his own, on the ground that no
less than this '^ would be required in the matter
of a goodness which was to be voluntarily ex-
ercised by him, that is to say, by the liberty
of his will, without either favour or servility
to the constitution of his nature, so that man


' Suae potestatis.
» Substantia.

3 Accommodata.

4 Status.

5 Suse potestatis.
^Sed et alias.

7 Quale erat.

8 Animi sui possessione.

9 Dignatione.

1° Ex dispositione. The same as the " universa disponendo "
above.

" Institutione.

I'Bonuin jam suum, not bonitaictn.

'SEmancipatum.

i4Libripens. The language here is full of legal technicalities,
denved from the Roman usage in conveyance of property. *' Lib-
ripens quasi arbiter mancipationis " (Rigalt.).

iSQuoniam (with a subj.) et hoc.


should be good "^ just up to this point, '^ if he
should display his goodness in accordance
with his natural constitution indeed, but still
as the result of his will, as a property of his
nature; and, by a similar exercise of volition, ''
should show himself to be too strong ''in de-
fence against evil also (for even this God, of
course, foresaw), being free, and master of
himself; because, if he were wanting in this
prerogative of self-mastery , so as to perform
even good by necessity and not will, he would,
in the helplessness of his servitude, become
subject to the usurpation of evil, a slave as
much to evil as to good. Entire freedom of
will, therefore, was conferred upon him in
both tendencies; so that, as master of him-
self, he might constantly encounter good by
spontaneous observance of it, and evil by its
spontaneous avoidance; because, were man
even otherwise circumstanced, it was yet his
bounden duty, in the judgment of God, to do
justice according to the motions ~ of his will,
regarded, of course, as free. But the reward
neither of good nor of evil could be paid to
the man who should be found to have been
either good or evil through necessity and not
choice. In this really lay =' the law which did
not exclude, but rather prove, human liberty
by a spontaneous rendering of obedience, or
a spontaneous commission of iniquity; so pat-
ent was the liberty of man's will for either
issue. Since, therefore, both the goodness
and purpose of God are " discovered in the
gift to man of freedom in his will, it is not
right, after ignoring the original definition of
goodness and purpose which it was necessary
to determine previous to any discussion of
the subject, on subsequent facts to presume to
say that God ought not in such a way to have
formed man, because the issue was other than
what was assumed to be^^ proper for God.
We ought rather, =* after duly considering that
it behoved God so to create man, to leave this fl
consideration unimpaired, and to survey the im
other aspects of the case. It is, no doubt, an
easy process for persons who take offence at
the fall of man, before they have looked into
the facts of his creation, to impute the blame
of what happened to the Creator, without any J|
examination of His purpose. To conclude: *
the goodness of God, then fully considered
from the beginning of His works, will be
enough to convince us that nothing evil could


i6 Bonus consisterct.
'7 Ita demum,
i8 Proinde.
'9 Fortior,
=0 Mentis.
2' Constituta est.

=" Our author's word invenitur (in the singular) combines the
bonitas and ratio in one view.
23 The verb is subj., " deceret.
"4 Sed, with oportet understood.


I


CHAP. VIII.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


303


possibly have come forth from God; and the
liberty of man will, after a second thought,'
show us that it alone is chargeable with the
fault which itself committed.

CHAP. VII. — IF GOD HAD ANYHOW CHECKED
man's liberty, MARCION WOULD HAVE BEEN
READY WITH ANOTHER AND OPPOSITE CAVIL.
man's fall FORESEEN BY GOD. PROVISION
MADE FOR IT REMEDIALLY AND CONSISTENTLY
WITH HIS TRUTH AND GOODNESS.

By such a conclusion all is reserved' unim-
paired to God; both His natural goodness,
and the purposes of His governance and fore-
knowledge, and the abundance of His power.
You ought, however, to deduct from God's
attributes both His supreme earnestness of
purpose 3 and most excellent truth in His
whole creation, if you would cease to inquire
whether anything could have happened against
the will of God. For, while holding this
earnestness and truth of the good God, which
are indeed * capable of proof from the rational
creation, you will not wonder at the fact that
God did not interfere to prevent the occur-
rence of what He wished not to happen, in
order that He might keep from harm what
He wished. For, since He had once for all
allowed (and, as we have shown, worthily al-
lowed) to man freedom of will and mastery of
himself, surely He from His very authority
in creation permitted f/iese gifts to be enjoyed :
to be enjoyed, too, so far as lay in Himself,
according to His own character as God, that
is, for good (for who would permit anything
hostile to himself?); and, so far as lay in
man, according to the impulses of his liberty
(for who does not, when giving anything to
any one to enjoy, accompany the gift with a
permission to enjoy it with all his heart and
will?). The necessary consequence, s there-
fore, was, that God must separate from the
liberty which He had once for all bestowed
upon man (in other words, keep within Him-
self), both His foreknowledge and power,
through which He might have prevented
man's falling into danger when attempting
wrongly to enjoy his liberty. Now, if He had
interposed. He would have rescinded the lib-
erty of man's will, which He had permitted
with set purpose, and in goodness. But, sup-
pose God had interposed; suppose Him to
have abrogated man's liberty, by warning him
from the tree, and keeping off the subtle ser-
pent from his interview with the woman;


' Recogitata. [Again, a noble Theodicy.]

2 Salva.

3 Gravitatem.

4 Sed, for scilicet, not unfrequent with our author.

5 That is, from the Marcionite position referred to in the sec-
ond sentence of this chapter, in opposition to that of Tertullian
which follows.


would not Marcion then exclaim, What a frivo-
lous, unstable, and faithless Lord, cancelling
the gifts He had bestowed ! Why did He
allow any liberty of will, if He afterwards
withdrew it ? Why withdraw it after allowing
it? Let Him choose where to brand Himself
with error, either in His original constitution
of man, or in His subsequent abrogation
thereof ! If He had checked (man's free-
dom), would He not then seem to have been
rather deceived, through want of foresight into
the future ? But in giving it full scope, who
would not say that He did so in ignorance of
the issue of things ? God, however, did fore-
know that man would make a bad use of his
created constitution; and yet what can be so
worthy of God as His earnestness of purpose,
and the truth of His created works, be they
what they may? Man must see, if he failed
to make the most of^ the good gift he had
received, how that he was himself guilty in
respect of the law which he did not choose to
keep, and not that the Lawgiver was com-
mitting a fraud against His own law, by not
permitting its injunctions to be fulfilled.
Whenever you are inclined to indulge in such
censure ^ (and it is the most becoming for you)
against the Creator, recall gently to your
mind in His behalf^ His earnestness, and en-
durance, and truth, in having given complete-
ness 5 to His creatures both as rational and
good.

CHAP. VIII. MAN, ENDUED WITH LIBERTY,

SUPERIOR TO THE ANGELS. OVERCOMES EVEN
THE ANGEL WHICH LURED HIM TO HIS FALL,
WHEN REPENTANT AND RESUMING OBEDIENCE
TO GOD.

For it was not merely that he might live
the natural life that God had produced man,
but'° that he should live virtuously, that is,
in relation to God and to His law. Accord-
ingly, God gave him to live when he was formed
into a living soul; but He charged him to live
virtuously when he was required to obey a law.
So also God shows that man was not consti-
tuted for death, by now wishing that he should
be restored to life, preferring the sinner's re-
pentance to his death." As, therefore, God
designed for man a condition of life, so man
brought on himself a state of death; and this,
too, neither through infirmity nor through ig-
norance, so that no blame can be imputed to
the Creator. No doubt it was an angel who
was the seducer; but then the victim of that
seduction was free, and master of himself;


6 Si non bene dispunxisset.

7 Peroratunis.

8 Tibi insusurra pro Creatore.

9 Functo.

'o Ut non, "as if he were not," etc.
" Ezek. xviii. 23.


304


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book II.


and as being the image and likeness of God,
was stronger than any angel; and as being,
too, the afflatus of the Divine Being, was
nobler than that material spirit of which angels
were made. Who maketh^ says he, His angels
spirits y and His ministers a flame of fire. ^ He
would not have made all things subject to man,
if he had been too weak for the dominion,
and inferior to the angels, to whom He as-
signed no such subjects; nor would He have
put the burden of law upon him, if he had
been incapable of sustaining so great a weight;
nor, again, would He have threatened with
the penalty of death a creature whom He
knew to be guiltless on the score of his help-
lessness: in short, if He had made him infirm,
it would not have been by liberty and inde-
pendence of will, but rather by the withhold-
ing from him these endowments. And thus
it comes to pass, that even now also, the same
human being, the same substance of his soul,
the same condition as Adam's, is made con-
queror over the same devil by the self-same
liberty and power of his will, when it moves
in obedience to the laws of God.''

CHAP. IX. ANOTHER CAVIL ANSWERED, I.E.,

THE FALL IMPUTABLE TO GOD, BECAUSE MAN's
SOUL IS A PORTION OF THE SPIRITUAL ES-
SENCE OF THE CREATOR. THE DIVINE AFFLA-
TUS NOT IN FAULT IN THE SIN OF MAN, BUT
THE HUMAN WILL WHICH WAS ADDITIONAL
TO IT.

But, you say, in what way soever the sub-
stance of the Creator is found to be susceptible
of fault, when the afflatus of God, that is to
say, the soul,^ offends in man, it cannot but
be that that fault of the portion is referrible
to the original whole. ^ Now, to meet this ob-
jection, we must explain the nature* of the
soul. We must at the outset hold fast the
meaning of the Greek scripture, which has
afflatus^ not spirit. s Some interpreters of the
Greek, without reflecting on the difference of
the words, and careless about their exact
meaning, put spirit for afflatus; they thus af-
ford to heretics an opportunity of tarnishing^
the Spirit of God, that is to say, God Himself,
with default. And now comes the question.
Afflatus^ observe then, is less than spirit, al-
though it comes from spirit; it is the spirit's


* Ps. civ. 4.

= [On capp. viii. and ix. See Kaye's references in notes p. 178
et seqq^

3 Anima, for animus. This meaning seems required through-
out this passage, where afterwards occurs the phrase immortalis
anima.

4 Qualitas.

5 II«'oi7J', not irveOina ; so the Vulgate has s/>iraculum, not
spiritiim. [Kaye (p. 247) again refers to Profr. Andrews Norton
of Harvard for valuable remarks concerning the use of the word
spiritus by the ancients. Evidences^ Vol. III. p. 160, note 7.]

<5Infuscandi.


gentle breeze, ' but it is not the spirit. Now
a breeze is rarer than the wind; and although
it proceeds from wind, yet a breeze is not the
wind. One may call a breeze the image of
the spirit. In the same manner, man is the
image of God, that is, of spirit; for God is
spirit. Afflatus is therefore the image of the
spirit. Now the image is not in any case
equal to the very thing.^ It is one thing to
be like the reality, and another thing to be
the reality itself. So, although the afflatus is
the image of the spirit, it is yet not possible
to compare the image of God in such a way,
that, because the reality — that is, the spirit,
or in other words, the Divine Being — is fault-
less, therefore the afflatus also, that is to say,
the image, ought not by any possibility to
have done wrong. In this respect will the
image be less than the reality, and the afflatus
inferior to the spirit, in that, while it possesses
beyond doubt the true lineaments of divinity,
such as an immortal soul, freedom and its
own mastery over itself, foreknowledge in a
great degree,^ reasonableness, capacity of un-
derstanding and knowledge, it is even in these
respects an image still, and never amounts to
the actual power of Deity, nor to absolute
exemption from fault, — a property which is
only conceded to God, that is, to the reality,
and which is simply incompatible with an
image. An image, although it may express
all the lineaments of the reality, is yet wanting
in its intrinsic power; it is destitute of motion.
In like manner, the soul, the image of the
spirit, is unable to express the simple power
thereof, that is to say, its happy exemption
from sinning." Were it otherwise," it would
not be soul, but spirit; not man, who received
a soul, but God. Besides, to take another
view of the matter," not everything which per-
tains to God will be regarded as God, so that
you would not maintain that His afflatus was
God, that is, exempt from fault, because it is
the breath of God. And in an act of your
own, such as blowing into a flute, you would
not thereby make the flute human, although
it was your own human breath which you
breathed into it, precisely as God breathed of
His own Spirit. In fact,'^ the Scripture, by A
expressly saying *-* that God breathed into "B
man's nostrils the breath of life, and that man
became thereby a living soul, not a life-giving
spirit, has distinguished that soul from the
condition of the Creator. The work must


7 Aurulam.

8 Veritati.

9 Plerumque.

JoNon delmquendi felicitatem.
" Ceterum.
12 Et alias autem.
»3 Denique.
'4 Gen. li. 7.


CHAP. X.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


305


necessarily be distinct from the' workman, and
it is inferior to him. The pitcher will not
be the potter, although made by the potter;
nor in like manner, will the afflatus^ because
made by the spirit, be on that account the
spirit. The soul has often been called by the
same name as the breath. You should also take
care that* no descent be made from the breath
to a still lower quality. So you have granted
(you say) the infirmity of the soul, which you
denied before ! Undoubtedly, when you de-
mand for it an equality with God, that is, a
freedom from fault, I contend that it is infirm.
But when the comparison is challenged with
an angel, I am compelled to maintain that the
head over all things is the stronger of the two,
to whom the angels are ministers,' who is
destined to be the judge of angels,^ if he shall
stand fast in the law of God — an obedience
which he refused at first. Now this disobedi-
ence 3 it was possible for the afflatus of God
to commit: it was possible, but it was not
proper. The possibility lay in its slenderness
of nature, as being the breath and not the
spirit; the impropriety, however, arose from
its power of will, as being free, and not a slave.
It was furthermore assisted by the warning
against committing sin under the threat of
incurring death, which was meant to be a sup-
port for its slender nature, and a direction
for its liberty of choice. So that the soul can
no longer appear to have sinned, because it
has an affinity with God, that is to say, through
the afflatus, but rather through that which was
an addition to its nature, that is, through its
free-will, which was indeed given to it by God
in accordance with His purpose and reason,
but recklessly employed* by man according
as he chose. This, then, being the case, the
entire course s of God's action is purged from
all imputation to evil. For the liberty of the
will will not retort its own wrong on Him by
whom it was bestowed, but on him by whom
it was improperly used. What is the evil,
then, which you want to impute to the Creator ?
If it is man's sin, it will not be God's fault,
because it is man's doing; nor is that Being
to be regarded as the author of the sin, who
turns out to be its forbidder, nay, its con-
demner. If death is the evil, death will not
give the reproach of being its own author to
Him who threatened it, but to him who de-
spised it. For by his contempt he introduced
it, which assuredly^ would not have appeared
had man not despised it.


'Heb. i. 14.

2 I Cor. vi. 3.

3 Hoc ipsum, referring to the noluit of the preceding clause.

4 Agitatum.

5 Dispositio.

6 Utique.

20


CHAP. X. — ANOTHER CAVIL MET, I.E., THE DEVIL
WHO INSTIGATED MAN TO SIN HIMSELF THE
CREATURE OF GOD. NAY, THE PRIMEVAL
CHERUB ONLY WAS GOD's WORK. THE DEVIL-
ISH NATURE SUPERADDED BY WILFULNESS.
IN man's RECOVERY THE DEVIL IS VANQUISH-
ED IN A CONFLICT ON HIS OWN GROUND,

If, however, you choose to transfer the ac-
count ^ of evil from man to the devil as the
instigator of sin, and in this way, too, throw
the blame on the Creator, inasmuch as He
created the devil, — for He maketh those
spirtual beings, the angels — then it will follow
that^ what was made, that is to say, the angel,
will belong to Him who made it; while that
which was not made by God, even the devil,
or accuser,' cannot but have been made by
itself; and this by false detraction '° from God:
first, how that God had forbidden them to eat
of every tree; then, with the pretence that
they should not die if they ate; thirdly, as if
God grudged them the property of divinity.
Now, whence originated this malice of lying
and deceit towards man, and slandering of
God ? Most certainly not from God, who
made the angel good after the fashion of His
good works. Indeed, before he became the
devil, he stands forth the wisest of creatures;
and " wisdom is no " evil. If you turn to the 1
prophecy of Ezekiel, you will at once perceive
that this angel was both by creation good and
by choice corrupt. For in the person of the
prince of Tyre it is said in reference to the
devil: " Moreover, the word of the Lord came
unto me, saying. Son of man, take up a lam-
entation upon the king of Tyrus, and say
unto him. Thus saith the Lord God: Thou
sealest up the sum, full of wisdom, perfect in
beauty" (this belongs to him as the highest
of the angels, the archangel, the wisest of all);
"amidst the delights of the paradise of thy
God wast thou born " (for it was there, where
God had made the angels in a shape which
resembled the figure of animals). "Every
precious stone was thy covering, the sardius,
the topaz, and the diamond, the beryl, the
onyx, and the jasper, the sapphire, the eme-
rald, and the carbuncle; and with gold hast
thou filled thy barns and thy treasuries. From
the day when thou wast created, when I set
thee, a cherub, upon the holy mountain of
God, thou wast in the midst of stones of fire,
thou wast irreproachable in thy days, from
the day of thy creation, until thine iniquities
were discovered. By the abundance of thy


7 Elogium.

8 Ergo.

9 Delator.

10 Deferendo, in reference to the word delator, our author's
synonyme for SuijSoAos.
" N'^isi.


io6


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book II.


merchandise thou hast filled thy storehouses,
and thou hast sinned," etc' This descrip-
tion, it is manifest, properly belongs to the
transgression of the angel, and not to the
prince's: for none among human beings was
either born in the paradise of God, not even
Adam himself, who was rather translated
thither; nor placed with a cherub upon God's
holy mountain, that is to say, in the heights
of heaven, from which the Lord testifies that
Satan fell; nor detained amongst the stones
of fire, and the flashing rays of burning con-
stellations, whence Satan was cast down like
lightning." No, it is none else than the very
author of sin who was denoted in the person
of a sinful man: he was once irreproachable,
at the time of his creation, formed for good
by God, as by the good Creator of irreproach-
able creatures, and adorned with every angelic
glory, and associated with God, good with
the Good; but afterwards of his own accord
removed to evil. From the day when thine
iniquities ^^ says he, mere discovered^ — attribut-
ing to him those injuries wherewith he in-
jured man when he was expelled from his al-
legiance to God, — even from that time did he
sin, when he propagated his sin, and thereby
plied " the abundance of his merchandise,"
that is, of his wickedness, even the tale^ of
his transgressions, because he was himself as
a spirit no less (than man) created, with the
faculty of free-will. For God would in nothing
fail tb"endow a being who was to be next to
Himself with a liberty of this kind. Never-
theless, by precondemning him, God testified
that he had departed from the condition s of
his created nature, through his own lusting
after the wickedness which was spontaneously
conceived within him; and at the same time,
by conceding a permission for the operation
of his designs, He acted consistently with the
purpose of His own goodness, deferring the
devil's destruction for the self-same reason as
He postponed the restitution of man. For
He afforded room for a conflict, wherein man
might crush his enemy with the same freedom
of his will as had made him succumb to him
(proving that the fault was all his own, not
God's), and so worthily recover his salvation
by a victory; wherein also the devil might
' receive a more bitter punishment, through
being vanquished by him whom he had pre-
viously injured; and wherein God might be
discovered to be so much the more good, as
waiting* for man to return from his present


life to a more glorious paradise, with a right
to pluck of the tree of life.^

CHAP. XI. — IF, AFTER MAN's SIN, GOD EXER-
CISED HIS ATTRIBUTE OF JUSTICE AND JUDG-
MENT, THIS WAS COMPATIBLE WITH HIS
GOODNESS, AND ENHANCES THE TRUE IDEA
OF THE PERFECTION OF GOD's CHARACTER.

Up to the fall of man, therefore, from the
beginning God was simply good; after that
He became a judge both severe and, as the
Marcionites will have it, cruel. Woman is at
once condemned to bring forth in sorrow, and
to serve her husband,^ although before she
had heard without pain the increase of her
race proclaimed with the blessing, Increase
and multiply, and although she had been des-
tined to be a help and not a slave to her
male partner. Immediately the earth is also
cursed,' which before was blessed. Immedi-
ately spring up briers and thorns, where once
had grown grass, and herbs, and fruitful trees.
Immediately arise sweat and labour for bread,
where previously on every tree was yielded
spontaneous food and untilled '° nourishment.
Thenceforth it is " man to the ground," and
not as before, ''from the ground; to death
thenceforth, but before, to life; thenceforth
with coats of skins, but before, nakedness
without a blush. Thus God's prior goodness
was from " nature. His subsequent severity
from " a cause. The one was innate, the
other accidental; the one His own, the other
adapted;" the one issuing from Him, the
other admitted by Him. But then nature
could not have rightly permitted His good-
ness to have gone on inoperative, nor the
cause have allowed His severity to have es-
caped in disguise or concealment. God pro-
vided the one for Himself, the other for the
occasion. '3 You should now set about show-
ing also that the position of a judge is allied
with evil, who have been dreaming of another
god as a purely good one— solely because you
cannot u?tderstand the Deity to be a judge; al-
though we have proved God to be also a judge.
Or if not a judge, at any rate a perverse and
useless originator of a discipline which is not
to be vindicated — in other words, not to be
judged. You do not, however, disprove God's
being a judge, who have no proof to show that
He is a judge. You will undoubtedly have
to accuse justice herself, which provides the
judge, or else to reckon her among the specif^


' Ezek. xxviii. ix-i6 (Sept.).

= Luke X. i8.

3 I.susurae = " injuries." 'Aiix^/utara iv trot — Iniquitatcs

te."— HiERON.

4Censum.

5 Forma.

6 Sustinens.


7[Kaye. p. 313.]

8 Gen. iii. 16.

9 Gen. iii. 18.
'o Secura.

Ji Secundum.
'2 Acrommodata.
«3 Kei.


-CHAP. XIII.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


307


of evil, that is, to add injustice to the titles
of goodness. But then justice is an evil, if
injustice is a good. And yet you are forced
to declare injustice to be one of the worst of
things, and by the same rule are constrained
to class justice amongst the most excellent.
Since there is nothing hostile' to evil which
is not good, and no enemy of good which is
not evil. It follows, then, that as injustice
is an evil, so in the same degree is justice a
good. Nor should it be regarded as simply
a species of goodness, but as the practical
observance of it, because goodness (unless
justice be so controlled as to be just) will not
be goodness, if it be unjust. For nothing is
good which is unjust; while everything, on
the other hand, which is just is good.

CHAP. XII. THE ATTRIBUTES OF GOODNESS AND

JUSTICE SHOULD NOT BE SEPARATED. THEY
ARE COMPATIBLE IN THE TRUE GOD. THE
FUNCTION OF JUSTICE IN THE DIVINE BEING
DESCRIBED.

Since, therefore, there is this union and
agreement between goodness and justice, you
cannot prescribe ^ their separation. With
what face will you determine the separation
of your two Gods, regarding in their separate
condition one as distinctively the good God,
and the other as distinctively the just God ?
Where the just is, there also exists the good.
In short, from the very first the Creator was
both good and also just. And both His at-
tributes advanced together. His goodness
created, His justice arranged, the world; and in
this process it even then decreed that the world
should be formed of good materials, because
it took counsel with goodness. The work of
^UcA justice is apparent, in the separation which
was pronounced between light and darkness,
between day and night, between heaven and
earth, between the water above and the water
beneath, between the gathering together of
the sea and the mass of the dry land, between
the greater lights and the lesser, between the
luminaries of the day and those of the night,
between male and female, between the tree of
knowledge of death and of life, between the
world and paradise, between the aqueous and
the earth-born animals. As goodness con-
ceived all things, so did justice discriminate
them. With the determination of the latter,
everything was arranged and set in order.
Every site and quality '^ of the elements, their
effect, motion, and state, the rise and setting
of each, are the judicial determinations of


* iEmulum.
2 Tutela.

3Cavere. This is Oehler's reading, and best suits the sense of
the passage and the style of our author.

* Habitus.


the Creator. Do not suppose that His func-
tion as a judge must be defined as beginning
when evil began, and so tarnish His justice
with the cause of evil. By such considera-
tions, then, do we show that this attribute ad-
vanced in company with goodness, the author s
of all things, — worthy of being herself, too,
deemed innate and natural, and not as acci-
dentally accruing*^ to God, inasmuch as she
was found to be in Him, her Lord, the arbiter
of His works.

CHAP. XIII. — FURTHER DESCRIPTION OF THE

DIVINE justice; since the fall of man IT

HAS REGULATED THE DIVINE GOODNESS.
god's claims on our LOVE AND OUR FEAR
RECONCILED.

But yet, when evil afterwards broke out,
and the goodness of God began now to have
an adversary to contend against, God's justice
also acquired another function, even that of
directing His goodness according to men's
application for it.^ And this is the result:
the divine goodness, being interrupted in that
free course whereby God was spontaneously
good, is now dispensed according to the
deserts of every man; it is offered to the
worthy, denied to the unworthy, taken away
from the unthankful, and also avenged on all
its enemies. Thus the entire office of justice
in this respect becomes an agency^ for good-
ness: whatever it condemns by its judgment,
whatever it chastises by its condemnation,
whatever (to use your phrase) it ruthlessly
pursues,' it, in fact, benefits with good in-
stead of injuring. Indeed, the fear of judg-
ment contributes to good, not to evil. For
good, now contending with an enemy, was
not strong enough to recommend itself '° by
itself alone. At all events, if it could do so
muchy it could not keep its ground; for it had
lost its impregnability through the foe, unless
some power of fear supervened, such as might
compel the very unwilling to seek after good,
and take care of it. But who, when so many
incentives to evil were assailing him, would
desire that good, which he could despise with
impunity? Who, again, would take care of
what he could lose without danger ? You read
how broad is the road to evil," how thronged
in comparison with the opposite: would not
all glide down that road were there nothing in
it to fear? We dread the Creator's tremen-
dous threats, and yet scarcely turn away from


5 Auctrice.

6 Obventiciam.

7 Secundum adversionem

8 Procuratio.

9 Saivit.

'o Commendari.
" Matt. vii. 13.


;o8


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book II.


evil. What, if He threatened not? Will you
call this justice an evil, when it is all un-
favourable to evil ? Will you deny it to be a
good, when it has its eye towards ' good ?
What sort of being ought you to wish God to
be? Would it be right to prefer that He
should be such, that sins might flourish under
Him, and the devil make mock at Him?
Would you suppose Him to be a good God,
who should be able to make a man worse by
security in sin? Who is the author of good,
but He who also requires it ? In like manner,
who is a stranger to evil, except Him who is
its enemy? Who its enemy, besides Him
who is its conqueror ? Who else its conqueror,
than He who is its punisher? Thus God is
wholly good, because in all things He is on
the side of good. In fact. He is omnipotent,
because able both to help and to hurt. Merely
to profit is a comparatively small matter, be-
cause it can do nothing else than a good turn.
From such a conduct ^ with what confidence
can I hope for good, if this is its only ability ?
How can I follow after the reward of inno-
cence, if I have no regard to the requital of
wrong-doing ? I must needs have my doubts
whether he might not fail in recompensing
oiie or other alternative, who was unequal in
his resources to meet both. Thus far, then,
justice is the very fulness of the Deity
Himself, manifesting God as both a perfect
father and a perfect master: a father in His
mercy, a master in His discipline; a father in
the mildness of His power, a master in its
severity; a father who must be loved with
dutiful affection, a master who must needs be
feared; be loved, because He prefers mercy
to sacrifice; ^ be feared because He dislikes sin;
be loved, because He prefers the sinner's re-
pentance to his death ;^ be feared, because
He dislikes the sinners who do not repent.
Accordingly, the divine law enjoins duties in
respect of both these attributes: Thou shalt
love God, and. Thou shalt fear God. It pro-
posed one for the obedient man, the other
for the transgressor.5

CHAP. XIV. EVIL OF TWO KINDS, PENAL AND

CRIMINAL. IT IS NOT OF THE LATTER SORT
THAT GOD IS THE AUTHOR, BUT ONLY OF THE
FORMER, WHICH ARE PENAL, AND INCLUDED
IN HIS JUSTICE.

On all occasions does God meet you: it is
He who smites, but also heals; who kills,
but also makes alive; who humbles, and yet
exalts; who " creates* evil," but also *' makes


* Prospicit.

» De ejusmodi.

3Hos. vi. 6.

4 Ezek. xxxiii. ii.

5 Matt. xxii. 37 f.
^^(,^Condens.


peace; " ^ — so that from these very (contrasts ■
of His providence) I may get an answer to the . |
heretics. Behold, they say, how He acknowl-
edges Himself to be the creator of evil in the
passage, "It is I who create evil." They
take a word whose one form reduces to con-
fusion and ambiguity two kinds of evils (be-
cause both sins and punishments are called
ei'ils), and will have Him in every passage to
be understood as the creator of all evil things,
in order that He may be designated the author
of evil. We, on the contrary, distinguish be-
tween the two meanings of the word in ques-
tion, and, by separating evils of sin from penal
evils, mala culpa from mala po'fKB, confine to
each of the two classes its own author, — the
devil as the author of the sinful evils [culpa),.
and God as the creator of penal evils {pa'mr) ; so-
that the one class shall be accounted as morally
bad, and the other be classed as the opera-
tions of justice passing penal sentences against
the evils of sin. Of the latter class of evils
which are compatible with justice, God is
therefore avowedly the creator. They are, no
doubt, evil to those by whom they are endured,
but still on their own account good, as being
just and defensive of good and hostile to sin.
In this respect they are, moreover, worthy of
God. Else prove them to be unjust, in order
to show them deserving of a place in the sin-
ful class, that is to say, evils of injustice; be-
cause if they turn out to belong to justice,
they will be no longer evil things, but good —
evil only to the bad, by whom even directly
good things are condemned as evil. In this
case, you must decide that man, although the
wilful contemner of the divine law, unjustly
bore the doom which he would like to have
escaped; that the wickedness of those days
was unjustly smitten by the deluge, afterwards
by the fire (of Sodom); that Egypt, although
most depraved and superstititious, and, worse
still, the harasser of its guest-population,^
was unjustly stricken with the chastisement
of its ten plagues. God hardens the heart of
Pharaoh. He deserved, however, to be in- —
fluenced' to his destruction, who had already «
denied God, already in his pride so often re- ■'
jected His ambassadors, accumulated heavy
burdens on His people, and (to sum up all)
as an Egyptian, had long been guilty before j
God of Gentile idolatry, worshipping the ibis -^
and the crocodile in preference to the living f
God. Even His own people did God visit in *'
their ingratitude.'" Against young lads, too,


7 See Isa. xlv. 7.

SHospitispopuli conflictatricem.

9Subministrari. In A/>oL ii., the verb 7Hin{strarc is used to

indicate Satan's power in influencing men. [The tran.-^Iator here

corrects his own -woxA seduced ^nA \ have substituted his better

word influenced. The Lord gave him over to Satan's influence;]

»o Num. xi. and xxi.


I


CHAP. XVI. J


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


309


did He send forth bears, for their irreverence
to the prophet.'

CHAP. XV. — THE SEVERITY OF GOD COMPATIBLE
WITH REASON AND JUSTICE. WHEN INFLICT-
ED, NOT MEANT TO BE ARBITRARY, BUT

REMEDIAL.

Consider well,' then, before all things the
justice of the Judge; and if its purpose ^ be
clear, then the severity thereof, and the opera-
tions of the severity in its course, will appear
compatible with reason and justice. Now,
that we may not linger too long on the point,
(I would challenge you to) assert the other
reasons also, that you may condemn the
Judge's sentences; extenuate the delinquen-
cies of the sinner, that you may blame his ju-
dicial conviction. Never mind censuring the
Judge; rather prove Him to be an unjust one.
Well, then, even though -^ He required the
sins of the fathers at the hands of the children,
the hardness of the people made such reme-
dial measures necessary s for them, in order
that, having their posterity in view, they might
obey the divine law. For who is there that
feels not a greater care for his children than
for himself? Again, if the blessing of the
fathers was destined Hkewise for their off-
spring, previous to ^ any merit on the part of
these, why might not the guilt of the fathers
also redound to their children ? As was the
grace, so was the offence; so that the grace
and the offence equally ran down through the
whole race, with the reservation, indeed, of
that subsequent ordinance by which it became
possible to refrain from saying, that "the
fathers had eaten a sour grape, and the chil-
dren's teeth were set on edge:"^ in other
words, that the father should not bear the in-
iquity of the son, nor the son the iniquity of
the father, but that every man should be
chargeable with his own sin; so that the harsh-
ness of the law having been reduced^ after
the hardness of the people, justice was no
longer to judge the race, but individuals. If,
however, you accept the gospel of truth, you
will discover on whom recoils the sentence of
the Judge, when requiting on sons the sins
of their fathers, even on those who had been
(hardened enough) to imprecate spontane-
ously on themselves this condemnation:
*' His blood be on us, and on our children." ^
Thisy therefore, the providence of God has


ordered throughout its course, '° even as it had
heard it.

CHAP. XVI. — TO THE SEVERITY OF GOD THERE
BELONG ACCESSORY QUALITIES, COMPATIBLE
WITH JUSTICE. IF HUMAN PASSIONS ARE
PREDICATED OF GOD, THEY MUST NOT BE
MEASURED ON THE SCALE OF HUMAN IMPER-
FECTION.

Even His severity then is good, because
just: when the judge is good, that is just.
Other qualities likewise are good, by means
of which the good work of a good severity runs
out its course, whether wrath, or jealousy," or
sternness." For all these are as indispensable ''
to severity as severity is to justice. The
shamelessness of an age, which ought to have
been reverent, had to be avenged. Accord-
ingly, qualities which pertain to the judge,
when they are actually free from blame, as
the judge himself is, will never be able to be
charged upon him as a fault.''* What would
be said, if, when you thought the doctor nec-
essary, you were to find fault with his instru-
ments, because they cut, or cauterize, or am-
putate, or tighten; whereas there could be no
doctor of any value without his professional
tools? Censure, if you please, the practi-
tioner who cuts badly, amputates clumsily, is
rash in his cautery; and even blame his imple-
ments as rough tools of his art. Your conduct
is equally unreasonable, '^ when you allow
indeed that God is a judge, but at the same
time destroy those operations and dispositions
by which He discharges His judicial func-
tions. We are taught '^ God by the prophets,
and by Christ, not by the philosophers nor
by Epicurus. We who believe that God really
lived on earth, and took upon Him the low
estate of human form,'^ for the purpose of
man's salvation, are very far from thinking
as those do who refuse to believe that God
cares for'^ anything. Whence has found its
way to the heretics an argument of this kind:
If God is angry, and jealous, and roused, and
grieved. He must therefore be corrupted, and
must ther-efore die. Fortunately, however,
it is a part of the creed of Christians even to
believe that God did die,'' and yet that He is
alive for evermore. Superlative is their folly,
who prejudge divine things from human; so


1 2 Kings ii. 23, 24. [See notes 4, 5, 9, following,]

2 Dispice.

3 Ratio.

4 Nam et si.

5 Compulerat.
*Sine adhuc.
7jer. xxxi. 29.

^Edomita, cf. chap. xix. sub init. and xxix.
■9 Matt, xxvii. 25.


10 Omnis providentia.
" i'Emulatio.

12 Saevitia.

13 Debita.

14 Exprobrari.

15 Proinde est enim.

16 Erudimur.
'7 Habitus.

18 Curare.

19 [See Vol. II. p. 71 (this series), for an early example of this
Cotnmunicatio idiomatufH.']


lO


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[UOOK II.


that, because in man's corrupt condition tiiere
are found passions of this description, there-
fore there must be deemed to exist in God
also sensations * of the same kind. Discrimi-
nate between the natures, and assign to them
their respective senses, which are as diverse
as their natures require, although they seem
to have a community of designations. We
read, indeed, of God's right hand, and eyes,
and feet: these must not, however, be com-
pared with those of human beings, because
they are associated in one and the same name.
Now, as great as shall be the difference be-
tween the divine and the human body, al-
though their members pass under identical
names, so great will also be the diversity be-
tween the divine and the human soul, not-
withstanding that their sensations are desig-
nated by the same names. These sensations
in the human being are rendered just as cor-
rupt by the corruptibility of man's substance,
as in God they are rendered incorruptible by
the incorruption of the divine essence. Do
you really believe the Creator to be God ?
By all means, is your reply. How then do
you suppose that in God there is anything
human, and not that all is divine ? Him whom
you do not deny to be God, you confess to be
not human; because, when you confess Him
to be God, you have, in fact, already deter-
mind that He is undoubtedly diverse from
every sort of human conditions. Furthermore,
although you allow, with others, = that man
was inbreathed by God into a living soul, not
God by man, it is yet palpably absurd of you
to be placing human characteristics in God
rather than divine ones in man, and clothing
God in the likeness of man, instead of man in
the image of God. And this, therefore, is to
be deemed the likeness of God in man, that
the human soul have the same emotions and
sensations as God, although they are not of
the same kind; differing as they do both in
their conditions and their issues according to
their nature. Then, again, with respect to
the opposite sensations, — I mean meekness,
patience, mercy, and the very parent of them
all, goodness, — why do you form your opinion
of 3 the divine displays of these (from the
human qualities) ? For we indeed do not
possess them in perfection, because it is God
alone who is perfect. So also in regard to
those others, — namely, anger and irritation:
we are not affected by them in so happy a
manner, because God alone is truly happy,
by reason of His property of incorruptibility.
Angry He will possibly be, but not irritated,


» Status.

2 Pariter.

3 Prsesumitis. [So of generation, Sonship, etc.]


nor dangerously tempted; ^ He will be moved, »
but not subverted. 5 All appliances He must I
needs use, because of all contingencies; as ■
many sensations as there are causes: anger
because of the wicked, and indignation be-
cause of the ungrateful, and jealousy because
of the proud, and whatsoever else is a hinder-
ance to the evil. So, again, mercy on ac-
count of the erring, and patience on account
of the impenitent, and pre-eminent resources ^
on account of the meritorious, and whatsoever
is necessary to the good. All these affections
He is moved by in that peculiar manner of
His own, in which it is profoundly fit^ that
He should be affected; and it is owing to Him
that man is also similarly affected in a way
which is equally his own.

CHAP. XVII. TRACE GOD's GOVERNMENT IN

HISTORY AND IN HIS PRECEPTS, AND YOU WILL.
FIND IT FULL OF HIS GOODNESS.

These considerations show that the entire
order of God as Judge is an operative one,
and (that I may express myself in worthier
words) protective of His Catholic^ and su-
preme goodness, which, removed as it is from
judiciary emotions, and pure in its own con-
dition, the Marcionites refuse to acknowledge
to be in one and the same Deity, " raining on
the just and on the unjust, and making His
sun to rise on the evil and on the good," » —
a bounty which no other god at all exercises.
It is true that Marcion has been bold enough
to erase from the gospel this testimony of
Christ to the Creator; but yet the world itself
is inscribed iiny/i the goodness of its Maker ^
and the inscription is read by each man's
conscience. Nay, this very long-suffering of
the Creator will tend to the condemnation of
Marcion; that patience, (I mean,) which waits
for the sinner's repentance rather than his
death, which prefers mercy to sacrifice,'" avert-
ing from the Ninevites the ruin which had
been already denounced against them," and
vouchsafing to Hezekiah's tears an extension
of his life," and restoring his kingly state to
the monarch of Babylon after his complete
repentance; '3 that mercy, too, which conceded
to the devotion of the people the son of Saul
when about to die,'* and gave free forgiveness
to David on his confessing his sins against


4 Pertclitabitur.

5 Evertetur.

6 Praestantiam, " Qua scilicet praestat prsemia vel supplicia "^
(Rigalt.).

7 Condecet.

8 Catholic, because diffused throughout creation (Pamelius).

9 Matt. V. 45. T. predicates this (by the word fluentevt^
strictly of the '^^ goodness ^^ of God, the guam.

»o Hos. vi. 6.
" Jonah iii. 10.
»2 2 Kin^s XX. I.
»3 Dan. IV. ^3.
'4 I Sam. XIV. 45.


I

I


CHAP. XVill.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


311


the house of Uriah;' which also restored the
house of Israel as often as it condemned it,
and addressed to it consolation no less fre-
quently than reproof. Do not therefore look
at God simply as Judge, but turn your atten-
tion also to examples of His conduct as the
Most Good.^ Noting Him, as you do, when
He takes vengeance, consider Him likewise
when He shows mercy. ^ In the scale, against
His severity place His gentleness. When
you shall have discovered both qualities to
co-exist in the Creator, you will find in Him
that very circumstance which induces you to
think there is another God. Lastly, come
and examine into His doctrine, discipline, pre-
cepts, and counsels. You will perhaps say
that there are equally good prescriptions in
human laws. But Moses and God existed be-
fore all your Lycurguses and Solons. There
is not one after-age ^ which does not take from
primitive sources. At any rate, my Creator
did not learn from your God to issue such
commandments as: Thou shalt not kill; thou
shalt not commit adultery; thou shalt not
steal; thou shalt not bear false witness; thou
shalt not covet what is thy neighbour's;
honour thy father and thy mother; and, thou
shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. To these
prime counsels of innocence, chastity, and
justice, and piety, are also added prescriptions
of humanity, as when every seventh year
slaves are released for liberty; s when at the
same period the land is spared from tillage;
a place is also granted to the needy; and
from the treading ox's mouth the muzzle is
removed, for the enjoyment of the fruit of
his labour before him, in order that kindness
first shown in the case of animals might be
raised from such rudiments ^ to the refresh-
ment' of men.

CHAP. XVIII. — SOME OF GOD's LAWS DEFENDED
AS GOOD, WHICH THE MARCIONITES IMPEACH-
ED, SUCH AS THE LEX TALIONIS. USEFUL
PURPOSES IN A SOCIAL AND MORAL POINT OF
VIEW OF THIS, AND SUNDRY OTHER ENACT-
MENTS.

But what parts of the law can I defend as
good with a greater confidence than those
which heresy has shown such a longing for ? —
as the statute of retaliation, requiring eye for
eye, tooth for tooth, and stripe for stripe.^
Now there is not here any smack of a per-


I 2 Sam. xii. 13.
= Optimi.

3 Indulget.

4 Posteritas.

* Lev. XXV. 4, etc.

^ Erudiretur.

7 Refrigeria. [i Cor. ix. 10.]

^Ex. xxi. 24.


mission to mutual injury; but rather, on the
whole, a provision for restraining violence.
To a people which was very obdurate, and
wanting in faith towards God, it might seem
tedious, and even incredible, to expect from
God that vengeance which was subsequently
to be declared by the prophet: "Vengeance
is mine; I will repay, saith the Lord."'
Therefore, in the meanwhile, the commission
of wrong was to be checked '° by the fear of
a retribution immediately to happen; and so
the permission of this retribution was to be
the prohibition of provocation, that a stop
might thus be put to all hot-blooded " injury,
whilst by the permission of the second the
first is prevented by fear, and by this deterring
of the first the second fails to be committed.
By the same law another result is also ob-
tained," even the more ready kindling of the
fear of retaliation by reason of the very savour
of passion which is in it. There is no more
bitter thing, than to endure the very suffer-
ing which you have inflicted upon others.
When, again, the law took somewhat away
from men's food, by pronouncing unclean
certain animals which were once blessed, you
should understand this to be a measure for
encouraging continence, and recognise in it a
bridle imposed on that appetite which, while
eating angels' food, craved after the cucum-
bers and melons of the Egyptians. Recognise
also therein a precaution against those com-
panions of the appetite, even lust and luxury,
which are usually chilled by the chastening of
the appetite. '3 For "the people sat down to
eat and to drink, and rose up to play.'"*
Furthermore, that an eager wish for money
might be restrained, so far as it is caused by
the need of food, the desire for costly meat
and drink was taken out of their power.
Lastly, in order that man might be more
readily educated by God for fasting, he was
accustomed to such articles Of food as were
neither plentiful nor sumptuous, and not likely
to pamper the appetite of the luxurious. Of
course the Creator deserved all the greater
blame, because it was from His own people
that He took away food, rather than from the
more ungrateful Marcionites. As for the
burdensome sacrifices also, and the trouble-
some scrupulousness of their ceremonies 's and
oblations, no one should blame them, as if
God specially required them for Himself;
for He plainly asks, " To what purpose is the
multitude of your sacrifices unto me?" and.


9 Deut. xxxii. 35; Rom. xii. 19.
10 Repastinaretur.
" ^stuata.

12 Qua et alias.

13 Ventris.

14 Ex. xxxii. 6.
'5 Operationes.


312


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book II.


"Who hath required them at your hand?"*
But he should see herein a careful provision =
on God's part, which showed His wish to bind
to His own religion a people who were prone
to idolatry and transgression by that kind of
services wherein consisted the superstition of
that period; that He might call them away
therefrom, while requesting it to be performed
to Himself, as if He desired that no sin should
be committed in making idols.

CHAP. XIX. — THE MINUTE PRESCRIPTIONS OF
THE LAW MEANT TO KEEP THE PEOPLE DE-
■ PENDENT ON GOD. THE PROPHETS SENT BY
GOD IN PURSUANCE OF HIS GOODNESS. MANY
BEAUTIFUL PASSAGES FROM THEM QUOTED IN
ILLUSTRATION OF THIS ATTRIBUTE.

But even in the common transactions of life,
and of human intercourse at home and in
public, even to the care of the smallest ves-
sels, He in every possible manner made dis-
tinct arrangement; in order that, when they
everywhere encountered these legal instruc-
tions, they might not be at any moment out
of the sight of God. For what could better
tend to make a man happy, than having " his
delight in the law of the Lord ? " "In that
law would he meditate day and night. ^ It
was not in severity that its Author promulgated
this law, but in the interest of the highest be-
nevolence, which rather aimed at subduing*
the nation's hardness of heart, and by labori-
ous services hewing out a fealty which was (as
yet) untried in obedience: for I purposely ab-
stain from touching on the mysterious senses
of the law, considered in its spiritual and pro-
phetic relation, and as abounding in types of
almost every variety and sort. It is enough
at present, that it simply bound a man to God,
so that no one ought to find fault with it, ex-
cept him who does not choose to serve God.
To help forward this beneficent, not onerous,
purpose of the law, the prophets were also
ordained by the self-same goodness of God,
teaching precepts worthy of God, how that
men should "cease to do evil, learn to do
well, seek judgment, judge the fatherless, s
and plead for the widow: " "^ be fond of the
divine expostulations: ^ avoid contact with
the wicked:^ " let the oppressed go free: "^
dismiss the unjust sentence. '° "deal their
bread to the hungry; bring the outcast into


» Isa. i. IT, 12.

2 Industriam.

3 Ps. i. 2.

4Edomantis, cf. chap. xv. suh /in. SinA xxix.

5 Pupillo.

6 Isa. i. i6, 17.

7 Quaestiones, alluding to Isa. i. 18: ficvre Ka\ Sia\e\9o)ft.«v, \eyti
Kvpioi.

8 Alluding to Isa. Iviii. 6 : " Loose the bands of wickedness."

9 Isa. Iviii. 6.

*o A lax quotation, perhaps, of the next clause in the same verse:
"Break every yoke.'


their house; cover the naked, when they see
him; nor hide themselves from their own flesh
and kin:"" " keep their tongue from evil,
and their lips from speaking guile: depart
from evil, and do good; seek peace, and pur-
sue it: " " be angry, and sin not; that is, not
persevere in anger, or be enraged: '^ "walk
not in the counsel of the ungodly; nor stand
in the way of sinners; nor sit in the seat of
the scornful." ^-^ Where then? "Behold,
how good and how pleasant it is for brethren
to dwell together in unity; " 's meditating (as
they do) day and night in the law of the™
Lord, because "it is better to trust in theB
Lord than to put confidence in man; better to"
hope in the Lord than in man." ^"^ For what
recompense shall man receive from God ?
" He shall be like a tree planted by the rivers
of water, that bringeth forth his fruit in his
season; his leaf also shall not wither, and what-
soever he doeth shall prosper." '^ "He that
hath clean hands and a pure heart, who hath
not taken God's name in vain, nor sworn de-
ceitfully to his neighbour, he shall receive
blessing from the Lord, and mercy from the
God of his salvation."'^ " For the eyes of
the Lord are upon them that fear Him, upon
them that hope in His mercy, to deliver their
souls from death," even eternal death, "and
to nourish them in their hunger," that is, after
eternal life.'^ " Many are the afflictions of
the righteous, but the Lord delivereth them
out of them all."=~ "Precious in the sight
of the Lord is the death of His saints.""
" The Lord keepeth all their bones; not one
of them shall be broken."" The Lord will
redeem the souls of His servants. ""^ We have
adduced these few quotations from a mass of
the Creator's Scriptures; and no more, I sup-
pose, are wanted to prove Him to be a most
good God, for they sufficiently indicate both
the precepts of His goodness and the first-
fruits '* thereof.

CHAP. XX. THE MARCIONITES CHARGED GOD

WITH HAVING INSTIGATED THE HEBREWS TO
SPOIL THE EGYPTIANS. DEFENCE OF THE
DIVINE DISPENSATION IN THAT MATTER.

But these " saucy cuttles " 's (of heretics)


" Isa. Iviii. 7, slightly changed from the second to the third
person.
«2Ps. xxxiv. 13, 14.
'3 Comp. Ps. iv. 4.
14 Ps. i. 1.
'5 Ps. cxxxiii. I.
"5 Ps. cxviii. 4.
"7 Ps. J. 3.

18 Ps. xxiv. 4, 5. He has slightly misquoted the passage.
»9 Ps. xxxiii. 18, 19, slightly altered,
"o Ps. xxxiv. 19.
=' Ps. cxvi. 15.

22 Ps. xxxiv. 20, modified.

23 Ps. xxxiv. 22.

24 Praemissa.
23 Se/iife isti. Pliny, in his Nat. Hist. ix. 29, says: " The mal<

of the cuttles kind are spotted with sundry colours more dark ar


CHAP. XXI.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


313


under the figure of whom the law about things
to be eaten' prohibited this very kind of pis-
catory ahment, as soon as they find themselves
confuted, eject the black venom of their blas-
phemy, and so spread about in all directions
the object which (as is now plain) they sever-
ally have in view, when they put forth such
assertions and protestations as shall obscure
and tarnish the rekindled light * of the Crea-
tor's bounty. We will, however, follow their
wicked design, even through these black
clouds, and drag to light their tricks of dark
calumny, laying to the Creator's charge with
especial emphasis the fraud and theft of gold
and silver which the Hebrews were com-
manded by Him to practise against the Egyp-
tians. Come, unhappy heretic, I cite even
you as a witness; first look at the case of the
two nations, and then you will form a judg-
ment of the Author of the command. The
Egyptians put in a claim on the Hebrews for
these gold and silver vessels. ^ The Hebrews
assert a counter claim, alleging that by the
bond '* of their respective fathers, attested by
the written engagement of both parties, there
were due to them the arrears of that laborious
slavery of theirs, for the bricks they had so
painfully made, and the cities and palaces^
which they had built. What shall be your
verdict, you discoverer ^ of the most good God ?
That the Hebrews must admit the fraud, or
the Egyptians the compensation ? For they
maintain that thus has the question been set-
tled by the advocates on both sides, ^ of the
Egyptians demanding their vessels, and the
Hebrews claiming the requital of their labours.
But for all they say,^ the Egyptians justly
renounced their restitution-claim then and


"blackish, yea, and more firme and steady, than the female. If the
female be smitten with the trout-speare, they will come to succour
her; but she again is not so kind to them: for if the male be
stricken, she will not stand to it, but runs away. But both of them,
if they perceive that they be taken in such streights that they can-
not escape, shed from them a certain black humor like to ink; and
when the water therewith is troubled and made duskish, therein
they hide themselves, and are no more seen " (Holland's 'I'rans-
lation^ p. 250). Our epithet '''■ saucy cuttle " comes from Shakes-
pere, 2 Henry iv. 2, 4, where, however, the word seems employed
in a different sense.

^ Deut. xiv.

" Relucentem, " rekindled " by the confutation.

3 Vasa = the jewels and the raiment mentioned in Ex. iii. 22.

4 Nomine. [Here our author exhibits his tact as a juriscon-
ault.]

sVillis.

6 Elector.

7 For a discussion of the spoiling of the Egyptians by the
Israelites, the reader is referred to Calmet's Commentary^ on Ex.
in. 22, where he adduces, besides this passage of Tertullian, 'the
opmions of Irenseus, adv. Ha-res. iv. 49 ; Augustine, contra
/"a«f^. ii. 71 ; Theodoret, Oiuest. in Ejcod. xxiii. ; Clement of
Alex. Stromat. i. i ; of Philo, De Vita Moysis, i. ; Josephus,
Antioq. ii. 8, who says that " the Egyptians freely gave all to the
Israelites ;" of Melchior Canus, Loc. Tlieoll. i. 4. He also refers
to the book of Wisdom, x. 17-20. These all substantially agree
■With our author. See also a full discussion in Selden, De Jure
^cit.et Gentium, vii. 8, who quotes from the Gemara, Sanhedrin,
c.ii. f. girt,- and Bereshith Kabba, par. 61 f., 68, col. 2, where
such a tribunal as Tertullian refers to is mentioned as convened
by Alexander the Great, who, after hearing the pleadings, gave
his assent to the claims of the advocates of Israel.

<= lamen.


there; while the Hebrews to this day, in spite
of the Marcionites, re-assert their demand for
even greater damages,' insisting that, however
large was their loan of the gold and silver, it
would not be compensation enough, even if
the labour of six hundred thousand men should
be valued at only " a farthing " '° a day apiece.
Which, however, were the more in number —
those who claimed the vessel, or those who
dwelt in the palaces and cities ? Which, too,
the greater — the grievance of the Egyptians
against the Hebrews, or " the favour " " which
they displayed towards them ? Were free
men reduced to servile labour, in order that
the Hebrews might simply proceed against
the Egyptians by action at law for injuries;
or in order that their officers might on their
benches sit and exhibit their backs and
shoulders shamefully mangled by the fierce
application of the scourge ? It was not by a
few plates and cups — in all cases the property,
no doubt, of still fewer rich men — that any one
would pronounce that compensation should
have been awarded to the Hebrews, but both
by all the resources of these and by the con-
tributions of all the people. '= If, therefore,
the case of the Hebrews be a good one, the
Creator's case must likewise be a good one;
that is to say, his command, when He both
made the Egyptians unconsciously grateful,
and also gave His own people their discharge
in full '3 at the time of their migration by the
scanty comfort of a tacit requital of their iofig
servitude. It was plainly less than their due
which He commanded to be exacted. The
Egyptians ought to have given back their
men-children '"^ also to the Hebrews.

CHAP. XXI. THE LAW OF THE SABBATH-DAY

EXPLAINED. THE EIGHT DAYS' PROCESSION
AROUND JERICHO. THE GATHERING OF

STICKS A VIOLATION.

Similarly on other points also, you reproach
Him with fickleness and instability for contra-
dictions in His commandments, such as that
He forbade work to be done on Sabbath-days,
and yet at the siege of Jericho ordered the
ark to be carried round the walls during eight
days; in other words, of course, actually on a
Sabbath, You do not, however, consider the
law of the Sabbath: they are human works,
not divine, which it prohibits. '^ For it says,
"Six days shalt thou labour, and do all thy
work; but the seventh day is the Sabbath of


9 Amplius.

10 Singulis nummis. [Clem. Alex. Strom, i. 23. Vol. II., p. 336,
supra. "^

" Gratia Hebraeonim, either a reference to Ex. iii. 21, or mean-
ing, perhaps, " the unpaid services of the Hebrews."

'2 Popularium omnium.

'3Expunxit.

'4 Ex. i. 18, 22. [An ingenious and eloquent defence.]

iS Ex. XX. 9, 10.


314


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book ii^


the Lord thy God: in it thou shalt not do any-
work." What work ? Of course your own.
The conckision is, that from the Sabbath-day
He removes those works which He had before
enjoined for the six days, that is, your own
works; in other words, human works of daily
life. Now, the carrying around of the ark is
evidently not an ordinary daily duty, nor yet
a human one; but a rare and a sacred work,
and, as being then ordered by the direct pre-
cept of God, a divine one. And I might fully
explain what this signified, were it not a
tedious process to open out the forms ' of all
the Creator's proofs, which you would, more-
over, probably refuse to allow. It is more to
the point, if you be confuted on plain matters ="
by the simplicity of truth rather than curious
reasoning. Thus, in the present instance,
there is a clear distinction respecting the Sab-
bath's prohibition of human labours, not di-
vine ones. Accordingly, the man who went
and gathered sticks on the Sabbath-9ay was
punished with death. For it was his own
work which he did; and this ^ the law forbade.
They, however, who on the Sabbath carried
the ark round Jericho, did it with impunity.
For it was not their own work, but God's,
which they executed, and that too, from His
express commandment.

CHAP. XXII. — THE BRAZEN SERPENT AND THE
GOLDEN CHERUBIM WERE NOT VIOLATIONS OF
THE SECOND COMMANDMENT. THEIR MEAN-
ING.

Likewise, when forbidding the similitude
to be made of all things which are in heaven,
and in earth, and in the waters. He declared
also the reasons, as being prohibitory of all
material exhibition-* of a latent s idolatry.
For He adds: " Thou shalt not bow down to
them, nor serve them." The form, however,
of the brazen serpent which the Lord after-
wards commanded Moses to make, afforded
no pretext* for idolatry, but was meant for
the cure of those who were plagued with the
fiery serpents. ^ I say nothing of what was
figured by this cure.« Thus, too, the golden
Cherubim and Seraphim were purely an orna-
ment in the figured fashion » of the ark;
adapted to ornamentation for reasons totally
remote from all condition of idolatry, on ac-
count of which the making a likeness is pro-


I Fijfuras.

' De absolutis.

3 [He was not punished for gathering sticks, but for setting
example of contempt of the Divine I^w.]

4 Substantiam.

5 Caeca:.

^Tituiiim. [See Vol. II. p. 477, this series.]
7 Num. xxi, 8, 9.
^ See John iii. 14.

6 Exemplum.


hibited; and they are evidently not at variance
with '° this law of prohibition, because the^
are not found in that form " of similitude, in
reference to which the prohibition is given.
We have spoken " of the rational institution
of the sacrifices, as calling off their homage
from idols to God; and if He afterwards re-
jected this homage, saying, "To what pur-
pose is the multitude of your sacrifices unto
me ? " '3 — He meant nothing else than this to
be understood, that He had never really re-
quired such homage for Himself. For He
says, " I will not eat the flesh of bulls; " '* and
in another passage: "The everlasting God
shall neither hunger nor thirst." 's Although
He had respect to the offerings of Abel, and
smelled a sweet savour from the holocaust of
Noah, yet what pleasure could He receive
from the flesh of sheep, or the odour of burn-
ing victims ? And yet the simple and God-
fearing mind of those who offered what they
were receiving from God, both in the way of
food and of a sweet smell, was favourably ac-
cepted before God, in the sense of respectful
homage '* to God, who did not so much want
what was offered, as that which prompted the
offering. Suppose now, that some dependant
were to offer to a rich man or a king, who was
in want of nothing, some very insignificant
gift, will the amount and quality of the gift
bring dishonour '^ to the rich man and the
king; or will the consideration '^ of the homage
give them pleasure ? Were, however, the de-
pendant, either of his own accord or even in
compliance with a command, to present to
him gifts suitably to his rank, and were he to
observe the solemnities due to a king, only
without faith and purity of heart, and without
any readiness for other acts of obedience,
will not that king or rich man consequently
exclaim: " To what purpose is the multitude
of your sacrifices unto me ? I am full of your
solemnities, your feast-days, and your Sab-
baths."'^ By calling thGin yours , cis having
been performed "^ after the giver's own will,
and not according to the religion of God
(since he displayed them as his own, and not
as God's), f/ie Almighty in this passage, demon-
strated how suitable to the conditions of the
case, and how reasonable, was His rejection of
those very offerings which He had commande(
to be made to Him.


»o Refragari.
" Statu.

" In chap, xviii. towards the end. [p. 311. su/>ra.'\
13 Isa.j i. II.
MPs. 1. 13.

'S An inexact quotation of Isa. xl. 28.
»6 Honorem.
'7 Infuscabit.
«8 Titulus.
'9 See Isa. i. 11-14.
zo Fecerat seems the better reading; q.d. " which he had per
formed," etc. Oehler x^&As freer ant.


CHAP. XXIV.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


315


CHAP. XXII^ — god's purposes IN ELECTION
AND REJECTION OF THE SAME MEN, SUCH AS
KING SAUL, EXPLAINED, IN ANSWER TO THE
MARCIONITE CAVIL.

Now, although you will have it that He is
inconstant' in respect of persons, sometimes
disapproving where approbation is deserved; or
else wanting in foresight, bestowing approba-
tion on men who ought rather to be reprobated,
as if He either censured^ His own past judg-
ments, or could not forecast His future ones;
yet 3 nothing is so consistent for even a good
judge '* as both to reject and to choose on the
merits of the present moment. Saul is
chosen, s but he is not yet the despiser of the
prophet Samuel.^ Solomon is rejected; but
he is now become a prey to foreign women,
and a slave to the idols of Moab and Sidon.
What must the Creator do, in order to escape
the censure of the Marcionites ? Must He
prematurely condemn men, who are thus far
correct in their conduct, because of future de-
linquencies ? But it is not the mark of a good
God to condemn beforehand persons who have
not yet deserved condemnation. Must He
then refuse to eject sinners, on account of
their previous good deeds ? But it is not the
characteristic of a just judge to forgive sins
in consideration of former virtues which are
no longer practised. Now, who is so faultless
among men, that God could always have him
in His choice, and never be able to reject him ?
Or who, on the other hand, is so void of any
good work, that God could reject him for ever,
and never be able to choose him ? Show me,
then, the man who is always good, and he will
not be rejected; show me, too, him who is
always evil, and he will never be chosen.
Should, however, the same man, being found
on different occasions in the pursuit of both
(good and evil) be recompensed ^ in both di-
rections by God, who is both a good and judi-
cial Being, He does not change His judgments
through inconstancy or want of foresight, but
dispenses reward according to the deserts of
each case with a most unwavering and provi-
dent decision.^

CHAP. XXIV. — INSTANCES OF GOD'S REPENT-
ANCE, AND NOTABLY IN THE CASE OF THE
NINEVITES, ACCOUNTED FOR AND VINDI-
CATED.

Furthermore, with respect to the repentance
which occurs in His conduct, ^ you interpret it

■ Levem.

2Damnet.

3 Atquin.

* Or, " for one who is a good man and a judge."

S I Sam. ix.

^1 Sam. xiii.

7Dispungetur.

^Censura.

9 Apud ilium.


with similar perverseness just as if it were with

fickleness and improvidence that He repented,
or on the recollection of some wrong-doing;
because He actually said, " It repenteth me
that I have set up Saul to be king,'° "very much
as if He meant that His repentance savoured of
an acknowledgment of some evil work or error.
Well," this is not always implied. For there
occurs even in good works a confession of re-
pentance, as a reproach and condemnation of
the man who has proved himself unthankful for
a benefit. For instance, in this case of Saul,
the Creator, who had made no mistake in se-
lecting him for the kingdom, and endowing
him with His Holy Spirit, makes a statement
respecting the goodliness of his person, how
that He had most fitly chosen him as being at
that moment the choicest man, so that (as He
says) there was not his fellow among the chil-
dren of Israel." Neither was He ignorant how
he would afterwards turn out. For no one
would bear you out in imputing lack of fore-
sight to that God whom, since you do not
deny Him to be divine, you allow to be also
foreseeing; for this proper attribute of divinity
exists in Him. However, He did, as I have
said, burden '3 the guilt of Saul with the con-
fession of His own repentance; but as there is
an absence of all error and wrong in His
choice of Saul, it follows that this repentance
is to be understood as upbraiding another '*
rather than as self-incriminating. 's Look here
then, say you : I discover a self-incriminating
case in the matter of the Ninevites, when the
book of Jonah declares, "And God repented
of the evil that He had said that He would dO'
unto them; and He did it not." '^ In accord-
ance with which Jonah himself says unto the
Lord, " Therefore I fled before unto Tarshish;
for I knew that Thou art a gracious God and
merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness,
and repentest Thee of the evil." '^ it is well,
therefore, that he premised the attribute '^ of
the most good God as most patient over the
wicked, and most abundant in mercy and kind-
ness over such as acknowledged and bewailed
their sins, as the Ninevites were then doing.
For if He who has this attribute is the Most
Good, you will have first to relinquish that
position of yours, that the very contact with '»
evil is incompatible with such a Being, that
is, with the most good God. And because


'o I Sam. XV. II.

" Porro.

12 1 Sam. ix. 2.

»3 Onerabat.

'4 Invidiosam.

isCriminosam.

■6 Jonah iii. 10.

17 lonah iv. 2.

iSTitulum.

i9Malitiae conciirpti


3i6


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book II.


Marcion, too, maintains tiiat a good tree
ought not to produce bad fruit ; but yet lie
has mentioned "evil" (in the passage under
discussion), which the most good God is in-
capable of,' is there forthcoming any explana-
tion of these " evils," which may render them
compatible with even the most Good ? There is.
We say, in short, that evil in the present case ="
means, not what may be attributed to the Crea-
tor's nature as an evil being, but what may be
attributed to His power as a judge. In ac-
cordance with which He declared, " I create
evil," 3 and, "I frame evil against you;"-*
meaning not to sinful evils, but avenging ones.
"What sort of stigmas pertains to these, con-
gruous as they are with God's judicial charac-
ter, we have sufficiently explained.*^ Now,
although these are called "evils," they are
yet not reprehensible in a judge ; nor because
of this their name do they show that the
judge is evil : so in like manner will this par-
ticular evil 7 be understood tc be one of this
■class of judiciary evils, and along with them
to be compatible with (God as) a judge.
The Greeks also sometimes^ use the word
"evils" for troubles and injuries (not malig-
nant ones), as in this passage of yours ^ is also
meant. Therefore, if the Creator repented
of such evil as this, as showing that the creat-
ure deserveCdcondemnation, and ought to be
punished for his sin, then, in'° the present in-
stance no fault of a criminating nature will be
imputed to the Creator, for having deservedly
and worthily decreed the destruction of a
city so full of iniquity. What therefore He
had justly decreed, having no evil purpose in
His decree. He decreed .from the principle of
justice," not from malevolence. Yet He gave
it the name of " evil," because of the evil
and desert involved in the very suffering it-
self. Then, you will say, if you excuse the
evil under name of justice, on the ground that
He had justly determined destruction against
the people of Nineveh, He must even on this
argument be blameworthy, for having repented
of an act of justice, which surely should not
be repented of. Certainly not," my reply is;
God will never repent of an act of justice. And
it now remains that we should understand
what God's repentance means. For although


> Non capit.

2 Nunc.

3 Isa. xlv. 7.

4 Jer. xviii. 11.
Slnfamiam.

6 See above, chap. xiv. Pp. 308, snpra.'\

7 Malitia, i.e., " the evil mentioned in the cited Jonah iii. 10.

8 Thus, according to St. Jerome, in Matt. vi. 34, Kouci'a means
<td(ti.>(Tis. '• Sufficient for the day is the evil thereof" — the occur-
rent adversities.

9 In isto articulo.
*o Atqui hie.

*i Or, " in his capacity as Judge," ex justitia.
»2lmmo.


man repents most frequently on the recollec-
tion of a sin, and occasionally even from the
unpleasantness '^ of some good action, this is
never the case with God. For, inasmuch as
God neither commits sin nor condemns a good
action, in so far is there no room in Him for
repentance of either a good or an evil deed.
Now this point is determined for you even in
the scripture which we have quoted. Samuel
says to Saul, " The Lord hath rent the king-
dom of Israel from thee this day, and hath
given it to a neighbour of thine that is better
than thou;"''* and into two parts shall Israel
be divided: "for He will not turn Himself,
nor repent; for He does not repent as a man
does." '5 According, therefore, to this defi-
nition, the divine repentance takes in all cases
a different form from that of man, in that it is
never regarded as the result. of improvidence
or of fickleness, or of any condemnation of a
good or an evil work. What, then, will be
the mode of God's repentance ? It is already
quite clear,'^ if you avoid referring it to human
conditions. For it will have no other meaning
than a simple cliange of a prior purpose; and
this is admissible without any blame even in
a man, much more '^ in God, whose every pur-
pose is faultless. Now in Greek the word for
repentance (/"f'?wia) is formed, not from the
confession of a sin, but from a change of mind,
which in God we have shown to be"^regulated
by the occurrence of varying circumstances.

CHAP. XXV. god's dealings WITH ADAM AT

THE FALL, AND WITH CAIN AFTER HIS CRIME,
ADMIRABLY EXPLAINED AND DEFENDED.

It is now high time that I should, in order
to meet all '^ objections of this kind, proceed to
the explanation and clearing up '" of the other
trifles, "" weak points, and inconsistencies, as
you deemed them. God calls out to Adam,"
Where art thou ? as if ignorant where he was;
and when he alleged that the shame of hil
nakedness was the cause (of his hiding himS
self). He inquired whether he had eaten of th<
tree, as if He were in doubt. By no means;
God was neither uncertain about the commis-
sion of the sin, nor ignorant of Adam's where-
abouts. It was certainly proper to summoi
the offender, who was concealing himself from]
the consciousness of his sin, and to bring him
forth into the presence of his Lord, not]
merely by the calling out of his name, but


'3 Ingratia.

'4 I Sam. XV. 28.

'5 Ver. 29, but inexactly quoted.

«6 Relucet.

»7 Nedum.

'8 Ut omnia expediam.

'9 Purgandas.

2" Pusillitates.

=^1 Gen. iii. 9, ii.

M Immo.


(.iiAr. XXVI.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


317


with a home-thrust blow ' at the sin which he
had at that moment committed. For the
question ought not to be read in a merely-
interrogative tone, Where art thou, Adam?
but with an impressive and earnest voice, and
with an' air of imputation, Oh, Adam, where
art thou ? — as much as to intimate: thou art
no longer here, thou art in perdition — so that
the voice is the utterance of One who is at
once rebuking and sorrowing. "" But of course
some part of paradise had escaped the eye of
Him who holds the universe in His hand as
if it were a bird's nest, and to whom heaven
is a throne and earth a footstool; so that He
could not see, before He summoned him
forth, where Adam was, both while lurking
and when eating of the forbidden fruit ! The
wolf or the paltry thief escapes not the
notice of the keeper of your vineyard or your
garden ! And God, I suppose, with His
keener vision, ^ from on high was unable to
miss the sight of'* aught which lay beneath
Him ! Foolish heretic, who treat with scorn s
so fine an argument of God's greatness and
man's instruction ! God put the question
with an appearance of uncertainty, in order
that even here He might prove man to be
the subject of a free will in the alternative
of either a denial or a confession, and give to
him the opportunity of freely ackowledging
his transgression, and, so far,^ of lightening it.^
In like manner He inquires of Cain where his
brother was, just as if He had not yet heard
the blood of Abel crying from the ground, in
order that he too might have the opportunity
from the same power of the will of sponta-
neously denying, and to this degree aggravat-
ing, his crime; and that thus there might
be supplied to us examples of confessing sins
rather than of denying them: so that even
then was initiated the evangelic doctrine,
" By thy words ^ thou shalt be justified, and
by thy words thou shalt be condemned." »
Now, although Adam was by reason of his
condition under law '"subject to death, yet
was hope preserved to him by the Lord's say-
ing, "Behold, Adam is become as one of
us;"" that is, in consequence of the future
taking of the man into the divine nature.
Then what follows? "And now, lest he put
forth his hand, and take also of the tree of
life, (and eat), and live for ever." Insert-


' Sujrillatione.
^DolendT.

3 Oculatiorem.

4 Prseterire.

5 Naso.
^Hoc nomine.

7 Relevandi.

8 Ex ore tuo, " out of thine own mouth."

9 Matt. xii. 37.

»o Propter statum le.a:is.

" Gen. iii. 22. [II. Peter, i. 4.]


ing thus the particle of present time, "And
now," He shows that He had made for a
time, and at present, a prolongation of man's
life. Therefore He did not actually " curse
Adam and Eve, for they were candidates for
restoration, and they had been relieved '^ by
confession. Cain, however. He not only
cursed; but when he wished to atone for his
sin by death. He even prohibited his dying,
so that he had to bear the load of this prohi-
bition in addition to his crime. This, then,
will prove to be the ignorance of our God,
which was simulated on this account, that
delinquent man should not be unaware of
what he ought to do. Coming down to the
case of Sodom and Gomorrha, he says: " I
will go down now, and see whether they have
done altogether according to the cry of it
which is come unto me; and if not, I will
know." '•* Well, was He in this instance also
uncertain through ignorance, and desiring to
know ? Or was this a necessary tone of utter-
ance, as expressive of a minatory and not a
dubious sense, under the colour of an inquiry ?
If you make merry at God's "going down,"
as if He could not except by the descent have
accomplished His judgment, take care that
you do not strike your own God with as hard
a blow. For He also came down to accom-
plish what He wished.

CHAP. XXVI. THE OATH OF GOD: ITS MEANING.

MOSES, WHEN DEPRECATING GOD's WRATH
AGAINST ISRAEL, A TYPE OF CHRIST.

But God also swears. Well, is it, I won-
der, by the God of Marcion ? No, no, he
says; a much vainer oath — by Himself ! 's
What was He to do, when He knew'* of no
other God; especially when He was swearing
to this very point, that besides himself there
was absolutely no God ? Is it then of swear-
ing falsely that you convict '^ Him, or of swear-
ing a vain oath ? But it is not possible for him
to appear to have sworn falsely, when he was
ignorant, as you say he was, that there was an-
other God. For when he swore by that which
he knew, he really committed no perjury.
But it was not a vain oath for him to swear
that there was no other God. It would in-
deed be a vain oath, if there had been no per-
sons who believed that there were other Gods,
like the worshippers of idols then, and the
heretics of the present day. Therefore He
swears by Himself, in order that you may
believe God, even when He swears that there


" Ipsum. [Comp. Heb. ix. 8, and Rev. xxii. 14.]

13 Relevatos.

14 Gen. xviii. 21. [Marcion's god also "comes down." p. 284,
supraJX

15 See Jer. xxii. 5.
i6Isa. xliv. 8.

17 Deprehendis.


i8


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book II.


is besides Himself no other God at all. But
you have yourself, O Marcion, compelled
God to do this. For even so early as then
were you foreseen. Hence, if He swears
both in His promises and His threatenings,
and thus extorts ' faith which at first was diffi-
cult, nothing is unworthy of God which causes
men to believe in God. But (you say) God
was even then mean' enough in His very
fierceness, when, in His wrath against the
people for their consecration of the calf, He
makes this request of His servant Moses:
*' Let me alone, that my wrath may wax
hot against them, and that I may consume
them; and I will make of thee a great na-
tion." ^ Accordingly, you maintain ■ that
Moses is better than his God, as the depreca-
tor, nay the averter, of His anger. " For,"
said he, "Thou shalt not do this; or else
destroy me along with them." ^ Pitiable are
ye also, as well as the people, since you know
not Christ, prefigured in the person of Moses,
as the deprecator of the Father, and the of-
ferer of His own life for the salvation of the
people. It is enough, however, that the
nation was at the instant really given to Moses.
That which he, as a servant, was able to ask
of the Lord, the Lord required of Himself.
For this purpose did He say to His servant,
*' Let me alone, that I may consume them,"
in order that by his entreaty, and by offering
himself, he might hinder s (the threatened
judgment), and that you might by such an
instance learn how much privilege is vouch-
safed^ with God to a faithful man and a
prophet.

•CHAP. XXVII. — OTHER OBJECTIONS CONSIDERED.
god's CONDESCENSION IN THE INCARNATION.
NOTHING DEROGATORY TO THE DIVINE BEING
IN THIS ECONOMY. THE DIVINE MAJESTY
WORTHILY SUSTAINED BY THE ALMIGHTY
FATHER, NEVER VISIBLE TO MAN. PERVERSE-
NESS OF THE MARCIONITE CAVILS.

And now, that I may briefly pass in review ^
the other points which you have thus far been
engaged in collecting, as mean, weak, and un-
worthy, for demolishing^ the Creator, I will
propound them in a simple and definite state-
ment:' that God would have been unable
to hold any intercourse with men, if He had
not taken on Himself the emotions and affec-
tions of man, by means of which He could
temper the strength of His majesty, which
would no doubt have been incapable of en-


1 Extorquens.

2 Pusillus.

3 Ex. xxxii. lo.

4 An allusion to, rather than a quotation of, Ex. xxxii

5 Non sineret.

6 Quantum liceat.

7 Absolvam.

8 Ad destructionem.
S Ratione.


durance to the moderate capacity of man, by
such a humiliation as was indeed degrading"
to Himself, but necessary for man, and such
as on this very account became worthy of God,
because nothing is so worthy of God as the
salvation of man. If I were arguing with
heathens, I should dwell more at length on
this point ; although with heretics too the
discussion does not stand on very different
grounds. Inasmuch as ye yourselves have now
come to the belief that God moved about "
in the form and all other circumstances of
man's nature," you will of course no longer
require to be convinced that God conformed
Himself to humanity, but feel yourselves
bound by your own faith. For if the God
(in whom ye believe,) even from His higher
condition, prostrated the supreme dignity of
His majesty to such a lowliness as to undergo
death, even the death of the cross, why can
you not suppose that some humiliations '^ are
becoming to our God also, only more toler-
able than Jewish contumelies, and crosses,'*
and sepulchres? Are these the humiliations
which henceforth are to raise a prejudice
against Christ (the subject as He is of human
passions 's) being a partaker of that Godhead ^^
against which you make the participation in
human qualities a reproach ? Now we believe
that Christ did ever act in the name of God
the Father ; that He actually '7 from the be-
ginning held intercourse with (men); actu-
ally '^ communed with "^ patriarchs and proph-
ets; was the Son of the Creator; was His
Word; whom God made His Son-"" by emit-
ting Him from His own self," and thence-
forth set Him over every dispensation and
(administration of) His will," making Him
a little lower than the angels, as is written in
David. =^3 In which lowering of His condition
He received from the Father a dispensation in
those very respects which you blame as
human; from the very beginning learning,"*
even then, (that state of a) man which He was
destined in the end to become. "s It is He


10 Indiana.

" Diversatum.

'2 Conditionis.

J3 Pusillitates.

14 Patibulis.

>Si.e., the sensations of our emotional nature.

I6EJUS Dei.

»7 Ipsum.

'8 Ipsum.

»9 ConKressum. , . c. «• u

30 On this mode of the eternal generation of the Son from the
Father, as the Adyo? Trpo<^opi*c6?, the reader is referred for much
patristic information to Bp. Bull's De/ensio Fid. Nic. (transl. in
Anglo-Cat h. Library by the translator of this work).

a» F'roferendo ex semet ipso.

22 Voluntati.

23 Ps. viii. 6. .

24 Ediscens, " practising " or " rehearsing.

25 This doctrine of theology is more fully expressed by our au-
thor in a line passage in his Treatise against Praxeas, xvt.
(Oehler, vol. ii. p. 674), of which the translator gave this version in
Bp. Bull's De/. Nic. Creed, vol. i. p. 18 : " The Son hath exe-
cuted judgment from the beginning, throwing down the haughty


CHAP. XXVIII.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


319


Avho descends, He who interrogates, He who
demands, He who swears. With regard, how-
ever, to the Father, the very gospel which is
common to us will testify that He was never
visible, according to the word of Christ: " No
man knoweth the Father, save the Son."'
For even in the Old Testament He had de-
clared, "No man shall see me, and live."=
He means that the Father is invisible, in
whose authority and in whose name was He
God who appeared as the Son of God. But
with us 3 Christ is received in the person of
Christ, because even in this manner is He
our God. Whatever attributes therefore you
require as worthy of God, must be found in
the Father, who is invisible and unapproach-
able, and placid, and (so to speak) the God
of the philosophers; whereas those qualities
which you censure as unworthy must be sup-
posed to be in the Son, who has been seen,
and heard, and encountered, the Witness and
Servant of the Father, uniting in Himself
man and God, God in mighty deeds, in weak
ones man, in order that He may give to man
as much as He takes from God. What in
your esteem is the entire disgrace of my God,
IS in fact the sacrament of man's salvation.
God held converse with man, that man might
learn to act as God. God dealt on equal
terms'* with man, that man might be able
to deal on equal terms with God. God was
found little, that man might become very
great. You who disdain such a God, I hardly
know whether you ex fide believe that God
was crucified. How great, then, is your per-
versity in respect of the two characters of the
Creator ! You designate Him as Judge ^ and
repiobate as cruelty that severity of the
Judge which only acts in accord with the mer-
its of cases. You 'require God to be very
goody and yet despise as meanness that gentle-
ness of His which accorded with His kindness,
(and) held lowly converse in proportion to the


tower, and dividing the tongues, punishing the whole world by the
violence of waters, raining upon Sodom and Gomorrha fire and
brimstone ' the Lokd from the Lord.' For He it was who at all
times came down to hold converse with men, from Adam on to the
patriarchs and the prophets, in vision, in dream, in mirror, in dark
saying ; ever from the beginning laying the foundation of the
course (of His dispensations), which He meant to follow out unto
the end. Thus was He ever learning (practising or rehearsing) ;
and the God who conversed with men upon earth could be no
other than the Word, which was to be made flesh. But He was
thus learning (or rehearsing, ediscebat) in order to level for us the
\vay of faith, that we might the more readily believe that the Son
of God had come down into the world, if we knew that in times
past also something similar had been done." The original thus
opens : " Filius itaque est qui ab '\xnt\ojtidicavit.''' This the au-
thor connects with John iii. 35, Matt, xxviii. 18, John v. 22. The
judgme7tt " is dispensational from the first to the last. Every
judicial function of God's providence from Eden to the judgment
day IS administered by the Son of God. This oflFice of judge has
been largely dealt with in its general view j^y Tertullian, in this
book II. against Marcion (see gha'^ si.-xvii.),

1 Matt. xi. 27.

^Ex. xxxiii. 20.

3 Penes nos. Christians, not Marcionites. [Could our author
have regarded himself as formally at war with the church, at this
time ?]

•» Ex aequo agebat.


mediocrity of man's estate. He pleases you
not, whether great or little, neither as your
judge nor as your friend ! What if the same
features should be discovered in your God ?
That He too is a judge, we have already shown
in the proper section: s that from being a
judge He must needs be severe; and from
being severe He must also be cruel, if indeed
cruel. '^

CHAP. XXVni. THE TABLES TURNED UPON

MARCION, BY CONTRASTS, IN FAVOUR OF THE
TRUE GOD.

Now, touching the weaknesses and maligni-
ties, and the other (alleged), notes (of the
Creator), I too shall advance antitheses in ri-
valry to Marcion's. If my God knew not of
any other superior to Himself, your god also
was utterly unaware that there was any be-
neath himself. It is just what Heraclitus
"the obscure " 7 said; whether it be up or
down,^ it comes to the same fhing. If, in-
deed, he was not ignorant (of his position), it
must have occurred to Him from the begin-
ning. Sin and death, and the author of sin
too — the devil — and all the evil which my
God permitted to be, this also, did your god
permit; for he allowed Him to permit it. Our
God changed His purposes ;9 in like manner
yours did also. For he who cast his look so
late in the human race, changed that purpose,
which for so long a period had refused to cast
that look. Our God repented Him of the
evil in a given case; so also did yours. For
by the fact that he at last had regard to the
salvation of man, he showed such a repent-
ance of his previous disregard '° as was due
for a wrong deed. But neglect of man's sal-
vation will be accounted a wrong deed, simply
because it has been remedied " by his repen-
tance in the conduct of your god. Our God
you say commanded a fraudulent act, but in
a matter of gold and silver. Now, inasmuch
as man is more precious than gold and silver,
in so far is your god more fraudulent still,
because he robs man of his Lord and Cre-
ator. Eye for eye does our God require; but
your god does even a greater injury, (in your
ideas,) when he prevents an act of retaliation.
For what man will not return a blow, without
waiting to be struck a second time." Our


5 In the ist book, 25th and following chapters.

6 Saevum.

7Tenebrosus. Cicero, De Jinibus, ii. says : " Heraclitus qui
cognomento^ SKOTeii/os perhibetur, quia de natura nimis obscure
memoravit."

8 Sursum et deorsum. An allusion to Heraclitus' doctrine of
constant change, flux and reflux, out of which all things came.
Kai Tiji' /uera/SoAT}!/ o56i' ovoj Karco, ^6v re kovij-ov yiveaOat Kara.
TavTTji/j jc.T.A. " Change is the way ?</ ufid down ; the world
comes into being thus,' etc. (Diogenes Laertius, ix. 8).

9 Sententias.

10 Dissimulationes.
" Non nisi emendata.
'3 Non repercussus.


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book II.


God (you say) knows not whom He ought to
choose. Nor does your god, for if he had
foreknown the issue, he would not have chosen
the traitor Judas. If you allege that the
Creator practised deception ' in any instance,
there was a far greater mendacity in your
Christ, whose very body was unreal.' Many
were consumed by the severity of my God.
Those also who were not saved by your god
are verily disposed by him to ruin. My God
ordered a man to be slain. Your god willed
himself to be put to death; not less a homi-
cide against himself than in respect of him
by whom he meant to be slain. I will more-
over prove to Marcion that they were many
who were slain by his god; for he made every
one a homicide: in other words, he doomed
him to perish, except when people failed in
no duty towards Christ.^ But the straight-
forward virtue of truth is contented with few
resources."* Many things will be necessary
for falsehood.

CHAP. XXIX. marcion' S OWN ANTITHESES, IF

ONLY THE TITLE AND OBJECT OF THE WORK
BE EXCEPTED, AFFORD PROOFS OF THE CON-
SISTENT ATTRIBUTES OF THE TRUE GOD.

But I would have attacked Marcion' s
own Antitheses in closer and fuller combat,
if a more elaborate demolition of them
were required in maintaining for the Cre-
ator the character of a good God and a Judge,
after s the examples of both points, which
we have shown to be so worthy of God.
Since, however, these two attributes of
goodness and justice do together make up the
proper fulness of the Divine Being as omnipo-
tent, I am able to content myself with having
now compendiously refuted his Antitheses,
which aim at drawing distinctions out of the
qualities of the (Creator's) artifices,*^ or of
His laws, or of His great works; and thus
sundering Christ from the Creator, as the
most Good from the Judge, as One who is
merciful from Him who is ruthless, and One
who brings salvation from Him who causes
ruin. The truth is,^ they^ rather unite the
two Beings whom they arrange in those di-
versities (of attribute), which yet are compat-
ible in God. For only take away the title
of Marcion' s book ' and the intention and


' Mentitum.

= Non verum. An allusion to the pocctism of Marcion."

3 Nihil deliquit in Christum, that is, Marcion's Christ.

4 Paucis amat.

5 Secundum.

6 Injfenioruin.

7 Enim.

8 i.e., Marcion's A ntitkeses.

9 A ntitkeses so called because Marcion in it had set psssages
out of the O. T. and the N. T. in opposition to each other, intend-
ing his readers to infer from the apparent disagreement tha'. the
law and the gospel were not from the same author (Bp. Kayc on
TertuUian, p. 468).


purpose of the work itself, and you could g?t
no better demonstration that the self-same
God was both very good and a Judge, inas-
much as these two characters are only com-
petently found in God. Indeed, the very
effort which is made in the selected exam-
ples to oppose Christ to the Creator, conduces
all the more to their union. For so entirely
one and the same was the nature of the Di-
vine Beings, the good and the severe, as
shown both by the same examples and in
similar proofs, that It willed to display Its
goodness to those on whom It had first in-
flicted Its severity. The difference in time
was no matter of surprise, when the same
God was afterwards merciful in presence of
evils which had been subdued, '° who had
once been so austere whilst they were as yet
unsubdued. Thus, by help of the Afititheses,
the dispensation of the Creator can be more
readily shown to have been reformed by Christ,
rather than destroyed; " restored, rather than
abolished; " especially as you sever your own
god from everything like acrimonious con-
duct,'^ even from all rivalry whatsoever with
the Creator. Now, since this is the case,
how comes it to pass that the Antitheses dem-
onstrate Him to have been the Creator's rival
in every disputed cause ? '* Well, even here,
too, I will allow that in these causes my God
has been a jealous God, who has in His own
right taken especial care that all things done
by Him should be in their beginning of a
robuster growth; '5 and this in the way of a
good, because rational '^ emulation, which
tends to maturity. In this sense the world
itself will acknowledge His "antitheses,"
from the contrariety of its own elements, al-
though it has been regulated with the very
highest reason. '7 Wherefore, most thought-
less Marcion, it was your duty to have shown
that one (of the two Gods you teach) was a
God of light, and the other a God of darkness ;
and then you would have found it an easier
task to persuade us that one was a God of
goodness, the other a God of severity. How-
ever, the " antithesis " (or variety of adminis-
tration) will rightly be His property, to whom
it actually belongs in (the government of)
the world.


I" Pro rebus cdomitis. See chap. xv. and xix.. whore he refers
to the law as the .subduing instrument.

" Repercussus: perhaps "refuted."

J2 Exclusus.

»3 Ab omni motu amariorc.

'4 Singulas species, a law term.

'5 Arbustiores. A figurative word, taken from vines more firmly
supported on trees instead of on frames. He has used the word in-
domitis above to express his meaning.

>6 Rationali. Compare chap. vi. of this book, where the " r^/zV;,"
or purpose of God, is shown to be consistent with His goodness in
providmg for its highest development in man's interest.

17 Ratione: in reference to God's ratio or purpose in creation.
See chap, vi. note 10. [p. 301, supra,'\


THE FIVE BOOKS AGAINST MARCION.

Book III.

WHEREIN CHRIST IS SHOWN TO BE THE SON OF GOD, WHO CREATED
THE WORLD ; TO HAVE BEEN PREDICTED BY THE PROPHETS ; TO
HAVE TAKEN HUMAN FLESH LIKE OUR OWN, BY A REAL INCARNA-
TION.


CHAP. I. — introductory: a brief statement

OF THE preceding ARGUMENT IN CONNEC-
TION WITH THE SUBJECT OF THIS BOOK.

Following the track of my original treatise,
the loss of which we are steadily proceeding'
to restore, we come now, in the order of our
subject, to treat of Christ, although this be a
work of supererogation,^ after the proof which
we have gone through that there is but one
only God. For no doubt it has been already
ruled with sufficient clearness, that Christ
must be regarded as pertaining to ^ no other
God than the Creator, when it has been de-
termined that no other God but the Creator
should be the object of our faith. Him did
Christ so expressly preach, whilst the apostles
one after the other also so clearly affirmed
that Christ belonged to ■* no other God than
Him whom He Himself preached — that is,
the Creator — that no mention of a second God
(nor, accordingly, of a second Christ) was ever
agitated previous to Marcion's scandal. This
is most easily proved by an examination s of
both the apostolic and the heretical churches,'^
from which we are forced to declare that there
is undoubtedly a subversion of the rule (of
faith), where any opinion is found of later
date, 7 — a point which I have inserted in my


' Perseveramus.

2 Ex abundant!.

3 i.e., " as the Son of, or sent by, no other God."

4 i.e., " was the Son of, or sent by, no other God."

5 Recensu.

^[Surely TertuUian, when he wrote this, imagined himself not
separated formally from the Apostolic churches. Of which see
De Prescript tone, (p. 258) sitpra.']

T \]b\ posteritas invenitur. Compare De Preescript. Haeret.
34, where TertuUian refers to " that definite rule, before laid
down, touching ' the later date ' (illo fine supra A\cto poster itatis),
whereby they (i.e., certain novel opinions) would at once be con-
demned on the ground of their age alone." In 31 of the same
work he contrasts '''' posteriiatem mendacitatis " with " principal-
Jtatem veritatis "— " the latter date of falsehood" with "the
primary date of truth." [pp. 258, 260, supra.^

21


first book.^ A discussion of it would unques-
tionably be of value even now, when we are
about to make a separate examination into
(the subject of) Christ; because, whilst prov-
ing Christ to be the Creator's So?i, we are ef-
fectually shutting out the God of Marcion.
Truth should employ all her available re-
sources, and in no limping way.^ In our
compendious rules of faith, however, she has
it all her own way.'° But I have resolved, like
an earnest man," to meet my adversary every
way and everywhere in the madness of his
heresy, which is so great, that he has found it
easier to assume that that Christ has come
who was never heard of, than He who has
always been predicted.

CHAP. II. — WHY Christ's coming should be

PREVIOUSLY ANNOUNCED.

Coming then at once to the point," I have
to encounter the question, Whether Christ
ought to have come so suddenly ? '^ (i answer,
No.) First, because He was the Son of God
His Father. For this was a point of order,
that the Father should announce '■» the Son
before the Son should the Father, and that
the Father should testify of the Son before
the Son should testify of the Father. Sec-
ondly, because, in addition to the title of Son,
He was the Sent. The authority,'^ therefore,
of the Sender must needs have first appeared


8 See book i. chap. i.

9 Non ut laborantem. " Qui enim laborant non totis sed frac-
tis utuntur viribus." IlaftrTpaTio irofavfiijj ; Anglice, " witli all
her might."

'o In praescript. compendiis vincit.

" Ut gestientem.

"Hinc denique.

13 As Marcion makes Him.

M Profiteretur.

'5 Patrocinium.


322


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book III.


in a testimony of the Sent; because none who
comes in the authority of another does himself
set it forth ' for himself on his own assertion,
but rather looks out for protection from it,
for first comes the support' of him who gives
him his authority. Now (Christ) will neither
be acknowledged as Son if the Father never
named Him, n^r be believed in as the Sent
One if no Sender ^ gave Him a commission:
the Father, if any, purposely naming Him;
and the Sender, if any, purposely commis-
sioning Him. Everything will be open to
suspicion which transgresses a rule. Now the
primary order of all things will not allow that
the Father should come after the Son in recog-
nition, or the Sender after the Sent, or God
after Christ. Nothing can take precedence
of its own original in being acknowledged, nor
in like manner can it in its ordering.^ Sud-
denly a Son, suddenly Sent, and suddenly
Christ ! On the contrary, I should suppose
that from God nothing comes suddenly, be-
cause there is nothing which is not ordered
and arranged by God, And if ordered, why
not also foretold, that it may be proved to
have been ordered by the prediction, and by
the ordering to be divine ? And indeed so
great a work, which (we may be sure) required
preparation, s as being for the salvation of
man, could not have been on that very account
a sudden thing, because it was through faith
that it was to be of avail. ^ Inasmuch, then,
as it had to be believed in order to be of use,
so far did it require, for the securing of this
faith, a preparation built upon the foundations
of pre-arrangement and fore-announcement.
Faith, when informed by such a process, might
justly be required ^ of man by God, and by
man be reposed in God; it being a duty, after
that knowledge^ has made it a possibility, to
believe those things which a man had learned
indeed to believe from the fore-announce-
ment."

CHAP. III. — MIRACLES ALONE, WITHOUT PROPH-
ECY, AN INSUFFICIENT EVIDENCE OF CHRIST's
MISSION.

A procedure" of this kind, you say, was
not necessary, because He was forthwith to
prove Himself the Son and the Sent One, and
the Christ of God in very deed, by means of
the evidence of His wonderful works." . On


* Defendit, " insist on it."
= Sugjfestu.

3 Mandator.

^Dispositione, " its being ordered or arranged."

5 Parabatur.

* Per fidem profuturum.

7 Indiceretur.

8 Agnitione.

\^ 9 Praedicatione, "prophecy."
9^0rdo.
'* « Virtutum, " miracles."


my side, however, I have to deny that evidence
simply of this sort was sufficient as a testimony
to Him. He Himself afterwards deprived
it of its authority," because when He declared
that many would come and " show great signs
and wonders," '^ so as to turn aside the very
elect, and yet for all that were not to be re-
ceived, He showed how rash was belief in signs
and wonders, which were so very easy of ac-
complishment by even false christs. Else
how happens it, if He meant Himself to be
approved and understood, and received on a
certain evidence — I mean that of miracles —
that He forbade the recognition of those
others who had the very same sort of proof
to show, and whose coming was to be quite as
sudden and unannounced by any authority ? '*
If, because He came before them, and was
beforehand with them in displaying the signs
of His mighty deeds, He therefore seized
the first right to men's faith, — just as the first
comers do the first place in the baths, — and
so forestalled all who came after Him in that
right, take care that He, too, be not caught
in the condition of the later comers, if He be
found to be behindhand with the Creator, who
had already been made known, and had already
worked miracles like Him,'^ and like Him had
forewarned men not to believe in others, even
such as should come after Him. If, there-
fore, to have been the first to come and utter
this warning, is to bar and limit faith, '^. He
will Himself have to be condemned, because
He was later in being acknowledged; and au-
thority to prescribe such a rule about later
comers will belong to the Creator alone, who
could have been posterior to none. And now,
when I am about to prove that the Creator
sometimes displayed by His servants of old,
and in other cases reserved for His Christ to
display, the self-same miracles which you
claim as solely due to faith in your Christ, I
may fairly even from this maintain that there
was so much the greater reason wherefore
Christ should not be believed in simply on
account of His miracles, inasmuch as these
would have shown Him to belong to none
other (God) than the Creator, because an-
swering to the mighty deeds of the Creator,
both as performed by His servants and re-
served for '^ His Christ; although, even if some
other proofs should be found in your Christ
— new ones, to wit — we should more readily
believe that they, too, belong to the same God
as do the old ones, rather than to him who


" Exauctoravit.

»3 Matt. xxiv. 24. [See Kaye, p. 125.]

'4 Auctore.

»5 Proinde.

'6 Cludet, funsi claudet.

»7 Repromissis in.


^A


CHAP. IV.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


323


has no other than new' proofs, such as are
wanting in the evidences of that antiquity
which wins the assent of faith, = so that even
on this ground he ought to have come an-
nounced as much by prophecies of his own,
building up faith in him, as by miracles, es-
pecially in opposition to the Creator's Christ,
who was to come fortified by signs and proph-
ets of His own, in order that he might shine
forth as the rival of Christ by help of evidence
of different kinds. But how was his'Christ to
be foretold by a god who was himself never
predicted ? This, therefore, is the unavoid-
able inference, that neither your god nor your
Christ is an object of faith, because God ought
not to have been unknown, and Christ ought
to have been made known through God.^

CHAP. IV. — MARCION's CHRIST NOT THE SUBJECT
OF PROPHECY. THE ABSURD CONSEQUENCES
OF THIS THEORY OF THE HERETIC.

He* disdained, I suppose, to imitate the
order of our God, as one who was displeasing
to him, and was by all means to be van-
quished. He wished to come, as a new being
in a new way — a son previous to his father's
announcement, a sent one before the authority
of the sender; so that he might in person s
propagate a most monstrous faith, whereby it
should come to be believed that Christ was
come before it should be known that He had
an existence. It is here convenient to me to
treat that other point: Why he came not after
Christ ? For when I observe that, during so
long a period, his lord ^ bore with the greatest
patience the very ruthless Creator who was all
the while announcing His Christ to men, I
say^ that whatever reason impelled him to do
so, postponing thereby his own revelation and
interposition, the self-same reason imposed
on him the duty of bearing with the Creator
(who had also in His Christ dispensations of
His own to carry out); so that, after the com-
pletion and accomplishment of the entire plan
of the rival God and the rival Christ, ^ he might
then superinduce his own proper dispensation.
But he grew weary of so long an endurance,
and so failed to wait till the end of the Cre-
ator's course. It was of no use, his enduring
that his Christ should be predicted, when he
refused to permit him to be manifested.^


I Tantummodo nova.

== Egentia experimentis fidei victricis vetustatis.

3 i.e., through God's announcement by prophecy.

4 Your Godf

5 Ipse.

^Ejus (i.e.Marcionis) Dominum, meaning Marcion's God, who
had not yet been revealed.

7 The Creator and His Christ, as rivals of Marcion's.

8 He twits Marcion with introducing his Christ on the scene too
toon. He ought to have waited until the Creator s Christ (proph-
esied of through the Old Testament) had come. Why allow Him
to be predicted, and then forbid His actual coming, by his own


Either it was without just cause that he in-
terrupted the full course of his rival's time,
or without just cause did he so long refrain
from interrupting it. What held him back
at first 'i Or what disturbed him at last? As
the case now stands, however, ' he has com-
mitted himself in respect of both, having re-
vealed himself so tardily after the Creator, so
hurriedly before His Christ; v/hereas he ought
long ago to have encountered the one with a
confutation, the other to have forborne en-
countering as yet — not to have borne with the
one so long in His ruthless hostility, nor to
have disquieted the other, who was as yet
quiescent! In the case of both, while depriv-
ing them of their title to be considered the
most good God, he showed himself at least
capricious and uncertain; lukewarm (in his re-
sentment) towards the Creator, but fervid
against His Christ, and powerless '° in respect
of them both ! For he no more restrained
the Creator than he resisted His Christ. The
Creator still remains such as He really is.
His Christ also will come," just as it is written
of Him. Why did he " come after the Cre-
ator, since he was unable to correct Him by
punishment? '3 Why did he reveal himself
before Christ, whom he could not hinder from
appearing ? '"^ If, on the contrary, 's he did
chastise the Creator, he revealed himself, (I
suppose,) after Him in order that things which
require correction might come first. On which
account also, (of course,) he ought to have
waited for Christ to appear first, whom he was
going to chastise in like manner; then he
would be His punisher coming after Him,"'
just as he had been in the case of the Creator.
There is another consideration: since he will
at his second advent come after Him, that as
he at His first coming took hostile proceed-
ings against the Creator, destroying the law
and the prophets, which were His, so he may,
to be sure, '7 at his second coming proceed in
opposition to Christ, upsetting'^ His kingdom.
Then, no doubt, he would terminate his


arrival on the scene first ? Of course, M. must be understood to
deny that the Christ of the New Testament is the subject of the
Old Testament prophecies at all. Hence T.'s anxiety to adduce
pro/>hecv as the main evidence of our Lord as being really the
Creator s Christ.
9 Atquin.

'o Vanus.

" The reader will remember that Tertullian is here arguing on
Marcion's, ground, according to whom the Creator's Christ, the
Christ predicted through the O. T., was not yet come. Marcion's
Christ, however, had proved himself so weak to stem the Creator's
course, that he had no means really of checking the Creator's
Christ from coming. It had been better, adds Tertullian, rf Mar-
cion's Christ had waited for the Creator's Christ to have first ap-
peared.

12 Marcion's Christ.

13 Emendare.
M Revocare.
'5 Aut si.

16 Posterior emendator futurus: an instance of TertuUian's style
in paradox.
>7 Vero.
'8 Redarguens.


324


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[hook III.


course, and then (if ever) ^ be worthy of be-
lief; for else, if his work has been already
perfected, it would be in vain for him to come,
for there would indeed be nothing that he
could further accomplish.

CHAP. V. — SUNDRY FEATURES OF THE PRO-
PHETIC style: principles of its interpre-
tation.

These preliminary remarks I have ventured
to make'' at this first step of the discussion,
and while the conflict is, as it were, from a
distance. But inasmuch as I shall now from
this point have to grapple with my opponent on
a distinct issue and in close combat, I perceive
that I must advance even here some lines, at
which the battle will have to be delivered; they
are the Scriptures of the Creator. For as I shall
have to prove that Christ was from the Crea-
tor, according to these (Scriptures), which
were afterwards accomplished in the Creator's
Christ, I find it necessary to set forth the
form and, so to speak, the nature of the Scrip-
tures themselves, that they may not distract
the reader's attention by being called into
controversy at the moment of their application
to subjects of discussion, and by their proof
being confounded with the proof of the sub-
jects themselves. Now there are two condi-
tions of prophetic announcement which I ad-
duce, as requiring the assent of our adversaries
in the future stages of the discussion. One,
that future events are sometimes announced
as if they were already passed. For it is^
consistent with Deity to regard as accom-
plished facts whatever It has determined on,
because there is no difference of time with
that Being in whom eternity itself directs a
uniform condition of seasons. It is indeed
more natural ♦ to the prophetic divination to
represent as seen and already brought to
pass,5 even while forseeing it, that which it
foresees; in other words, that which is by all
means future. As for instance, in Isaiah: " I
gave my back to the smiters, and my cheeks
(I exposed) to their hands. I hid not my face
from shame and spitting."*^ For whether it
was Christ even then, as we hold, or the proph-
et, as the Jews say, who pronounced these
words concerning himself, in either case, that
which as yet had not happened sounded as if
it had been already accomplished. Another
characteristic will be, that very many events
are figuratively predicted by means of enigmas
and allegories and parables, and that they


» Si forte.

2 Proluserim.

3 [An important principle, See Kaye, p. 325.]

4 Familiare.

5 Expunctum.

6 Ch. 1. 6, slightly altered.


must be understood in a sense different from
the literal description. For we both read of
"the mountains dropping down new wine,"^
but not as if one might expect " ?nust'' from
the stones, or its decoction from the rocks;
and also hear of "a land flowing with milk
and honey," ^ but not as if you were to sup-
pose that you would ever gather Samian cakes
from the ground; nor does God, forsooth, offer
His services as a water-bailiff or a farmer
when He' says, "I will open rivers in a dry
land ; I will plant in the wilderness the cedar
and the box-tree." » In like manner, when,
foretelling the conversion of the Gentiles, He
says, " The beasts of the field shall honour
me, the dragons and the owls," He surely
never meant to derive '° His fortunate omens
from the young of birds and foxes, and from
the songsters of marvel and fable. But why
enlarge on such a subject? When the very
apostle whom our heretics adopt," interprets
the law which allows an unmuzzled mouth to
the oxen that tread out the corn, not of cattle,
but of ourselves;" and also alleges that the
rock which followed (the Israelites) and sup-
plied them with drink was Christ; '^ teaching
the Galatians, moreover, that the two narra-
tives of the sons of Abraham had an allegorical
meaning in their course;'* and to the Ephe-
sians giving an intimation that, when it was
declared in the beginning that a man should
leave his father and mother and become one
flesh with his wife, he applied this to Christ
and the church. ^s

CHAP. VI. COMMUNITY IN CERTAIN POINTS OF

MARCIONITE AND JEWISH ERROR. PROPHE-
CIES OF CHRIST'S REJECTION EXAMINED

Since, therefore, there clearly exist these
two characteristics in the Jewish prophetic
literature, let the reader remember,'* whenever
we adduce any evidence therefrom, that, by
mutual consent, '7 the point of discussion is
not the form of the scripture, but the subject
it is called in to prove. When, therefore, our
heretics in their phrenzy presumed to say that
that Christ was come who had never been fore-
announced, it followed that, on their assump-
tion, that Christ had not yet appeared who


7 Joel iii. 18.

8 Ex. iii. 8, 17; Dent. xxvi. 9, 15.

9 Isa. xli. 18, 19, inexactly quoted.
»o Relaturus.

" Haereticorum apostolu.s. We have already referred to Mar-
cion's acceptance of St. Paul's epistles. It has been sufrjfested
that Tertullian in the text uses hiereticoruvt apostolus as synony-
mous with ethnicorum apostolus = " apostle of the Gentiles," in
which case the allusion to St. Paul would of course be equally
clear. But this interpretation is unnecessary.

" I Cor. ix. 9.

'3 I Cor. X. 4 ; compare below, book v., chap. vii.

'4 Gal. iv. 22, 24.

'S Eph. V. 31, 32.

>6 " Remember, O reader."

'7 Constitisse.


CHAP. VI.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


325


had always been predicted; and thus they are
obliged to make common cause with ' Jewish
error, and construct their arguments with its
assistance, on the pretence that the Jews were
themselves quite certain that it was some other
who came: so they not only rejected Him as
a stranger, but slew Him as an enemy, al-
though they would without doubt have ac-
knowledged Him, and with all religious de-
votion followed Him, if He had only been one
of themselves. Our shipmaster = of course
got his craft-wisdom not from the Rhodian
jaw,3 but from the Pontic,* which cautioned
him against believing that the Jews had no
right to sin against their Christ; whereas
(even if nothing like their conduct had been
predicted against them) human nature alone,
liable to error as it is, might well have induced
him to suppose that it was quite possible for
the Jews to have committed such a sin, con-
sidered as men, without assuming any unfair
prejudice regarding their feelings, whose sin
was antecedently so credible. Since, how-
ever, it was actually foretold that they would
not acknowledge Christ, and therefore would
even put Him to death, it will therefore follow
that He was both ignored s and slain by them,
who were beforehand pointed out as being
about to commit such offences against Him.
If you require a proof of this, instead of turn-
ing out those passages of Scripture which,
while they declare Christ to be capable of
suffering death, do thereby also affirm the
possibility of His being rejected (for if He
had not been rejected. He could not really
suffer anything), but rather reserving them
for the subject of His sufferings, I shall con-
tent myself at the present moment with ad-
ducing those which simply show that there
was a probability of Christ's rejection. This
is quickly done, since the passages indicate
that the entire power of understanding was
by the Creator taken from the people. " I
will take away," says He, "the wisdom of
their wise men; and the understanding of
their prudent men will I hide; " ^ and again:
"With your ear ye shall hear, and not under-
stand; and with your eyes ye shall see, but
not perceive: for the heart of this people
hath growth fat, and with their ears they hear
heavily, and their eyes have they shut; lest
they hear with their ears, and see with their
eyes, and understand with the heart, and be
converted, and I heal them." ^ Now this


I Sociari cum.

^Marcion.

3 The model of wise naval legislation, much of which found its
way into the Roman pandects.

•♦Symbol of barbarism and ignorance— a heavy joke against the
once seafaring heretic.

5 Ignoratus, " rejected of men."

° Isa. .\-xix. 14.

7 Isa, vi. 9, 10. Quoted with some verbal differences.


blunting of their sound senses they had
brought on themselves, loving God with their
lips, but keeping far away from Him in their
heart. Since, then, Christ was announced by
the Creator, "who formeth the lightning,
and createth the wind, and declareth unto man
His Christ," as the prophet Joel says,^ since
the entire hope of the Jews, not to say o( the
Gentiles too, was fixed on the manifestation
of Christ, — it was demonstrated that they, by
their being deprived of those powers of knowl-
edge and understanding — wisdom and pru-
dence, would fail to know and understand that
which was predicted, even Christ; when the
chief of their wise men should be in error re-
specting Him — that is to say, their scribes
and prudent ones, or Pharisees; and when the
people, like them, should hear with their ears
and not understand Christ while teaching
them, and see with their eyes and not perceive
Christ, although giving them signs. Similarly
it is said elsewhere: "Who is blind, but my
servant ? or deaf, but he who ruleth over
them ? " 9 Also when He upbraids them by
the same Isaiah: "I have nourished and
brought up children, and they have rebelled
against me. The ox knoweth his owner, and
the ass his master's crib: but Israel doth not
know; my people doth not consider." '° We
indeed, who know for certain that Christ al-
ways spoke in the prophets, as the Spirit of
the Creator (for so says the prophet: "The
person of our Spirit, Christ the Lord," "who
from the beginning was both heard and seen
as the Father's vicegerent in the name of
God), are well aware that His words, when
actually upbraiding Israel, were the same
as those which it was foretold that He should
denounce against him: "Ye have forsaken
the Lord, and have provoked the Holy One
of Israel to anger." " If, however, you would
rather refer to God Himself, instead of to
Christ, the whole imputation of Jewish igno-
rance from the first, through an unwillingness
to allow that even anciently '^ the Creator's
word and Spirit — that is to say. His Christ —
was despised and not acknowledged by them,
you will even in this subterfuge be defeated.


8 A supposed quotation of Amos iv. 13. See Oehler's marginal
reference. If so, the reference to Joel is either a slip of Tertullian
or a corruption of his text ; more likely the former, for the best
Mss. insert Joel's name. Amos iv. 13, accordingto the LXX.,
runs, 'AnayyeWuiv €19 avOpunrovi rbv \pi(rTOv avrov, which exact-
ly suits Tertullian's quotation. Junius supports the reference to
Joel, supposing that Tertullian has his ch. ii. 31 in view, as com-
pared with Acts ii. 16-33. This is too harsh an interpretation. It
IS simpler and better to suppose that Tertullian really meant to
quote the LXX. of the passage in Amos, but in mistake named
Joel as his prophet.

9 Isa. xlii. 19, altered.

10 Isa. i. 2, 3.

11 This seems to be a translation wjth a slight alteration of the
LXX. version of Lam. iv. 20, nvevixa TTpo<ro>nov TJ/aaJK Xpiarb^
Kvpio9.

12 Isa. i. 4.

13 Retro.


326


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book III.


For when you do not deny that the Creator's
Son and Spirit and Substance is also His
Christ, you must needs allow that those who
have not acknowledged the Father have failed
likewise to acknowledge the Son through the
identity of their natural substance;' for if in
Its fulness It has baffled man's understand-
ing, much more has a portion of It, especially
when partaking of the fulness ' Now, when
these things are carefully considered, it be-
comes evident how the Jews both rejected
Christ and slew Him; not because they re-
garded Him as a strange Christ, but because
they did not acknowledge Him, although their
own. For how could they have understood
the strange One, concerning whom nothing
had ever been announced, when they failed
to understand Him about whom there had
been a perpetual course of prophecy ? That
admits of being understood or being not un-
derstood, which, by possessing a substantial
basis for prophecy,^ will also have a subject-
matter* for either knowledge or error; whilst
that which lacks such matter admits not the
issue of wisdom. So that it was not as if He
belonged to another s god that they conceived
an aversion for Christ, and persecuted Him,
but simply as a man whom they regarded as
a wonder-working juggler,^ and an enemy ^
in His doctrines. They brought Him there-
fore to trial as a mere man, and one of them-
selves too — that is, a Jew (^only a renegade
and a destroyer of Judaism) — and punished
Him according to their law. If He had been
a stranger, indeed, they would not have sat
in judgment over Him. So far are they from
appearing to have understood Him to be a
strange Christ, that they did not even judge
Him to be a stranger to their own human
nature.^

CHAP. VII. — PROPHECY SETS FORTH TWO DIF-
FERENT CONDITIONS OF CHRIST, ONE LOWLY,
THE OTHER MAJESTIC. THIS FACT POINTS TO
TWO ADVENTS OF CHRIST. ,

Our heretic will now have the fullest oppor-
tunity of learning the clue' of his errors
along with the Jew himself, from whom he
has borrowed his guidance in this discussion.
Since, however, the blind leads the blind,
they fall into the ditch together. We affirm
that, as there are two conditions demonstrated


* Per ejusdem substantiae conditionem.

" He seems here to allude to such statements of God's being as
Col. ij. g.

3 Substantiam praedicationis.

4 Materiam.

5 Alterius, " the other," i.e., Marcion's rival God.

^ Planum in sijjnis, cf. the Mapim in potestate of Apolog. 21.

7 itmulum, " a rival," i.e., to Moses.

8 Nee hominem ejus ut alienum judicaverunt, " His manhood
they judged not to be different."

9Rationem.


by the prophets to belong to Christ, so these
presignified the same number of advents;
one, and that the first, was to be in lowli-
ness,'° when He had to be led as a sheep to
be slain as a victim, and to be as a lamb
dumb before the shearer, not opening His
mouth, and not fair to look upon." ' For,
says (the prophet), we have announced con-
cerning Him: " He is like a tender plant,'"'
like a root out of a thirsty ground; He hath
no form nor comeliness; and we beheld Him,
and He was without beauty: His form was
disfigured; " '3 *' marred more than the sons
of men; a man stricken with sorrows, and
knowing how to bear our infirmity;"'*
"placed by the Father as a stone of stum-
bling and a rock of offence; " 's "made by
Him a little lower than the angels; " '^ declar-
ing Himself to be " a worm and not a man, a
reproach of men, and despised of the
people." '7 Now these signs of degradation
quite suit His first coming, just as the tokens
of His majesty do His second advent, when
He shall no longer remain " a stone of stum-
bling and a rock of offence," but after His
rejection become " the chief corner-stone,"
accepted and elevated to the top place '^ of
the temple, even His church, being that very
stone in Daniel, cut out of the mountain,
which was to smite and crush the image of the
secular kingdom.'' Of this advent the same
prophet says: "Behold, one like the Son of
man came with the clouds of heaven, and
came to the Ancient of days; and they brought
Him before Him, and there was given Him
dominion and glory, and a kingdom, that all
people, nations, and languages should serve
Him. His dominion is an everlasting do-
minion, which shall not pass away; and His
kingdom that which shall not be destroyed." ""
Then indeed He shall have' both a glorious
form, and an unsullied beauty above the sons
of men. " Thou art fairer," says (the Psalm-
ist), "than the children of men; grace is
poured into Thy lips; therefore God hath
blessed Thee for ever. Gird Thy sword upon
Thy thigh, O most mighty, with Thy glory
and Thy majesty."" For the Father, after
making Him a little lower than the angels,
"will crown Him with glory and honour, and
put all things under His feet."" "Then


10 Humilitate.

" A reference to, rather than quotation from, Isa. liii. 7.

i^Sicut puerulus, " like a little boy," or, "a sorry slave.'

13 Isa. liii. 2, 3, according to the Septuagint.

'4 See Isa. Hi. 14, liii. 3, 4.

15 Isa. viii. 14.

16 Ps. viii. 6.
»7 Ps. xxii. 7.

»8 Consummationem : an allusion to Zech. iv. 7.
19 See Dan. ii. 34.
=0 Dan. vii. 13, 14.

21 Ps. xlv. 2, 3.

22 Ps. viii. 5, 6,


CHAP. VIII.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


327


shall they look on Him whom they have
pierced, and they shall mourn for Him, tribe
after tribe; " ^ because, no doubt, they once
refused to acknowledge Him in the lowliness
of His human condition. He is even a man,
says Jeremiah, and who shall recognise Him ?
Therefore, asks Isaiah, "who shall declare
His generation ?" ^^ So also in Zechariah,
Christ Jesus, the true High Priest of the
Father, in the person of Joshua, nay, in the
very mystery of His name,^ is portrayed in a
twofold dress with reference to both His ad-
vents. At first He is clad in sordid garments,
that is to say, in the lowliness of suffering
and mortal flesh: then the devil resisted Him,
as the instigator of the traitor Judas, not to
mention his tempting Him after His baptism:
aftenvards He was stripped of His first filthy
raiment, and adorned with the priestly robe*
and mitre, and a pure diadem; s in other
words, with the glory and honour of His
second advent.^ If I may offer, moreover,
an interpretation of the two goats which
were presented on "the great day of atone-
ment," 7 do they not also figure the two nat-
ures of Christ ? They were of like size, and
very similar in appearance, owing to the Lord's
identity of aspect; because He is not to come
in any other form, having to be recognised
by those by whom He was also wounded and
pierced. One of these goats was bound^ with
scarlet, 9 and driven by the people out of the
camp ^° into the wilderness," amid cursing, and
spitting, and pulling, and piercing,'^ being
thus marked with all the signs of the Lord's
own passion; while the other, by being offered
up for sins, and given to the priests of the
temple for meat, afforded proofs of His second
appearance, when (after all sins have been
expiated) the priests of the spiritual temple,
that is, the church, are to enjoy the flesh, as
it were, '3 of the Lord's own grace, whilst- the
residue go away from salvation without tast-

' Zech. xii. 10, 12.

2 Isa. liii. 8.

3 Joshua, i.e., Jesus.
•♦ Podere.

5 Cidari munda.

6 See Zech. iii.

7 Jejunio, see Lev. xvi. 5, 7, etc.

8 Circumdatus.

9 Perhaps in reference to Heb. ix. 19.
'"Civitatem, " city."

" In perditionera.

12 This treatment of the scape-goat was partly ceremonial,
partly disorderly. The Mischna (I'oma vf. 4-6) mentions the
scarlet ribbon which was bound round the animal's head between
the horns, and the " pulling " (rather plucking out of its hair) ;
but this latter was an indignity practised by scoffers and guarded
against by Jews. TertuUian repeats the whole of this passage,
Adv.Jiid. xiv. Similar use is made of the type of the scape-goat
by other fathers, as Justin Martyr {Dial, cum Tryph.) and Cyril of
Alex. (Epist. ad Acactum). In his book ix. Against Julian, he
expressly says : " Christ was described by the two goats,— as dying
for us in the flesh, and then (as shown by the scape-goat) over-
coming death in His divine nature." See Tertullian s passages
illustrated fully in Rabbi Chiga, Addti. ad Cod. de die Expiat.
(in Ugolini, Z'/si-j. i. 88).

'3 Quasi visceratione. [See Kaye's important comment, p, 426.]


ing it.'* Since, therefore, the first advent was
prophetically declared both as most obscure
in its types, and as deformed with every kind
of indignity, but the second as glorious and
altogether worthy of God, they would on this
very account, while confining their regards to
that which they were easily able both to un-
derstand and to believe, even the second ad-
vent, be not undeservedly deceived respecting
the more obscure, and, at any rate, the more
lowly first coming. Accordingly, to this day
they deny that their Christ has come, because
He has not appeared in majesty, while they
ignore the fact that He was to come also in
lowliness.

CHAP. VIII. — ABSURDITY OF MARCION's DOCETIC

opinions; reality of Christ's incarna-
tion.

Our heretic must now cease to borrow poi-
son from the Jew — "the asp," as the adage
runs, "from the viper " 's — and henceforth
vomit forth the virulence of his own dispo-
sition, as when he alleges Christ to be a phan-
tom. Except, indeed, that this opinion of
his will be sure to have others to maintain
it in his precocious and somewhat abortive
Marcionites, whom the Apostle John desig-
nated as antichrists, when they denied that
Christ was come in the flesh; not that they
did this with the view of establishing the right
of the other god (for on this point also they
had been branded by the same apostle), but
because they had started with assuming the
incredibility of an incarnate God. Now, the
more firmly the antichrist Marcion had seized
this assumption, the more prepared was he,
of course, to reject the bodily substance of
Christ, since he had introduced his very god
to our notice as neither the author nor the
restorer of the flesh; and for this very reason,
to be sure, as pre-eminently good, and most
remote from the deceits and fallacies of the
Creator. His Christ, therefore, in order to
avoid all such deceits and fallacies, and the
imputation, if possible, of belonging to the
Creator, was not what he appeared to be, and
feigned himself to be what he was not — in-
carnate without being flesh, human without
being man, and likewise a divine Christ with-
out being God ! But why should he not have
propagated also the phantom of God ? Can I
believe him on the subject of the internal
nature/ who was all wrong touching the ex-
ternal substance ? How will it be possible to
believe him true on a mystery, when he has
been found so false on a plain fact ? How,


J+Jejunantibus.

IS So Epiphanius, adv. Hares. 1. 23. 7, quotes the same proverb,
s d<r7rls Trap' exc'fii'Tjs Cov Savi^o/xivri. [Tom. II. p. 144. Ed.Oehler.]


328


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book III.


moreover, when he confounds the truth of the
spirit with the error of the flesh,' could he
combine within himself that communion of
light and darkness, or truth and error, which
the apostle says cannot co-exist?' Since,
however, Christ's being flesh is now discov-
ered to be a lie, it follows that all things which
were done by the flesh of Christ were done
untruly, 3— every act of intercourse,-* of con-
tact, of eating or drinking,5 yea. His very
miracles. If with a touch, or by being
touched. He freed anyone of a disease, what-
ever was done by any corporeal act cannot be
believed to have been truly done in the ab-
sence of all reality in His body itself. Noth-
ing substantial can be allowed to have been
effected by an unsubstantial thing; nothing
full by a vacuity. If the habit were putative,
the action was putative; if the worker were
imaginary the works were imaginary. On
this principle, too, the sufferings of Christ
will be found not to warrant faith in Him.
For He suffered nothing who did not truly
suffer; and a phantom could not truly suffer.
God's entire work, therefore, is subverted.
Christ's death, wherein lies the whole weight
and fruit of the Christian name, is denied,
although :he apostle asserts ^ it so expressly '
as undoubtedly real, making it the very
foundation of the gospel, of our salvation,
and of his own preaching.^ " I have deliv-
ered unto you before all things," says he,
" how that Christ died for our sins, and
that he was buried, and that He rose again
the third day." Besides, if His flesh is
denied, how is His death to be asserted; for
death is the proper suffering of the flesh,
which returns through death back to the earth
out of which it was taken, according to the
law of its Maker? Now, if His death be de-
nied, because of the denial of His flesh, there
will be no certainty of His resurrection. For
He rose not, for the very same reason that
He died not, even because He possessed not
the reality of the flesh, to which as death ac-
crues, so does resurrection likewise. Simi-
larly, if Christ's resurrection be nullified, ours
also is destroyed. If Christ's resurrection be
not realized,' neither shall that be for which
Christ came. For just as they, who said that
there is no resurrection of the dead, are re-
futed by the apostle from the resurrection of
Christ, so, if the resurrection of Christ falls


^:


* As in his Docetic views of the body of Christ,

= 2 Cor. vi. 14.

SMendacio.

4 Congressus.

5 Convictus.
^Demandat.

7 Tam impresse, " so strongly."
81 Cor. XV. 3, 4, 14, 17, 18.
1^ Valebit.


to- the ground, the resurrection of the dead
is also swept away." And so our faith is vain,
and vain also is the preaching of the apos-
tles. Moreover, they even show themselves
to be false witnesses of God, because they
testified that He raised up Christ, whom He
did not raise. And we remain in our sins
still." And those who have slept in Christ
have perished; destined, forsooth," to rise
again, but peradventure in a phantom state, '^
just like Christ.

CHAP. IX. — REFUTATION OF MARCION's OBJEC-
TIONS DERIVED FROM THE CARES OF THE
ANGELS, AND THE PRE-INCARNATE MANIFES-
TATIONS OF THE SON OF GOD.

Now, in this discussion of yours,'* when
you suppose that we are to be met with the
case of the Creator's angels, as if they held
intercourse with Abraham and Lot in a phan-
tom state, that of merely putative flesh, '^ and
yet did truly converse, and eat, and work, as
they had been commissioned to do, you will
not, to begin with, be permitted to use as ex-
amples the acts of that God whom you are
destroying. For by how much you make
your god a better and more perfect being, by
just so much will all examples be unsuitable
to him of that God from whom he totally dif-
fers, and without which difference he would
not be at all better or more perfect. But
then, secondly, you must know that it will not
be conceded to you, that in the angels there
was only a putative flesh, but one of a true
and solid human substance. For if (on your
terms) it was no difficulty to him to manifest
true sensations and actions in a putative flesh,
it was much more easy for him still to have
assigned the true substance of flesh to these
true sensations and actions, as the proper
maker and former thereof. But your god,
perhaps on the ground of his having produced
no flesh at all, was quite right in introducing
the mere phantom of that of which he had
been unable to produce the reality. My God,
however, who formed that which He had taken
out of the dust of the ground in the true
quality of flesh, although not issuing as yet,
from conjugal seed, was equally able to apply-
to angels too a flesh of any material whatso-
ever, who built even the world out of nothing,
into so many and so various bodies, and tliat at
a word ! And, really, if your god promises^
to men some time or other the true nature of


w Aufertur.
" I Cor. XV. 13-18
"Sane.

'3 Phantasniate forsitan.
Mista. I See Kaye, p. 205.]
>S [Pamehus attributes this doctrine to Appellt
cion, of whom See Kaye, pp. 479, 480.]


I disciple of Mar-


CHAP. XI.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


329


angels' (for he says, " They shall be like the
angels "), why should not my God also have
fitted on to angels the true substance of men,
from whatever source derived ? For not even
you will tell me, in reply, whence is obtained
that angelic nature on your side; so that it is
enough for me to define this as being fit and
proper to God, even the verity of that thing
which was objective to three senses — sight,
touch, and hearing. It is more difficult for
God to practise deception Mhan to produce
real flesh from any material whatever,- even
without the means of birth. But for other
heretics, also, who maintain that the flesh in
the angels ought to have been born of flesh,
if it had been really human, we have an an-
swer on a sure principle, to the effect that it
was truly Juwiati flesh, and yet not born. It
was truly human, because of the truthfulness
of God, who can neither lie nor deceive, and
because (angelic beings) cannot be dealt with
by men in a human way except in human sub-
stance: it was withal unborn, because none^
but Christ could become incarnate by being
born of the flesh in order that by His own
nativity He might regenerate '' our birth, and
might further by His death also dissolve our
death, by rising again in that flesh in which,
that He might even die. He was born.
Therefore on that occasion He did Himself
appear with the angels to Abraham in the
verity of the flesh, which had not as yet under-
gone birth, because it was not yet going to
die, although it was even now learning to
hold intercourse amongst men. Still greater
was the propriety in angels, who never re-
ceived a dispensation to die for us, not hav-
ing assumed even a brief experience ^ of flesh
by being born, because they were not des-
tined to lay it down again by dying; but
from whatever quarter they obtained it, and
by what means soever they afterwards entirely
divested themselves of it, they yet never pre-
tended it to be unreal flesh. Since the Cre-
ator " maketh His angels spirits, and His
ministers a flame of fire "—as truly spirits as
also fire — so has He truly made them flesh
likewise; wherefore we can now recall to our
own minds, and remind the heretics also, that
He has promised that He will one day form
men into angels, who once formed angels into
men.

CHAP. X. THE TRULY INCARNATE STATE MORE

WORTHY OF GOD THAN MARCION's FANTASTIC
FLESH.

Therefore, since you are not permitted to

' Lnke xx. 36.
= Mentiri.

3 i.e , among the angels.

4 Reforniaret.

5 Commeatum.


resort to any instances of the Creator, as
alien from the subject, and possessing special
causes of their own, I should like you to
state yourself the design of your god, in ex-
hibiting his Christ not in the reality of flesh.
If he despised it as earthly, and (as you ex-
press it) full of dung,^ why did he not on that
account include the likeness of it also in his
contempt ? For no honour is to be attributed
to the image of anything which is itself un-
worthy of honour. As the natural state is,
so will the likeness be. But how could he
hold converse with men except in the image
of human substance "f Why, then, not rather
in the reality thereof, that his intercourse
might be real, since he was under the neces-
sity of holding it ? And to how much better
account would this necessity have been turned
by ministering to faith rather than to a fraud ! ^
The god whom you make is miserable enough,
for this very reason that he was unable to dis-
play his Christ except in the effigy of an un-
worthy, and indeed an alien, thing. In some
instances, it will be convenient to use even
unworthy things, if they be only our own, as
it will also be quite improper to use things,
be they ever so worthy, if they be not our
own. 9 Why, then, did he not come in some
other worthier substance, and especially his
own, that he might not seem as if he could
not have done without an unworthy and an
alien one ? Now, since my Creator held in-
tercourse with man by means of even a bush
and fire, and again afterwards by means of a
cloud and column, '° and in representations of
Himself used bodies composed of the ele-
ments, these examples of divine power afford
sufficient proof that God did not require the
instrumentality of false or even of real flesh.
But yet, if we look steadily into the subject,
there is really no substance which is worthy
of becoming a vestment for God. Whatso-
ever He is pleased to clothe Himself withal.
He makes worthy of Himself — only without
untruth." Therefore how comes it to pass
that he should have thought the verity of the
flesh, rather than its unreality, a disgrace ?
Well, but he honoured it by his fiction of it.
How great, then, is that flesh, the very phan-
tasy of which was a necessity to the superior
God!

CHAP. XI. CHRIST WAS TRULY BORN; MAR-

CION's ABSURD CAVIL IN DEFENCE OF A PUTA-
TIVE NATIVITY.

All these illusions of an imaginary corpo-


6 Stercoribtis infersam.

7 A Marcionite argument.

SStropham, a player's trick ; so in Spectac. 29.

9 Alienis.
10 Globum.
" Mendacio.


330


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book III.


reity' in (his) Christ, Marcion adopted with
this view, that his nativity also might not be
furnished with any evidence from his human
substance, and that thus the Christ of the Cre-
ator might be free to have assigned to Him
all predictions which treated of Him as one
capable of human birth, and therefore fleshly.
But most foolishly did our Pontic heresiarch
act in this too. As if it would not be more
readily believed that flesh in the Divine
Being should rather be unborn than untrue,
this belief having in fact had the way mainly
prepared for it by the Creator's angels when
they conversed in flesh which was real, al-
though unborn. For indeed the notorious
Philumena=* persuaded Apelles and the other
seceders from Marcion rather to believe that
Christ did really carry about a body of flesh;
not derived to Him, however, from birth, but
one which He borrowed from the elements.
Now, as Marcion was apprehensive that a be-
lief of the fleshly body would also involve a
belief of birth, undoubtedly He who seemed
to be man was believed to be verily and
indeed born. For a certain woman had
exclaimed, " Blessed is the womb that
bare Thee, and the paps which Thou hast
sucked !" 3 And how else could they have
said that His mother and His brethren were
standing without?'* But we shall see more
of this in the proper place. s Surely, when
He also proclaimed Himself as the Son of
man, He, without doubt, confessed that He
had been born. Now I would rather refer all
these points to an examination of the gospel;
but still, as I have already stated, if he, who
seemed to be man, had by all means to pass
as having been born, it was vain for him to
suppose that faith in his nativity was to be
perfected^ by the device of an imaginary
flesh. For what advantage was there in that
being not true which was held to be true,
whether it were his flesh or his birth ? Or if
you should say, let human opinion go for
nothing; ^ you are then honouring your god
under the shelter of a deception, since he
knew himself to be something different from
what he had made men to think of him. In
that case you might possibly have assigned
to him a putative nativity even, and so not
have hung the question on this point. For


« Corpulentiae.

a This woman is called in De Pretscr. Hard. 6, " an angel of
deceit," and (in lo) "a virgin, but afterwards a monstrous prosti-
tute." Our author adds: " Induced by her tricks and miracles,
Apelles introduced a new heresy." See also Eusebius, ffist. Eccl.
V. 13 ; Augustin, De Hares. 42 ; Hieronymus, Epist. adv. Ctes-
iph. p. 477, tom. iv. ed. Benedictin.

3 Luke xi- 27.

4 Luke viii. 20.

5 Below, iv. 26 ; also in De came Christi, cap. vii.

* Expungendam, *' consummated," a frequent use of the word
In our auihor.
* 7 Viderit opinio humana.


silly women fancy themselves pregnant some-
times, when they are corpulent^ either from
their natural flux^* or from some other malady.
And, no doubt, it had become his duty, since
he had put on the mere mask of his substance,
to act out from its earliest scene the play of
his phantasy, lest he should have failed in his
part at the beginning of the flesh. You have,
of course, *° rejected the sham of a nativity,
and have produced true flesh itself. And, no
doubt, even the real nativity of a God is a
most mean thing." Come then, wind up your
cavils " against the most sacred and reverend
works of nature; inveigh against all that you
are; destroy the origin of flesh and life; call
the womb a sewer of the illustrious animal —
in other words, the manufactory for the pro-
duction of man; dilate on the impure and
shameful tortures of parturition, and then on
the filthy, troublesome, contemptible issues
of the puerperal labour itself ! But yet, after
you have pulled all these things down to in-
famy, that you may affirm them to be un-
worthy of God, birth will not be worse for
Him than death, infancy than the cross, pun-
ishment than nature, condemnation than the
flesh. If Christ truly suffered all this, to be
born was a less thing for Him. If Christ
suffered evasively,'^ as a phantom; evasively,
too, might He have been born. Such are
Marcion' s chief arguments by which he makes
out another Christ; and I think that we show
plainly enough that they are utterly irrele-
vant, when we teach how much more truly
consistent with God is the reality rather than
the falsehood of that condition '* in which He
manifested His Christ. Since He was " the
truth," He was flesh; since He was flesh. He
was born. For the points which this heresy
assaults are confirmed, when the means of the
assault are destroyed. Therefore if He is to
be considered in the flesh, 's because He was
born; and born, because He is in the flesh,
and because He is no phantom, — it follows
that He must be acknowledged as Himself
the very Christ of the Creator, who was by the
Creator's prophets foretold as about to come
in the flesh, and by the process of human
birth.'*

CHAP. XII. — Isaiah's prophecy of emmanuel.

CHRIST ENTITLED TO THAT NAME.

And challenge us first, as is your wont, to
consider Isaiah's description of Christ, while


^Inflatae.

9 Sanguinis tributo.
10 Plane, ironically said.
" Turpissimum.
■2 Perora.
'3 Mendacio.
14 Habitus.
'SCarneus.
*6 Ex nativitate.


CHAP. XIII.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


331


you contend that in no point does it suit. For,
to begin with, you say that Isaiah's Christ
will have to be called Emmanuel;' then, that
He takes the riches of Damascus and the
spoils of Samaria against the king of Assy-
ria.' But yet He who is come was neither
born under such a name, nor ever engaged in
any warlike enterprise. I must, however,
remind you that you ought to look into the
contexts ^ of the two passages. For there is
immediately added the interpretation of
Emmanuel, " God with us; " so that you have
to consider not merely the name as it is ut-
tered, but also its meaning. The utterance
is Hebrew, Emmmmel, of the prophet's own
nation; but the meaning of the word, God
with lis, is by the interpretation made com-
mon property. Inquire, then, whether this
name, God-with-us, which is Emmanuel, be
not often used for the name of Christ,^ from
the fact that Christ has enlightened the world.
And I suppose you will not deny it, inasmuch
as you do yourself admit that He is called
God-with-us, that is, Emmanuel. Else if you
are so foolish, that, because with you He gets
the designation God-with-us, not Emmanuel,
you therefore are unwilling to grant that He
is come whose property it is to be called
Emmanuel, as if this were not the same name
as God-with-us, you will find among the He-
brew Christians, and amongst Marcionites
too, that they name Him Emmanuel when
they mean Him to be called God-with-us; just
indeed as every nation, by whatever word
they would express God-with-us, has called
Him Emmanuel, completing the sound in its
sense. Now since Emmanuel is God-with-
us, and God-with-us is Christ, who is in us
(for "as many of you as are baptized into
Christ, have put on Christ " s), Christ is as
properly implied in the meaning of the name,
which is God-with-us, as He is in the pronun-
ciation of the name, which is Emmanuel. And
thus it is evident that He is now come who
was foretold as Emmanuel, because what
Emmanuel signifies is come, that is to say,
God-with-us.

CHAP. XIII. — Isaiah's prophecies considered.

THE VIRGINITY OF CHRIST's MOTHER A SIGN.
OTHER PROPHECIES ALSO SIGNS. METAPHOR-
ICAL SENSE OF PROPER NAMES IN SUNDRY
PASSAGES OF THE PROPHETS.

You are equally led away by the sound of
names, "^ when you so understand the riches
of Damascus, and the spoils of Samaria, and

^ Isa. vii. 14.

2lsa. viii. 4. Compare adv. Judceos, 9.

3 Cohserentia.

4 Agitetur in Christo.
SGal. iii. 27.

6 Compare with this chapter, T.'s adv.Judaos, 9.


the king of Assyria, as if they portended that
the Creator's Christ was a warrior, not attend-
ing to the promise contained in the passage,
" For before the Child shall have knowledge
to cry. My father and My mother. He shall
take away the riches of Damascus and the
spoil of Samaria before the king of Assyria." 7
You should first examine the point of age,
whether it can be taken to represent Christ
as even yet a man,^ much less a warrior. Al-
though, to be sure. He might be about to call
to arms by His cry as an infant; might be
about to sound the alarm of war not with a
trumpet, but with a little rattle; might be
about to seek His foe, not on horseback, or
in chariot, or from parapet, but from nurse's
neck or nursemaid's back, and so be des-
tined to subjugate Damascus and Samaria
from His mother's breasts ! It is a different
matter, of course, when the babes of your
barbarian Pontus spring forth to the fight.
They are, I ween, taught to lance before they
lacerate; 5 swathed at first in sunshine and
ointment, '"afterwards armed with the satchel,"
and rationed on bread and butter ! " Now,
since nature, certainly, nowhere grants to man
to learn warfare before life, to pillage the
wealth of a Damascus before he knows his
father and mother's name, it follows that the
passage in question must be deemed to be a
figurative one. Well, but nature, says he,
does not permit " a virgin to conceive," and
still the prophet is believed. And indeed
very properly; for he has paved the way for
the incredible thing being believed, by giving
a reason for its occurrence, in that it was to
be for a sign. "Therefore," says he, "the
Lord himself shall give you a sig7i; behold,
a virgin shall conceive, and bear a son."'^
Now a sign from God would not have been a
sign, '4 unless it had been some novel and pro-
digious thing. Then, again, Jewish cavillers,
in order to disconcert us, boldly pretend that
Scripture does not hold 's that a virgin, but
only a young woman, '^ is to conceive and bring


7 Isa. viii. 4.

8 Jam hominem, jam virum in Ad7'.Jud^os, "at man's estate.

9 Lanceare ante quam lancinare. This play on the words points
to the very early training of the barbarian boys to war. Lancinare
perhaps means, " to nibble the nipple with the ^um."

'" He alludes to the suppling of their young joints with oil, and
then drying them in the sun.
" Pan n is.

12 Butyro.

13 Isa. vii. 14.

M The /a;« dignum of this place is "jam signum " in adv.
Judceos.

IS Contineat.

•6 This opinion of Jews and Tudaizing heretics is mentioned by
Irena;us, Adv. Hteret. iii. 21 (Stieren'sed. i. 532) ; Eusebius, Hist.
Eccles. V. 8 ; Jerome, Adv. Helvid. (ed. Benedict), p. 132. Nor
has the cavil ceased to be held, as is well known, to the present
day. The rDOTTD of Isa. vii. 4 is supposed by the Jewish Fuerst

to be Isaiah's ivi/e, and he. quotes Kinichi's authority ; while the
neologian Gesenius interprets the word, a bride, and rejects the
Catholic notion of an unspotted virgin. To make way, however,
for their view, both Fuerst and Gesenius have to reject the LXX.
rendering, Trap^eVos.


OO'


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[hook III.


forth. They are, however, refuted by this
consideration, that nothing of the nature of
a sign can possibly come out of what is a daily
occurrence, the pregnancy and child-bearing
of a young woman. A virgin mother is justly
deemed to be proposed ' by God as a sign,
but a warlike infant has no like claim to the
distinction; for even in such a case' there
does not occur the character of a sign. But
after the sign of the strange and novel birth
has been asserted, there is immediately after-
wards declared as a sign the subsequent
course of the Infant, ^ who was to eat butter
and honey. Not that this indeed is of the
nature of a sign, nor is His " refusing the
evil;" for this, too, is only a characteristic
of infancy.* But His destined capture of the
riches of Damascus and the spoil of Samaria
before the king of Assyria is no doubt a ivofi-
iier/ul sign.^ Keep to the measure of His
age, and seek the purport of the prophecy,
and give back also to the truth of the gospel
what you have taken away from it in the late-
ness of your heresy,'^ and the prophecy at once
becomes intelligible and declares its own ac-
complishment. Let those eastern magi wait
on the new-born Christ, presenting to Him,
{although) in His infancy, their gifts of gold
and frankincense; and surely an Infant will
have received the riches of Damascus without
a battle, and unarmed.

For besides the generally known fact, that
the riches of the East, that is to say, its
strength and resources, usually consist of gold
and spices, it is certainly true of the Creator,
that He makes gold the riches of the other ^
nations also. Thus He says by Zechariah:
"And Judah shall also fight at Jerusalem,
and shall gather together all the wealth of
the nations round about, gold and silver."^
Moreover, respecting that gift of gold, David
also says: "And there shall be given to Him
of the gold of Arabia; " » and again: " The
kings of Arabia and Saba shall' offer to Him
gifts." '° For the East generally regarded the
magi as kings; and Damascus was anciently
deemed to belong to Arabia, before it was
transferred to Syrophoenicia on the division
of the Syrias (by Rome)." Its riches Christ
then received, when He received the tokens
thereof in the gold and spices; while the


1 Disposita.

2 Et hic.

3 Alius ordo jam infantjs.

4 Infantia est. Better in adv. Jud^os, " est infantiae."

5 The italicised words we have added from adT. Judteos, " hoc
•est mirabile signum."

6 Posterior. Poster Has is an attribute of heresy in T-'s view.
7Ceterarum, other than the Jews, i.e., Gentiles.

8 Zech. XIV. 14.

9 Ps. Ixxii. 15.
" Ps. Ixxii. 10.

II See (Jno's Justin Martyr, ii. 273, n. 23. [See Vol. I. p. 258,


spoils of Samaria were the magi themselves.
These having discovered Him and honoured
Him with their gifts, and on bended knee
adored Him as their God and King, through
the witness of the star which led their way and
guided them, became the spoils of Samaria,
that is to say, of idolatry, because, as it is
easy enough to see," they believed in Christ.
He designated idolatry under the name of
Samaria, as that city was shameful for its
idolatry, through which it had then revolted
from God from the days of king Jeroboam.
Nor is this an unusual manner for the Creator,
(in His Scriptures '3) figuratively to employ
names of places as a metaphor derived from
the analogy of their sins. Thus He calls the
chief men of the Jews "rulers of Sodom,"
and the nation itself " people of Gomorrah." '*
And in another passage He also says: " Thy
father was an Amorite, and thy mother an
Hittite, "'5 by reason of their kindred iniquity ;'*
although He had actually called them His
sons: " I have nourished and brought up
children.'' '''' So likewise by Egypt is some-
times understood, in His sense, '^ the whole
world as being marked out by superstition
and a curse. '^ By a similar usage Babylon
also in our (St.) John is a figure of the city of;
Rome, as being like (Babylon) great and proud
in royal power, and warring down the saints
of God. Now it was in accordance with this
style that He called the magi by the name of '
Samaritans, because (as we have said) they
had practised idolatry as did the Samaritans.
Moreover, by the phrase "before or against
the king of Assyria," understand "against
Herod;" against whom the magi then opposed
themselves, when they refrained from carry-
ing him back word concerning Christ, whom
he was seeking to destroy.

CHAP. XIV. FIGURATIVE STYLE OF CERTAIN

MESSIANIC PROPHECIES IN THE PSALMS. MILI-
TARY METAPHORS APPLIED TO CHRIST.

This interpretation of ours will derive con-|
firmation, when, on your supposing that Christ
is in any passage called a warrior, from th(
mention of certain arms and expressions of that!
sort, you weigh well the analogy of their other]
meanings, and draw your conclusions accord-
ingly. "Gird on Thy sword," says David,
" upon Thy thigh." =~ But what do you read;
about Christ just before ? "Thou art fairer


'= Videlicet.

13 The Creatori here answers to the Scripturis divt'ttis of the
parallel passage in adv.jud<eps. Of course there is a special
force in this use of the Creator s name here against Marcion.

14 Isa. i. 10.

15 Ezek. xvi. 3.

16 To the sins of these nations.
'7 Isa. i. 2.

J^Apud ilium, i.e., Creatorem
19 Maledictionis.
2>5 Ps. xlv. 3.


CHAP. XV.]


TERTULLIAN ACxAINST MARCION.


T -» -J


than the children of men ; grace is poured
forth upon Thy Hps." ' It amuses me to im-
agine that blandishments of fair beauty and
graceful lips are ascribed to one who had to
gird on His sword for war ! So likewise, when
it is added, " Ride on prosperously in Thy
majesty,"' the reason is subjoined: "Be-
cause of truth, and meekness, and righteous-
ness." ^ But who shall produce //lese results
with the sword, and not their opposites rather
— deceit, and harshness, and injury — which,
it must be confessed, are the proper business
of battles ? Let us see, therefore, whether
that is not some other sword, which has so
different an action. Now the Apostle John,
in the Apocalypse, describes a sword which
proceeded from the mouth of God as "a
doubly sharp, two-edged one."'^ This may
be understood to be the Divine Word, who is
doubly edged with the two testaments of the
law and the gospel — sharpened with wisdom,
hostile to the devil, arming us against the
spiritual enemies of all wickedness and con-
cupiscence, and cutting us off from the dear-
est objects for the sake of God's holy name.
If, however, you will not acknowledge John,
you have our common master Paul, who
"girds our loins about with truth, and puts
on us the breastplate of righteousness, and
shoes us with the preparation of the gospel of
peace, not of war; who bids us take the shield
of faith, wherewith we may be able to quench
all the fiery darts of the devil, and the helmet
of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit,
which (he says) is the word of God." s This
sword the Lord Himself came to send on
earth, and not pe.ace.^ If he is your Christ,
then even he is a warrior. If he is not a
warrior, and the sword he brandishes is an
allegorical one, then the Creator's Christ in
the psalm too may have been girded with the
figurative sword of the Word, without any
martial gear. The above-mentioned " fair-
ness " of His beauty and " grace of His lips "
would quite suit such a sword, girt as it even
then was upon His thigh in the passage of
David, and sent as it would one day be by
Him on earth. For this is what He says:
" Ride on prosperously in Thy majesty ^ " —
advancing His word into every land, so as to
call all nations: destined to prosper in the
success of that faith which received Him, and
reigning, from the fact that*^ He conquered
death by His resurrection. " Thy right


1 Ps. Xlv. 2.

2 Literally, " Advance, and prosper, and reign.

3 Ps. xlv. 4.

4 Rev. i. i6.
SEph. vi. 14-17.
6 Matt. X. 34.

7" Advance, and prosper, and reign."
° Exinde qua.


hand," says He, "shall wonderfully lead
Thee forth," ' even the might of Thy spiritual
grace, whereby the knowledge of Christ is
spread. " Thine arrows are sharp;" '° every-
where Thy precepts fly about. Thy threaten-
ings also, and convictions " of heart, pricking
and piercing each conscience. "The people
shall fall under Thee," " that is, in adoration.
Thus is the Creator's Christ mighty in war,
and a bearer of arms; thus also does He now
take the spoils, not of Samaria alone, but of
all nations. Acknowledge, then, that His
spoils are figurative, since you have learned
that His arms are allegorical. Since, there-
fore, both the Lord speaks and His apostle
writes such things '^ in a figurative style, we
are not rash in using His interpretations, the
records "* of which even our adversaries admit;
and thus in so far will it be Isaiah's Christ
who has come, in as far as He was not a
warrior, because it is not of such a character
that He is described by Isaiah.

CHAP. XV. — THE TITLE CHRIST SUITABLE AS A
NAME OF THE CREATOR'S SON, BUT UNSUITED
TO MARCION'S CHRIST.

Touching then the discussion of His flesh,
and (through that) of His nativity, and inci-
dentally '5 of His name Emmanuel, let this suf-
fice. Concerning His other names, however,
and especially that of Christ, what has the other
side to say in reply ? If the name of Christ
is as common with you as is the name of God
— so that as the Son of both Gods may be
fitly called Christ, so each of the Fathers may
be called Lord — reason will certainly be op-
posed to this argument. For the name of
God, as being the natural designation of Deity,
may be ascribed to all those beings for whom
a divine nature is claimed, — as, for instance,
even to idols. The apostle says: " For there
be that are called gods, whether in heaven or
in earth." '^ The name of Christ, however,
does not arise from nature, but from dispen-
sation;'^ and so becomes the proper name of
Him to whom it accrues in consequence of
the dispensation. Nor is it subject to be
shared in by any other God, especially a rival,
and one that has a dispensation of His own,
to whom it will be also necessary that He
should possess names apart from all others.
For how happens it that, after they have de-


9 Ps. xlv. 4, but changed.
10 Ps. xlv. 5.
" Traductiones.

12 Ps. xlv. 5.

13 Ejusmodi.

14 Exempla.

15 Interim.

16 I Cor. viii.'s. , . . ,. ,

17 Ex dispositione. This word seems to mean what is itnphed
in the phrases, " Christian dispensation" " Mosaic dispen-
sation" etc.


Mosaic dispen-


334


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book hi.


vised different dispensations for two Gods,
tliey admit into this diversity of dispensation
a commimity of names; whereas no proof could
be more useful of two Gods being rival ones,
than if there should be found coincident with
their (diverse) dispensations a diversity also
of names? For that is not a state of diverse
qualities, which is not distinctly indicated ' in
the specific meanings = of their designations.
Whenever these are wanting, there occurs
what the Greeks call the katachresis^ of a
term, by its improper application to what does
not belong to it.-* In God, however, there
ought, I suppose, to be no defect, no setting
up of His dispensations by katachrestic abuse
of words. Who is this god, that claims for
his son names from the Creator ? I say not
names which do not belong to him, but an-
cient and well-known names, which even in
this view of them would be unsuitable for a
novel and unknown god. How is it, again,
that he tells us that " a piece of new cloth is
not sewed on to an old garment," or that
"new wine is not trusted to old bottles," s
when he is himself patched and clad in an old
suit* of names ? How is it he has rent off the
gospel from the law, when he is wholly invested
with the law, — in the name, forsooth, of
Christ? What hindered his calling himself
by some other name, seeing that he preached
another (gospel), came from another source,
and refused to take on him a real body, for
the very purpose that he might not be sup-
posed to be the Creator's Christ? Vain,
however, was his unwillingness to seem to be
He whose name he was willing to assume;
since, even if he had been truly corporeal, he
would more certainly escape being taken for
the Christ of the Creator, if he had not taken
on him His name. But, as it is, he rejects
the substantial verity of Him whose name he
has assumed, even though he should give a
proof of that verity by his name. For Christ
means anointed, and to be anointed is certainly
an affair 7 of the body. He who had not a
body, could not by any possibility have been
anointed; he .who could not by any possibility
have been anointed, could not in any wise
have been called Christ. It is a different thing
(quite), if he only assumed the phantom of a
name too. But how, he asks, was he to in-
sinuate himself into being believed by the
Jews, except through a name which was usual
and familiar amongst them? Then 'tis a


» Consipnatur.

2 Proprietatibus.

3 Quintilian, Inst. viii. 6, defines this as a figure " which lends
a name to things which have it not."

4De alieno abutendo.
S Matt. ix. i6, 17.
^Senio.
7 Passio.


fickle and tricksty God whom you describe!
To promote any plan by deception, is the re-
source of either distrust or of maliciousness.
Much more frank and simple was the conduct
of the false prophets against the Creator, when
they came in His name as their own God.^
But I do not find that any good came of this
proceeding,^ since they were more apt to sup-
pose either that Christ was their own, or rather
was some deceiver, than that He was the Christ
of the other god; and this the gospel will show.

CHAP. XVI. THE SACRED NAME JESUS MOST

SUITED TO THE CHRIST OF THE CREATOR.
JOSHUA A TYPE OF HIM.

Now if he caught at the name Christ, just
as the pickpocket clutches the dole-basket,
why did he wish to be called Jesus too, by a
name which was not so much looked for by the
Jews ? For although we, who have by God's
grace attained to the understanding of His
mysteries, acknowledge that this name also
was destined for Christ, yet, for all that, the
fact was not known to the Jews, from whom
wisdom was taken away. To this day, in
short, it is Christ that they are looking for,
not Jesus; and they interpret Elias to be
Christ rather than Jesus. He, therefore, who
came also in a name in which Christ was not
expected, might have come only in that name
which was solely anticipated for Him.'° But
since he has mixed up tne two," the expected
one and the unexpected, his twofold project
is defeated. For if he be Christ for the very
purpose of insinuating himself as the Cre-
ator's, then Jestis opposes him, because Jesus
was not looked for in the Christ of the Crea-
tor; or if he be Jesus, in order that he might
pass as belonging to the other (God), then
Christ hinders him, because Christ was not ex-
pected to belong to any other than the Creator.
I know not which one of these names may be
able to hold its ground." In the Christ of the
Creator, however, both will keep their place,
for in Him a Jesus too is found. Do you ask,
how ? Learn it then here, with the Jews also
who are partakers of your heresy. AVhen
Oshea the son of Nun was destined to be the
successor of Moses, is not his old name then
changed, and for the first time he is called *'
Joshua ? It is true, you say. This, then, we
first observe, was a figure of Him who was
to come. For inasmuch as Jesus Christ was
to introduce a new generation '* (because we
are born in the wilderness of this world) into


8 Adversus Creatorem, in sui Dei nomine venientes.

9 i.e., to the Marcionite position.
'o That is, Christ.

" Surely it is Duo, not Deo.

'^Constare.

•3 Incipit vocari.

'4 Secundum populuni.


1


CHAP. XVII.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


'> 1 r

oo5


the promised land which flows with milk and
honey, that is, into the possession of eternal
life, than which nothing can be sweeter; inas-
much, too, as 'this was to be brought about
not by Moses, that is to say, not by the disci-
pline of the law, but by Joshua, by the grace
of the gospel, our circumcision being effected
by a knife of stone, that is, (by the circumci-
sion) of Christ, for Christ is a rock (or stone),
therefore that great man,' who was ordained
as a type of this mystery, was actually conse-
crated with the figure of the Lord's own name,
being called Joshua. This name Christ Him-
self even then testified to be His own, when
He talked with Moses. For who was it
that talked with him, but the Spirit of the
Creator, which is Christ? When He there-
fore spake this commandment to the people,
"Behold, I send my angel before thy face,
to keep thee in the way, and to bring thee into
the land which I have prepared for thee; at-
tend to him, and obey his voice and do not
provoke him; for he has not shunned you,^
since my name is upon him," ^ He called him
an atigel indeed, because of the greatness of
the powers which he was to exercise, and be-
cause of his prophetic office,-* while announc-
ing the will of God; but Joshua also (Jesus),
because it was a type^ of His own future
name. Often ^ did He confirm that name of
His which He had thus conferred upon (His
servant); because it was not the name of
angel^ nor Oshea, but Joshua (Jesus), which
He had commanded him to bear as his usual
appellation for the time to come. Since, there-
tore, both these names are suitable to the
Christ of the Creator, they are proportionate-
ly unsuitable to the no?i- Creator' s Christ; and
so Indeed is all the rest of (our Christ's) des-
tined course. 7 In short, there must now for
the future be made between us that certain
and equitable rule, necessary to both sides,
which shall determine that there ought to be
absolutely nothing at all in common between
the Christ of the other god and the Creator's
Christ. For you will have as great a necessity
to maintain their diversity as we have to resist
it, inasmuch as you will be as unable to show
that the Christ of the other god has come, until
you have p^ed him to be a far different being
from the Creator's Christ, as ivCy to claim
Him (who has come) as the Creator's, until
we have shown Him to be such a one as the
Creator has appointed. Now respecting their
names, such is our conclusion against (Mar-

'Vir.

2 Non celavit te, " not concealed Himself from you.'

3 Ex. xxiii. 2o, 21.

4 Officium prophetae.

5 Sacramentum.
^Identidem.

7 Reliquus ordo.


cion).^ I claim for myself Christ; I maintain
for myself Jesus.

CHAP. XVII. — PROPHECIES IN ISAIAH AND THE
PSALMS RESPECTING CHRIST's HUMILIATION.

Let US compare with Scripture the rest of
His dispensation. Whatever that poor de-
spised body 5 may be, because it was an object
of touch '° and sight," it shall be my Christ,
be He inglorious, be He ignoble, be He dis-
honoured; for such was it announced that He
should be, both in bodily condition and aspect.
Isaiah comes to our help again: " We have
announced (His way) before Him," says he;
" He is like a servant," like a root in a dry
ground; He hath no form nor comeliness; we
saw Him, and He had neither form nor beauty;
but His form was despised, marred above all
men." '^ Similarly the Father addressed the
Son just before: " Inasmuch as many will be
astonished at Thee, so also will Thy beauty
be without glory from men." "* For although,
in David's words, " He is fairer than the chil-
dren of men," 's yet it is in that figurative state
of spiritual grace, when He is girded with
the sword of the Spirit, which is verily His
form, and beauty, and glory. According to
the same prophet, however. He is in bodily
condition "a very worm, and no man; a
reproach of men, and an outcast of the
people." '^ But no internal quality of such a
kind does He announce as belonging to Him.
In Him dwelt the fulness of the Spirit; there-
fore I acknowledge Him to be "the rod of
the stem of Jesse," His blooming flower
shall be my Christ, upon whom hath rested,
according to Isaiah, " the spirit of wisdom
and understanding, the spirit of counsel and
might, the spirit of knowledge and of piety,
and of the fear of the Lord." '^ Now to no
man, except Christ, would the diversity of
spiritual proofs suitably apply. He is in-
deed like a flower for the Spirit's grace, reck-
oned indeed of the stem of Jesse, but thence
to derive His descent through Mary. Now I
purposely demand of you, whether you grant
to Him the destination '^ of all this humilia-
tion, and suffering, and tranquillity, from
which He will be the Christ of Isaiah, — a man
of sorrows, and acquainted with grief, who
was led as a sheep to the slaughter, and
who, like a lamb before the shearer, opened


8 Obduximus.

9 Corpusculum illud.
"^ Habitum.

" Conspectum.

"Puerulus, "little child, ' perhaps.

'3 Sentences out of Isa. Hi. 14 and liii. 2, etc.

14 Isa. Hi. 14.

15 Ps. xlv. 2.
j6 Ps. xxii. 6.
17 Isa. xi. I, 2.
iSIntentionem.


00^


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book III.


not His mouth;' who did not struggle nor
cry, nor was His voice heard in the street;
who broke not the bruised reed — that is, the
shattered faith of the Jews — nor quenched the
smoking flax — that is, the freshly-kindled ^
ardour of the Gentiles. He can be none other
than the Man who was foretold. It is right
that His conduct 3 be investigated according
to the rule of Scripture, distinguishable as it
is unless I am mistaken, by the twofold opera-
tion of preaching-* and of miracle. But the
treatment of both these topics I shall so ar-
range as to postpone, to the chapter wherein
I have determined to discuss the actual gospel
of Marcion, the consideration of His wonder-
ful doctnnes and miracles — with a view, how-
ever, to our present purpose. Let us here,
then, in general terms complete the subject
which we had entered upon, by indicating, as
we pass on, 5 how Christ was fore-announced
by Isaiah as a preacher: " For who is there
among you," says he, " that feareth the Lord,
that obeyeth the voice of His Son? "^ And
likewise as a healer: "For," says he, "He
hath taken away our infirmities, and carried
our sorrows." ^

CHAP. XVIII. ^ — TYPES OF THE DEATH OF CHRIST.
ISAAC; JOSEPH; JACOB AGAINST SIMEON AND
LEVI; MOSES PRAYING AGAINST AMALEK; THE
BRAZEN SERPENT.

On the subject of His death, ' I suppose,
you endeavour to introduce a diversity of
opinion, simply because you deny that the
suffering of the cross was predicted of the
Christ of the Creator, and because you con-
tend, moreover, that it is not to be believed
that the Creator would expose His Son to that
kind of death on which He had Himself pro-
nounced a curse. "Cursed," says He, "is
every one who hangeth on a tree."'" But
what is meant by this curse, worthy as it is of
the simple prediction of the cross, of which
we are now mainly inquiring, I defer to con-
sider, because in another passage " we have
given the reason " of the thing preceded by
proof. First, I shall offer a full explanation '^


» Isa. liii. 3, 7.
a Momentaneum.

3 Actum.

4 Praedicationis.

5 Interim.

6 Isa. 1. 10.

7 Isa. liii. 4.

8 Compare adv. /ud^ros, ch&p. 10. [pp. 165, 166, j«/rrt.]
9De exitu.

»o Compare Deut. xxi. 23 with Gal. iii. i^.

"The words "quia et alias antecedit rerum probatio ra-
tionem," seem to refer to the parallel passage in adr'. Jiideeos.
where he has described the Jewish law of capital punishment, and
argued for the exemption of Christ from its terms. He begins
that paragraph with saying, " Sed hujus maledictionis sensum
antecedit rerum ratio." [See, p. 164, supra.'\

»2 Perhaps rationale or procedure.

13 Edoccbo.


of the types. And no doubt it was proper
that this mystery should be prophetically set
forth by types, and indeed chiefly by that
method : for in proportion to its incredibility
would it be a stumbling-block, if it were set
forth in bare prophecy; and in proportion too,
to its grandeur, was the need of obscuring it
in shadow, 'nhat the difficulty of understanding
it might lead to prayer for the grace of God.
First, then, Isaac, when he was given up by
his father as an offering, himself carried the
wood for his own death. By this act he even
then was setting forth the death of Christ,
who was destined by His Father as a sacrifice,
and carried the cross whereon He suffered.
Joseph likewise was a type of Christ, not in-
deed on this ground (that I may not delay my
course '5), that he suffered persecution for the
cause of God from his brethren, as Christ did
from His brethren after the flesh, the Jews;
but when he is blessed by his father in these
words: "His glory is that of a bullock; his
horns are the horns of a unicorn; with them
shall he push the nations to the very ends of the
earth," '^ — he was not, of course, designated as
a mere unicorn with its one horn, or a minotaur
with two; but Christ was indicated in him — a
bullock in respect of both His characteristics:
to some as severe as a Judge, to others gentle
as a Saviour, whose horns were the extremi-
ties of His cross. For of the antenna, which
is a part of a cross, the ends are called horns;
while the midway stake of the whole frame
is the imicorn. By this virtue, then, of His
cross, and in this manner "horned," He is
both now pushing all nations through faith,
bearing them away from earth to heaven;
and will then push them through judgment,
casting them down from heaven to earth. He
will also, according to another passage in the
same scripture, be a bullock, when He is
spiritually interpreted to be Jacob against «
Simeon and Levi, which means against the
scribes and the Pharisees; for it was from
them that these last derived their origin. '^
Like Simeon and Levi, they consummated
their wickedness by their heresy, with which
they persecuted Christ. " Into their counsel
let not my soul enter; to their assembly let
not my heart be united: for in their anger
they slew men," that is, the prophets; "and
in their self-will they hacked the sinews of a
bullock,"'" that is, of Christ. For against
Him did they wreak their fury after they'-


M Magis obumbrandum.

'5 IJut he may mean, by " ne dcntorer cursutti^^ " that I may
not obstruct the course of the type," by taking off attention from
its true force. In the parallel place, however, another turn is
given to the sense; Joseph is a type, " e7>en on this g^round— that
I may but briefly allude to it— that he suffered," etc.

»6 Deut. xxxiii. 17.

'7 Census.

'8 Gen. xlix. 6. The last clause is, " ceciderunt nervos tauro."


CHAP, XIX.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


2>Z7


had slain His prophets, even by affixing
Him with nails to the cross. Otherwise, it is
an idle thing' when, after slaying men, he
inveighs against them for the torture of a bul-
lock ! Again, in the case of Moses, wherefore
did he at that moment particularly, when
Joshua was fighting Amalek, pray in a sitting
posture with outstretched hands, when in
such a conflict it would surely have been more
seemly to have bent the knee, and smitten
the breast, and to have fallen on the face
to the ground, and in such prostration to
have offered prayer ? Wherefore, but because
in a battle fought in the name of that Lord
who was one day to fight against the devil,
the shape was necessary of that very cross
through which Jesus was to win the victory ?
Why, once more, did the same Moses, after
prohibiting the likeness of everything, set up
the golden serpent on the pole; and as it
hung there, propose it as an object to be looked
at for a cure ? ^ Did he not here also intend
to show the power of our Lord's cross, where-
by that old serpent the devil was vanquished,
— whereby also to every man who was bitten
by spiritual serpents, but who yet turned
with an eye of faith to it, was proclaimed a
cure from the bite of sin, and health for ever-
more ?

CHAP. XIX. PROPHECIES OF THE DEATH OF

CHRIST.

Come now, when you read in the words of
David, how that "the Lord reigneth from
the tree," 3 I want to know what you under-
stand by it. Perhaps you think some wooden *
king of the Jews is meant ! — and not Christ,
who overcame death by His suffering on the
cross, and thence reigned ! Now, although
death reigned from Adam even to Christ, why
may not Christ be said to have reigned from
the tree, from His having shut up the king-
dom of death by dying upon the tree of His
cross ? Likewise Isaiah also says: " For unto
us a child is born." s But what is there un-
usual in this, unless he speaks of the Son of
God? " To us is given He whose government
is upon His shoulder." s Now, what king is
there who bears the ensign of his dominion
upon his shoulder, and not rather upon his
head as a diadem, or in his hand as a sceptre,
or else as a mark in some royal apparel ?
But the one new King of the new ages, Jesus
Christ, carried on His shoulder both the power
and the excellence of His new glory, even
His cross; so that, according to our former


' Vanum.

= Spectaculum salutare.

3 Ps. xcvi. lo, with a ligno added.

4 Lignarium aliquem regem.
5lsa. ix. 6.

99,


prophecy. He might thenceforth reign from
the tree as Lord. This tree it is which Jere-
miah likewise gives you intimation of, when
he prophesies to the Jews, who should say,
" Come, let us destroy the tree with the fruit,
(the bread) thereof,"^ that is, His body.
For so did God in your own gospel even reveal
the sense, when He called His body bread;
so that, for the time to come, )'Ou may un-
derstand that He has given to His body the
figure of bread, whose body the prophet of
old figuratively turned into bread, the Lord
Himself designing to give by and by an in-
terpretation of the mystery. If you require
still further prediction of the Lord's cross,
the twenty-first Psalm ' is sufficiently able to
afford it to you, containing as it does the en-
tire passion of Christ, who was even then
prophetically declaring^ His glory. "They
pierced," says He, "my hands and my
feet,"' which is the special cruelty of the
cross. And again, when He implores His
Father's help. He says, "Save me from the
lion's mouth," that is, the jaws of death,
" and my humiliation from the horns of the
unicorns; " in other words, from the extremi-
ties of the cross, as we have shown above.
Now, David himself did not suffer this cross,
nor did any other king of the Jews; so that
you cannot suppose that this is the prophecy
of any other's passion than His who alone
was so notably crucified by the nation. Now
should the heretics, in their obstinacy," re-
ject and despise all these interpretations, I
will grant to them that the Creator has given
us no signs of the cross of His Christ; but
they will not prove from this concession that
He who was crucified was another (Christ),
unless they could somehow show that this
death was predicted as His by their own god,
so that from the diversity of predictions there
might be maintained to be a diversity of suf-
ferers," and thereby also a diversity of per-
sons. But since there is no prophecy of even
Marcion's Christ, piuch less of his cross, it
is enough for my Christ that there is a proph-
ecy merely of death. For, from the fact that
the kind oi death is not declared, it was pos-
sible for the death of the cross to have been
still intended, which would then have to be
assigned to another (Christ), if the prophecy
had had reference to another. Besides," if
he should be unwilling to allow that the death
of my Christ was predicted, his confusion


6 Jer. xi. 19.

7 The twenty-second Psalm, a.v.

8 Canentis.

9 Ps. xxii. 16.

10 Haeretica duritia.

11 Passionum, literally sufferings^ which would hardly give the
sense.

■^ Nisi.


33^


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION,


[book hi.


must be the greater ' if he announces that his
own Christ indeed died, whom he denies to
have had a nativity, whilst denying that my
Christ is mortal, though he allows Him to be
capable of birth. However, I will show him
the death, and burial, and resurrection of my
Christ all =■ indicated in a single sentence of
Isaiah, who says, " His sepulture was removed
from the midst of them." Now there could
have been no sepulture without death, and
no removal of sepulture except by resurrec-
tion. Then, finally, he added: "Therefore
He shall have many for his inheritance, and
He shall divide the spoil of the many, because
He poured out His soul unto death." 3 For
there is here set forth the cause of this favour
to Him, even that it was to recompense Him
for His suffering of death. It was equally
shown that He was to obtain this recompense
for His death, was certainly to obtain it after
His death by means of the resurrection.^

chap. xx. 5 — the subsequent influence of

Christ's death in the world predicted.

the sure mercies of david. what these

are.

It is sufficient for my purpose to have traced
thus far the course of Christ's dispensation
in these particulars. This has proved Him
to be such a one as prophecy announced He
should be, so that He ought not to be re-
garded in any other character than that which
prediction assigned to Him; and the result of
this agreement between the facts of His course
and the Scriptures of the Creator should be
the restoration of belief in them from that
prejudice which has, by contributing to diver-
sity of opinion, either thrown doubt upon, or
led to a denial of, a considerable part of them.
And now we go further and build up the su-
perstructure of those kindred events^ out of
the Scriptures of the Creator which were pre-
dicted and destined to happen after Christ.
For the dispensation would not be found com-
plete, if He had not come after whom it had
to run. on its course. ^ Look at all nations
from the vortex of human error emerging out
of it up to the Divine Creator, the Divine
Christ, and deny Him to be the object of
prophecy, if you dare. At once there will
occur to you the Father's promise in the
Psalms: " Thou art my Son, this day have I
begotten Thee. Ask of me, and I shall give
Thee the heathen for Thine inheritance, and
the uttermost parts of the earth for Thy pos-


I Quo magis erubescat.

3 Et— et— et.
3lsa. liii. 12.

4 Both His own and His people's.
sComp. adv. Judaos^ ii and 12.

6 Ea paria.

7 Evenire.


session."* You will not be able to put in a
claim for some son of David being here
meant, rather than Christ; or for the ends of
the earth being promised to David, whose
kingdom was confined to the Jewish nation
simply, rather than to Christ, who now em-
braces the whole world in the faith of His
gospel. So again He says by Isaiah: " I have
given Thee for a dispensation of the people,
for a light of the Gentiles, to open the eyes of
the blind," that is, those that be in error, " to
bring out the prisoners from the prison," that
is, to free them from sin, "and from the
prison-house," that is, of death, "those that
sit in darkness" — even that of ignorance.'
If these things are accomplished through
Christ, they would not have been designed
in prophecy for any other than Him through
whom they have their accomplishment. In
another passage He also says: " Behold, I
have set Him as a testimony to the nations,
a prince and commander to the nations; na-
tions which know Thee not shall invoke Thee,
and peoples shall run together unto Thee." "
You will not interpret these words of David,
because He previously said, " I will make an
everlasting covenant with you, even the sure
mercies of David." " Indeed, you will be
obliged from these words all the more to un-
derstand that Christ is reckoned to spring
from David by carnal descen,t, by reason of
His birth " of the Virgin Mary. Touching
this promise of Him, there is the oath to
David in the psalm, " Of the fruit of thy
body '3 will I set upon thy throne." '** What
body is meant? David's own? Certainly
not. For David was not to give birth to a
son.'s Nor his wife's either. For instead of
saying, " Of the fruit of thy body," he would
then have rather said, "Of the fruit of thy
wife's body." But by mentioning /«>'^ body,
it follows that He pointed to some one of his
race of whose body the flesh of Christ was to
be the fruit, which bloomed forth from*'
Mary's womb. He named the fruit of the
body (womb) alone, because it was peculiarly
fruit of the womb, of the womb only in fact,
and not of the husband also; and he refers
the womf:» (body) to David, as to the chief of
the race and father of the family. Because
it could not consist with a virgin's condition
to consort her with a husband,'^ He therefore
attributed the body (womb) to the father.


8 Ps. ii. 7.

9 Isa. xhi. 6, 7.
»o Isa. Iv. 4, 5.
II Isa. Iv. 3.

i^Censum. [Kaye, p. 149.]
i3Ventris, "womb."
14 Ps. cxxxii. Ti.

15 He treats " body " as here meaning womb.

16 Ipsius.

17 Floruit ex.

»8 Viro deputare.


I


CHAP. XXI.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


339


That new dispensation, then, which is found
in Christ now, will prove to be what the Cre-
ator then promised under the appellation of
"the sure mercies of David," which were
Christ's, inasmuch as Christ sprang from
David, or rather His very flesh itself was
David's " sure mercies," consecrated by reli-
gion, and "sure" after its resurrection.
Accordingly the prophet Nathan, in the first
of Kings,' makes a promise to David for his
seed, "which shall proceed," says he, "out
of thy bowels." = Now, if you explain this
simply of Solomon, you will send me into a
fit of laughter. For David will evidently have
brought forth Solomon! But is not Christ
here designated the seed of David, as of that
womb which was derived from David, that is,
Mary's? Now, because Christ rather than
any other 3 was to build the temple of God,
that is to say, a holy manhood, wherein God's
Spirit might dwell as in a better temple,
Christ rather than David's son Solomon was
to be looked for as "^ the Son of God. Then,
again, the throne for ever with the kingdom
for ever is more suited to Christ than to Solo-
mon, a mere temporal king. From Christ,
too, God's mercy did not depart, whereas on
Solomon even God's anger alighted, after his
luxury and idolatry. For Satan ^ stirred up
an Edomite as an enemy against him. Since,
therefore, nothing of these things is compat-
ible with Solomon, but only with Christ, the
method of our interpretations will certainly
be true; and the very issue of the facts shows
that they were clearly predicted of Christ.
And so in Him we shall have " the sure mer-
les of David." Hifn, not David, has God
appointed for a testimony to the nations; Hi'm,
for a prince and commander to the nations,
not David, who ruled over Israel alone. It
is Christ whom all nations now invoke, which
knew Him not; Christ to whom all races now
betake themselves, whom they were ignorant
of before. It is impossible that that should
be said to be future, which you see (daily)
coming to pass.

CHAP. XXI. THE CALL OF THE GENTILES UN-
DER THE INFLUENCE OF THE GOSPEL FORE-
TOLD.

So you cannot get out of this notion of
yours a basis for your difference between the
two Christs, as if the Jewish Christ were or-


' The four books of ike Kings were sometimes regarded as
iwo, " the first " of which contained i and 2 Samuel^ " the sec-
ond" 1 and 2 Kings. The reference in this place is to 2 Samuel
vii. 12.

= He here again makes bowels synonymous with womb.

3 Magis.

4Habendus in.

Sin 1 Kings xi. 14, " the Lord" is said to have done this.
Comp. 2 Sam. xxiv. i with i Chron. xxi. i.


dained by the Creator for the restoration of
the people alone"* from its dispersion, whilst
yours was appointed by the supremely good
God for the liberation of the whole human
race. Because, after all, the earliest Chris-
tians are found on the side of the Creator,
not of Marcion,7 all nations being called to
His kingdom, from the fact that God set up
that kingdom from the tree (of the cross),
when no Cerdon was yet born, much less a
Marcion. However, when you are refuted
on the call of the naHons, you betake yourself
to proselytes. You ask, who among the na-
tions can turn to the Creator, when those
whom the prophet names are proselytes of
individually different and private condition?^
" Behold," says Isaiah, " the proselytes shall
come unto me through Thee," showing that
they were even proselytes who were to find
their way to God through Christ. But nations
(Gentiles) also, like ourselves, had likewise
their mention (by the prophet) as trusting in
Christ. "And in His name," says he,
"shall the Gentiles trust." Besides, the
proselytes whom you substitute for the nations
in prophecy, are not in the habit of trusting
in Christ's name, but in the dispensation of
Moses, from whom comes their instruction.
But it was in the last days that the choice ' of
the nations had its commencement. '° In these
very words Isaiah says: "And it shall come
to pass in the last days, that the mountain of
the Lord," that is, God's eminence, " and
the house of God," that is, Christ, the Catho-
lic temple of God, in which God is wor-
shipped, " shall be established upon the
mountains," over all the eminences of vir-
tues and powers; " and all nations shall come
unto it; and many people shall go and say.
Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain
of the Lord, and to the house of the God of
Jacob; and He will teach us His way, and
we will walk in it: for out of Sion shall go
forth the law, and the word of the Lord from
Jerusalem."" The gospel will be this "way,"
of the new law and the new word in Christ,
no longer in Moses. "And He shall judge
among the nations," even concerning their
error. " And these shall rebuke a large na-
tion," that of the Jews themselves and their
proselytes. " And they shall beat their swords
into ploughshares, and their spears " into prun-


6 i.e., the Jews.

7 Or perhaps, " are found to belong to the Creator's Christ, not
to Marcion 's.

8 Marcion denied that there was any prophecy of national or
Gentile conversion ; it was only the conversion of individual pros-
elytes that he held.

9 Allectio.

1° Exorta est.

" Isa. ii. 2, 3.

i^Sibynas, 24/3v»^' onkov Bopari iTapan\ri<riov. Hesychius,
"6V3>'«aw appellant Illyrii telum venabuli simile." Paulus, ejc
Festo, p. 336, Mull. (Oehler.)


340


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book III.


ing-hooks;" in other words, they shall
change into pursuits of moderation and peace
the dispositions of injurious minds, and hos-
tile tongues, and all kinds of evil, and blas-
phemy. " Nation shall not lift up sword
against nation," shall not stir up discord.
*' Neither shall they learn war any more,"'
that is, the provocation of hostilities; so that
you here learn that Christ is promised not as
powerful in war, but pursuing peace. Now
you must deny either that these things were
predicted, although they are plainly seen, or
that they have been accomplished, although
you read of them; else, if you cannot deny
either one fact or the other, they must have
been accomplished in Him of whom they were
predicted. For look at the entire course of
His call up to the present time from its be-
ginning, how it is addressed to the nations
(Gentiles) who are in these last days approach-
ing to God the Creator, and not to proselytes,
whose election = was rather an event of the
earliest days. Verily the apostles have an-
nulled ^ that belief of yours.

CHAP. XXII. — THE SUCCESS OF THE APOSTLES,
AND THEIR SUFFERINGS IN THE CAUSE OF THE
GOSPEL, FORETOLD.

You have the work of the apostles also pre-
dicted: "How beautiful are the feet of them
which preach the gospel of peace, which bring
good tidings of good, ' ' * not of war nor evil tid-
ings. In response to which is the psalm,
*' Their sound is gone through all the earth,
and their words to the ends of the world; " s
that is, the words of them who carry round
about the law that proceeded from Sion and
the Lord's word from Jerusalem, in order
that that might come to pass which was writ-
ten: " They who were far from my righteous-
ness, have come near to my righteousness and
truth." ^ When the apostles girded their
loins for this business, they renounced the
elders and rulers and priests of the Jews.
Well, says he, but was it not above all things
that they might preach the other god ?
Rather 7 (that they might preach) that very
self-same God, whose scripture they were
with all their might fulfilling ! " Depart ye,
depart ye," e.xclaims Isaiah; *' go ye out from
thence, and touch not the unclean thing," that
is blasphemy against Christ; "Go ye out of


I Isa. ii. 4.
a Allectio.

3 Junius explains the author's induxcrunt by deleverunt ; i.e.,
"they annulled your opinion about proselytes being the sole
called, by their promulgation of the gospel."

4 Isa. Hi. 7 and Rom. x. 15.

5 Ps. xix. 5.

6 Pamelius regards this as a quotation from Isa. xlvi. 12, 13,
only put narratively^ in order to indicate briefly its realization.

7 Atquin.


the midst of her," even of the synagogue " Be
ye separate who bear the vessels of the Lord. ' ' ^
For already had the Lord, according to
the preceding words (of the prophet), revealed
His Holy One with His arm, that is to say,
Christ by His mighty power, in the eyes of
the nations, so that all the^ nations and the
utmost parts of the earth have seen the salva-
tion, which was from God. By thus departing
from Judaism itself, when they exchanged the
obligations and burdens of the law for the
liberty of the gospel, they were fulfilling the
psalm, " Let us burst their bonds asunder,
and cast away their yoke from us; " and this
indeed (they did) after that " the heathen
raged, and the people imagined vain de-
vices;" after that " the kings of the earth
set themselves, and the rulers took their
counsel together against the Lord, and against
His Christ." '° What did the apostles there-
upon suffer? You answer: Every sort of in-
iquitous persecutions, from men that belonged
indeed to that Creator who was the adversary
of Him whom they were preaching. Then
why does the Creator, if an adversary of
Christ, not only predict that the apostles
should incur this suffering, but even express
His displeasure" thereat? For He ought
neither to predict the course of the other god,
whom, as you contend, He knew not, nor to
have expressed displeasure at that which He
had taken care to bring about. " See how the
righteous perisheth, and no man layeth it to
heart; and how merciful men are taken away,
and no man considereth. For the righteous
man has been removed from the evil person." "
Who is this but Christ? "Come, say they,
let us take away the righteous, because He is
not for our turn, (and He is clean contrary to
our doings)." '^ Premising, therefore, and like-
wise subjoining the fact that Christ suffered.
He foretold that His just ones should suffer
equally with Him — both the apostles and all
the faithful in succession; and He signed
them with that very seal of which Ezekiel
spake: " The Lord said unto me, Go through
the gate, through the midst of Jerusalem, and
set the mark Tau upon the foreheads of the
men." '♦ Now the Greek letter Tau and our
own letter T is the very form of the cross,
which He predicted would be the sign on our


8 Isa. Hi. n.

9 Universae.

'°Comp. Ps. ii. 2, 3, with Acts iv. 25-30.

" Exprobrat.

" Isa. Ivii. I.

»3Wisd. of Sol. ii. 12.

»4 Ezek. ix. 4. The ms. which T. used seems to have agreed
with the versions of Theodotion and Aquila mentioned thus by
Origen (Sclccta in Ezek.): o fie 'AxuAas >cal ©eofioTt'wr 4>a<ri.
2rju€itocris ToO 0aO ejrl to ix(T<ana, k.t.\. Origen, in his own re-
marks, refers to i/te sie-n 0/ the cross, as indicated by this letter.
Ed. Hened. (by Migne), iii. 802.


CHAP. XXI 1 1. J


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


341


foreheads in the true Catholic Jerusalem,' in
which, according to the twenty-first Psalm,
the brethren of Christ or children of God
would ascribe glory to God the Father, in

»the person of Christ Himself addressing His
Father; "I will declare Thy name unto my
brethren; in the midst of the congregation
will I sing praise unto Thee." For that

» which had to come to pass in our day in His
name, and by His Spirit, He rightly foretold
would be of Him. And a little afterwards He
says: "My praise shall be of Thee in the
great congregation." = In the sixty-seventh
Psalm He says again: " In the congregations
bless ye the Lord God."^ So that with this
agrees also the prophecy of Malachi: " I have
no pleasure in you, saith the Lord; neither
will I accept your offerings: for from the ris-
ing of the sun, even unto the going down of
the same, my name shall be great among the
Gentiles; and in every place sacrifice shall be
offered unto my name, and a pure offering " '*
— such as the ascription of glory,, and bless-
ing, and praise, and hymns. Now, inasmuch
as all these things are also found amongst
you, and the sign upon the forehead, s and
the sacraments of the church, and the offer-
ings of the pure sacrifice, you ought now to
burst forth, and declare that the Spirit of the
Creator prophesied of your Christ.


CHAP. XXIII. — THE DISPERSION OF THE JEWS,
AND THEIR DESOLATE CONDITION FOR RE-
JECTING CHRIST, FORETOLD.

Now, since you join the Jews in denying
that their Christ has come, recollect also what
is that end which they were predicted as
about to bring on themselves after the time
of Christ, for the impiety wherewith they
both rejected and slew Him. For it began
to come to pass from that day, when, according
to Isaiah, " a man threw away his idols of
gold and of silver, which they made into use-
less and hurtful objects of worship;"^ in
other words, from the time when he threw
away his idols after the truth had been made
clear by Christ. Consider whether what fol-
lows in the prophet has not received its ful-
filment: " The Lord of hosts hath taken away
from Judah and from Jerusalem, amongst other
things, both the prophet and the wise artifi-
cer;' ' 7 that is, His Holy Spirit, who builds the


^ [Ambiguous, according to Kaye, p. 304, may mean a transition
from Paganism to true Christianity.]
= Ps. xxii. 22, 25.

3 Ps. Ixviii. 26.

4 Mai. i. 10, II.

5 [Kaye remarks that tTadlt'ionsoi practice, unlike the traditions
of doctrine, may be varied according to times and circumstances.
See p. 286.]

^ Isa. ii. 20.

7 Arcfiitectum, Isa. iii. 1-3, abridged.


church,which is indeed the temple, and house-
hold and city of God. For thenceforth God's
grace failed amongst them; and "the clouds
were commanded to rain no rain upon the
vineyard " of Sorech; to withhold, that is, the
graces of heaven, that they shed no blessing
upon "the house of Israel," which had but
produced "the thorns" wherewith it had
crowned the Lord, and " instead of righteous-
ness, the cry " wherewith it had hurried Him
away to the cross. ^ And so in this manner
the law and the prophets were until John, but
the dews of divine grace were withdrawn from
the nation. After his time their madness
still continued, and the name of the Lord was
blasphemed by them, as saith the Scripture:
" Because of you my name is continually blas-
phemed amongst the nations"' (for from
them did the blasphemy originate) ; neither in
the interval from Tiberius to Vespasian did
they learn repentance.'" Therefore " has
their land become desolate, their cities are
burnt with fire, their country strangers are
devouring before their own eyes; the daugh-
ter of Sion has been deserted like a cottage
in a vineyard, or a lodge in a garden of
cucumbers," " ever since the time when
" Israel acknowledged not the Lord, and the
people understood Him not, but forsook Him,
and provoked the Holy One of Israel unto an-
ger." '^ So likewise that conditional threat of
the sword, " If ye refuse and hear me not, the
sword shall devour you," '^ has proved that it
was Christ, for rebellion against whom they
have perished. In the fifty-eighth Psalm He
demands of the Father their dispersion:
" Scatter them in Thy power." '■* By Isaiah He
also says, as He finishes a prophecy of their
consumption by fire:'^ "Because of me has
this happened to you; ye shall lie down in
sorrow." '* But all this would be unmeaning
enough, if they suffered this retribution not
on account of Him, who had in prophecy
assigned their suffering to His own cause,
but for the sake of the Christ of the other god.
Well, then, although you affirm that it is the
Christ of the other god who was driven to the
cross by the powers and authorities of the
Creator, as it were by hostile beings, still I
have to say. See how manifestly He was de-
fended'^ by the Creator: there were given to
Him both "the wicked for His burial," even
those who had strenuously maintained that


8 Isa. V. 6, 7.

9 Isa. Hi. 5.

10 Compare Adv.Judaos^ 13, p. 171, for a like statement.
"Isa. i. 7, 8.

12 Isa. i. 3, 4,

13 Isa. i. 20.

MPs. lix. II.

15 Exustionem.

i6Isa. 1. II.

'7 Defensus, perhaps " claimed."


342


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book hi.


His corpse had been stolen, " and the rich for
His death," ' even those who had redeemed
Him from the treachery of Judas, as well as
from tlie lying report of the soldiers that His
body had been taken away. Therefore these
things either did not happen to the Jews on
His account, in which case you will be re-
futed by the sense of the Scriptures tallying
with the issue of the facts and the order of
the times, or else they did happen on His
account, and then the Creator could not have
inflicted the vengeance except for His own
Christ; nay, He must have rather had a re-
ward for Judas, if it had been his master's
enemy whom they put to death. At all events, ="
if the Creator's Christ has not come yet, on
whose account the prophecy dooms them to
such sufferings, they will have to endure the
sufferings when He shall have come. Then
where will there be a daughter of Sion to be
reduced to desolation, for there is none now
to be found ? Where will thete be cities to be
burnt with fire, for they are now in heaps ?3
Where a nation to be dispersed, which is
already in banishment ? Restore to Judaea its
former state, that the Creator's Christ may
find it, and then you may contend that
another Christ has come. But then, again, *
how is it that He can have permitted to range
through 5 His own heaven one whom He was
some day to put to death on His own earth,
after the more noble and glorious region of
His kingdom had been violated, and His
own very palace and sublimest height had
been trodden by him ? Or was it only in ap-
pearance rather that he did this P*^ God is no
doubt 7 a jealous God ! Yet he gained the
victory. You should blush with shame, who
put your faith in a vanquished god! What
have you to hope for from him, who was not
strong enough to protect himself? For it
was either through his infirmity that he was
crushed by the powers and human agents of
the Creator, or else through maliciousness, in
order that he might fasten so great a stigma
on them by his endurance of their wickedness.

o-^^ . CHAP. ^xv,. — Christ's millennial and heav-

^ y/ ENLY GLORY IN COMPANY WITH HIS SAINTS.

Yes, certainly,^ you say, I do hope from
Him that which amounts in itself to a proof
of the diversity (of Christs), God's kingdom
in an everlasting and heavenly possession.
Besides, your Christ promises to the Jews


' See Isa. Hii. 9.

2 Certe.

3 Compare a passage in the Apology^ chap. xxi. p. 34, supra.

4 Jam vero.

-— I Admisvit per.
W'^ Hoc affectavit,
7 Plane.
S^mmo.


their primitive condition, with the recovery
of their country; and after this life's course
is over, repose in Hades' in Abraham's
bosom. Oh, most excellent God, when He
restores in amnesty '° what He took away in
wrath ! Oh, w^hat a God is yours, who both
wounds and heals, creates evil and makes
peace ! Oh, what a God, that is merciful
even down to Hades ! I shall have some-
thing to say about Abraham's bosom in the
proper place." As for the restoration of
Judaea, however, which even the Jews them-
selves, induced by the names of places and
countries, hope for just as it is described," it
would be tedious to state at length '^ how the
figurative "* interpretation is spiritually appli-
cable to Christ and His church, and to the
character and fruits thereof; besides, the
subject has been regularly treated '^ in another
work, which we entitle De Spe Fidelium^^ At
present, too, it would be superfluous '^ for this
reason, that our inquiry relates to ivhat is
promised in heaven, not on earth. ■ But we
do confess that a kingdom is promised to us
upon the earth, although before heaven, only
in another state of existence; inasmuch as
it will be after the resurrection for a thousand
years in the divinely-built city of Jerusalem,**
" let down from heaven," '« which the apostle
also calls " our mother from above; " =" and,
while declaring that our Tro/JTevfia, or citizen-
ship, is in heaven," he predicates of it" that
it is really a city in heaven. This both Eze-
kiel had knowledge of^^ and the Apostle
John beheld. =^4 And the word of the new
prophecy which is a part of our belief,^^
attests how it foretold that there would be
for a sign a picture of this very city exhibited
to view previous to its manifestation. This
prophecy, indeed, has been very lately ful-
filled in an expedition to the East.=* For it
is evident from the testimony of even heathen
witnesses, that in Judaea there was suspended


9 A pud inferos.

10 Placatus.

" See below, in book iv. chap. iv.

" Ita ut describitur, i.e., in the literal sense.

11 Persequi.
14 Allegorica.
»5 Digestum.

16 On the Hope of the Faithful. This work, which is not ex-
tant (although its title appears in one of the oldest mss. of Ter-
tullian, the Codex Agvbardinus), is mentioned by St. Jerome in
his Commentary on Ezekiel, chap, xxxvi. ; in the preface to his
Comtnent. on Isaiah, chap, xviii. ; and in his notice of Papias of
Hierapoiis (Oehler).

17 Otiosum.

'8 [See Kaye's important Comment, p. 345.]

«9 Rev. xxi. 2.

aoGal. iv. 26.

2' Phil. iii. 20, " our conversation," A. v.

22 Deputat.

=3 Ezek. xlviii. 30-35.

24 Rev. XXI. 10-23.

25 That is, the Montanist. [Regarded as conclusive ; but not
conclusive evidence of an accomplished lapse from Catholic Com-
munion.]

26 He means that of Severus against the Parthians. TertuUiaa
is the only author who mentions this prodigy.


CHAP. XXV.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


343


in the sky a city early every morning for
forty days. As the day advanced, the entire
figure of its walls would wane gradually/ and
sometimes it would vanish instantly.' We
say that this city has been provided by God
for receiving the saints on their resurrection,
and refreshing them with the abundance of
all really spiritual blessings, as a recompense
for those which in the world we have either
despised or lost; since it is both just and God-
worthy that His servants should have their
joy in the place where they have also suffered
affliction for His name's sake. Of the heavenly
kingdom this is the process. ^ After its thou-
sand years are over, within which period is
completed the resurrection of the saints, who
rise sooner or later according to their deserts,
there" will ensue the destruction of the world
and the conflagration of all things at the judg-
ment: we shall then be changed in a moment
into the substance of angels, even by the in-
vestiture of an incorruptible nature, and so
be removed to that kingdom in heaven of
which we have now been treating, just as if it
had not been predicted by the Creator, and
as if it were proving Christ to belong to the
other god and as if he were the first and sole
revealer of it. But now learn that it has
been, in fact, predicted by the Creator, and
that even without prediction it has a claim
upon our faith in respect of'^ the Creator.
What appears to be probable to you, when
Abraham's seed, after the primal promise of
being like the sand of the sea for multitude,
is destined likewise to an equality with the
stars of heaven — are not these the indications
both of an earthly and a heavenly dispensa-
tion ?5 When Isaac, in blessing his son Jacob,
says, "God give thee of the dew of heaven,
and the fatness of the earth," ^ are there not
in his words examples of both kinds of bless-
ing ? Indeed, the very form of the blessing
is in this instance worthy of notice. For in
relation to Jacob, who is the type of the later
and more excellent people, that is to say our-
selves,^ first comes the promise of the hea-
enly dew, and afterwards that about the fat-
ness of the earth. So are we first invited to
heavenly blessings when we are separated
from the world, and afterwards we thus find
ourselves in the way of obtaining also earthly
blessings. And your own gospel likewise has
it in thiswise: " Seek ye first the kingdom of
God, and these things shall be added unto


' Evanescente.

2 Et alias de proximo nullam : or " de proximo " may mean, " on
a near approach."

3 Ratio.

4 Apiid : or, " in the dispensation of the Creator."

5 Dispositionis.

6 Gen. xxvii. 28.

7Nostri, i.e.. Christians. [Not Montanist, but Catholic]


you." ^ But to Esau the blessing promised is
an earthly one, which he supplements with a
heavenly, after the fatness of the earth, say-
ing, " Thy dwelling shall be also of the dew
of heaven," 9 For the dispensation of the
Jews (who were in Esau, the prior of the sons
in birth, but the later in affection '°) at first
was imbued with earthly blessings through the
law, and afterwards brought round to heavenly
ones through the gospel by faith. When
Jacob sees in his dream the steps of a ladder
set upon the earth, and reaching to heaven,
with angels ascending and descending thereon,
and the Lord standing above, we shall without
hesitation venture to suppose," that by this
ladder the Lord has in judgment appointed
that the way to heaven is shown to men,
whereby some may attain to it, and others
fall therefrom. For why, as soon as he awoke
out of his sleep, and shook through a dread
of the spot, does he fall to an interpretation
of his dream? He exclaims, " How terrible
is this place ! " And then adds, " This is none
other than the house of God; this is the gate
of heaven!"" For he had seen Christ the
Lord, the temple of God, and also the gate
by whom heaven is entered. Now surely he
would not have mentioned the gate of heaven,
if heaven is not entered in the dispensation
of the '3 Creator. But there is now a gate pro-
vided by Christ, which admits and conducts
to glory. Of this Amos says: " He buildeth
His ascensions into heaven; " ^^ certainly not
for Himself alone, but for His people also,
who will be with Him. "And Thou shalt
bind them about Thee," says he, "like the
adornment of a bride." '^ Accordingly the
Spirit, admiring such as soar up to the celes-
tial realms by these ascensions, says, "They
fly, as if they were kites; they fly as clouds,
and as young doves, unto me " '^ — that is,
simply like a dove.'^ For we shall, according
to the apostle, be caught up into the clouds to
meet the Lord (even the Son of man, who
shall come in the clouds, according to Daniel '^),
and so shall we ever be with the Lord,'' so
long as He remains both on the earth and in
heaven, who, against such as are thankless


8 Luke xii. ji.

9 Gen. xxvii. 3g.

10 Judaeorum enim dispositio in Esau priorum natu et posteri-
orum affectu filiorum. This is the original of a difficult passage, in
which TertuUian, who has taken Jacob as a type of the later, the
Christian church, seems to make Esau the symbol of the former,
the Jewish church, which, although prior in time, was later m
allegiance to the full truth of God.

11 Temere, si forte, interpretabimur.

12 Gen. xxviii. 12-17.

13 Apud.

14 Amos. ix. 6.

15 Isa. xlix. 18.

16 Isa. Ix. 8.

17 In allusion to the dove as the symbol of the Spirit, see Matt,
iii. 16.

18 Dan vii. 13.

19 I Thess. iv. 17.


344


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[chap. XXV,


for both one promise and the other, calls the
elements themselves to witness: " Hear, O
heaven, and give ear, O earth."' Now, for
my own part indeed, even though Scripture
held out no hand of heavenly hope to me (as,
in fact, it so often does), I should still pos-
sess a sufficient presumption = of even this
promise, in my present enjoyment of the
earthly gift; and I should look out for some-
thing also of the heavenly, from Him who is
the God of heaven as well as of earth. I
should thus believe that the Christ who prom-
ises the higher blessings is (the Son) of Him
who had also promised the lower ones; who
had, moreover, afforded proofs of greater gifts
by smaller ones; who had reserved for His
Christ alone this revelation ^ of a (perhaps'')
unheard of kingdom, so that, while the earthly
glory was announced by His servants, the


» Isa. i. I.
= Prstjudicium.
sPraeconium.
4 Si forte.


heavenly might have God Himself for its
messenger. Vou, however, argue for another
Christ, from the very circumstance that He
proclaims a new kingdom. You ought first
to bring forward some example of His benefi-
cence,s that I may have no good reason for
doubting the credibility of the great promise,
which you say ought to be hoped for; nay,
it is before all things necessary that you
should prove that a heaven belongs to Him,
whom you declare to be a promiser of heavenly
things. As it is, you invite us to dinner, but
do not point out your house; you assert a
kingdom, but show us no royal state. ^ Can
it be that your Christ promises a kingdom of
heaven, without having a heaven; as He dis-
played Himself man, without having flesh ?
O what a phantom from first to last ! ^ O hol-
low pretence of a mighty promise !


5 Indulgentiae.

6 Regiara : perhaps " capital " or " palace.

7 Omne.


THE FIVE BOOKS AGAINST MARCION.

Book IV.^

IN WHICH TERTULLIAN PURSUES HIS ARGUMENT. JESUS IS THE CHRIST
OF THE CREATOR. HE DERIVES HIS PROOFS FROM ST. LUKE'S GOS-
PEL ; THAT BEING THE ONLY HISTORICAL PORTION OF THE NEW
TESTAMENT PARTIALLY ACCEPTED BY MARCION. THIS BOOK MAY
ALSO BE REGARDED AS A COMMENTARY ON ST. LUKE. IT GIVES
REMARKABLE PROOF OF TERTULLIAN'S GRASP OF SCRIPTURE, AND
PROVES THAT " THE OLD TESTAMENT IS NOT CONTRARY TO THE
NEW." IT ALSO ABOUNDS IN STRIKING EXPOSITIONS OF SCRIPTURAL
PASSAGES, EMBRACING PROFOUND VIEWS OF REVELATION, IN CON-
NECTION WITH THE NATURE OF MAN.


CHAP. I.— EXAMINATION OF THE ANTITHESES
OF MARCION, BRINGING THEM TO THE TEST
OF MARCION'S own gospel. CERTAIN TRUE
ANTITHESES IN THE DISPENSATIONS OF THE
OLD AND THE NEW TESTAMENTS. THESE
VARIATIONS QUITE COMPATIBLE WITH ONE
AND THE SAME GOD, WHO ORDERED THEM.

Every opinion and the whole scheme ^ of
the impious and sacrilegious Marcion we now
bring to the test ^ of that very Gospel which,
by his process of interpolation, he has made
his own. To encourage a belief of this Gospel
he has actually* devised for it a sort of
dower,s in a work composed of contrary state-
ments set in opposition, thence entitled Antith-
eses, and compiled with a view to such a
severance of the law from the gospel as should
divide the Deity into two, nay, diverse, gods
— one for each Instrument, or Testament^ as
it is more usual to call it; that by such means


' [The remarks of Bishop Kaye on our author's Marcion are
simply invaluable, and the student cannot dispense with what is
said more particularly of this Book. See Kaye, pp. 450-480.]

2 Paraturam.

sProvocamus ad. [Kaye, p. 469, refers to Schleiermacher's
Critical Essay on St. Luke and to a learned note of Mr. Andrews
Norton of Harvard (vol. iii. Appendix C.) for valuable remarks on
Marcion's Gospel.]

■* Et, emphatic.

5 Dotem quandam.

* [See cap. 2, in/ra."]


he might also patronize ^ belief in " the Gos-
pel according to the Antitheses." These,
however, I would have attacked in special
combat, hand to hand; that is to say, I would
have encountered singly the several devices
of the Pontic heretic, if it were not much
more convenient to refute them in and with
that very gospel to which they contribute their
support. Although it is so easy to meet
them at once with a peremptory demurrer,^
yet, in order that I may both make them ad-
missible in argument, and account them valid
expressions of opinion, and even contend that
they make for our side, that so there may be
all the redder shame for the blindness of
their author, we have now drawn out some
a?ititheses 6i our own in opposition to Marcion.
And indeed » I do allow that one order did run
its course in the old dispensation under the
Creator,'" and that another is on its way in the
new under Christ. I do not deny that there
is a difference in the language of their docu-
ments, in their precepts of virtue, and in their


7 Patrocinaretur.

8 Praescriptive occurrere. This law term (the Greek 7rapaypaj>ri)
seems to refer to the Church's "rule of faith" (praescriptio),
which he mi.trht at once put in against Marcion's heresy ; only he
prefers to refute him on his own ground.

9 Atque adeo.

10 Apud Creatorem.


34^


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book IV.


teachings of the law; but yet all this diversity
is consistent with one and the same God,
even Him by whom it was arranged and also
foretold. Long ago' did Isaiah declare that
" out of Sion should go forth the law, and the
word of the Lord from Jerusalem " =* — some
other law, that is, and another word. In
short, says he, " He shall judge among the
nations, and shall rebuke many people; "^
meaning not those of the Jewish people only,
but of the nations which are judged by the
new law of the gospel and the new word of
the apostles, and are amongst themselves re-
buked of their old error as soon as they have
believed. And as the result of this, "they
beat their swords into ploughshares, and their
spears (which are a kind of hunting instru-
ments) into pruning-hooks; " * that is to say,
minds, which once were fierce and cruel, are
changed by them into good dispositions pro-
ductive of good fruit. And again: " Hearken
unto me, hearken unto me, my people, and ye
kings, give ear unto me; for a law shall proceed
from me, and my judgment for a light to the na-
tions;" 5 wherefore He had determined and de-
creed that the nations also were to be enlight-
ened by the law and the word of the gospel.
This will be that law which (according to David
also) is unblameable, because " perfect, con-
verting the soul " ^ from idols unto God.
This likewise will be the word concerning
which the same Isaiah says, " For the Lord
will make a decisive word in the land."^
Because the New Testament is compendiously
short, ^ and freed from the minute and per-
plexing' burdens of the law. But why en-
large, when the Creator by the same prophet
foretells the renovation more manifestly and
clearly than the light itself? " Remember not
the former things, neither consider the things
of old " (the old things have passed away,
and new things are arising). *' Behold, I will
do new things, which shall now spring forth." '°
So by Jeremiah: "Break up for yourselves
new pastures," and sow not among thorns,
and circumcise yourselves in the foreskin of
your heart." " And in another passage: " Be-
hold, the days come, saith the Lord, that I
will make a new covenant with the house of
Jacob, and with the house of Judah; not ac-
cording to the covenant that I made with their
fathers in the day when I arrested their dis-


' Glim.

2 Isa. ji. 3.

3 Isa. ii. 4.

4 Isa. ii. 4.

5 Isa. Ii. 4, according to the Sept

6 Ps. xix. 7.

7 T.'s version of Isa. x. 23.
mined" of A. V.

8 Compendiatum.

9 I^ciniosis.

*o Isa. xliii. 18, 19.

»' Novate novamen novum. Agricultural words.
;;«» Altered version of Jer. iv. 3, 4.


Decisus Sermo" = " deter-


pensation, in order to bring them out of the
land of Egypt." '3 He thus shows that the
ancient covenant is temporary only, when He
indicates its change; also when He promises
that it shall be followed by an eternal one.
For by Isaiah He says: " Hear me, and ye
shall live; and I will make an everlasting cove-
nant with you," adding " the sure mercies of
David," '■* in order that He might show that
that covenant was to run its course in Christ.
That He was of the family of David, accord-
ing to the genealogy of Mary,'^ He declared
in a figurative way even by the rod which was
to proceed out of the stem of Jesse. *^ Foras-
much then as he said, that from the Creator
there would come other laws, and other words,
and new dispensations of covenants, indicat-
ing alsothatthe very sacrifices were to receive
higher offices, and //lat amongst all nations,
by Malachi when he says: " I have no pleas-
ure in you, saith the Lord, neither will I ac-
cept your sacrifices at your hands. For from
the rising of the sun, even unto the going
down of the same, my name shall be great
among the Gentiles; and in every place a sac-
rifice is offered unto my name, even a pure
offering " '7 — meaning simple prayer from a
pure conscience, — it is of necessity that every
change which comes as the result of innova-
tion, introduces a diversity in those things of
which the change is made, from which diversity
arises also a contrariety. For as there is
nothing, after it has undergone a change,
which does not become different, so there is
nothing different which is not contrary.'^ Of
that very thing, therefore, there will be pred-
icated a contrariety in consequence of its
diversity, to which there accrued a change
of condition after an innovation. He who
brought about the change, the same instituted
the diversity also ; He who foretold the inno-
vation, the same announced beforehand the
contrariety likewise. Why, in your interpre-l
tation, do you impute a difference in the state]
of things to a difference of powers ? Why do
you wrest to the Creator's prejudice those e.x-
amples from which you draw your antitheses,
when you may recognise them all in His sen-i
sations and affections? " I will wound," He
says, "and I will heal;" " I wiH kill," He!
says again, " and I will make alive " '» — even


»3 Jer. xxxi. 31, 32, with slight change.

14 Isa. Iv. 3.

»S Secundum Mariae censum. See Kitto's Cyclnptrdla 0/ Bto^
lical Literature (third edition), in the article " (".enealogy of
Jesus Christ," where the translator of this work ha.s largely given
reasons for believing that St. Luke in his genealogy, (chap, iii.) has
traced the descent of the Virgin Makv. To the authorities there
given may be added this pas.sage of Tertullian, and a fuller one,
Adversusjudceos^ ix., towards the end. [p. 164, supra."]

"5 Isa. xi. I.

17 Mai. i. 10, IT.

18 To its former self.
'9 Deut. xxxii. 39.


ciiAr. II.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


347


the same "who createth evil and maketh
peace;"' from which you are used even to
censure Him with the imputation of fickleness
and inconstancy, as if He forbade what He
commanded, and commanded what He for-
bade. Why, then, have you not reckoned
up the Antitheses also which occur in the natu-
ral works of the Creator, who is for ever con-
trary to Himself ? You have not been able,
unless I am misinformed, to recognise the
fact,^ that the world, at all events, ^ even
amongst your people of Pontus, is made up
of a diversity of elements which are hostile to
one another. "^ It was therefore your bounden
duty first to have determined that the god of
the light was one being, and the god of dark-
ness was another, in such wise that you might
have been able to have distinctly asserted one
of them to be the god of the law and the other
the god of the gospel. It is, however, the
settled conviction already s of my mind from
manifest proofs, that, as His works and plans ^
exist in the way of Antitheses, so also by the
same rule exist the mysteries of His religion. ^

CHAP. II. — ST. Luke's gospel, selected by

MARCION AS HIS AUTHORITY, AND MUTILATED
BY HIM. THE OTHER GOSPELS EQUALLY
AUTHORITATIVE. MARCION's TERMS OF DIS-
CUSSION, HOWEVER, ACCEPTED, AND GRAP-
PLED WITH ON THE FOOTING OF ST. LUKE's
GOSPEL ALONE.

You have now our answer to the A?ititheses
compendiously indicated by us.^ I pass on
to give a proof of the Gospel ^ — not, to be
sure, of Jewry, but of Pontus — having iDecome
meanwhile" adulterated; and this shall indi-
cate" the order by which we proceed. We
lay it down as our first position, that the evan-
gelical Testament" has apostles for its
authors, '3 to whom was assigned by the Lord
Himself this office of publishing the gospel.
Since, however, there are apostolic''* men
also, '5 they are yet not alone, but appear with
apostles and after apostles; because the


' Isa. xlv. 7.
2 Recogitare.
3Saltitn.

4 .^mularum invicem.

5 Praejudicatum est.

6 In the external world.

7 Sacramenta.

8 Expeditam a nobis.

9 [The term evayyeKiov was often employed for a written book,
says Kaye (p. 298), who refers to l^ook i. cap. i. supra, etc.]

JO Interim, perhaps " occasionally.''

i» Praestructuram.

"Instrumentum. [See cap. i, supra. And, above, note 9.
Also m cap. 111. and the Apology, (cap. xlvii.) he calls the Testa-
ments, Digests, or Sancta Digesta.]

»3 By this canon of his, that the true Gospels must h3ve for their
authors either apostles or companions and disciples of apostles, he
shuts out the false Gospels of the heretics, such as the Ebionites,
l^ncratites, Nazarenes, and Marcionites (Le Prieur).

'4Apostolicos, companions of the apostles associated in the
authorship.

■5 He means, of course, St. Mark and St. Luke.


preaching of disciples might be open to the
suspicion of an affectation of glory, if there
did not accompany it '^ the authority of the
masters, which means that of Christ, '^ for it
was that which made the apostles their mas-
ters. Of the apostles, therefore, John and
Matthew first instil '^ faith into us ; whilst of
apostolic men, Luke and Mark renew it after-
wards.'^ These all start with the same prin-
ciples of the faith,*' so far as relates to the
one only God the Creator and His Christ, how
that He was born of the Virgin, and came to
fulfil ==' the law and the prophets. Never
mind " if there does occur some variation in
the order of their narratives, provided that
there be agreement in the essential matter ="*
of the faith, in which there is disagreement
with Marcion. Marcion, on the other hand,
you must know,=^ ascribes no author to his
Gospel, as if it could not be allowed him to
affix a title to that from which it was no crime
(in his eyes) to subvert =s the very body.
And here I might now make a stand, and
contend that a work ought not to be recog-
nised, which holds not its head erect, which
exhibits no consistency, which gives no prom-
ise of credibility from the fulness of its title
and the just profession of its author. But
we prefer to join issue ^ on every point; nor
shall we leave unnoticed ^^ what may fairly be
understood to be on our side."^^ Now, of the
authors whorn we possess, Marcion seems
to have singled out Luke "^ for his mutilating
process. 3° Luke, however, was not an apos-
tle, but only an apostolic man; not a master,
but a disciple, and so inferior to a master —
at least as far subsequent to^^ him as the apos-
tle whom he followed (and that, no doubt,
was Paul 3^) was subsequent to the others; so
that, had Marcion even published his Gospel
in the name of St. Paul himself, the single
authority of the document,33 destitute of all
support from preceding authorities, would
not be a sufficient basis for our faith. There
would be still wanted that Gospel which St.
Paul found in existence, to which he yielded


i^Adsistat illi.

17 Immo Christi.

18 Insinuant.
'9 Instaurant.

20 Isdem regulis.

21 Supplementura.

22 Viderit.

23 De capita.

24 Scilicet.

25 Evertere.

26 Congredi.

27 Dissimulamus.

28 Ex nostro.

29 Compare Irenxus, A (iversus fttereses (Harvey), i. 25 and iii.
II ; also Epiphanius, Nter. xlii. See also the editor's notes on
the passages in Irenseus, who quotes other authorities also, and
shows the particulars of Marcion's mutilations. [Vol. I. 429.]

30 Quern caideret.

31 Posterior.

32 See Hieronymi, Catal. Scriptt. Eccles. 7, and Fabricius'
notes.

33 Instrumenti.


;4S


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book IV.


his belief, and with which he so earnestly
wished his own to agree, that he actually on
that account went up to Jerusalem to know
and consult the apostles, " lest he should run,
or had been running in vain;" ' in other words,
that the faith which he had learned, and the
gospel which he was preaching, might be in
accordance with theirs. Then, at last, hav-
ing conferred with the (primitive) authors,
and having agreed with them touching the
rule of faith, they joined their hands in fel-
lowship, and divided their labours thenceforth
in the office of preaching the gospel, so that
they were to go to the Jews, and St. Paul to
the Jews and the Gentiles. Inasmuch, there-
fore, as the enlightener of St. Luke himself
desired the authority of his predecessors for
both his own faith and preaching, how much
more may not I require for Luke's Gospel
that which was necessary for the Gospel of
his master.'

CHAP. III. 3 MARCION INSINUATED THE UN-
TRUSTWORTHINESS OF CERTAIN APOSTLES
WHOM ST. PAUL REBUKED. THE REBUKE
SHOWS THAT IT CANNOT BE REGARDED AS
DEROGATING FROM THEIR AUTHORITY. THE
\POSTOLIC GOSPELS PERFECTLY AUTHENTIC.

In the scheme of Marcion, on the con-
trary,* the mystery s of the Christian religion
begins from the discipleship of Luke. Since,
however, it was on its course previous to that
point, it must have had^ its own authentic
materials, 7 by means of which it found its
own way down to St. Luke; and by the assist-
ance of the testimony which it bore,- Luke
himself becomes admissible. Well, but^
Marcion, finding the Epistle of Paul to the
Galatians (wherein he rebukes even apostles')
for " not walking uprightly according to the
truth of the gospel," *° as well as accuses cer-
tain false apostles of perverting the gospel of
Christ), labours very hard to destroy the
character " of those Gospels which are pub-
lished as genuine " and under the name of
apostles, in order, forsooth, to secure for his
own Gospel the credit which he takes away
from them. But then, even if he censures


» Gal. ii. 2.

2 [Dr. Holmes not uniformly, yet constantly inserts the prefix
St. before the name of Paul, and brackets it, greatly disfiguring the
page. It is not in our author's text, but I venture to dispense
with the ever-recurring brackets.]

3 This is Oehler's arrangement of the chapter, for the sake of
the sense. The former editions begin this third chapter with " Sed
enim Marcion nactus."

4 Aliud est si.

5 Sacramentum.
* Habuit utique.

7 Paraturam.

8 Sed enim.

9 See Gal. ii. 13, 14.

»o Compare what has been already said in book i. chap. 20, and
■below in book v. chap. 3. See also TertuUian's treatise, De Prcr-
script. Ifteret. chap. 23. [Kaye, p. 275.]

II Statum.

Jfs^Propria.


I Peter and John and James, who were thought
[to be pillars, it is for a manifest reason.
They seemed to be changing their company '^
from respect of persons. And yet as Paul
himself "became all things to all men,"**
that he might gain all, it was possible that
Peter also might have betaken himself to the
same plan of practising somewhat different
from what he taught. And, in like manner,
if false apostles also crept in, their character
too showed itself in their insisting upon cir-
cumcision and the Jewish ceremonies. So
that it was not on account of their preaching,
but of their conversation, that they were
marked by St. Paul, who would with equal
impartiality have marked them with censure,
if they had erred at all with respect to God
the Creator or His Christ. Each several case
will therefore have to be distinguished. When
Marcion complains that apostles are suspected
(for their prevarication and dissimulation) of
having even depraved the gospel, he thereby
accuses Christ, by accusing those whom Christ
chose. If, then, the apostles, who are cen-
sured simply for inconsistency of walk, com-
posed the Gospel in a pure form,'s but false
apostles interpolated their true record; and
if our own copies have been made from
these,'^ where will that genuine text'^ of the
apostle's writings be found which has not suf-
fered adulteration ? Which was it that en-
lightened Paul, and through him Luke? It
is either completely blotted out, as if by some
deluge — being obliterated by the inundation
of falsifiers — in which case even Marcion does
not possess the true Gospel; or else, is that
very edition which Marcion alone possesses
the true one, that is, of the apostles ? How,
then, does that agree with ours, which is said
not to be (the work) of apostles, but of Luke?
Or else, again, if that which Marcion uses is
not to be attributed to Luke simply because
it does agree with ours (which, of course,*^ is,
also adulterated in its title), then it is the
work of apostles. Our Gospel, therefore,
which is in agreement with it, is equally the
work of apostles, but also adulterated in its
title. '9

CHAP. IV. EACH SIDE CLAIMS TO POSSESS THE

TRUE GOSPEL. ANTIQUITY THE CRITERION
OF TRUTH IN SUCH A MATTER. MARCION'S
PRETENSIONS AS AN AMENDER OF THE GOSPEL.

We must follow, then, the clue"" of our dis-
cussion, meeting every effort of our opponents


»3 Variare convictum.

M I Cor. ix. 22.

'S Integrum.

16 Inde nostra digesta.

>/ Germanum instrumentum.

»8 That is, according to the Marcionite cavil,

»9 De titulo quoque.

30 Funis ducendus est.


CHAP, v.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


349


with reciprocal vigor. I say that my Gospel
is the true one; Marcion, that his is. I affirm
that Marcion' s Gospel is adulterated; Mar-
cion, that mine is. Now what is to settle the
point for us, except it be that principle ' of
tinic^ which rules that the authority lies with
that which shall be found to be more ancient;
and assumes as an elemental truth, "^ that cor-
ruption (of doctrine) belongs to the side which
shall be convicted of comparative lateness in
its origin. 3 For, inasmuch as error -^ is falsi-
fication of truth, it must needs be that truth
therefore precede error. A thing must exist
prior to its suffering any casualty; s and an
object^ must precede all rivalry to itself.
Else how absurd it would be, that, when we
have proved our position to be the older one,
and Marcion' s the later, ours should yet ap-
pear to be the false one, before it had even
received from truth its objective existence ;7
and Marcion' s should also be supposed to
have experienced rivalry at our hands, even
before its publication; and, in fine, that that
should be thought to be the truer position
which is the later one — a century ^ later than
the publication of all the many and great facts
and records of the Christian religion, which
certainly could not have been published with-
out, that is to say, before, the truth of the
gospel. With regard, then, to the pending ^
question, of Luke's Gospel (so far as its being
the common property '° of ourselves and Mar-
cion enables it to be decisive of the truth,")
that portion of it which we alone receive '^ is
so much older than Marcion, that Marcion,
himself once believed it, when in the first
warmth of faith he contributed money to the
Catholic church, which along with himself was
afterwards rejected, '^ when he fell away from
our truth into his own heresy. What if the
Marcionites have denied that he held the
primitive faith amongst ourselves, in the face
even of his own letter ? What, if they do not
acknowledge the letter ? They, at any rate,
receive his Antitheses; and more than that,
they make ostentatious use '-^ of them. Proof
out of these is enough for me. For if the
Gospel, said to be Luke's which is current
amongst us '^ (we shall see whether it be also


1 Ratio.

2 Praejudicans.

3 Posterius revincetur. See De Prcescriptione Hasrct., which
goes on this principle of time. Compare especially chapters xxix.
and XXX. [p. 256, supra.']

4 Falsum.

5 Passione.

6 Materia.

7 De veritate materiam.

8 Sseculo post.

9 Interim.
'°Communio ejus.

'^ De veritate disceptat.

"Quod est secundum nos. [A note of T.'s position.]

i3Projectam. [Catholic = Primitive.]

14 Praeferunt.

*5 Penes nos.


current with Marcion), is the very one which,
as Marcion argues in his A?ititheses, was inter-
polated by the defenders of Judaism, for the
purpose of such a conglomeration with it of
the law and the prophets as should enable
them out of it to fashion their Christ, surely
he could not have so argued about it, unless
he had found it (in such a form). No one
censures things before they exist,'^ when he
knows not whether they will come to pass.
Emendation never precedes the fault. To be
sure, '7 an amender of that Gospel, which had
been all topsy-turvy '^ from the days of Tibe-
rius to those of Antoninus, first presented
himself in Marcion alone — so long looked for
by Christ, who was all along regretting that
he had been in so great a hurry to send out
his apostles without the support of Marcion !
But for all that,'^ heresy, which is for ever
mending the Gospels, and corrupting them in
the act, is an affair of man's audacity, not of
God's authority; and if Marcion be even a
disciple, he is yet not " above his master;" =°
if Marcion be an apostle, still as Paul says,
" Whether it be I or they, so we preach;" " if
Marcion be a prophet, even "the spirits of
the prophets will be subject to the prophets," ^
for they are not the authors of confusion,
but of peace; or if Marcion be actually an
angel, he must rather be designated "as
anathema than as a preacher of the gospel," "^
because it is a strange gospel which he has
preached. So that, whilst he amends, he
only confirms both positions: both that our
Gospel is the prior one, for he amends that
which he has previously fallen in with; and
that that is the later one, which, by putting it
together out of the emendations of ours, he
has made his own Gospel, and a novel one too.

CHAP. V. BY THE RULE OF ANTIQUITY, THE

CATHOLIC GOSPELS ARE FOUND TO BE TRUE,
INCLUDING THE REAL ST. LUKE'S. MARCION's
ONLY A MUTILATED EDITION. THE HERE-
TIC'S WEAKNESS AND INCONSISTENCY IN IG-
NORING THE OTHER GOSPELS. ^''^

On the whole, then, if that is evidently
more true which is earlier, if that is earlier
which is from the very beginning, if that is
from the beginning which has the apostles for
its authors, then it will certainly be quite as
evident, that that comes down from the apos-


16 Post futura.

17 Sane.

18 Eversi.

19 Nisi quod.

20 Matt. X. 24.

21 I Cor. xy. II.

22 I Cor. xiv. 32.

23 Gal. i. 8.

24 [On this whole chapter and subject, consult Kaye, pp. 27
289.]


350


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book IV


ties, which has been kept as a sacred deposit '
in the churches of the apostles. Let us see
what milk the Corinthians drank from Paul;
to what rule of faith the Galatians were
brought for correction; what the Philippians,
the Thessalonians, the Ephesians read by it;
what utterance also the Romans give, so very
near' (to the apostles), to whom Peter and
Paul conjointly ^ bequeathed the gospel even
sealed with their own blood. We have also
St. John's foster churches.-* For although
Marcion rejects his Apocalypse, the order ^ of
the bishops (thereof), when traced up to their
origin, will yet rest on John as their author.
In the same manner is recognised the excel-
lent source^ of the other churches. I say,
therefore, that in them (and not simply such
of them as were founded by apostles, but in
all those which are united with them in the
fellowship of the mystery of the gospel of
Christ ^) that Gospel of Luke which we are
defending with all our might has stood its
ground from its very first publication; whereas
Marcion's Gospel is not known to most people,
and to none whatever is it known without be-
ing at the same time^ condemned. It too,
of course, 9 has its churches, but specially its
own — as late as they are spurious; and should
you want to know their original,'" you will
more easily discover apostasy in it than apos-
tolicity, with Marcion forsooth as their found-
er, or some one of Marcion's swarm." Even
wasps make combs; " so also these Marcionites
make churches. The same authority of the
apostolic churches will afford evidence '^ to the
other Gospels also, which we possess equally
through their means, "» and according to their
usage — I mean the Gospels of John and Mat-
thew— whilst that which Mark published may
be affirmed to be Peter's 's whose interpreter
Mark way. I-'or even Luke's form "^ of the
Gospel men unsually ascribe to Paul.'^ And
it may well seem '^ that the works which disci-
ples publish belong to their masters. Well,
then, Marcion ought to be called to a strict ac-
count"' concerning these (other Gospels) also,


^ Sacrosanctum. Inviolate. Westcott, On the Canon, p. 384.
Compare De Prcescript. Hasret. c. j,6, su^ra.

2 De proximo. Westcott renders this, ' who are nearest to us."
See in loco.

3et . . . et. L'N-B- Not Peter's See, then.]

4 Alumnas ecclesias. He seems to allude to the seven churches
of the Apocalypse.

5 [Not the Order of bishops (as we now speak) but of their suc-
cession from St. John. Kaye, p. 219.]

6 Generositas.

7 De societate sacramenti. [i.e. Catholic Unity.]
SEadem.

9 Plane.
*o Censum.
II Examine.
i^Favos. See Pliny, Nat. Hist. xi. ai.

13 Patrocinabitur. [Jones on the Canon, Vol. I. p. 66.]

14 Proinde per illas.

J»- »SSee Hieronymus, Catal. Scriptt. Eccles. c. 8.
^ i6 Digestum.

17 See above, chap. 2. p. 347.

iSCapit videri. '9 Flagitandus.


for having omitted them, and insisted in prefer-
ence =" on Luke; as if they, too, had not had
free course in the churches, as well as Luke's
Gospel, from the beginning. Nay, it is even
more credible that they "' existed from the very
beginning; for, being the work of apostles,
they were prior, and coeval in origin with =" the
churches themselves. But how come"s it to
pass, if the apostles published nothing, that
their disciples were more forward in such a
work; for they could not have been disciples,
without any instruction from their masters ?
If, then, it be evident that these (Gospels) also
were current in the churches, why did not Mar-
cion touch them — either to amend them if they
were adulterated, or to acknowledge them if
they were uncorrupt ? For it is but natural ='
that they who were perverting the gospel,
should be more solicitous about the perversion
of those things whose authority they knew to
be more generally received. Even the false
apostles (were so called) on this very account,
because they imitated the apostles by means
of their falsification. In as far, then, as he
might have amended what there was to amend,
if found corrupt, in so far did he firmly im-|
ply''^ that all was free from corruption which
he did not think required amendment. Ini
short, =5 he simply amended what he thought
was corrupt; though, indeed, not even this
justly, because it was not really corrupt. For
if the (Gospels) of the apostles =*^ have cornel
down to us in their integrity, whilst Luke's,
which is received amongst us,^'^ so far accords
with their rule as to be on a par with them in
permanency of reception in the churches, it
clearly follows that Luke's Gospel also has
come down to us in like integrity until the
sacrilegious treatment of Marcion. In short,
when Marcion laid hands on it, it then be-
came diverse and hostile to the Gospels of the
apostles. I will therefore advise his followers,
that they either change these Gospels, how-
ever late to do so, into a conformity wit!
their own, whereby they may seem to be ii
agreement with the apostolic writings (for
they are daily retouching their work, as dailj
they are convicted by us); or else that the]
blush for their master, who stands self-con-l
demned ='® either way — when once ^ he hands]
on the truth of the gospel conscience smitten,
or again ^ subverts it by shameless tampering.


=° Potius insliterit.
=» The Gospels of the apostles John and Matthew, and perhaps
Mark's also, as being St. Peter's.

22 Dedicata cum.

23 Competit.
=4Connrmavit.
25 Denique.
=6 Apostolica, i.e.,evanKelia.

27 That is, the canonical Gospel of St. Luke, as distinct
Marcion's corruption of it. [N.B. " Us" = Catholics.]

28 Traducto.

29 Nunc— nunc.


rilAP. VII.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


35


Such are the summary arguments which we
use, when we take up arms ' against heretics
for the faith ^ of the gospel, maintaining both
that order of periods, which rules that a late
date is the mark of forgers,^ and that au-
thority of churches'* which lends support to
the tradition of the apostles; because truth
must needs precede the forgery, and proceed
straight from those by whom it has been
handed on.

CHAP. VI. — MARCION's OBJECT IN ADULTERAT-
ING THE GOSPEL. NO DIFFERENCE BETWEEN
THE CHRIST OF THE CREATOR AND THE CHRIST
OF THE GOSPEL. NO RIVAL CHRIST ADMISSI-
BLE. THE CONNECTION OF THE TRUE CHRIST
WITH THE DISPENSATION OF THE OLD TESTA-
MENT ASSERTED.

But we now advance a step further on, and
challenge (as we promised to do) the very Gos-
pel of Marcion, with the intention of thus
proving that it has been adulterated. For it
is certains that the whole aim at which he
has strenuously laboured even in the drawing
up of his Antitheses^ centres in this, that he
may establish a diversity between the Old and
the New Testaments, so that his own Christ
maybe separate from the Creator, as belonging
to this rival god, ««^as alien from the law and
the prophets. It is certain, also, that with
this view^ he has erased everything that was
contrary to his own opinion and made for the
Creator, as if it had been interpolated by His
advocates, whilst everything which agreed
with his own opinion he has retained. The
latter statements we shall strictly examine; ^
and if they shall turn out rather for our side,
and shatter the assumption of Marcion, we
shall embrace them. It will then become evi-
dent, that in retaining them he has shown no
less of the defect of blindness, which charac-
terizes heresy, than he displayed when he
erased all the former class of subjects. Such,
then, is to be^ the drift and form of my little
treatise; subject, of course, to whatever con-
dition may have become requisite on both
sides of the question. ' Marcion has laid
down the position, that Christ who in the days
of Tiberius was, by a previously unknown
god, revealed for the salvation of all nations,
is a different being from Him who was or-
dained by God the Creator for the restoration


' Expedimur.

2 Fide, integrity.

3 Posteritati falsariorum prsescribentem.

4 [Mark the authority of churches. He uses the plural — quod
ab omnibus.'\

5 Certe, for certo.

6 Propterea.

7 Conveniemus.

8 Sic habebit.

9 This seems to be the sense of the words, " sub ilia utique con-
ditione quae ex utraqtie parte condicta sit."


of the Jewish state, and who is yet to come.
Between these he interposes the separation
of'" a great and absolute difference — as great
as lies between what is just and what is good; "
as great as lies between the law and the gos-
pel; as great, (in short,) as is the difference
between Judaism and Christianity. Hence
will arise also our rule," by which we deter-
mine '3 that there ought to be nothing in com-
mon between the Christ of the rival god and
the Creator; but that (Christ) must be pro-
nounced to belong to the Creator, '■♦ if He has
administered His dispensations, fulfilled His
prophecies, promoted 's His laws, given reality
to '^ His promises, revived His mighty power, '^
remoulded His determinations '^ expressed
His attributes, His properties. This law and
this rule I earnestly request the reader to
have ever in his mind, and so let him begin
to investigate whether Christ be Marcion' s or
the Creator's.

CHAP. VII. MARCION REJECTED THE PRECED-
ING PORTION OF ST. LUKE's GOSPEL. THERE-
FORE THIS REVIEW OPENS WITH AN EXAMINA-
TION OF THE CASE OF THE EVIL SPIRIT IN THE
SYNAGOGUE OF CAPERNAUM. HE WHOM THE
DEMON ACKNOWLEDGED WAS THE CREATOR'S
CHRIST,

In the fifteenth year of the reign of Tibe-
rius'^ (for such is Marcion's proposition) he
" came down to the Galilean city of Caper-
naum," of course meaning^ from the heaven
of the Creator, to which he had previously
descended from his own. What then had
been his course,^' for him to be described as
first descending from his own heaven to the
Creator's? For why should I abstain from
censuring those parts of the statement which
do not satisfy the requirement of an ordinary
narrative, but always end in a falsehood ? To
be sure, our censure has been once for all
expressed in the question, which we have al-
ready" suggested: Whether, when descend-
ing through the Creator's domain, and indeed
in hostility to him, he could possibly have
been admitted by him, and by him been
transmitted to the earth, which was equally
his territory ? Now, however, I want also to
know the remainder of his course down, as-


10 Scindit.

11 That is, between what is severe and judicial and punitive on
one side, that is, the Creator's ; and what is mild, merciful, and
forgiving, on the other, that is, the Redeemer's side (Rigalt.).

12 Prsescriptio.
i3Defigimus.

'4 Creatoris pronunciandum.

»5 Adjuverit.

i6 Repraesentaverit.

17 Restauraverit virtutes ejus.

18 Sententias reformaverit.

19 Luke iii. 1 and iv. 31.

20 Utique.

21 Ecquid ordinis.

22 See above, book i. chap, xxiii. [Comp. i. cap. xix.]


352


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book IV.


suming that he came down. For we must
not be too nice in inquiring' whether it is
supposed that he was see7i in any place. To
come into view= indicates ' a sudden unex-
pected glance, which for a moment fixed ^ the
eye upon the object that passed before the
view, without staying. But when it happens
that a descent has been effected, it is apparent,
and comes under the notice of the eyes.s
Moreover, it takes account of fact^ and thus
obliges one to examine in w-hat condition,
with what preparation,* with how much vio-
lence or moderation, and further, at what time
of the day or night, the descent was made;
who, again, saw the descent, who reported it,
who seriously avouched the fact, which cer-
tainly was not easy to be believed, even after
the asseveration. It is, in short, too bad ^
that Romulus should have had in Proculus an
avoucher of his ascent to heaven, when the
Christ of (this) god could not find any one to
announce his descent from heaven; just as
if the ascent of the one and the descent of
the other were not effected on one and the
same ladder of falsehood ! Then, what had
he to do with Galilee, if he did not belong to
the Creator by whom ^ that region was des-
tined (for His Christ) when about to enter on
His ministry ?9 As Isaiah says: "Drink in
this first, and be prompt, O region of Zabulon
and land of Nephthalim, and ye others who
(inhabit) the sea-coast, and that of Jordan,
Galilee of the nations, ye people who sit in
darkness, behold a great light; upon you, who
inhabit (that) land, sitting in the shadow of
death, the light hath arisen." '° It is, how-
ever, well that Marcion's god does claim to be
the enlightener of the nations, that so he
might have the better reason for coming down
from heaven; only, if it must needs be," he
should rather have made Pontus his place of
descent than Galilee. But since both the
place and the work of illumination according


' This is here the force of viderit, our author's very favourite
idiom.

2 Apparere.

3 Sapit.

* Impegerit.

5 Descendisse autem, dum fit, videtur et subit oculos. Probably
this bit of characteristic I^atinity had better be rendered thus :
" The accomplishment of a descent, however, is, whilst happening,
a visible process, and one that meets the eye." Of the various
readings, " dum sit," " dum it," "dum fit," we take the last
with Oehier, only understanding the clause as a parenthesis.

^Suggestu.

7lndignum.

8Cui.

9lngressuro prxdicationem.

10 This is the literal rendering of Tertullian's version of the
prophet's words, which occur chap. ix. i, 2. The first clause
closely follows the LXX. (ed. Tisch.) : ToOto trfmrov wie, ray^v
iroiei. This curious passage is explained by Grotius (on Matt. iv.
14) as a mistake of ancient copyists ; as if what the Seventy had
originally rendered ra\v irot'ei, from the hiphil of 7^p, had been
faultily written raxu Tri«, and the latter had crept into the text
with the marginal note -nftiiiriiv, instead of a repetition of ta.\v.
However this be, Tertullian's old Latin Bible had the passage
thus : " Hoc primum bibito, cito facito, regio Zabulon," etc.
'■ Si utiqiie.


to the prophecy are compatible with Christ,
we begin to discern " that He is the subject
of the prophecy, which shows that at the very
outset of His ministry, He came not to destroy
the law and the prophets, but rather to fulfil
them; '3 for Marcion has erased the passage
as an interpolation.'* It will, however, be vain
for him to deny that Christ uttered in word
what He forthwith did partially indeed. For
the prophecy about place He at once fulfilled.
From heaven straight to the synagogue. As
the adage runs: " The business on which we
are come, do at once." Marcion must even
expunge from the Gospel, " I am not sent but
unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel; " 's
and, "It is not meet to take the children's
bread, and to cast it to dogs," '* — in order,
forsooth, that Christ may not appear to be an
Israelite. But facts will satisfy me instead of
words. Withdraw all the sayings of my
Christ, His acts shall speak. Lo, He enters
the synagogue; syrely (this is going) to the
lost siieep of the house of Israel. Behold, it is
to Israelites first that He offers the " bread "
of His doctrine; surely it is because they
are " children " that He shows them this pri-
ority.'^ Observe, He does not yet impart it
to others; surely He passes them by as
"dogs." For to whom else could He better
have imparted it, than to such as were stran-
gers to the Creator, if He especially belonged
not to the Creator ? And yet how could He
have been admitted into the synagogue — one
so abruptly appearing,'^ -so unknown; one, of
whom no one had as yet been apprised of His
tribe, His nation, His family, and lastly. His
enrolment in the census of Augustus — that
most faithful witness of the Lord's nativity,
kept in the archives of Rome? They cer-
tainly would have remembered, if they did
not know Him to be circumcised, that He
must not be admitted into their most holy
places. And even if He had the general right
of entering '9 the synagogue (like other Jews),
yet the function of giving instruction was al-
lowed only to a man who was extremely well
known, and examined and tried, and for some
time invested with the privilege after experi-
ence duly attested elsewhere. But " they
were all astonished at His doctrine." Of
course they were; " for, says (St. Luke),
" His word was with power "^ — not because He
taught in opposition to the law and the proph-


»2 Agnoscere.

13 Matt. V. 17.

M Additum.

'5 Matt. XV. 24.

'6 Matt. XV. 26.

17 Pra:fert.

>8Tam repentinus.

19 Etsi passim adiretur.

2° Luke iv. 32.


CHAP. VII.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


353


ets. No doubt, His divine discourse ' gave
forth both power and grace, building up rather
than pulHng down the substance of the law
and the prophets. Otherwise, instead of
"astonishment, they would feel horror. It
would not be admiration, but aversion, prompt
and sure, which they would bestow on one
who was the destroyer of law and prophets,
and the especial propounder as a natural con-
sequence of a rival god; for he would have
been unable to teach anything to the dispar-
agement of the law and the prophets, and so
far of the Creator also, without premising the
doctrine of a different and rival divinity. In-
asmuch, then, as the Scripture makes no other
statement on the matter than that the simple
force and power of His word produced aston-
ishment, it more naturally^ shows that His
teaching was in accordance with the Creator,
by not denying (that it was so), than that it
was in opposition to the Creator, by not as-
serting (such a fact). And thus He will either
have to be acknowledged as belonging to
Him, 3 in accordance with whom He taught;
or else will have to be adjudged a deceiver,
since He taught in accordance with One whom
He had come to oppose. In the same pas-
sage, "the spirit of an unclean devil" ex-
claims: "What have we to do with Thee,
Thou Jesus ? Art Thou come to destroy us ?
I know Thee who Thou art, the Holy One of
God.""* I do not here raise the question
whether this appellation was suitable to one
who ought not to be called Christ, unless he
were sent by the Creator. 5 Elsewhere^ there
has been already given a full consideration of
His titles. My present discussion is, how the
evil spirit could have known that He was called
by such a name, when there had never at any
time been uttered about Him a single proph-
ecy by a god who was unknown, and up to
that time silent, of whom it was not possible
for Him to be attested as " the Holy One,"
as (of a god) unknown even to his own Cre-
ator, What similar everit could he then have
published ^ of a fmv deity, whereby he might
betaken for " the holy one " of the rival god ?
Simply that he went into the synagogue, and
did nothing even in word against the Creator ?
As therefore he could not by any means ac-
knowledge him, whom he was ignorant of, to
be Jesus and the Holy One of God; so did
he acknowledge Him whom he knew (to be


' Eloquium.
'^ Facilius.

3 That is, the Creator.

4 Luke iv. 33, 34.

5 Si non Creatoris.

^ See above, in book iii. chap, xii., on the name Emmanuel:
in chap. XV., on the name Christ: and in chap, xvi., on the name
Jesus.

7 Quid tale ediderit.

23


both). For he remembered how that the proph-
et had prophesied^ of " the Holy One" of
God, and how that God's name of "Jesus"
was in the son of Nun.^ These facts he had
also received'" from the angel, according to
our Gospel: " Wherefore that which shall be
born of thee shall be called the Holy One, the
Son of God;"" and, "Thou shalt call his
n^mt Jesus."" Thus he actually had (al-
though only an evil spirit) some idea of the
Lord's dispensation, rather than of any
strange and heretofore imperfectly understood
one. Because he also premised this question:
" What have we to do with Thee ? " — not as
if referring to a strange Jesus, to whom per-
tain the evil spirits of the Creator. Nor did
he say. What hast Thou to do with us ? but,
" What have we to do with Thee ? " as if de-
ploring himself, and deprecating his own ca-
lamity; at the prospect of which he adds:
" Art Thou come to destroy us ? " So com-
pletely did he acknowledge in Jesus the Son
of that God who was judicial and avenging,
and (so to speak) severe, '^ and not of him who
was simply good,"» and knew not how to de-
stroy or how to punish ! Now for what pur-
pose have we adduced this passage first ? '^ In
order to show that Jesus was neither acknowl-
edged by the evil spirit, nor affirmed by
Himself, to be any other than the Creator's.
Well, but Jesus rebuked him, you say. To
be sure he did, as being an envious (spirit),
and in his very confession only petulant, and
evil in adulation — just as if it had been
Christ's highest glory to have come for the
destruction of demons, and not for the salva-
tion of mankind; whereas His wish really was
that His disciples should not glory in the sub-
jection of evil spirits but in the fair beauty of
salvation.'^ Why else '^ did He rebuke him ?
If it was because he was entirely wrong (in
his invocation), then He was neither Jesus
nor the Holy One of God; if it was because
he was partially wrong — for having supposed
him to be, rightly enough,'^ Jesus and the
Holy One of God, but also as belonging to
the Creator — most .unjustly would He have
rebuked him for thinking what he knew he
ought to think (about Him), and for not sup-
posing that of Him which he knew not that
he ought to suppose — that he was another
Jesus, and the holy one of the other god. If,


8 Ps. xvi. 10, and probably Dan. ix. 24.

9 Compare what was said above in book iii., chap. xvi. p. 335.
10 E,\ceperat.

" Such is our author's reading of Luke i. 3S,

12 Matt. i. 21.

"SSsevi.

uOptimi.

'5 Prsemisimus.

"6 De Candida salutis : see Luke x. 20.

'7 Aut cur.

•SQuidem.


354


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book IV.


however, the rebuke has not a more probable
meaning' than that which we ascribe to it,
iX follows that the evil spirit made no mistake,
and was not rebuked for lying; for it was
Jesus Himself, besides whom it was impossi-
ble for the evil spirit to have acknowledged
any other, whilst Jesus affirmed that He was
He whom the evil spirit had acknowledged, by
not rebuking him for uttering a lie.

CHAP. VIII. — OTHER PROOFS FROM THE SAME
CHAPTER, THAT JESUS, WHO PREACHED AT
NAZARETH, AND WAS ACKNOWLEDGED BY
CERTAIN DEMONS AS CHRIST THE SON OF GOD,
WAS THE creator's CHRIST. AS OCCASION
OFFERS, THE DOCETIC ERRORS OF MARCION
ARE EXPOSED.

The Christ of the Creator had = to be called
a Nazarene according to prophecy; whence
the Jews also designate us, on that very ac-
count,^ Nazerenes^ after Him. For we are
they of whom it is written, " Her Nazarites
were whiter than snow; " s even they who were
once defiled with the stains of sin, and dark-
ened with the clouds of ignorance. But to
Christ the title Nazarene was destined to be-
come a suitable one, from the hiding-place of
His infancy, for which He went down and
dwelt at Nazareth,^ to escape from Archelaus
the son of Herod. This fact I have not re-
frained from mentioning on this account, be-
cause it behoved Marcion's Christ to have
forborne all connection whatever with the
domestic localities of the Creator's Christ,
when he had so many towns in Judaea which
had not been by the prophets thus assigned ^
to the Creator's Christ. But Christ will be
(the Christ) of the prophets, wheresoever He
is found in accordance with the prophets.
And yet even at Nazareth He is not remarked
as having preached anything new,^ whilst in
another verse He is said to have been re-
jected 9 by reason of a simple proverb. '° Here
at once, when I observe that they laid their
hands on Him, I cannot help drawing a con-
clusion respecting His bodily substance, which
cannot be believed to have been a phantom,"
since it was capable of being touched and
even violently handled, when He was seized
and taken and led to the very brink of a preci-
pice. For although He escaped through the


I Verisimiliorem statum.
aHabebat.

3 Ipso nomine, or by His very name.

4 Nazara;os; or, Nazarites. [Christians were still so called by
the Jews in the Third Century, Kaye, 446.]

5 I^m. iv. 7.

6 Descendit apud, see Luke iv. 16-30.

7 Emancipata.

8 Luke iv. 23.

9 Luke jv. 29.
^o Luke iv. 24.

I' A rebuke of Marcion's Docetic views of ChJist.


midst of them, He had already experienced
their rough treatment, and afterwards went
His way, no doubt" because the crowd (as
usually happens) gave way, or was even
broken through; but not because it was eluded
as by an impalpable disguise, '^ which, if there
had been such, would not at all have sub-
mitted to any touch.

" Tangere enim et tangi, nisi corpus, nulla potest res, "'♦J

is even a sentence worthy of a place in the
world's wisdom. In short. He did himself!
touch others, upon whom He laid His hands,!
which were capable of being felt, and con-|
ferred the blessings of healing,'5 which were]
not less true, not less unimaginary, than wer(
the hands wherewith He bestowed them. He I
was therefore the very Christ of Isaiah, the
healer of our sicknesses.'^ "Surely," saysl
he, " He hath borne our griefs and carried\
our sorrows." Now the Greeks are accus-
tomed to use for carry a word which also sig-
nifies to take away. A general promise ii
enough for me in passing. '^ Whatever were
the cures which Jesus effected. He is mine;
We will come, however, to the kinds of curesj
To liberate men, then, from evil spirits, is
cure of sickness. Accordingly, wicked spiritj
(just in the manner of our former example)
used to go forth with a testimony, exclaiming,
" Thou art the Son of God," '«— of what God,
is clear enough from the case itself. But
they were rebuked, and ordered not to speak;
precisely because'' Christ willed Himself to
be proclaimed by men^ not by unclean spirits,
as the Son of God — even that Christ alone to
whom this was befitting, because He had sent
beforehand men through whom He might be-
come known, and who were assuredly worthier
preachers. It was natural to Him ^ to refuse
the proclamation of an unclean spirit, at whose
command there was an abundance of saints.
He, however, =' who had never been foretolc
(if, indeed, he wished to be acknowledged)
for if he did not wish so much, his cominj
was in vain), would not have spurned the X.t%\
timony of an alien or any sort of substance,
who did not happen to have a substance of
his ownj^^* but had descended in an alien one.
And now, too, as the destroyer also of the
Creator, he would have desired nothing better ^


"Scilicet.

'3 Per caligfinem.

'4 " For nothing can touch and be touched but a bodily sub-
stance." This line from Lucretius, Dc Rerum NaturaA. 3051 '•
again quoted by Tertullian in his De Anima, chap, v, (Oehler). _

'S Luke iv. 40.

'6 See Isa. liii. 4.

'7 Interim.

'8 Luke iv. 41,

19 Proinde enim.

20 Illius erat.
2' Porro.
22 Propriae non habebat.


CHAP. IX.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


355


than to be acknowledged by His spirits, and
to be divulged for the sake of being feared: '
only that Marcion says = that his god is not
feared; maintaining that a good being is not
an object of fear, but only a judicial being,
in whom reside the grounds ^ of fear — anger,
severity, judgments, vengeance, condemna-
tion. But it was from fear, undoubtedly, that
the evil spirits were cowed. ^ Therefore they
confessed that (Christ) was the Son of a God
who was to be feared, because they would
have an occasion of not submitting if there
were none for fearing. Besides, He showed
that He was to be feared, because He drave
them out, not by persuasion like a good being,
but by command and reproof. Or else did
he 5 reprove them, because they were making
him an object of fear, when all the while he
did not want to be feared? And in what
manner did he wish them to go forth, when
they could not do so except with fear ? So
that he fell into the dilemma^ of having to
conduct himself contrary to his nature, where-
as he might in his simple goodness have at once
treated them with leniency. He fell, too, into
another false position ?— of prevarication,
when he permitted himself to be feared by
the demons as the Son of the Creator, that he
might drive them out, not indeed by his own
power, but by the authority of the Creator.
" He departed, and went into a desert place. ' ' ^
This was, indeed, the Creator's customary
region. It was proper that the Word ^ should
there appear in body, where He had afore-
time, wrought in a cloud. To the gospel also
was suitable that condition of place '° which
had once been determined on for the law."
"Let the wilderness and the solitary place,
therefore, be glad and rejoice;" so had
Isaiah promised. ^= When " stayed " by the
crowds. He said," I must preach the kingdom
of God to other cities also." '^ Had He dis-
played His God anywhere yet? I suppose as
yet nowhere. But was He speaking of those
who knew of another god also? I do not
believe so. If, therefore, neither He had
preached, nor they had known, any other
God but the Creator, He was announcing the
kingdom of that God whom He knew to be
the only God known to those who were listen-
ing to Him.


'Prae timore.

"^ See above, book i. chap. vii. xxvi. and xxvii.

3 MatericC.

4 Cedebant.

5 Aut nunquid.
* Necessitatem.

7 In aliam notam.

8 Luke iv. 42.

oSermonem. \Nota Be7te^ Acts vii. 38.]
10 Habitus loci.

" The law was given in the ivilderness of Sinai ; see Ex. xix.
v'2 Isa. XXXV. I,
'3 Luke iv. 42, 43.


CHAP. IX. — OUT OF ST. LUKE S FIFTH CHAPTER
ARE FOUND PROOFS OF CHRIST'S BELONGING
TO THE CREATOR, E.G. IN THE CALL OF FISH-
ERMEN TO THE APOSTOLIC OFFICE, AND IN
THE CLEANSING OF THE LEPER. CHRIST
COMPARED WITH THE PROPHET ELISHA.

Out of SO many kinds of occupations, why in-
deed had He such respect for that of fisher-
men, as to select from it for apostles Simon
and the sons of Zebedee (for it cannot seem
to be the mere fact itself for which the nar-
rative was meant to be drawn out'-*), saying to
Peter, when he trembled at the very large
draught of the fishes, " Fear not; from hence-
forth thou shalt catch men? "'5 By saying
this. He suggested to them the meaning of
the fulfilled prophecy, that it was even He
who by Jeremiah had foretold, "Behold, I
will send many fishers; and they shall fish
them," '* that is, men. Then at last they left
their boats, and followed Him, understanding
that it was He who had begun to accomplish
what He had declared. It is quite another
case, when he affected to choose from the
college of shipmasters, intending one day to
appoint the shipmaster Marcion his apostle.
We have indeed already laid it down, in op-
position to his Antitheses, that the position of
Marcion derives no advantage from the di-
versity which he supposes to exist between
the Law and the Gospel, inasmuch as even
this was ordained by the Creator, and indeed
predicted in the promise of the new Law,
and the new Word, and the new Testament.
Since, however, he quotes with especial care, '^
as a proof in his domain,'* a certain companion
in misery (awToXalTrupov), and associate in
hatred {aviijiiaohfievov), with himself, for the
cure of leprosy, '^ I shall not be sorry to meet
him, and before anything else to point out
to him the force of the law figuratively inter-
preted, which, in this example of a leper (who
was not to be touched, but was rather to be
removed from all intercourse with others),
prohibited any communication with a person
who was defiled with sins, with whom the apos-
tle also forbids us even to eat food,=° foras-
much as the taint of sins would be communi-
cated as if contagious, wherever a man should
mix himself with the sinner. The Lord, there-
fore, wishing that the law should be more
profoundly understood as signifying spiritual
truths by carnal facts " — and thus " not de-


'4 Argumentum processurum erat.

15 See Luke v. i-ii.

16 Jer. xvi. 16.

17 Attentius arg^mentatur.

18 Apud ilium, i.e., the Creator.

19 Luke V. 12-14.

20 I Cor. V. II.

2> Per carnalia, by material things.
22 Hoc nomine.


356


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book IV.


stroying, but rather building up, that laiv
which He wanted to have more earnestly ac-
knowledged— touched the leper, by whom
(even although as man He might have been
defiled) He could not be defiled as God, be-
ing of course incorruptible. The prescription,
therefore, could not be meant for Him, that
He was bound to observe the law and not
touch the unclean person, seeing that contact
with the unclean would not cause defilement
to Him. I thus teach that this (immunity)
is consistent in my Christ, the rather when I
show that it is not consistent in yours. Now,
if it was as an enemy ' of the law that He
touched the leper — disregarding the precept
of the law by a contempt of the defilement —
how could he be defiled, when he possessed
not a body ^ which could be defiled ? For a
phantom is not susceptible of defilement. He,
therefore, who could not be defiled, as being
a phantom, will not have an immunity from
pollution by any divine power, but owing to
his fantastic vacuity; nor can he be regarded
as having despised pollution, who had not in
fact any material capacity ^ for it; nor, in like
manner, as having destroyed the law, who
had escaped defilement from the occasion of
his phantom nature, not from any display of
virtue. If, however, the Creator's prophet
Elisha cleansed Naaman the Syrian alone, ^ to
the exclusion of s so many lepers in Israel,^
this fact contributes nothing to the distinction
of Christ, as if he were in this way the better
one for cleansing this Israelite leper, although
a stranger to him, whom his own Lord had
been unable to cleanse. The cleansing of the
Syrian rather ^ was significant throughout the
nations of the world ^ of their own cleansing
in Christ their light,' steeped as they were in
the stains of the seven deadly sins: '° idolatry,
blasphemy, murder, adultery, fornication,
false-witness, and fraud." Seven times.


» ;*;miilus.

2 Another allusion to Marcion's Docetic doctrine.

sMateriam.

4 Unicum.

5 Ex., literally, "alone of." So Luke iv. 27.

6 Compare 2 Kings v. 9-14 with Luke iv. 27.

7 Facilius — rather than of Israelites.

sperNationes. [Bishop Andrewes thus classifies the ".Sins of the
Nations," as Tertullian's idea seems to have suKgested: (i) Pride ,
Amorite; (2) Envy, Hittite- (3) IVrath, Perizzite; (4) Gluttony
Girjjashite ; {5) Lechery, Hivite ; (6) Covetousness, Canaanite ;
(7) Sloth, Jebusite.Jj

9 Compare, in Simeon's song, Luke ii. 3a, the designation, " A
light to lighten the Gentiles.
10 [See Elucidation L]

"Such seems to be the meaning of the obscure passage in the
original, " Syro facilius emundato significato per nationes emun-
dationis in Christo lumine earum quae septem maculis, capitalium
delictorum inhorrerent, idolatria," etc. We have treated signifi-
cato as one member of an aUative absolute clause, from signtfi-
cattim, a noun occurring in Gloss. I^it. Gr. synonymous with
fijjAuxrts. Rigault, in a note on the passage, imputes the obscurity
to Tertullian's arguing on the Marcionite hypothesis. " Marcion, '
n- says he, " held that the prophets, like Elisha, belonged to the
JpwCreator, and Christ to the good God. To majrnifv Christ's benefi-
cence, he prominently dwells on the alleged fact, that Christ,
although a stranger to the Creator's world, yet vouchsafed to do
4Sood in it. This vain conceit Tertullian refutes from the Mar-


therefore, as if once for each," did he wash
in Jordan; both in order that he might cele-
brate the expiation of a perfect hebdomad; '^
and because the virtue and fulness of the one
baptism was thus solemnly imputed''' to Christ,]
alone, who was one day to establish on earth!
not only a revelation, but also a baptism, en-l
dued with compendious efficacy. 's Even
Marcion finds here an antithesis:'^ how that!
Elisha indeed required a material resource, i
applied water, and that seven times; whereas
Christ, by the employment of a word only,!
and that but once for all, instantly effected *^|
the cure. And surely I might venture '^ tc
claim '^ the Very Word also as of the Cre-I
ator's substance. There is nothing of which]
He who was the primitive Author is not also|
the more powerful one. Forsooth, =~ it is in-
credible that that power of the Creator should I
have, by a word, produced a remedy for a
single malady, which once by a word brought!
into being so vast a fabric as the world Ij
From what can the Christ of the Creator b(
better discerned, than from the power of His
word ? But Christ is on this account anothet
(Christ), because He acted differently froi
Elisha — because, in fact, the master is more
powerful than his servant ! Why, Marcion,
do you lay down the rule, that things are done
by servants just as they are by their very
masters ? Are you not afraid that it will turn
to your discredit, if you deny that Christ be-
longs to the Creator, on the ground that He
was once more powerful than a servant of the
Creator — since, in comparison with the weak-
ness of Elisha, He is acknowledged to be the
greater, if indeed greater ! =' For the cure
is the same, although there is a difference in
the working of it. What has your Christ per-
formed more than my Elisha? Nay, what
great thing has the word of )70ur Christ per-
formed, when it has simply done that which a
river of the Creator effected ? On the same
principle occurs all the rest. So far as re-
nouncing all human glory went. He forbade the
man to publish abroad the cure; but so far as the
honour of the law was concerned, He re-
quested that the usual course should be ^ol^i
lowed: "Go, show thyself to the priest, andfll


cionite hypothesis itself. God the Creator, said they, had found
Himself nicapahlc of cleansinjr this Israelite; but He had more
easily cleansed the Syrian. Christ, however, cleansed the Israel-
ite, and so showed hnnself the superior power. Tertullian denies
both positions."

'2 (^uasi per singulos titulos.

'3 1 here was a mystic completeness in the number seven.

'4 Dicabatur.

*S Sicut sermonem compendiatum, ita et lavacrum. In chap. i.
of this book, the N.T. is called the compendiatum. This illus-
trates the present phrase.

•6 Et hoc opponit.

>7 Repraesentavit.

»8 Quasi non audeam.

'9 \7indicare in.

20 Plane. An ironical cavil from the Marcionite view.

2' Si tamen major.


CHAP. X.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


357


present the offering which Moses command-
ed." ' For the figurative signs of the law in
its types He still would have observed, be-
cause of their prophetic import.^ These
types signified that a man. once a sinner, but
afterwards purified ^ from the stains thereof
by the word of God, was bound to offer unto
God in the temple a gift, even prayer and
thanksgiving in the church through Christ
Jesus, who is the Catholic Priest of the Father/
Accordingly He added: "that it maybe for
a testimony unto you" — one, no doubt,
whereby He would testify that He was not
destroying the law, but fulfilling it; whereby,
too, He would testify that it was He Himself
who was foretold as about to undertake '= their
sicknesses and infirmities. This very con-
sistent and becoming explanation of " the
testimony," that adulator of his own Christ,
Marcion seeks to exclude under the cover of
mercy and gentleness. For, being both good
(such are his words), and knowing, besides,
that every man who had been freed from
leprosy would be sure to perform the solemni-
ties of the law, therefore He gave this pre-
cept. Well, what then? Has He continued
in his goodness (that is to say, in his permis-
sion of the law) or not ? For if he has perse-
vered in his goodness, he will never become
a destroyer of the law; nor will he ever be
accounted as belonging to another god, be-
cause there would not exist that destruction
of the law which would constitute his claim
to belong to the other god. If, however, he
has not continued good, by a subsequent de-
struction of the law, it is a false testimony
which he has since imposed upon them in his
cure of the leper; because he has forsaken
his goodness, in destroying the law. If, there-
fore, he was good whilst upholding the law,^
he has now become evil as a destroyer of the
law. However, by the support which he gave
to the law, he affirmed that the law was good.
For no one permits himself in the support of
an evil thing. Therefore he is not only bad
if he has permitted obedience to a bad law;
but even worse still, if he has appeared ^ as
the destroyer of a good law. So that if he
commanded the offering of the gift because
he knew that every cured leper would be sure
to bring one; he possibly abstained from com-
manding what he knew would be spontane-
ously done. In vain, therefore, was his com-
ing down, as if with the intention of destroy-


' Luke V. 14.
' Utpote prophetatse.
3Emaculatum.

''[i.e., the Great High Priest whose sacrifice is accepted of the
Father, for the sins of the whole world.]
SSuscepturus: (o carry or take away.
° Legis indiiltor.
7 Advenit.


ing the law, when he makes concessions to the
keepers of the law. And yet,^ because he
knew their disposition,'' he ought the more
earnestly to have prevented their neglect of
the law,'° since he had come for this purpose.
Why then did he not keep silent, that man
might of his own simple will obey the law ?
For then might he have seemed to some ex-
tent" to have persisted in his patience. But
he adds also his own authority increased by
the weight of this " testimony." Of what tes-
timony, I ask," if not that of the assertion of
the law ? Surely it matters not in what way
he asserted the law — whether as good, or as
supererogatory, '3 or as patient, or as incon-
stant— provided, Marcion, I drive you from
your position."* Observe, 's he commanded
that the law should be fulfilled. In whatever
way he commanded it, in the same way might
he also have first uttered that sentiment:'^
" I came not to destroy the law, but to fulfil
it." '7 What business, therefore, had you to
erase out of the Gospel that which was quite
consistent in it ? ^^ For you have confessed
that, in his goodness, he did in act what you
deny that he did in word.'^ We have there-
fore good proof that He uttered the word, in
the fact that He did the deed; and that you
have rather expunged the Lord's word, than
that our (evangelists) ^ have inserted it.

CHAP. X. — FURTHER PROOFS OF THE SAME
TRUTH IN THE SAME CHAPTER, FROM THE
HEALING OF THE PARALYTIC, AND FROM THE
DESIGNATION SON OF MAN WHICH JESUS GIVES
HIMSELF. TERTULLIAN SUSTAINS HIS ARGU-
MENT BY SEVERAL QUOTATIONS FROM THE
PROPHETS.

The sick of the palsy is healed, =' and that
in public, in the sight of the people. For,
says Isaiah, *' they shall see the glory of the
Lord, and the excellency of our God.""
What glory, and what excellency? "Be
strong, ye weak hands, and ye feeble knees:" ^^
this refers to the palsy. " Be strong; fear
not." ^* Be stro7ig is not vainly repeated, nor
is fear not vainly added; because with the


8 Atquin,

9 Formam.

10 Ah ea avertendos.

11 AHquatenus.

12 Jam.
i3Supervacuus.

14 Gradu.

15 Ecce.

16 Sententiam.

17 Matt. V. 17.

18 Quod salvum est.

19 That is, you retain the passage in St. Luke, which relates the
act of honouring the law; but you reject that in St. Matthew,
which contains Christ's profession of honouring the law.

20 Nostros: or, perhaps, "our people,"— that is, the Catholics.

21 Luke V. 16-26.

22 Isa. XXXV. 2.

23 Isa. XXXV. 3 in an altered form.

24 Isa. XXXV. A,


358


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book IV.


renewal of the limbs there was to be, accord-
ing to the promise, a restoration^also of bodily-
energies: "Arise, and take up thy couch; "
and likewise moral courage ' not to be afraid
of those who should say, "Who can forgive
sins, but God alone ? " So that you have here
not only the fulfilment of the prophecy which
promised a particular kind of healing, but
also of the symptoms which followed the cure,
in like manner, you should also recognise
Christ in the same prophet as the forgiver of
sins. "For," he says, "He shall remit to
many their sins, and shall Himself take away
our sins." =* For in an earlier passage, speak-
ing in the person of the Lord himself, he had
said: " Even though your sins be as scarlet,
I will make them as white as snow; even
though they be like crimson, I will whiten
them as wool." 3 In the scarlet colour He
indicates the blood of the prophets; in the
crimson, that of the Lord, as the brighter.
Concerning the forgiveness of sins, Micah
also says: "Who is a God like unto Thee?
pardoning iniquity, and passing by the trans-
gressions of the remnant of Thine heritage.
He retaineth not His anger as a testimony
against them^ because He delighteth in
mercy. He will turn again, and will have
compassion upon us; He wipeth away our
iniquities, and casteth our sins into the depths
of the sea."* Now, if nothing of this sort
had been predicted of Christ, I should find
in the Creator examples of such a benignity
as would hold out to me the promise of similar
affections also in the Son of whom He is the
Father. I see how the Ninevites obtained
forgiveness of their sins from the Creator s
— not to say from Christ, even then, because
from the beginning He acted in the Father's
name. I read, too, how that, when David ac-
knowledged his sin against Uriah, the prophet
Nathan said unto him, " The Lord hath can-
celled^ thy sin, and thou shalt not die;"^
how king Ahab in like manner, the husband
of Jezebel, guilty of idolatry and of the blood
of Naboth, obtained pardon because of his re-
pentance;^ and how Jonathan the son of Saul
blotted out by his deprecation the guilt of a
violated fast.' Why should I recount the fre-
quent restoration of the nation itself after the
forgiveness of their sins? — by that God, in-
deed, who will have mercy rather than sacri-
fice, and a sinner's repentance rather than his


^ Animj vigorem.

2 This seems to be Isa. liii. 12, last clause.

3lsa. i. 18.

4 Mic. vii. 18, 19.

5 Jonah iii. 10.

6 Circumduxit.

7 2 Sam. xii. 13.

8 I Kings xxi, 29.

9 Resignati jejunii. See i Sam. xiv. 43-45.


death.*" You will first have to deny that the
Creator ever forgave sins; then you must in
reason show " that He never ordained any such
prerogative for His Christ; and so you will
prove how novel is that boasted *^ benevolence
of the, of course, novel Christ when you shall
have proved that it is neither compatible with '»
the Creator nor predicted by the Creator.
But whether to remit sins can appertain to
one who is said to be unable to retain them,
and whether to absolve can belong to him who
is incompetent even to condemn, and whether
to forgive is suitable to him against whom no
offence can be committed, are questions which
we have encountered elsewhere,"* when we pre-
ferred to drop suggestions 's rather than treat
them anew. '^ Concerning the Son of man our
rule '7 is a twofold one: that Christ cannot lie,
so as to declare Himself the Son of man, if
He be not truly so; nor can He be constituted
the Son of man, unless He be born of a human
parent, either father or mother. And then
the discussion will turn on the point, of
which human parent He ought to be accounted
the son — of the father or the mother? Since
He is (begotten) of God the Father, He is
not, of course, (the son) of a human father.
If He is not of a human father, it follows that
He must be (the son) of a human mother.
If of a human mother, it is evident that she
must be a virgin. For to whom a human father
is not ascribed, to his mother a husband will
not be reckoned; and then to what mother
a husband is not reckoned, the condition of
virginity belongs.'^ But if His mother be not
a virgin, two fathers will have to be reckoned
to Him — a divine and a human one. For she
must have a husband, not to be a virgin; and
by having a husband, she would cause two
fathers — one divine, the other human — to
accrue to Him, who would thus be Son both
of God and of a man. Such a nativity (if one
may call it so) '^ the mythic stories assign toj
Castor or to Hercules. Now, if this distinction]
be observed, that is to say, if He be Son of
man as born of His mother, because not be- 1
gotten of a father, and His mother be a
virgin, because His father is not human — He
will be that Christ whom Isaiah foretold that'
a virgin should conceive. '° On what principle
you, Marcion, can admit Him Son of man, I


«o Ezek. xxxiii. ii, ■^-

" Consequens est ut ostendas. "

" Istam.
n Parem.

'4 See book i. chap, xxvi.-xxviii.
*S Admonere.

'6 Rctractare: give a set treatise about them.
'7 Praescriptio.

'8 To secure terseness in the premisses, we are obliged to lengthen
out the brief terms of the conclusion, virgo est.
'9 Si forte.
^ Isa. vii. 14.


CHAP. X.J


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


359


cannot possibly see. If through a human
father, then you deny him to be Son of God;
if through a divine one also^"^ then you make
Christ the Hercules of fable; if through a
human mother only, then you concede my
point; if not through a human father also^'^
then He is not the son of any man,^ and He
must have been guilty of a lie for having de-
clared Himself to be what He was not. One
thing alone can help you in your difficulty:
boldness on your part either to surname your
God as actually the human father of Christ,
as Valentinus did^ with his ^^on; or else to
deny that the Virgin was human, which even
Valentinus did not do. What now, if Christ
be described s in Daniel by this very title of
" Son of man ? " Is not this enough to prove
that He is the Christ of prophecy? For if
He gives Himself that appellation which was
provided in the prophecy for the Christ of
the Creator, He undoubtedly offers Himself
to be understood as Him to whom (the ap-
pellation) was assigned by the prophet. But
perhaps ^ it can be regarded as a simple iden-
tity of names; 7 and yet we have maintained^
that neither Christ nor Jesus ought to have
been called by these names, if they possessed
any condition of diversity. But as regards
the appellation " Son of man," in as far as it
occurs by accident, ^ in so far there is a diffi-
culty in its occurrence along with '° a casual
identity of names. For it is of pure" acci-
dent, especially when the same cause does
not appear " whereby the identity may be oc-
casioned. And therefore, if Marcion's Christ
be also said to be born of man, then he too
would receive an identical appellation, and
there would be two Sons of man, as also two
Christs and two Jesuses. Therefore, since
the appellation is the sole right of Him in
whom it has a suitable reason, '^ if it be claimed
for another in whom there is an identity of
name, but not of appellation, '^ then the iden-
tity of name even looks suspicious in him for
whom is claimed without reason the identity
of appellation. And it follows that He must
be believed to be One and the Same, who is
found to be the more fit to receive both the
name and the appellation; while the other is


1 Si et Dei.

2 Si neque patris.

3 On Marcion's principles, it must be remembered.

4 Compare T.'s treatise, Adversus Valentinianos^ chap. xii.

5 Censetur.

6 Si forte.

7 Nominum communio simplex.

8 Defendimus. See above, book iii. chap. xv. xvi.

9 Ex accident! obvenit.
1° Super.

^' Propno.

12 Non convenit.

'3 Causam.

'4 The context explains the difference between nomen and
appellatio. The former refers to the name Jesus or Christ, the
latter to the designation Son of titan.


excluded, who has no right to the appellation,
because he has no reason to show for it. Nor
will any other be better entitled to both than
He who is the earlier, and has had allotted to
Him the name of Christ and the appellation
of Son of man, even the Jesus of the Creator.
It was He who was seen by the king of Baby-
lon in the furnace with His martyrs: "the
fourth, who was like the Son of man." 's He
also was revealed to Daniel himself expressly,
as " the Son of man, coming in the clouds of
heaven" as a Judge, as also the Scripture
shows. '^ What I have advanced might have
been sufficient concerning the designation in
prophecy of the Son of man. But the Scrip-
ture offers me further information, even in the
interpretation of the Lord Himself. For
when the Jews, who looked at Him as merely
man, and were not yet sure that He was God
also, as being likewise the Son of God, rightly
enough said that a man could not forgive sins,
but God alone, why did He not, following up
their point '^ about jnan, answer them, that He '^
had power to remit sins; inasmuch as, when He
mentioned the Son of man. He also named a
human being? except it were because He
wanted, by help of the very designation " Son
of man" from the book of Daniel, so to in-
duce them to reflect '^ as to show them that
He who remitted sins was God and man — that
only Son of man, indeed, in the prophecy of
Daniel, who had obtained the power of judg-
ing, and thereby, of course, of forgiving sins
likewise (for He who judges also absolves);
so that, when once that objection of theirs =°
was shattered to pieces by their recollection
of Scripture, they might the more easily ac-
knowledge Him to be the Son of man Him-
self by His own actual forgiveness of sins. I
make one more observation,^' how that He
has nowhere as yet professed Himself to be
the Son of God — but for the first time in this
passage, in which for the first time He has
remitted sins; that is, in which for the first
time He has used His function oijudgmentj by
the absolution. All that the opposite side has
to allege in argument against these things,
(I beg you) carefully weigh "what it amounts
to. For it must needs strain itself to such a
pitch of infatuation as, on the one hand, to
maintain that (their Christ) is also Son of
man, in order to save Him from the charge
of falsehood; and, on the other hand, to deny
that He was born ojf woman, lest they grant


15 Dan. iii. 25.

16 Dan. vii. 13.

17 Secundum intentionem eorura,

18 Eum: that is, man.

19 Repercutere.

20 Scandalo isto.
2' Denique.
22Dispice,


;^o


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[hook IV.


that He was the Virgin's son. Since, how-
ever, the divine authority and the nature of
the case, and common sense, do not admit
this insane position of the heretics, we iiave
here the opportunity of putting in a veto ' in
the briefest possible terms, on the substatice of
Christ's body, against Marcion's phantoms.
Since He is born of man, being the Son of
man. He is body derived from body.^* You
may, I assure you,^ more easily find a man born
without a heart or without brains, like Marcion
himself, than without a body, like Marcion's
Christ. And let this be the limit to your ex-
amination of the heart, or, at any rate, the
brains of the heretic of Pontus.*

CHAP. XI. — THE CALL OF LEVI THE PUBLICAN.
CHRIST IN RELATION TO THE BAPTIST.
CHRIST AS THE BRIDEGROOM. THE PARABLE
OF THE OLD WINE AND THE NEW. ARGU-
MENTS CONNECTING CHRIST WITH THE CRE-
ATOR.

The publican who was chosen by the Lord,s
he adduces for a proof that he was chosen,
as a stranger to the law and uninitiated in ^
Judaism, by one who was an adversary to the
law. The case of Peter escaped his memory,
who, although he was a man of the law, was
not only chosen by the Lord, but also obtained
the testimony of possessing knowledge which
was given to him by the Father. ^ He had
nowhere read of Christ's being foretold as the
light, and hope, and expectation of the Gen-
tiles ! He, however, rather spoke of the Jews
in a favourable light, when he said, "The
whole needed not a physician, but they that
are sick."^ For since by "those that are
sick" he meant that*the heathens and publi-
cans should be understood, whom he was choos-
ing, he affirmed of the Jews that they were
" whole " for whom he said that a physician was
not necessary. This being the case, he makes
a mistake in coming down ' to destroy the law,
as if for the remedy of a diseased condition,
because they who were living under it were
"whole," and " not in want of a physician."
How, moreover, does it happen that he pro-
posed the similitude of a physiciati, if he did
not verify it? For, just as nobody uses a
physician for healthy persons, so will no one
do so for strangers, in so far as he is one of
Marcion's god-made men,'° having to himself


* Interpellandi.

2 Corpus ex corpore.

3 Plane: introducing the sharp irony.

4 This is perhaps the best sense of T.'s sarcasm: " Atque adeo
{thus far) inspice cor Pontici aut (or else) cerebrum.

5 He means Levi or St. Matthew; see Luke v. 27-39.

6 Profanum.
^^ 7 Matt. xvi. 17.

"jLai8Luke V. 31.
4^$ Male descendit.

*o Homo a deo Marcionis.


j both a creator and preserver, and a specially
good physician, in his Christ. This much the
comparison predetermines, that a physician
is more usually furnished by him to whom
the sick people belong. Whence, too, does
John come upon the scene? Christ, sud-
denly ; and just as suddenly, John ! " After
this fashion occur all things in Marcion's sys-
tem. They have their own special and plenary
course" in the Creator's dispensation. Of
John, however, what else I have to say will
be found in another passage. '^ To the several
points which now come before us an answer
must be given. This, then, I will take care
to do"* — demonstrate that, reciprocally, John
is suitable to Christ, and Christ to John, the
latter, of course, as a prophet of the Creator,
just as the former is the Creator's Christ; and
so the heretic may blush at frustrating, to his
own frustration, the mission of John the Bap-
tist. For if there had been no ministry of
John at all— " the voice," as Isaiah calls him,
"of one crying in the wilderness," and the
preparer of the ways of the Lord by denunci-
ation and recommendation of repentance; if,
too, he had not baptized (Christ) Himself 's
along with others, nobody could have chal-
lenged the disciples of Christ, as they ate and
drank, to a comparison with the disciples of
John, who were constantly fasting and pray-
ing ; because, if there existed any diversity'^
between Christ and John, and their followers
respectively, no exact comparison would be
possible, nor would there be a single point
where it could be challenged. For nobody
would feel surprise, and nobody would be
perplexed, although there should arise rival
predictions of a diverse deity, which should
also mutually ditfer about modes of conduct,'^
having a prior difference about the authori-
ties '^ upon which they were based. Therefore
Christ belonged to John, and John to Christ;
while both belonged to the Creator, and both |
were of the law and the prophets, preachers
and masters. Else Christ would have rejected
the discipline of John, asof the rival god, and
would also have defended the disciples, as
very properly pursuing a different walk, be- I
cause consecrated to the service of another
and contrary deity. But as it is, while mod-
estly'^ giving a reason why " the children of
the bridegroom are unable to fast during the


" See chap. vii. of this book, and chap. ii. of book iii.

" Plenum ordinem.

>3 See below, chap, xviii,

'4 Tuebor.

'5 Ipsum.

»6 Marcion's diversitas implied an utter incompatibility between
John and Christ; for it assigned John to the Creator, from whom
It took Christ away.

'7 De disciplinis: or, "about discipleships."

'8 I)e auctoritatibus; or, "about the authors thereof."

'9 Humiliter.


CHAP. XI.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


361


time the bridegroom is with them," but prom-
ising that " they should afterwards fast, when
the bridegroom was taken away from them," '
He neither defended the disciples, (but rather
excused them, as if they had not been blamed
without some reason), nor rejected the dis-
cipline of John, but ratiier allowed^ it, refer-
ring it to the time of John, although destining
it for His own time. Otherwise His purpose
would have been to reject it,^ and to defend
its opponents, if He had not Himself already
belonged to it as then in force. I hold also
that it is my Christ who is meant by the
bridegroom, of whom the psalm says: "He
is as a bridegroom coming out of his cham-
ber; His going forth is from the end of the
heaven, and His return is back to the end of
it again." ^ By the mouth of Isaiah He also
says exultingly of the Father: " Let my soul
rejoice in the Lord; for He hath clothed me
with the garment of salvation and with the
tunic of joy, .as a bridegroom. He hath put
a mitre round about my head, as a bride." ^
To Himself likewise He appropriates*^ the
church, concerning which the same^ Spirit
says to Him: " Thou shalt clothe Thee with
them all, as with a bridal ornament." ^ This
spouse Christ invites home to Himself also
by Solomon from the call of the Gentiles, be-
cause you read: " Come with me from Leba-
non, my spouse." 5 He elegantly makes
mention of Lebanon (the mountain, of course)
because it stands for the name of frankincense
with the Greeks;'" for i-t was from idolatry
that He betrothed Himself the church. Deny
now, Marcion, your utter madness, (if you
can) ! Behold, you impugn even the law of
your god. He unites not in the nuptial bond,
nor, when contracted, does he allow it; no
one does he baptize but a ccelebs or a eunuch;
until death or divorce does he reserve bap-
tism." Wherefore, then, do you make his
Christ a bridegroom ? This is the designation
of Him who united man and woman, not of
him who separated them. You have erred
also in that declaration of Christ, wherein He
seems to make a difference between things
new and old. You are inflated about the old
bottles, and brain-muddled with the new wine;


I Luke V. 34, 35,
'•* Concessit.

3 Rejecturus alioq^uin.

4 Ps. xix. 5, 6.

5 Isa. Ixi. 10.
^ Deputat.

7 The same, which spake again by Isaiah.

8 Isa. xlix. 18.

9 Song of Sol. iv. 8. . .

J° There is also in Hebrew an affinity between J"(j2?< " frankin-
cense," and T'l^pTi) " Lebanon." [Note this strange but reiter-
ated and emphatic identification of incense with /cif'^/rt^rj'. In the
Gentile church it was thoroughly identified with Paganism.]

'" See also book i. chap. xxix. [On this reservation of Baptism
see Elucidation II.]


and therefore to the old (that is to say, to the
prior) gospel you have sewed on the patch of
your new-fangled heresy. I should like to
know in what respect the Creator is inconsist-
ent with Himself." When by Jeremiah He
gave this precept, " Break up for yourselves
new pastures," '^ does He not turn away from
the old state of things ? And when by Isaiah
He proclaims how " old things were passed
away; and, behold, all things, which I am
making, are new," '-* does He not advert to a
new state of things ? We have generally been
of opinion 's that the destination of the former
state of things was rather promised by the
Creator, and exhibited in reality by Christ,
only under the authority of one and the same
God, to whom appertain both the old things
and the new\ For new wine is not put into
old bottles, except by one who has the old
bottles; nor does anybody put a new piece to
an old garment, unless the old garment be
forthcoming to him. That person only '^ does
not do a thing when it is not to be done, who
has the materials wherewithal to do it if it
were to be done. And therefore, since His
object in making the comparison was to show
that He was separating the new condition '^ of
the gospel from the old state '^ of the law, He
proved that that '^ from which He was separa-
ting His own=° ought not to have been brand-
ed^' as a separation ="= of things which were
alien to each other; for nobody ever unites
his own things with things that are alien to
them, ^3 in order that he may afterwards be
able to separate them from the alien things.
A separation is possible by help of the con-
junction through which it is made. Accord-
ingly, the things which He separated He also
proved to have been once one; as they would
have remained, were it not for His separa-
tion. But still we make this concession, that
there is a separation, by reformation, by am-
plification,^'* by progress; just as the fruit is
separated from the seed, although the fruit
comes from the seed. So likewise the gospel
is separated from the law, whilst it advances ^s
from the law — a different thing =^ from it, but
not an alien one; diverse, but not contrary.
Nor in Chrfst do we even find any novel form
of discourse. Whether He proposes simili-


'2 Alter.

13 Jer. iv. 3.

14 His reading of (probably) Isa. xliii. 19; comp. 2 Cor. v. 17

15 Olim statuimus.
i6Ille.

'7 Novitas.

18 Vetustas.

--9 That is, " the oldness of the law."

-■°That is, " the newness of the gospel."

21 Notandam.

22 Separatione. The more general reading is separationem.

23 Alienis: i.e., " things not his own."

24 Amplitudinem.

25 Provehitur, "is developed."

26 Aliud.


362


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book IV.


tudes or refute questions, it comes from the
seventy-seventh Psalm. "I will open," says
He, " my mouth in a parable " (that is, in a
similitude); "I will utter dark problems"
(that is, I will set forth questions).' If you
should wish to prove that a man belonged to
another race, no doubt you would fetch your
proof from the idiom of his language.

CHAP. XII. — CHRIST'S AUTHORITY OVER THE
SABBATH. AS ITS LORD HE RECALLED IT FROM
PHARISAIC NEGLECT TO THE ORIGINAL PUR-
POSE OF ITS INSTITUTION BY THE CREATOR.
THE CASE OF THE DISCIPLES WHO PLUCKED
THE EARS OF CORN ON THE SABBATH. THE
WITHERED HAND HEALED ON THE SABBATH.

Concerning the Sabbath also I have this to
premise, that this question could not have
arisen, if Christ did not publicly proclaim =
the Lord of the Sabbath. Nor could there be
any discussion about His annulling ^ the Sab-
bath, if He had a right '* to annul it. More-
over, He would have the right, if He belonged
to the rival god; nor would it cause surprise
to any one that He did what it was right for
Him to do. Men's astonishment therefore
arose from their opinion that it was improper
for Him to proclaim the Creator to be God,
and yet to impugn His Sabbath. Now, that
we may decide these several points first, lest
we should be renewing them at every turn to
meet each argument of our adversary which
rests on some novel institutions of Christ, let
this stand as a settled point, that discussion
concerning the novel character of each insti-
tution ensued on this account, because as
nothing was as yet advanced by Christ touch-
ing any new deity, so discussion thereon was
inadmissible; nor could it be retorted, that
from the very novelty of each several institu-
tion another deity was clearly enough demon-
strated by Christ, inasmuch as it was plain
that novelty was not in itself a characteristic
to be wondered at in Christ, because it had
been foretold by the Creator. And it would
have been, of course, but right that a new*^
god should first be expounded, and his disci-
pline be introduced afterwards; . because it
would be the god that would impart authority
to the discipline, and not the discipline to the
god; except that (to be sure) it has happened
that Marcion acquired his very perverse
opinions not from a master, but his master
from his opinion ! All other points respecting
the Sabbath I thus rule. If Christ interfered


I See Ps. l.xxviii. 2.

aCircumferret.

3 Cur destrueret.

4Deberet.

S Institutione: or, teaching, perhaps.

C Alium.


with 7 the Sabbath, He simply acted after the
Creator's example; inasmuch as in the siege
of the city of Jericho the carrying around the
walls of the ark of the covenant for eiglit days
running, and therefore on a Sabbath-day,
actually^ annulled the Sabbath, by the Cre-
ator's command — according to the opinion of
those who think this of Christ />/ this passage
of St. Luke, in their ignorance that neither
Christ nor the Creator violated the Sabbath,
as we shall by and by show. And yet the
Sabbath was actually then broken ^ by Joshua,''*
so that the present charge might be alleged
also against Christ. But even if, as being not
the Christ of the Jews, He displayed a hatred
against the Jews' most solemn day. He was
only professedly following " the Creator, as
being His Christ, in this very hatred of the
Sabbath; for He exclaims by the mouth of
Isaiah: " Your new moons and your Sabbaths
my soul hateth." " Now, in whatever sense
these words were spoken, we .know that an
abrupt defence must, in a subject of this sort,
be used in answer to an abrupt challenge. I
shall now transfer the discussion to the very
matter in which the teaching of Christ seemed
to annul the Sabbath. The disciples had been
hungry; on that the Sabbath day they had
plucked some ears and rubbed them in their
hands; by thus preparing their food, they had
violated the holy day. Christ excuses them,
and became their accomplice in breaking the
Sabbath. The Pharisees bring the charge
against Him. Marcion sophistical ly inter-
prets the stages of the controversy (if I may
call in the aid of the truth of my Lord to ridi-
cule his arts), both in the scriptural record
and in Christ's purpose. '^ For from the Crea-
tor's Scripture, and from the purpose of
Christ, there is derived a colourable prece-
dent'*— as from the example of David, when
he went into the temple on the Sabbath, and
provided food by boldly breaking up the shew-
bread.'s Even he remembered that this privi-
lege (I mean the dispensation from fasting)
was allowed to the Sabbath from the very
beginning, when the Sabbath-day itself was
instituted. For although the Creator had
forbidden that the manna should be gathered
for two days. He yet permitted it on tiie one
occasion only of the day before the Sabbath,


7 Inter\'ertit.

8 Operatione.

9 ConciiRsum est sabbatum.
'o Per Jesum.

" Professus . . . sequebatur.
"Isa. i. 14.

'3 This obscure passajje runs thus in the original: ''Marcion
oaptat status controversiae (ut aliquid ludam cum mei Domini
veritate), scripti et voluntatis." Status is a technical word in
rhetoric, " Est qusestio qusc ex prima causarum confiictione na«-
citur." See Cicero, Topic, c. 25, Part. c. 29; and Qiiinctilian,
Instit. Rhetor, iii. 6. (Oehler).

14 Sumitur color.

'5 Luke vi. 1-4; \ Sam. xxi. 2-0.


I

i


CHAP. XII.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


;63


in order that the yesterday's provision of food
might free from fasting the feast of the fol-
lowing Sabbath-day. Good reason, therefore,
had tlie Lord for pursuing the same principle
in the annulling of the Sabbath (since that is
the word which men will use); good reason,
too, for expressing the Creator's will,' when
He bestowed the privilege of not fasting on
the Sabbath-day. In short. He would have
then and there ^ put an end to the Sabbath,
nay, to the Creator Himself, if He had com-
manded His disciples to fast on the Sabbath-
day, contrary to the intention ^ of the Scrip-
ture and of the Creator's will. But because
He did not directly defend'* His disciples,
but excuses them; because He interposes
human want, as if deprecating censure; be-
cause He maintains the honour of the Sabbath
as a day which is to be free from gloom rather
than from work;^ because he puts David and
his companions on a level with His own disci-
ples in their fault and their extenuation; be-
cause He is pleased to endorse^ the Creator's
indulgence; 7 because He is Himself good
according to His example — is He therefore
alien from the Creator ? Then the Pharisees
watch whether He would heal on the Sabbath-
day,^ that they might accuse Him — surely as
a violator of the Sabbath, not as the pro-
pounder of a new god; for perhaps I might be
content with insisting on all occasions on this
one point, that another Christ ^ is nowhere
proclaimed. The Pharisees, however, were in
utter error concerning the law of the Sabbath,
not observing that its terms were conditional,
when it enjoined rest from labour, making
certain distinctions of labour. For when it
says of the Sabbath-day, " In it thou shalt not
do any work of thine," '° by the word thine^^
it restricts the prohibition to human work —
which every one performs in his own employ-
ment or business — and not to divine work.
Now the work of healing or preserving is not
proper to man, but to God. So again, in the
law it says, " Thou shalt not do any manner
of work in it," '^ except what is to be done for
any soul, '3 that is to say, in the matter of de-


1 Affectum.

2 Tunc deinum.

3 Statum.

4 Non constanter tuebatur.

5 Non contristandi quam vacandi.

^[This adoption of an Americanism is worthy of passing no-
tice.]

7 Placet illi quia Creator indulsit.
^ Luke vi. 7.

9 That is, the Christ of another God.
'oEx. XX. 16

^' It is impossible to say where Tertullian got this reading.
Perhaps his LXX. copy might have had (in Ex. x;x. 10) : Ov
jroi^trei? kv avrji trav tpyov crov, instead of irv; every clause ending
in <7ou, which follows in that verse. No critical authority, how-
ever, now known warrants such a reading. [It is probably based
inferentially on verse 9, "all t/ty work."]
i=Ex. xii. 16.
'3 The LXX. of the latter clause of Ex. xii. 16 thus runs: nK'qv


livering the soul; '* because what is God's work
may be done by human agency for the salva-
tion of the soul. By God, however, would
that be done which the man Christ was to do,
for He was likewise God.'s Wishing, therefore,
to initiate them into this meaning of the law
by the restoration of the withered hand. He
inquires, "Is it lawful on the Sabbath-days to
do good, or not? to save life, or to destroy
it ? " '^ In order that He might, whilst allow-
ing that amount of work which He was about
to perform for a soul,'^ remind them what
works the law of the Sabbath forbade — even
human works; and what it enjoined — even
divine works, which might be done for the
benefit of any soul,'^ He was called " Lord of
the Sabbath," '9 because He maintained ^ the
Sabbath as His own institution. Now, even
if He had annulled the Sabbath, He would
have had the right to do so,^' as being its
Lord, (and) still more as He who instituted it.
But He did not utterly destroy it, although
its Lord, in order that it might henceforth be
plain that the Sabbath was not broken ''' by the
Creator, even at the time when the ark was
carried around Jericho. For that was really ^^^
God's work, which He commanded Himself,
and which He had ordered for the sake of the
lives of His servants when exposed to the
perils of war. Now, although He has in a
certain place expressed an aversion of Sab-
baths, by calling them jour Sadlf at/is, ^"^ reckon-
ing them as men's Sabbaths, not His own,
because they were celebrated without the fear
of God by a people full of iniquities, and lov-
ing God "with the lip, not the heart," ^s He
has yet put His own Sabbaths (those, that is,
which were kept according to His prescrip-
tion) in a different position; for by the same
prophet, in a later passage, ^^ He declared
them to be " true, and delightful, and inviola-
ble." Thus Christ did not at all rescind the
Sabbath: He kept the law thereof, and both
in the^ former case did a work which was
beneficial to the life of His disciples, for He
indulged them with the relief of food when
they were hungry, and in the present instance
cured the withered hand; in each case in-


oo-a 7roijjfljj<r«Tai jrao-jj <pvxr). Tertullian probably got this read-
ing from this clause, although the Hebrew is to this effect: " Save
that which every man (or, every soul) must eat," which the Vul-
gate renders: " Exceptis his, quae ad vescendum pertinent."

^4 Liberandae animae: perhaps saving life.

15 In salutem animae: or, for saving hfe.

'^ Luke vi. 9.

17 Pro anima : or, for a life.

18 Animae omni : or, any life,

19 Luke vi. 5.

20 Tuebatur.

21 Merito.

22 Destructum. We have, as has been most convenient, ren-
dered this word by annul, destroy break.

■^^ Et.

24 Isa. i. 13, 14.

25 Isa. xxix. 13.

26 Isa. Iviii. 13 and Ivi. 2.


M


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[1.,


timating by facts, " I came not to destroy, the
law, Init to fulfil it, "' although Marcion has
gagged - His mouth by this word.^ For even
in the case before us He fulfilled the law,
while interpreting its condition; Moreai'er, He
exhibits in a clear light the different kinds of
work, while doing what the law excepts from
the sacredness of the Sabbath^ ^«^/ while im-
parting to the Sabbath-day itself, which from
the beginning had been consecrated by the
benediction of the Father, an additional sanc-
tity by His own beneficent action. For He
furnished to this day divine safeguards,^ — a
course which* His adversary would have pur-
sued for some other days, to avoid honouring
the Creator's Sabbath, and restoring to the
Sabbath the works which were proper for it.
Since, in like manner, the prophet Elisha on
this day restored to life the dead son of the
Shunammite woman, ^ you see, O Pharisee,
and you too, O Marcion, how that it was
proper eynploymetit for the Creator's Sabbaths
of old ^ to do good, to save life, not to destroy
it; how that Christ introduced nothing new,
which was not after the example,^ the gentle-
ness, the mercy, and the prediction also of the
Creator, For in this very example He fulfils '°
the prophetic announcement of a specific heal-
ing: "The weak hands are strengthened,"
as were also " the feeble knees " " in the sick
of the palsy.

CHAP. XIII. — Christ's connection with the

CREATOR SHOWN. MANY QUOTATIONS OUT
OF THE OLD TESTAMENT PROPHETICALLY
BEAR ON CERTAIN EVENTS OF THE LIFE OF

JESUS SUCH AS HIS ASCENT TO PRAYING ON

THE MOUNTAIN; HIS SELECTION OF TWELVE
APOSTLES; HIS CHANGING SIMON's NAME TO
PETER, AND GENTILES FROM TYRE AND SIDON
RESORTING TO HIM.

Surely to Sion He brings good tidings, and
to Jerusalem peace and all blessings; He goes
up into a mountain, and there spends <i night
in prayer," and He is indeed heard by the
Father. Accordingly turn over the prophets,
and learn therefrom His entire course. '^
" Into the high mountain," says Isaiah, "get
Thee up, who bringest good tidings to Sion;


1 Matt. V. 17.

2 Obstriixit.

3 " Destroy "... It was hardly necessary for Oehler to para-
phrase our author's characteristically stronj? sentence by, " since
Marcion thought that he //<i</ gauged," etc.

4 In other words, " permits to be done on the Sabbath,"

5 Prsesidia.

^ Quod, not quee, as if in apposition with frasidia.

7 See 2 Kings iv. 23,

8 Olim.

9 Forma,

10 Reprsesentat.
U Isa. .XXXV. 3.
"Luke vi. 12,
i3 0rdine:n.


lift up Thy voice with strength, who bringest
good tidings to Jerusalem." "^ "They were
mightily '5 astonished at His doctrine; for He
was teaching as one who had power."'* And
again: " Therefore, my people shall know my
name in that day. ' ' What name does the prophet
inea?i, but Christ's? "That I am He that
doth speak — even I." "^ For it was He who
used to speak in the prophets — the Word, the
Creator's Son. " I am present, while it is the
hour, upon the mountains, as one that bring-
eth glad tidings of peace, as one that pub-
lisheth good tidings of good." '^ So one of
the twelve (minor prophets), Nahum: " For
behold upon the mountain the swift feet of
Him that bringeth glad tidings of peace."*'
Moreover, concerning the voice of His prayer
to the Father by night, the psalm manifestly
says: " O my God, I will cry in the day-time,
and Thou shalt hear; and in the night season,
and it shall not be in vain to me."=° In
another passage touching the same voice and
place, the psalm says: " I cried unto the Lord
with my voice, and He heard me out of His
holy mountain. ' ' " You have a representation
of the name; you have the action of the Evan-
gelizer; you have a mountain for the site;
and the night as the time; and the sound of
a voice; and the audience of the Father: you
have, (in short,) the Christ of the prophets.
But why was it that He chose twelve apostles,"
and not some other number ? In truth, =^3 I
might from this very point conclude^ of my
Christ, that He was foretold not only by the
words of prophets, but by the indications of
facts. For of this number I find figurative
hints up and down the Creator's dispensa-
tion's in the twelve springs of Elim;=^ in the
twelve gems of Aaron's priestly vestment;*^
and in the twelve stones appointed by Joshua
to be taken out of the Jordan, and set up for
the ark of the covenant. Now, the same
number of apostles was thus portended, as
if they were to be fountains and rivers which
should water the Gentile world, which was
formerly dry and destitute of knowledge (as
He says by Isaiah: " I will put streams in the
unwatered ground " "®); as if they were to be
gems to shed lustre upon the church's sacred


M Isa. xl. 9.

'S In vijrore. Or this phrase may qualify the noun thus:
were astonished at His doctrine, in its might,"
'^ Luke iv. 32.
17 Isa. lii. 6.

'^Our author's reading of Isa. lii. 7.
'9 Nahum i. 15.
20 Ps. xxii. 2.
2' Ps. iii. ^.
=2 Luke vi. 13-19.
=3Nae.

24 Interpretari.

25 Apud creatorem.

26 Num. xxxiii. 9,

27 Ex. xxviii. 13-21.

28 Isa. .xliii. 20.


They


CHAP. XIV.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION


365


robe, which Christ, the High Priest of the
Father, puts on; as if, also, they were to be
stones massive in their faith, which the true
Joshua took out of the laver of the Jordan,
and placed in the sanctuary of His covenant.
What equally good defence of such a number
has Marcion's Christ to show? It is impossi-
ble that anything can be shown to have been
done by him unconnectedly,' which cannot
be shown to have been done by my Christ in
connection (with preceding types). =" To him
will appertain the event ^ in whom is discov-
ered the preparation for the same.'^ Again,
He changes the name of Simon to Peter,5
inasmuch as the Creator also altered the
names of Abram, and Sarai, and Oshea, by
calling the latter Joshua, and adding a sylla-
ble to each of the former. But why Peter ? If
it was because of the vigour of his faith, there
were many solid materials which might lend
a name from their strength. Was it because
Christ was both a rock and a stone ? For we
read of His being placed "for a stone of
stumbling and for a rock of offence."^ I
omit the rest of the passage. ^ Therefore He
would fain^ impart to the dearest of His dis-
ciples a name which was suggested by one of
His own especial designations in figure; be-
cause it was, I suppose, more peculiarly fit
than a name which might have been derived
from no figurative description of Himself. ^
There come to Him from Tyre, and from
other districts even, a transmarine multitude.
This fact the psalm had in view: " And behold
tribes of foreign people, and Tyre, and the
people of the Ethiopians; they were there.
Sion is my mother, shall a man say; and in
her was born a man " (forasmuch as the God-
man was born), and He built her by the
Father's will; that you may know how Gen-
tiles then flocked to Him, because He was born
the God-man who was to build the church
according to the Father's will — even of other
races also. '° So says Isaiah too: "Behold,
these come from far; and these from the
north and from the west;" and these from the
land of the Persians."" Concerning whom
He says again: "Lift up thine eyes round
about, and behold, all these have gathered
themselves together." '^ And yet. again:


1 Simpliciter : i.e., simply^ or without relation to any types or
prophecies.

2 Non simpHciter.

3 Res.

4 Rei praeparatura.

5 Luke vi. 14. [Elucidation III.]

^ Isa. viii. 14 ; Rom. ix. 33 ; i Pet. ii. 8.

7 Caetera.

8 Affectavit.

9 De non suis : opposed to the de figuris suis pectiliariter.
[St. Peter was not the dearest of the Apostles though he was the
/oretnost.l

10 Ps. Ixxxvii. 4, 5, according to the Septuagint.

" Mari.

12 Isa. xlix. 12.

»3 Isa. xlix. 18.


" Thou seest these unknown and strange ones;
and thou wilt say in thine heart, Who hath
begotten me these ? But who hath brought
me up these ? And these, where have they
been?"'* Will such a Christ not be (the
Christ) of the prophets ? And what will be
the Christ of the Marcionites ? Since perver-
sion of truth is their pleasure, he could not be
(the Christ) of the prophets.

CHAP. XIV. — Christ's sermon on the mount.
IN manner and contents it so resembles

THE creator's DISPENSATIONAL WORDS AND
DEEDS. IT SUGGESTS THEREFORE THE CON-
CLUSION THAT JESUS IS THE CREATOR'S
CHRIST. THE BEATITUDES.

I. now come to those ordinary precepts of
His, by means of which He adapts the pe-
culiarity '5 of His doctrine to what I may call
His official proclamation as the Christ.'^
"Blessed are the needy" (for no less than
this is required for interpreting the word in
the Greek,''' "because theirs is the kingdom
of heaven."'^ Now this very fact, that He
begins with beatitudes, is characteristic of the
Creator, who used no other voice than that
of blessing either in the first fiat or the final
dedication of the universe: for " my heart,"
says He, " hath indited a very good word." '^
This will be that " very good word " of bless-
ing which is admitted to be the initiating prin-
ciple of the New Testament, after the example
of the Old. What is there, then, to wonder
at, if He entered on His vimistry with the
very attributes ^ of the Creator, who ever in
language of the same sort loved, consoled,
protected, a7id avenged the beggar, and the
poor, and the humble, and the widow, and the
orphan ? So that you may believe this pri-
vate bounty as it were of Christ to be a rivulet
streaming from the springs of salvation. In-
deed, I hardly know which way to turn amidst
so vast a wealth of ^^<?^ words like these; as
if I were m a forest, or a meadow, or an or-
chard of apples. I must therefore look out
for such matter as chance may present to me.^'

In the psalm he exclaims: "Defend the
fatherless and the needy; do justice to the
humble and the poor; deliver the poor, and
rid the needy out of the hand of the wicked. ' ' ==


14 Isa. xhx. 21.

15 Proprietatem.

16 The original runs thus: *' Venio nuncadordinarias sententias
ejus, perquas proprietatem doctrinae suae inducit ad edictuni. ut
ita dixerim, Christi." There is here an allusion to the edict of
the Roman praetor, that is, his public annoitnceincni, in which
he states (when entering on his office) the rules bv which he will
be guided in the administration of the same (see White and Riddle,
Latin Diet. s. v. Edictum).

'7 01 TTTwYOi, not 7reVT)Tes.

18 Luke VI. 20.

»9 Ps. xlv. I. [And see Vol. I. p. 213 supraJ]

20 Affectibus.

21 Prout incidit.
2= Ps. Ixxxii. 3, 4.


:66


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[bCX)K IV.


Similarly in the seventy-first Psalm : " In right-
eousness shall He judge the needy amongst
the people, and shall save the children of the
poor." ' And in the following words he says
of Christ: "All nations shall serve Him."''
Now David only reigned over the Jewish na-
tion, so that nobody can suppose that this was
spoken of David; whereas //<? had taken upon
Himself the condition of the poor, and
such as were oppressed with want, " Because
He should deliver the needy out of the hand
of the mighty man; He shall spare the needy
and the poor, and shall deliver the souls of
the poor. From usury and injustice shall He
redeem their souls, and in His sight shall
their name be honoured." 3 Again: " The
wicked shall be turned into hell, even all the
nations that forget God; because the needy
shall not alway be forgotten; the endurance
of the poor shall not perish for ever." -* Again:
" Who is like unto the Lord our God, who
dwelleth on high, and yet looketh on the humble
things that are in heaven and on earth ! — who
raiseth up the needy from off the ground, and
out of the dunghill exalteth the poor; that He
may set him with the princes of His people," ^
that is, in His own kingdom. And likewise
earlier, in the book of Kings,^ Hannah the
mother of Samuel gives glory to God in these
words: " He raiseth the poor man from the
ground, and the beggar, that He may set him
amongst the princes of His people (that is, in
His own kingdom), and on thrones of glory "
(even royal ones).^ And by Isaiah how He
inveighs against the oppressors of the needy !
"What mean ye that ye set fire to my vine-
yard, and that the spoil of the poor is in your
houses ? Wherefore do ye beat my people to
pieces, and grind the face of the needy?" ^
And again: " Woe unto them that decree un-
righteous decrees; for in their decrees they
decree wickedness, turning aside the needy
from judgment, and taking away their rights
from the poor of my people." ' These right-
eous judgments He requires for the father-
less also, and the widows, as well as for con-
solation " to the very needy themselves. " Do
justice to the fatherless, and deal justly with
the widow; and come, let us be reconciled,"
saith the Lord." " To him, for whom in every


' Ps. Ixxii. 4.
aPs. Ixxii. II.
3 Ps. Ixxii. 12, 13, 14.
4Ps. ix. 17, 18.
5 Ps. cxiii. 5-8.

6 The books of "Samuel" were also called the books of
" Kings."

7 I Sam. 11. 8.
8Isa. iii. 14, ^5-
9lsa. X. I, 2.
loSolatii.

" Tertullian seems to have read SiaWaxStofuty instead of 8to-
AtX^*^*^*"' ^^' "'" ^^'**<"' together, in his LXX.
"Isa. i. 17, 18.


Stage of lowliness there is provided so much
of the Creator's compassionate regard, shall
be given that kingdom also which is promised
by Christ, to whose merciful compassion be-
long, and for a great while have belonged, '^
those to whom the promise is made. For
even if you suppose that the promises of the
Creator were earthly, but that Christ's are
heavenly, it is quite clear that heaven has been
as yet the property of no other God whatever,
than Him who owns the earth also; quite clear
that the Creator has given even the lesser
promises (of earthly blessing), in order that
I may more readily believe Him concerning
His greater promises (of heavenly blessings)
also, than (Marcion's god), who has never
given proof of his liberality by any preceding
bestowal of minor blessings. " Blessed are
they that hunger, for they shall be filled." '*
I might connect this clause with the former
one, because none but the poor and needy
suffer hunger, if the Creator had not specially
designed that the promise of a similar bless-
ing should serve as a preparation for the gos-
pel, that so men might know it to be His.'s
For thus does He say, by Isaiah, concerning
those whom He was about to call from the
ends of the earth — that is, the Gentiles: " Be-
hold, they shall come swiftly with speed:"'*
swiftly^ because hastening towards the fulness
of the times; with speedy because unclogged
by the weights of the ancient law. They shall
neither hunger nor thirst. Therefore they
shall be filled^ — a promise which is made to
none but those who hunger and thirst. And
again He says: " Behold, my servants shall
be filled, but ye shall be hungry; behold, my
servants shall drink, but ye shall be thirsty." '^
As for these oppositions, we shall see whether
they are not premonitors of Christ.'^ Mean-
while the promise of fulness to the hungry is
a provision of God the Creator. " Blessed are
they that weep, for they shall laugh." '» Turn
again to the passage of Isaiah: " Behold, my
servants shall e.xult with joy, but ye shall be
ashamed; behold, my servants shall be glad,
but ye shall cry for sorrow of heart." =° And
recognise these oppositions also in the dispen-
sation of Christ. Surely gladness and joyous
exultation is promised to those who are in an
opposite condition — to the sorrowful, and sad,
and anxious. Just as it is said in the 125th
Psalm: " They who sow in tears shall reap in


joy.


Moreover, laughter is as mjch an


■3 Tamdudum pertinent.

'4 Luke vi. 21.

»5 In evangelii scilicet sui praestructionem.

"5 Isa. V. 26.

'7 Isa. Ixv. 13.

■'' An Christo prseministrentur,

'9 Luke vi. 21.

20 Isa. Ixv. 13, 14.

2' Ps. cxxvi. 5.


CHAP. XV.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


367


accessory to the exulting and glad, as weeping
is to the sorrowful and grieving. Therefore
the Creator, in foretelling matters for laughter
and tears, was the first who said that those
who mourned should laugh. Accordingly,
He who began (His course) with consolation
for the poor, and the humble, and the hun-
gry, and the weeping, was at once eager' to
represent Himself as Him whom He had
pointed out by the mouth of Isaiah: "The
Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because He
hath anointed me to preach good tidings unto
the poor. " ^ " Blessed are the needy, because
theirs is the kingdom of heaven." 3 "He
hath sent me to bind up the broken-heart-
ed."'* "Blessed are they that hunger, for
they shall be filled." s "To comfort all that
mourn." ^ " Blessed are they that weep, for
they shall laugh." ^ "To give unto them
that mourn in Sion, beauty (or glory) for
ashes, and the oil of joy for mourning, and
the garment of praise for the spirit of heavi-
ness."^ Now since Christ, as soon as He
entered on His course,^ fulfilled such a min-
istration as this, He is either. Himself, He
who predicted His own coming to do all this;
or else if he is not yet come who predicted
this, the charge to Marcion's Christ must be
a ridiculous one (although I should perhaps
add a necessary'" one), which bade him say,
" Blessed shall ye be, when men shall hate
you, and shall reproach you, and shall east
out your name as evil, for the Son of man's
sake."" In this declaration there is, no
doubt, an exhortation to patience. Well,
what did the Creator say otherwise by Isaiah ?
" Fear ye not the reproach of men, nor be di-
minished by their contempt."" What re-
proach ? what contempt ? That which was to
be incurred for the sake of the Son of man.
What Son of man ? He who (is come) accord-
ing to the Creator's will. Whence shall we
get our proof? From the very cutting off,
which was predicted against Him; as when
He says by Isaiah to the Jews, who were the
instigators of hatred against Him: " Because
of you, my name is blasphemed amongst the
Gentiles; "'3 and in another passage: "Lay
the penalty on''* Him who surrenders 's His
own life, who is held in contempt by the Gen-


' Oestivit.
2lsa. Ixi. I.
3 Luke vi. 20.
4lsa. Ixi. I.

5 Luke vi. 21.

6 Isa. Ixi. 2.

7 Luke vi. 21.
^ Isa. Ixi. 3.

9 Statim admissus,

'0 Said ia irony, as if Marcion's Christ deserved the rejection.
" Luke vi. 22.
•2 His reading of Isa. li. 7.
13 Isa. Hi. 5.
'4 Sancite.
'5 Circumscribit,


tiles, whether servants or magistrates."'^
Now, since hatred was predicted against that
Son of man who has His mission from the
Creator, whilst the Gospel testifies that the
name of Christians, as derived from Christ,
was to be hated for the Son of man's sake,
because He is Christ, it determines the point
that that was the Son of man in the matter of
hatred who came according to the Creator's
purpose, and against whom the hatred was
predicted. And even if He had not yet come,
the hatred of His name which exists at the
present day could not in any case have possi-
bly preceded Him who was to bear the name.'^
But He has both suffered the penalty '^ in our
presence, and surrendered His life, laying it
down for our sakes, and is held in contempt
by the Gentiles. And He who was born (into
the world) will be that very Son of man on
whose account our name also is rejected.

CHAP. XV. SERMON ON THE MOUNT CONTIN-
UED. ITS WOES IN STRICT AGREEMENT WITH
THE creator's DISPOSITION. MANY QUOTA-
TIONS OUT OF THE OLD TESTAMENT IN PROOF
OF THIS.

"In the like manner," says He,'^ "did
their fathers unto the prophets." What a
turncoat^ is J/<a:m^;^/'j- Christ ! Now the de-
stroyer, now the advocate of the prophets !
He destroyed them as their rival, by convert-
ing their disciples; he took up their cause as
their friend, by stigmatizing^' their persecu-
tors. But,=^ in as far as the defence of the
prophets could not be consistent in the Christ
of Marcion, who came to destroy them; in so
far is it becoming to the Creator's Christ that
He should stigmatize those who persecuted
the prophets, for He in all things accom-
plished their predictions. Again, it is more
characteristic of the Creator to upbraid sons
with their fathers' sins, than it is of that god
who chastizes no man for even his own mis-
deeds. But you will say. He cannot be re-
garded as defending the prophets simply be-
cause He wished to affirm the iniquity of the
Jews for their impious dealings with their own
prophets. Well, then, in this case,^^ no sin
ought to have been charged against the Jews:
they were rather deserving of praise and ap-
probation when they maltreated =''» those whom


16 Famulis et magistratibus. It is uncertain what passage this
quotation represents. It sounds like some of the clauses of Isa.
liii.

17 Personam nominis.

18 Sancitur.

19 Luke vi. 26.

20 Versipellem. An indignant exclamation on Marcion's Christ.

21 Suggillans.

22 Porro.

23 Hie.

24 Suggillaverunt. This is Oehler's emendation ; the common
reading mjiguraverunt.


368


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book IV.


the absolutely good god of Marcion, after so
long a time, bestirred himself' to destroy. I
suppose, however, that by this time he had
ceased to be the absolutely good god;' he
had now sojourned a considerable while even
with the Creator, and was no longer (like) the
god of Epicurus 3 purely and simply. For
see how he condescends * to curse, and proves
'himself capable of taking offence and feeling
anger ! He actually pronounces a woe! But
a doubt is raised against us as to the import
of this word, as if it carried with it less the
sense of a curse than of an admonition.
Where, however, is the difference, since even
an admonition is not given without the sting
of a threat, especially when it is embittered
with a luoe ? Moreover, both admonition and
threatening will be the resources of him^ who
knows how to feel angry. For no one will for-
bid the doing of a thing with an admonition
or a threat, except him who will inflict punish-
ment for the doing of it. No one would inflict
punishment, except him who was susceptible
of anger. Others, again, admit that the word
implies a curse; but they will have it that
Christ pronounced the woe, not as if it were
His own genuine feeling, but because the
woe is from the Creator, and He wanted to
set forth to them the severity of the Creator,
in order that He might the more commend
His own long-suffering^ in His beatitudes.
Just as if it were not competent to the Cre-
ator, in the pre-eminence of both His attributes
as the good God and Judge, that, as He had
made clemency ^ the, preamble of His bene-
diction so He should place severity in the
sequel of His curses; thus fully developing
His discipline in both directions, both in
following out the blessing and in providing
against the curse. ^ He had already said of
old, " Behold, I have set before you blessing
and cursing." 9 Which statement was really
a presage of '° this temper of the gospel. Be-
sides, what sort of being is that who, to in-
sinuate a belief in his own goodness, invidious-
ly contrasted " with it the Creator's severity?
Of little worth is the recommendation which
has for its prop the defamation of another.
And yet by thus setting forth the severity of
the Creator, he, in fact, affirmed Him to be
an object of fear." Now if He be an object
of fear. He is of course more worthy of being


1 Motus est.

2 Deus optimus.

3 That is, apathetic, inert, and careless about human afiairs.

4 Demutat.

5 Ejus erunt.
^Sufferentiam.

7 Benignitatem.

8 Ad maledictionen prxtavendam.

9 Deut. XXX. i^.
10 Portendebat in.
*' Opposuit.

" Timendum.


obeyed than slighted; and thus Marcion's
Christ begins to teach favourably to the Crea-
tor's interests. '3 Then, on the admission above
mentioned, since the woe which has regard to
the rich is the Creator's, it follows that it is
not Christ, but the Creator, who is angry with
the rich; while Christ approves of '•'the incen-
tives of the rich 's — I mean, their pride, their
pomp,'^ their love of the world, and their con-
tempt of God, owing to which they deserve
the woe of the Creator. But how happens it
that the reprobation of the rich does not pro-
ceed from the same God who had just before
expressed approbation of the poor? There is
nobody but reprobates the opposite of that
which he has approved. If, therefore, there
be imputed to the Creator the woe pronounced
against the rich, there must be claimed for
Him also the promise of the blessing upon the
poor; and thus the entire work of the Creator
devolves on Christ. — If to Marcion's god
there be ascribed the blessing of the poor, he
must also have imputed to him the maledic-
tion of the rich; and thus will he become the
Creator's equal, '^ both good and judicial; nor
will there be left any room for that distinction
whereby two gods are made; and when this
distinction is removed, there will remain the
verity which pronounces the Creator to be the
one only God. Since, therefore, ^'"woe" is
a word indicative o/ malediction, or of some
unusually austere '^ exclamation; and since it
is by Christ uttered against the rich, I shall
have to show that the Creator is also a de-
spiser '^ of the rich, as I have shown Him to
be the defender =^ of the poor, in order that I
may prove Christ to be on the Creator's side
in this matter, even when He enriched Solo-
mon." But with respect to this man, since,
when a choice was left to him, he preferred
asking for what he knew to be well-pleasing"
to God — even wisdom — he further merited the
attainment of the riches, which he did n<
prefer. The endowing of a man indeed witl
riches, is not an incongruity to God, for bj
the help of riches even rich men are comfortec
and assisted; moreover, by them many
work of justice and charity is carried out.
But yet there are serious faults =" which ac-1
company riches; and it is because of these]
that woes are denounced on the rich, even in
the Gospel. " Ye have received," says He,
*' your consolation; " "^ that is, of course, frony.


13 Creatori docere.
M Ratas habct.
'5 Divitum causas.
16 Gloriam.
'7 Erit par creatoris.
>8 Austerioris.
19 Aspernatorem.
30 Advocatorem
2« 1 Kings iii. 5-13.

22 Vitia. -

23 Luke vi. 24. [See Southey's JFrj/o', on " Riches," vol. li. p.3io-/


1


CHAP. XV.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


369


their riches, in the pomps and vanities of the
world which these purchase for them. Ac-
cordingly, in Deuteronomy, Moses says:
" Lest, when thou hast eaten and art full, and
hast built goodly houses, and when thy herds
and thy flocks multiply, as well as thy silver
and thy gold, thine heart be then lifted up,
and thou forget the Lord thy God."' In
similar terms, when king Hezekiati became
proud of his treasures, and gloried in them
rather than in God before those who had come
on an embassy from Babylon,^ (the Creator)
breaks forth ^ against him by the mouth of
Isaiah: " Behold, the days come when all that
is in thine house, and that which thy fathers
have laid up in store, shall be carried to Baby-
lon."^ So by Jeremiah likewise did He say:
"Let not the rich man glory in his riches;
but let him that glorieth even glory in the
Lord." 5 Similarly against the daughters of
Sion does He inveigh by Isaiah, when they
were haughty through their pomp and the
abundance of their riches,^ just as in another
passage He utters His threats against the
proud and noble: " Hell hath enlarged her-
self, and opened her mouth, and down to it
shall descend the illustrious, and the great,
and the rich (this shall be Christ's 'woe to
the rich'); and man^ shall be humbled,"
even he that exalts himself with riches; " and
the mighty man^ shall be dishonoured," even
ihe who is mighty from* his wealth. ^ Con-
cerning whom He says again: " Behold, the
Lord of hosts shall confound the pompous to-
gether with their strength: those that are lifted
up shall be hewn down, and such as are lofty
shall fall by the sword." '° And who are these
but the rich ? Because they have indeed re-
ceived their consolation, glory, and honour,
and a lofty position from their wealth. In
Ps. xlviii. He also turns off our care from these,
and says: "Be not thou afraid when one is
made rich, and when his glory is increased:
for when he shall die, he shall carry nothing
away; nor shall his glory descend along with
him."" So also in Ps. Ixi.: " Do not desire
riches; and if they do yield you their lustre,"
do not set your heart upon them." '^ Lastly,
this very same woe is pronounced of old by
Amos against the rich, who also abounded in
delights. "Woe unto them," says he, "who


Deut. viii. 12-14.

Tertullian says, ex Perside.

Insilit.

Isa. xxxix. 6.

Jer. ix. 23, 24.

Isa. iii. 16-24.

Homo : " the mean man," A. v.

Vir.

Isa. V. 14.

Isa. X. 33.

Ps. xlix. 16, 17.

Relucent.

Ps. Ixii. II.

24


sleep upon beds of ivory, and deliciously
stretch themselves upon their couches; who
eat the kids from the flocks of the goats, and
sucking calves from the flocks of the heifers,
while they chant to the sound of the viol; as
if they thought they should continue long, and
were not fleeting; who drink their refined
wines, and anoint themselves with the costli-
est ointments." "* Therefore, even if I could
do nothing else than show that the Creator
dissuades men from riches, without at the
same time first condemning the rich, in the
very same terms in which Christ also did, no
one could doubt that, from the same authority,
there was added a commination against the
rich in that woe of Christ, from whom also
had first proceeded the dissuasion against the
material sin of these persons, that is, their
riches. For such commination is the neces-
sary sequel to such a dissuasive. He inflicts
a woe also on "the full, because they shall
hunger; on those too which laugh now, because
they shall .mourn." 's To these will corre-
spond these opposites which occur, as we have
seen above, in the benedictions of the Crea-
tor: " Behold, my servants shall be full, but
ye shall be hungry" — even because ye have
been filled; "behold, my servants shall re-
joice, but ye shall be ashamed"'^ — even ye
who shall mourn, who now are laughing. For
as it is written in the psalm, " They who sow
in tears shall reap in joy," '^ so does it run in
the Gospel: They who sow in laughter, that
is, in joy, shall reap in tears. These princi-
ples did the Creator lay down of old; and
Christ has renewed them, by simply bringing
them into prominent view,'^ not by making
any change in them. "Woe unto you, when
all men shall speak well of you ! for so did
their fathers to the false prophets. "'» With
equal stress does the Creator, by His prophet
Isaiah, censure those who seek after human
flattery and praise: " O my people, they who
call you happy mislead you, and disturb the
paths of your feet."^ In another passage
He forbids all implicit trust in man, and like-
wise in the applause of man; as by the proph-
et Jeremiah: "Cursed be the man that
trusteth in man."^' Whereas in Ps. cxvii. it
is said: "It is better to trust in the Lord than
to put confidence in man; it is better to trust
in the Lord than to place hope in princes." "^
Thus everything which is caught at by men is
adjured by the Creator, down to their good


'4 Amos vi. \-(>.
»5 Luke vi. 25.
16 Isa. Ixv. 13.
■7 Ps. cxxvi. 5.

18 Distinguendo.

19 Luke vi. 26.

20 Isa. iii. 12.

21 Jer. xvii. 5.

« Ps. cxviii. 8, 9.


370


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book IV.


words.' It is as much His property to con-
demn the praise and flattering words bestowed
on the false prophets by their fathers, as to
condemn their vexatious and persecuting
treatment of the (true) prophets. As the in-
juries suffered by the prophets could not be
imputed - to their own God, so the applause
bestowed on the false prophets could not
have been displeasing to any other god but
the God of the /rue prophets.

CHAP. XVI. — THE PRECEPT OF LOVING ONE's
ENEMIES. IT IS AS MUCH TAUGHT IN THE
creator's SCRIPTURES OF THE OLD TESTA-
MENT AS IN Christ's sermon, the lex

TALIONIS OF MOSES ADMIRABLY EXPLAINED
IN CONSISTENCY WITH THE KINDNESS AND
LOVE WHICH JESUS CHRIST CAME TO PRO-
CLAIM AND ENFORCE IN BEHALF OF THE CRE-
ATOR. SUNDRY PRECEPTS OF CHARITY EX-
PLAINED.

*' But I say unto you which .hear" (dis-
playing here that old injunction, of the Crea-
tor: " Speak to the ears of those who lend
them to you " 3), "Love your enemies, and
bless * those which hate you, and pray for them
which calumniate you."s These commands
the Creator included in one precept by His
prophet Isaiah: "Say, Ye are our brethren,
to those who hate you.'"* For if they who
are our enemies, and hate us, and speak evil
of us, and calumniate us, are to be called our
brethren, surely He did in effect bid us bless
them that hate us, and pray for them who
calumniate us, when He instructed us to
reckon them as brethren. Well, but Christ
plainly teaches a new kind of patience, ^ when
He actually prohibits the reprisals which the
Creator permitted in requiring "an eye for
an eye,^ and a tooth for a tooth," ' and bids
us, on the contrary, "to him who smiteth us
on the one cheek, to offer the other also, and
to give up our coat to him that taketh away
our cloak."'" No doubt these are supple-
mentary additions by Christ, but they are
quite in keeping with the teaching of the
Creator. And therefore this question must
at once be determined," Whether the disci-


» Nedum benedictionem.

2 Non pertinuissent ad.

3 2 Estfras xv. i, and comp. Luke vi. 27, 28.

4 Benedicite. St. Luke's word, however, is KoAwt nottlrt, '* do
good."

5 Calumniantur. St. Luke's word applies to injury of speech
as well as of act.

6 Isa. Ixvi. 5.

7 " We have here the sense of Marcion's objection. I do not
suppose Tertullian quotes his very words." — Le Priei'R.

^Le Prieur refers to a similar passage in TertuUian's De
Patientin, chap. vi. Oehler quotes an eloquent passage in illus-
tration from Valerianus Episc. Horn. xiii.
9 Ex. XXI. 24. ,

>o Luke vi. 29.
II Renuntiandum est. '


pline of patience be enjoined by " the Crea-
tor? When by Zechariah He commanded,
" Let none of you imagine evil against his
brother^'' ^^ He did not expressly include his
neighbour; but then in another passage He
says, " Let none of you imagine evil in your
hearts against his neighbour.'' ^* He who
counselled that an injury should be forgotten,
was still more likely to counsel the patient
endurance of it. But then, when He said,
" Vengeance is mine, and I will repay," '5 He
thereby teaches that patience calmly waits for
the infliction of vengeance. Therefore, inas-
much as it is incredible '^ that the same (God)
should seem to require " a tooth for a tooth
and an eye for an eye," in return for an in-
jury, who forbids not only all reprisals, but
even a revengeful thought or recollection of
an injury, in so far does it become plain to
us in what sense He required " an eye for an
eye and a tooth for a tooth," — not, indeed,
for the purpose of permitting the repetition
of the injury by retaliating it, which it virtu-
ally prohibited when it forbade vengeance;
but for the purpose of restraining the injury
in the first instance, which it had forbidden
on pain of retaliation or reciprocity; '^ so that
every man, in view of the permission to inflict,
a second (or retaliatory) injury, might abstain
from the commission of the first (or provoca-
tive) wrong. For He knows how much more
easy it is to represf-violence by the prospect
of retaliation, than by the promise of (indefi-
nite) vengeance. Both results, however, it
was necessary to provide, in consideration of
the nature and the faith of men, that the man
who believed in God might expect vengeance
from God, while he who had no faith (to re-
strain him) might fear the laws which pre-
scribed retaliation.'^ This purpose '' of the
law, which it was difficult to understand,
Christ, as the Lord of the Sabbath and of the
law, and of all the dispensations of the Father,
both revealed and made intelligible, =° when
He commanded that " the other cheek should
be offered (to the smiter)," in order that He
might the more effectually extinguish all re
prisals of an injury, which the law had wished;
to prevent by the method of retaliation, (and)
which most certainly revelation" had mani-
festly restricted, both by prohibiting the
memory of the wrong, and referring the ven-
geance thereof to God. Thus, whatever (new


I


" Penes.

'3 Zech. vii. lo.

'4 Zech. viii. 17.

'5 Deut. xxxii. 35*, comp. Rom. xii. 19 and Heb. x. 30.

»6 Fidem non capit.

17 Talione, opposito.

»8 Leges talionis. [Judicial, not personal, reprisals.]

»9 Voluntatem.

=0 Compotem facit. That is, says Oehler, intclleciits sui,

2' Prophetia.


li


CHAP. XVI.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


Z7^


provision) Clirist introduced, He did it not in
opposition to the law, luit rather in further-
ance of it, without at all impairing the pre-
scription ' of the Creator. If, therefore," one
looks carefully 3 into the very grounds for
which patience is enjoined (and that to such
a full and complete extent), one finds that it
cannot stand if it is not the precept of the
Creator, who promises vengeance, who pre-
sents Himself as the judge (in the case). If
it were not so,'* — if so vast a weight of patience
— which is to refrain from giving blow for
blow; w^hich is to offer the other cheek; which
is not only not to return railing for railing, but
contrariwise blessing; and which, so far from
keeping the coat, is to give up the cloak also
— is laid upon me by one who means not to
help me, — (then all I can say is,) he has
taught me patience to no purpose, s because
he shows me no reward to his precept — I
mean no fruit of such patience. There is re-
venge which he ought to have permitted me
to take, if he meant not to inflict it himself;
if he did not give me that permission, then he
should himself have inflicted it;^ since it is
for the interest of discipline itself that an in-
jury should be avenged. For by the fear of
vengeance all iniquity is curbed. But if li-
cence is allowed to it without discrimination, ^
it will get the mastery — it will put out (a man's)
both eyes; it will knock out^ every tooth in
the safety of its impunity. This, however,
is (the principle) of your good and simply
beneficent god — to do a wrong to patience,
to open the door to violence, to leave the
righteous undefended, and the wicked unre-
strained ! " Give to every one that asketh of
thee "9 — to the indigent of course, or rather
to the indigent more especially, although to
the affluent likewise. But in order that no
man may be indigent, you have in Deuterono-
my a provision commanded by the Creator to
the creditor. '° " There shall not be in thine
hand an indigent man; so that the Lord thy
God shall bless thee with blessings,"" — thee
meaning the creditor to whom it was owing
that the man was not indigent. But more
than this. To one who does not ask. He bids
a gift to be given. " Let there be, not," He
says, " a poor man in thine hand; " in other
Avords, see that there be not, so far as thy will
can prevent;" by which command, too. He

' Disciplinas : or, "lessons."

^Denique.

3Considerem, or, as some of the editions have it, consideremus.

♦ Alioquin.

5 In vacuum.

*> Praestare, i.e. debuerat praestare.

/ Passim.

^ Excitatura.

9 Luke vi. 30.
10 Datori.

^i The author's reading of Deut. xv. 4.
»2Cura ultro ne sit.


all the more strongly by inference requires^
men to give to him that asks, as in the following
words also: " If there be among you a poor
man of thy brethren, thou shalt not turn away
thine heart, nor shut thine hand from thy
poor brother. But thou shalt open thine hand
wide unto him, and shalt surely lend him as
much as he wanteth. ' ' '* Loans are not usually
given, except to such as ask for them. On
this subject of lending,'s however, more here-
after.'^ Now, should any one wish to argue
that the Creator's precepts extended only to
a man's brethren, but Christ's to all that ask,
so as to make the latter a new and different
precept, (I have to reply) that one rule only
can be made out of those principles, which
show the law of the Creator to be repeated in
Christ. '7 For that is not a different thing
which Christ enjoined to be done towards all
men, from that which the Creator prescribed
in favour of a man's brethren. For although
that is a greater charity, which is shown to
strangers, it is yet not preferable to that '®
which was previously due to one's neighbours.
For what man will be able to bestow the love
(which proceeds from knowledge of character,'^
upon strangers ? Since, however, the second
step^ in charity is towards strangers, while
the first is towards one's neighbours, the
second step will belong to him to whom the
first also belongs, more fitly than the second
will belong to him who owned no first." Ac-
cordingly, the Creator, when following the
course of nature, taught in the first instance
kindness to neighbours,"^ intending afterwards
to enjoin it towards strangers; and when fol-
lowing the method of His dispensation, He
limited charity first to the Jews, but afterw^ards
extended it to the whole race of mankind. So
long, therefore, as the mystery of His goziern-
ment""^ was confined to Israel, He properly
commanded that pity should be shown only to
a man's brethren; but when Christ had given
to Him "the Gentiles for His heritage, and
the ends of the earth for His possession,"
then began to be accomplished what was said
by Hosea: " Ye are not my people, who were
my people; ye have not obtained mercy, who


13 Praijudicat.

14 Deut. XV. 7, 8.

15 De fenore.

16 Below, in the next chapter.

17 This obscure passage runs thus: " Immo unum erit ex his per
quae lex Creatoris erit in Christo."

18 Prior ea.

19 This is the idea, apparently, of TertuUian's question: " Quis
enim poterit diligere extraneos? " But a different turn is given
to the sense in the older reading of the passage : Quis enim non
diligens proximos poterit diligere extraneos ? " For who that
loveth not his neighbours will be able to love strangers?" The
inserted words, however, were inserted conjecturally by Fulvius
Ursinus without MS. authority.

20 Gradus.

21 Cujus non extitit primus

22 I n proximos-

23 Sacramentum.


Zl'2-


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book IV.


once obtained mercy " ' — that is, the (Jewish)
nation. Thenceforth Christ extended to all
men the law of His Father's compassion, ex-
cepting none from His mercy, as He omitted
none in His invitation. So that, whatever
was the ampler scope of His teaching, He
received it all in His heritage of the nations.
"And as ye would that men should do to
you, do ye also to them likewise." = In this
command is no doubt implied its counterpart:
*' And as ye would not that men should do to
you, so should ye also not do to them like-
wise." Now, if this were the teaching of the
new and previously unknown and not yet fully
proclaimed deity, who had favoured me with
no instruction beforehand, whereby I might
first learn what I ought to choose or to refuse
for myself, and to do to others what I would
wish done to myself, not doing to them what
I should be unwilling to have done to myself,
it would certainly be nothing else than the
chance-medley of my own sentiments ^ which
he would have left to me, binding me to no
proper rule of wish or action, in order that I
might do to others what I would like for my-
self, or refrain from doing to others what I
should dislike to have done to myself. For
he has not, in fact, defined what I ought to
wish or not to wish for myself as well as for
others, so that I shape my conduct ^ accord-
ing to the law of my own will, and have it in
my powers not to render^ to another what I
would like to have rendered to myself — love,
obedience, consolation, protection, and such
like blessings; and in like manner to do to
another what I should be unwilling to have
done to myself — violence, wrong, insult,
deceit, and evils of like sort. Indeed, the
heathen who have not been instructed by God
act on this incongruous liberty of the wiirand
the conduct. 7 For although good and evil are
severally known by nature, yet life is not there-
by spent ^ under the discipline of God, which
alone at last teaches men the proper liberty of
their will and action in faith, as in the fear of
God. The god of Marcion, therefore, al-
though specially revealed, was, in spite of his
revelation, unable to publish any summary of
the precept in question, which had hitherto
been so confined,' and obscure, and dark, and
admitting of no ready interpretation, except
according to my own arbitrary thought, '° be-
cause he had provided no previous discrimina-


» The sense rather than the words of Hos. i. 6, 9.

= Luke vi. 31.

sPassivitatem sentcntise meae.

4 Parem factum.

5 Possim.
^Praestare.

7 Hac inconvenientia voluntatis et facti. Will and action.

8 Non agitur.
9Strictum.

»o Pro meo arbitrio.


tion in the matter of such a precept. This,
however, was not the case with my God, for "
He always and everywhere enjoined that the
poor, and the orphan, and the widow should
be protected, assisted, refreshed; thus by
Isaiah He says: " Deal thy bread to the hun-
gry, and them that are houseless bring into
thine house; when thou seest the naked, cover
him."" By Ezekiel also He thus describes
the just man: " His bread will he give to the
hungry, and the naked will he cover with a
garment."'^ That teaching was even then a
sufficient inducement to me to do to others
what I would that they should do unto me.
Accordingly, when He uttered such denuncia-
tions as, "Thou shalt do no murder; thou
shalt not commit adultery; thou shalt not
steal; thou shalt not bear false witness," '* —
He taught me to refrain from doing to others
what I should be unwilling to have done to
myself; and therefore the precept developed
in the Gospel will belong to Him alone, who
anciently drew it up, and gave it distinctive
point, and arranged it after the decision of
His own teaching, and has now reduced it,
suitably to its importance, 's to a compendious
formula, because (as it was predicted in an-
other passage) the Lord — that is, Christ —
"was to make (or utter) a concise word on
earth." '^

CHAP. XVII. CONCERNING LOAN§. PROHIBI-
TION OF USURY AND THE USURIOUS SPIRIT.
THE LAW PREPARATORY TO THE GOSPEL IN
ITS PROVISIONS; SO IN THE PRESENT IN-
STANCE. ON REPRISALS. CHRIST'S TEACH-
ING THROUGHOUT PROVES HIM TO BE SENT
BY THE CREATOR.

And now, on the subject of a loan, when
He asks, " And if ye lend to them of whom
ye hope to receive, what thank have ye?"'^
compare with this the following words of Eze-
kiel, in which He says of the before-men-
tioned just man, " He hath not given his.
money upon usury, nor will he take any in-
crease " '^ — meaning the redundance of inter-
est,'9 which is usury. The first step was to
eradicate the fruit of the money lent,=^ the
more easily to accustom a man to the loss,
should it happen, of the money itself^ the in-


»» At enim. The Greek iAAa yap.

>alsa. Iviii. 7.

'3 Ezek. xviii. 7.

uEx. XX. 13-16.

iSMerito. . . ,.

>6" Recisum sermonem facturus in terns Dominus. This
reading of Isa. x. 23 is very unlike the original, but (as frequently
happens in TertuUian) is close upon the Septuagint version : Ort
Koyov avvTtriJLriniyov Kwpios »roiij(r«i iv Tji ot.icovfi.ivjf oAjj. [Rom.

17 Luke vi. 34. [Bossuet, Trnit^ de tusure, Opp. ix. 48.]
'8 Ezek. xviii. 8. [Huet, R^gne Social, etc., p. 334. Paris, 1858. J
'9 Literally, what redounds to the loan.
ao Fructum fenoris : the interest.


CHAP. XVII.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


Z7Z


terest of which he had learnt to lose. Now
this, we affirm, was the function of the law as
preparatory to the gospel. It was engaged
in forming the faith of such as would learn,'
by gradual stages, for the perfect light of the
Christian discipline, through the best pre-
cepts of which it was capable,^ inculcating a
benevolence which as yet expressed itself but
falteringly.3 For in the passage of Ezekicl
quoted above He says, *' And thou shalt re-
store the pledge of the loan " -^ — to him, cer-
tainly, who is incapable of repayment, be-
cause, as a matter of course, He would not
anyhow prescribe the restoration of a pledge
to one who was solvent. Much more clearly
is it enjoined in Deuteronomy: "Thou shalt
not sleep upon his pledge; thou shalt be sure
to return to him his garment about sunset,
and he shall sleep in his own garment." s
Clearer still is a former passage: " Thou shalt
remit every debt which thy neighbour oweth
thee; and of thy brother thou shalt not re-
quire it, because it is called the release of the
Lord thy God." ^ Now, when He commands
that a debt be remitted to a man who shall be
unable to pay it (for it is a still stronger argu-
ment when He forbids its being asked for
from a man who is even able to repay it),
what else does He teach than that we should
lend to those of whom we cannot receive
again, inasmuch as He has imposed so great
a loss on lending? "And ye shall be the
children of God."7 What can be more
shameless, than for him to be making us his
children, who has not permitted us to make
children for ourselves by forbidding mar-
riage?^ How does he propose to invest his
followers with a name which he has already
erased ? I cannot be the son of a eunuch !
Especially when I have for my Father the
same great Being whom the universe claims
for its ! For is not the Founder of the uni-
verse as much a Father, even of all men, as
(Marcion's) castrated deity, ^ who is the maker
of no existing thing? Even if the Creator
had not united male and female, and if He
had not allowed any living creature whatever
to have children, I yet had this relation to
Him'° before Paradise, before the fall, before
the expulsion, before the two became one."


^ Quorundam tunc fidem.
^Primis quibusque prseceptis.

3 Kalbutientis adhuc benignitatis. [Elucidation IV.]

4 Pignus reddes dati (i.e., fenoris) is his reading of a clause in
Ezek. xviii. i6.

5 Deut. xxiv. 12, 13.

6 Deut. XV. 2.

7 Luke vi. 35. In the original the phrase is, viol tov v^iarov.

8 One of the flagrant errors of Marcion's belief of God. See
above, chap. xi.

9 Quam spado.
'° Hoc eram ejus.

II Ante duos unum. Before God made Adam and Eve one
flesh, " I was created Adam, not became so by birth." — Fr.
Junius.


I became His son a second time," as soon as
He fashioned me '^ with His hands, and gave
me motion with His inbreathing. Now again
He names me His son, not begetting me into
natural life, but into spiritual life.'-^ " Be-
cause," says He, "He is kind unto the un-
thankful and to the evil."'s Well done,'*
Marcion ! how cleverly have you withdrawn
from Him the showers and the sunshine, that
He might not seem to be a Creator ! But
who is this kind being'^ which hitherto has not
been even known ? How can he be kind who
had previously shown no evidences of such a
kindness as this, which consists of the loan
to us of sunshine and rain ? — who is not des-
tined to receive from the human race (the
homage due to that) Creator, — who, up to this
very moment, in return for His vast liberality
in the gift of the elements, bears with men
while they offer to idols, more readily than
Himself, the due returns of His graciousness.
Btit God is truly kind even in spiritual bless-
ings. "The utterances'^ of the Lord are
sweeter than honey and honeycombs." '^ He
then has taunted^ men as ungrateful who
deserved to have their gratitude — even He,
whose sunshine and rain even you, O Mar-
cion, have enjoyed, but without gratitude !
Your god, however, had no right to complain
of man's ingratitude, because he had used no
means to make them grateful. Compassion
also does He teach: "Be ye merciful," says
He, "as your Father also that had mercy
upon you."^' This injunction will be of a
piece with, "Deal thy bread to the hungry;
and if he be houseless, bring him into thine
house; and if thou seest the naked, cover
him;"== also with, "Judge the fatherless,
plead with the widow. "^^ i recognise here
that ancient doctrine of Him who " prefers
mercy to sacrifice." ^^ If, however, it be now
some other being which teaches mercy, on
the ground of his own mercifulness, how hap-
pens it that he has been wanting in mercy to
me for so vast an age ? " Judge not, and ye
shall not be judged; condemn not, and ye
shall not be condemned; forgive, and ye shall
be forgiven; give, and it shall be given unto
you: good measure, pressed down, and run-
ning over, shall men give into your bosom.
For with the same measure that ye meas-


12 Denuo.

13 Me enixus est.

14 Non in animam sed in spiritum.

15 T.uke vi. 35.
1*5 Euge.

17 Suavis.

18 Eloquia,

19 Ps. xix. II.
2° Suggillavit.

21 Reading of Luke vi. 36.

22 Isa. Iviii. 7.

23 Isa. i. 17.

24 Hos. vi. 6.


374


TERTULLIAN AGAINST xMARCION.


[l^OOK IV.


ure withal, it shall be measured to you
again."' As it seems to me, this passage
announces a retribution proportioned to the
merits. But from whom shall come the retri-
bution ? If only from men, in that case he
teaches a merely human discipline and rec-
ompense; and in everything we shall have
to obey man: if from the Creator, as the
Judge and the Recompenser of merits, then
He compels our submission to Him, in whose
hands' He has placed a retribution which will
be acceptable or terrible according as every man
shall have judged or condemned, acquitted or
dealt with, 3 his neighbour; if from (Marcion's
god) himself, he will then exercise a judicial
function which Marcion denies. Let the
Marcionites therefore make their choice:
Will it not be just the same inconsistency to
desert the prescription of their master, as to
have Christ teaching in the interest of men or
of the Creator? But '*a blind man will lead
a blind man into the ditch." ** Some persons
believe Marcion. But "the disciple is not
above his master." 5 Apelles ought to have
remembered this — a corrector of Marcion,
although his disciple.^ The heretic ought to
take the beam out of his own eye, and then
he may convict ^ the Christian, should he sus-
pect a mote to be in his eye. Just as a good
tree cannot produce evil fruit, so neither can
truth generate heresy; and as a corrupt tree
cannot yield good fruit, so heresy will not
produce truth. Thus, Marcion brought noth-
ing good out of Cerdon's evil treasure; nor
Apelles out of Marcion's.^ For in applying
to these heretics the figurative words which
Christ used of men in general, we shall make
a much more suitable interpretation of them
than if we were to deduce out of them two
gods, according to Marcion's grievous expo-
sition.«' I think that I have the best reason
possible for insisting still upon the position
which I have all along occupied, that in no
passage to be anywhere found has another
God been revealed by Christ. I wonder that
in this place alone Marcion's hands should
have felt benumbed in their adulterating
labour.'" But even robbers have their qualms
now and then. There is no wrong-doing with-
out fear, because there is none without a guilty


' Luke vi. 37, 38.
2 Apud quem.
sMcnsus fuerit.

4 Luke vi. 39.

5 Luke vi. 40.

6 De discipulo.

7 Revincat.

8 Luke vi. 41-45. Cerdon is here referred to as Marcion's
master, and Apelles as Marcion's pupil.

9Scandalum. See above, book i. chap, ii., for Marcion's per-
verse application of the figure of the good and the corrupt tree.

«o In hoc solo adulteriuin Marcionis manus stupuisse miror. He
means that this passage has been left uncorrupted by M. (as if his
hand failed in the pruning process), foolishly for him.


conscience. So long, then, were the Jews
cognisant of no other god but Him, beside
whom they knew none else; nor did they call
upon any other than Him whom alone they
knew. This being the case, who will He clearly
be "that said, " Why callest thou me Lord,
Lord ? " " Will it be he who had as yet never
been called on, because never yet revealed ; '^
or He who was ever regarded as the Lord,
because known from the beginning — even the
God of the Jews ? Who, again, could possi-
bly have added, "and do not the things which
I say ? " Could it have been he who was only
then doing his best '-* to teach them ? Or He
who from the beginning had addressed to
them His messages 's both by the law and the
prophets ? He could then upbraid them with
disobedience, even if He had no ground at
any time else for His reproof. The fact is,
that He who was then imputing to them their
ancient obstinacy was none other than He
who, before the coming of Christ, had ad-
dressed to them these words, "This people
honoureth me with their lips, but their heart
standeth far off from me." "^ Otherwise, how
absurd it were that a new god, a new Christ,
the revealer of a new and so grand a religion
should denounce as obstinate and disobedient
those whom he had never had it in his power
to make trial of !

CHAP. XVIH. — CONCERNING THE CENTURION's
FAITH. THE RAISING OF THE WIDOW's SON.
JOHN BAPTIST, AND HIS MESSAGE TO CHRIST;
AND THE WOMAN WHO WAS A SINNER.
PROOFS EXTRACTED FROM ALL OF THE RELA-
TION OF CHRIST TO THE CREATOR.

Likewise, when extolling the centurion's
faith, how incredible a thing it is, that He
should confess that He had " found so great
a faith not even in Israel," '^ to whom Is-
rael's faith was in no way interesting ! '^ But
not from the fact (here stated by Christ) '»
could it have been of any interest to Him to
approve and compare what was hitherto
crude, nay, I might say, hitherto naught.
Why, however, might He not have used the
example of faith in another *" god ? Because,


" Videbitur.

'2 Luke vi. 46.

n Editus.

'4 Temptabat. Perhaps, " was tampering with them."

'5 Eloquia.

'6 Isa. xxix. 13.

'7 Luke vii. i-io.

>8 Comp. Epiphanius, /ftrrrs. xlii., Rr/ut. 7. for the same argu-
ment : Ei ov6« kv ry 'lo-parjA TotoiiTrji/ -niaTiv €vptv, k-t.K. " If He
found not so great faith, even in Israel, as He discovered in this
Gentile centurion, He does not therefore condemn the faith of
Israel. For if He were alien from Israel's God, and did not per-
tain to Him, even as His father, He would certainly not have in-
ferentially praised Israel's faith " (Oehler).

'9 Nee exinde. This points to Christ's words, "I have not
/iffunt/ such faith in Israel."— Oehlek.

=« Alienae fidei.


CHAP. XVIII.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


375


if He had done so, He would have said that
no such faith had ever had existence in Israel;
but as the case stands,' He intimates that He
ought to have found so great a faith in Israel,
inasmuch as He had indeed come for the pur-
pose of finding it, being in truth the God and
Christ of Israel, and had now stigmatized =
it, only as one who would enforce and uphold
it. If, indeed. He had been its antagonist,^
He would have preferred finding it to be such
faith,* having come to weaken and destroy it
rather than to approve of it. He raised also
the widow's son from death. s This was not
a strange miracle.'^ The Creator's prophets
had wrought such; then why not His Son
much rather? Now, so evidently had the
Lord Christ introduced no other god for the
working of so momentous a miracle as this,
that all who were present gave glory to the
Creator, saying: " A great prophet is risen
up among us, and God hath visited His
people." 7 What God? He, of course,
whose people they were, and from whom had
come their prophets. But if they glorified
the Creator, and Christ (on hearing them, and
knowing their meaning) refrained' from cor-
recting them even in their very act of invok-
ing^ the Creator in that vast manifestation
of His glory in this raising of the dead, un-
doubtedly He either announced no other God
but Him, whom He thus permitted to be
honoured in His own beneficent acts and
miracles, or else how happens it that He
quietly permitted these persons to remain so
long in their error, especially as He came for
the very purpose to cure them of their error ?
But John is offended ^ when he hears of the
miracles of Christ, as of an alien god." Well,
I on my side " will first explain the reason of
his offence, that I may the more easily ex-
plode the scandal '^ of our heretic. Now, that
the very Lord Himself of all might, the Word
and Spirit of the Father,'^ ^as operating and
preaching on earth, it was necessary that the
portion of the Holy Spirit which, in the form


' Ceterum.

^Suggillasset.

3itmulus.

4 Earn talem, that is, the faith of Israel.

SLuke vii. 11-17.

*Documentum.

7 Luke vii. 16.

8 Et quideni adhuc orantes.

9Comp. Epiphanius, Hxres. xlii., Schol. 8, cum Refut. ; Ter-
tullian, De Frtescript. Hceret. 8 ; and De Bapt. 10.

»o Ut ulterius. This is the absurd allegation of Marcion. So
Epiphanius (Le Prieur).

"Ego.

'^Scandalum. Playing on the word '■'' scandalum^^ in its ap-
plication to the Baptist and to Marcion.

'3 " It is most certain that the Son of God, the second Person of
the Godhead, is in the writings of the fathers throughout called by
L^ T*''^ "^ -S>;V/V, Spirit of God, etc. : with which usage agree
the Holy Scriptures. See Mark ii. 8 ; Rom. i. 3, 4 ; i Tim. iii. 16 ;
Heb. ix. 14 ; I Pet. iii. 18-20 ; also John vi. 63, compared with 56."
— Bp. Bull, Def. Nic. Creed (translated by the translator of this
work), vol. i. p, 48 and note X. [The whole passage should be
consulted. 1


of the prophetic gift,'* had been through John
preparing the ways of the Lord, should now
depart from John,'s and return back again of
course to the Lord, as to its all-embracing
original.'^ Therefore John, being now an or-
dinary person, and only one of the many,'^
was offended indeed as a man, but not be-
cause he expected or thought of another
Christ as teaching or doing nothing new, for
he was not even expecting such a one.'^ No-
body will entertain doubts about any one
whom (since he knows him not to exist) he
has no expectation or thought of. Now John
was quite sure that there was no other God
but the Creator, even as a Jew, especially as
a prophet. '9 Whatever doubt he felt was
evidently rather^ entertained about Him"
whom he knew indeed to exist but knew
not whether He were the very Christ. With
this fear, therefore, even John asks the
question, "Art thou He that should come,
or look we for another? " " — simply inquiring
whether He was come as He whom he was
looking for. "Art thou He that should
come?" i.e. Art thou the coming One? "or
look we for another?" i.e. Is He whom
we are expecting some other than Thou, if
Thou art not He whom we expect to come ?
For he was supposing,^^ as all men then
thought, from the similarity of the miracu-
lous evidences, =* that a prophet might possi-
bly have been meanwhile sent, from whom
the Lord Himself, whose coming was then
expected, was different, and to whom He was
superior. =^5 And there lay John's difficulty. =*
He was in doubt whether He was actually
come whom all men were looking for; whom,
moreover, they ought to have recognised by
His predicted works, even as the Lord sent
word to John, that it was by means of these
very works that He was to be recognised. '^
Now, inasmuch as these predictions evidently
related to the Creator's Christ — as we have
proved in the examination of each of them —
it was perverse enough, if he gave himself


14 Ex forma prophetic! moduli.

15 Tertullian stands alone in the notion that St. John's inquiry
was owing to any withdrawal of the Spirit, so soon before his mar-
tyrdom, or any diminution of his faith. The contrary is expressed
by Origen, Homil. xxvii., on Luke vii. ; Chrysostom on Matt. xi. ;
Augustine, Sermon. 66, de Verbo ; Hilary on Matthew; Jerome
on Matthew, and Epist. 121, ad Algas. ; Ambrose on Luke, book
v. g 93. They say mostly that the inquiry was for the sake of his
disciples (Oxford Lii?rary 0/ the Fathers, vol. x. p. 267, note e).
[Elucidation V.]

16 Ut m massalem suam summam.
'7 Unus jam de turba.

'8 Eundem.

19 Etiam prophetes.

20 Facilius.

21 Jesus.

22 Luke vii. 20.

23 Sperabat.

24 Documentorum.

25 Major.

26 Scandalum.

27 Luke vii. 21, 22.


2>7^


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[nooK IV.


out to be 710 f the Christ of the Creator, and
rested the proof of his statement on those very
evidences whereby he was urging his claims
to be received as the Creator's Christ. Far
greater still is his perverseness when, not be-
ing the Christ of John,' he yet bestows on
John his testimony, affirming him to be a
prophet, nay more, his messenger, "^ applying
to him the Scripture, " Behoid, I send my
messenger before thy face, which shall pre-
pare thy way before thee." ^ He graciously*
adduced the prophecy in the superior sense
of the alternative mentioned by the perplexed
John, in order that, by affirming that His
own precursor was already come in the person
of John, He might quench the doubts which
lurked in his question: "Art thou He that
should come, or look we for another?" Now
that the forerunner had fulfilled his mission,
and the way of the Lord was prepared, He
ought now to be acknowledged as that (Christ)
for whom the forerunner had made ready the
way. That forerunner was indeed "greater
than all of women born; " ^ but for all that. He
who was least in the kingdom of God ^ was
not subject to him'/ as if the kingdom in
which the least person was greater than John
belonged to one God, while John, who was
greater than all of women born, belonged
himself to another God. For whether He
speaks of any "least person" by reason of
his humble position, or of Himself, as being
thought to be less than John — since all were
running into the wilderness after John rather
than after Christ ("What went ye out into
the wilderness to see?"^) — the Creator has
equal right '° to claim as His own both John,
greater than any born of women, and Christ,
or every " least person in the kingdom of
heaven,'' who was destined to be greater than
John in that kingdom, although equally per-


1 That is, not the Creator's Christ— whose prophet John was—
therefore a different Christ from Him whom John announced.
This IS said, of course, on the Marcionite hypothesis (Oehler).

2 Anjfehim.

3 Luke vii. 26, 27, and Mai. iii, 1-3.

4 Eleganter.

5 Scrupulum.
^ Luke vii. 28.

7 That is, Christ, according to Epiphanius. See next not-^.

SComp. the Refutation of Epiphanius (Ha-res. xlii. Re/tit. 8):
" Whether with reference to fohn or to the Saviour, He pro-
nounces a blessing on such as should not be offended in Himself
or in John. Nor should the^ devise for themselves whatsoever
things they heard not from him. He also has a greater object in
view, on account of which the Saviour said this; even that no one
should think that John (who was pronounced to be greater than
any born of women) was greater than the Saviour Himself, be-
cause even He was born of a woman. He guards against this mis-
take, and says, ' Blessed is he who shall not be offended in me.'
He then adds, ' He that is least in the kingdom of heaven is
greater than he.' Now, in respect of His birth in the flesh, the
Saviour was less than he by the space of six months. But in the
kingdom He was greater, being even his God. For the Only-be-
gotten came not to say aught in secret, or to utter a falsehood in
His preaching, as He says Himself, ' In secret have I said nothing,
but in public, etc. (Kav re irpos 'Iwdfi'171' ep^oi . . . dAAa /u.«Ta
irappT)(7t'a?)-"— Oehler.

9 Luke vii. 25.

loTantundem competit creator!.


taining to the Creator, and who would be so
much greater than the prophet," because he
would not have been offended at Christ, an
i7ifirmity which then lessened the greatfiess of
John. We have already spoken of the for-
giveness "of sins. The behaviour of "the
woman which was a sinner," when she cov-
ered the Lord's feet with her kisses, bathed
them with her tears, wiped them with the hairs
of her head, anointed them with ointment,''
produced an evidence that what she handled
was not an empty phantom,'* but a really
solid body, and that her repentance as a sin-
ner deserved forgiveness according to the
mind of the Creator, who is accustomed to
prefer mercy to sacrifice. 's But even if the
stimulus of her repentance proceeded from
her faith, she heard her justification by faith
through her repentance pronounced in the
words, " Thy faith hath saved thee," by Him
who had declared by Habakkuk, "The just
shall live by his faith." '^

CHAP. XIX. THE RICH WOMEN OF PIETY WHO

FOLLOWED JESUS CHRIST'S TEACHING BY
PARABLES. THE MARCIONITE CAVIL DERIVED

FROM Christ's remark, when told of his

MOTHER AND HIS BRETHREN. EXPLANA-
TION OF CHRIST'S APPARENT REJECTION OF
THEM.

The fact that certain rich women clave to
Christ, "which ministered unto Him of their
substance," amongst whom was the wife of
the king's steward, is a subject of prophecy.
By Isaiah the Lord cdiWed these wealthy ladies
— " Rise up, ye women that are at ease, and
hear my voice " '^ — that He might prove''
them first as disciples, and then as assistants
and helpers: "Daughters, hear my words in
hope; this day of the year cherish the mem-
ory of, in labour with hope." For it was
"in labour "that they followed Him, and
" with hope " did they minister to Him. On
the subject of parables, let it suffice that it
has been once for all shown that this kind of
language '» was with equal distinctness prom-
ised by the Creator. But there is that direct
mode of His speaking =° to the people —
"Ye shall hear with the ear, but ye shall not
understand"^' — which now claims notice as


" Major tanto propheta.

12 De remissa.

'3 Luke vii. ^6-50.

»4 Comp. Epiphanius, Ha-res. xlii., Re/ttt. 10, 11.

15 Hos. vi. 6.

16 Hab ii. 4. ;

'7 Isa. xxxii. 9, 10. Quoted as usual, fromthe LXX. : VvvalKtj;
TrAoiitriai a»'a<7-Ti7Te, Kai. aKOvaare t^s (^(orij? fj-ov 6vyaTej>t<! iv
eATTi'Si fliraKOvaaTt Aoyovs juov. 'H/w.epas evtavrov fiveiav noLrjcraarOt
iy oSvvif) fier e\Tri&oi

18 Ostenderet.

19 Eloquii.

20 Pronunciatio.

21 Isa. vi. 9,


CHAP. XIX.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


zn


having furnished to Christ that frequent form
of His earnest instruction: "He that hath
ears to hear, let him hear."' Not as if Christ,
actuated with a diverse spirit, permitted a
hearing which the Creator had refused; but
because the exhortation followed the threaten-
ing. First came, " Ye shall hear with the ear,
but shall not understand;" then followed,
"He that hath ears to hear, let him hear."
For they wilfully refused to hear, although
they had ears. He, however, was teaching
them that it was the ears of the heart which
were necessary; and with these the Creator
had said that they would not hear. There-
fore it is that He adds by His Christ, " Take
heed how ye hear," ^ and hear not, — mean-
ing, of course, with the hearing of the heart,
not of the ear. If you only attach a proper,
sense to the Creator's admonition ^ suitable
to the meaning of Him who was rousing the
people to hear by the words, " Take heed how
ye hear," it amounted to a menace to such as
would not hear. In fact,'* that most merciful
god of yours, who judges not, neither is angry,
Is minatory. This is proved even by the sen-
tence which immediately follows: "Whoso-
ever hath, to him shall be given; and who-
soever hath not, from him shall be taken even
that which he.seemeth to have. ' ' ^ What shall
be given ? The increase of faith, or under-
standing, or even salvation. What shall be
taken away ? That, of course, which shall be
given. By whom shall the gift and the dep-
rivation be made ? If by the Creator it be
taken away, by Him also shall it be given.
If by Marcion's god it be given, by Mar-
cion's god also will it be taken away. Now,
for whatever reason He threatens the "dep-
rivation," it will not be the work of a god
who knows not how to threaten, because in-
capable of anger. I am, moreover, astonished
when he says that " a candle is not usually
hidden," ^ who had hidden himself — a greater
and more needful light — during so long a
time; and when he promises that "everything
shall be brought out of its secrecy and made
manifest," ^ who hitherto has kept his god in
obscurity, waiting (I suppose) until Marcion
be born. We now come to the most strenu-
ously-plied argument of all those who call in
question the Lord's nativity. They say that
He testifies Himself to His not having been
born, when He asks, "Who is my mother,
and who are my brethren ? " ^ In this manner


' Luke viii. 8.

2 Luke viii. i8.

3 Pronuntiationi.

4 Sane : with a touch of irony.

5 Luke viii. i8.

6 Luke viii. i6.

7 Luke viii. 17.

8 Matt. xii. 48.


heretics either wrest plain and simple words
to any sense they choose by their conjectures,
or else they violently resolve by a literal in-
terpretation words which imply a conditional
sense and are incapable of a simple solution, '
as in this passage. We, for our part, say in
reply, first, that it could not possibly have
been told Him that His mother and His
brethren stood without, desiring to see Him,
if He had had no mother and no brethren.
They must have been known to him who
announced them, either some time previously,
or then at that very time, when they desired
to see Him, or sent Him their message. To
this our first position this answer is usually
given by the other side. But suppose they
sent Him the message for the purpose of
tempting Him? Well, but the Scripture does
not say so; and inasmuch as it is usual for it
to indicate what is done in the way of temp-
tation ("Behold, a certain lawyer stood up,
and tempted Him;"'° again, when inquiring
about tribute, the Pharisees came to Him,
tempting Him"), so, when it makes no men-
tion of temptation, it does not admit the in-
terpretation of temptation. However, al-
though I do not alloiv this sense, I may as well
ask, by way of a superfluous refutation, for
the reasons of the alleged temptation, To what
purpose could they have tempted Him by
naming His mother and His brethren ? If it
was to ascertain whether He had been born
or not — when was a question raised on this
point, which they must resolve by tempting
Him in this way? Who could doubt His hav-
ing been born, when they '^ saw Him before
them a veritable man ? — whom they had heard
call Himself "Son of man ? " — of whom they
doubted whether He were God or Son of God,
from seeing Him, as they did, in the perfect
garb of human quality ? — supposing Him
rather to be a prophet, a great one indeed, '^
but still one who had been born as man ?
Even if it had been necessary that He should
thus be tried in the investigation of His birth,
surely any other proof would have better an-
swered the trial than that to be obtained from
mentioning those relatives which it was quite
possible for Him, in spite of His true nativity,
not at that moment to have had. For tell
me now, does a mother live on contemporane-
ously '^ with her sons in every case ? Hav^ all
sons brothers born for them ? 's May a man
rather not have fathers and sisters (living),


9 Rationales. " Quae voces adhibita ratione sunt interpre-
tandae." — Oehler.
1° Luke X. 25.
" Luke XX. 20.

12 Singular in the original, but (to avoid confusion) here made
plural.

13 In allusion to Luke vii, 16. See above, chap, xviii.

14 Advivit

15 Adgenerantur


?>7


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book iv»


or even no relatives at all ? But there is his-
torical proof ' that at this very time " a census
had been taken in Judaea by Sentius Saturni-
nus,3 which might have satisfied their inquiry
respecting the family and descent of Christ.
Such a method of testing the point had there-
fore no consistency whatever in it and they
*'who were standing without" were really
" His mother and His brethren." It remains
for us to examine His meaning when He re-
sorts to non-literal* words, saying "Who is
my mother or my brethren?" It seems as
if His language amounted to a denial of His
family and His birth; but it arose actually
from the absolute nature of the case, and the
conditional sense in which His words were to
be explained. 5 He was justly indignant, that
persons so very near to Him " stood without^''
while strangers were within hanging on His
words, especially as they wanted to call Him
away from the solemn work He had in hand.
He did not so much deny as disavow^ them.
And therefore, when to the previous question,
" Who is my mother, and who are my breth-
ren ?" ^ He added the answer "None but
they who hear my words and do them," He
transferred the names of blood-relationship to
others, whom He judged to be more closely
related to Him by reason of their faith. Now
no one transfers a thing except from him who
possesses that which is transferred. If, there-
fore. He made them " His mother and His
brethren" who were not so, how could He
deny them these relationships who really had
them ? Surely only on the condition of their
deserts, and not by any disavowal of His near
relatives; teaching them by His own actual
example,^ that "whosoever preferred father
or mother or brethren to the Word of God,


» Constat. [Jarvis, Introd. p. 204 and p. 536.]

2 Nunc : i.e., when Christ was told of His mother and brethren.

.3"C. Sentius Saturninus, a consular, held this census of the
whole empire as principal aujfur, because Aujfustus determined to
impart the sanction of religion to his institution. The agent
through whom Saturninus carried out the census in Judaea was the
governor Cyrenius, according to Luke, chap, ii." — Fr. Junius.
Tertullian mentions Sentius Saturnmus again in De Pallio, i.
Tertullian's statement in the text has weighed with Sanclemente
and others, who suppose that Saturninus was governor of Judaea
at the time of our Lord's birth, which they place in 747 a. u.c.
" It is evident, however," says Wieseler, " that this argument is
far from decisive ; for the New Testament itself supplies far bet-
ter aids for determining this que.stion than the discordant ecclesias-
tical traditions, — different fathers giving different dates, which
might be appealed to with equal justice ; while Tertullian is even
inconsistent with himself, since in his treatise Adv. Jud. viii., he
gives 751 A. U. c. as the year of our Lord s birth (Wieseler's
Chronological Synopsis by Venables, p. qq, note 2). This Sentius
Saturninus filled the office of governor of Syria, 744-748. For the
elaborate argument of Aug. W. Zumpt, by which he defends St.
Luke's chronology, and goes far to prove that Publius Sulpicius
Quirinus (or " Cyrenius ' ) was actually the governor of Syria at
the time of the Lord's birth, the reader may be referred to a care-
ful abridgment by the translator of NVieseler's work, pp. 129-115.

4Non simpliciter. St. Mark rather than St. Luke is quoted in
this interrogative sentence.

5 Ex condicione rationali. See Oehler's note, just above, on the
word " rationalfs."

^Abdicavit: Rigalt"thinks this AarfA, and reminds us that at the
cross the Lord had not cast away His mother. [Elucidation VL]

7 This is literally from St. Matthew's narrative, chap. xii. 48.

8 In se;netipso.'


was not a disciple worthy of Him."' Be-
sides,'" His admission of His mother and His
brethren was the more express, from the fact
of His unwillingness to acknowledge them.
That He adopted others only confirmed those
in their relationship to Him whom He refused
because of their offence, and for whom He
substituted the others, not as being truer rela-
tives, but worthier ones. Finally, it was no
great matter if He did prefer to kindred (that)
faith which it" did not possess."

CHAP. XX. COMPARISON OF CHRIST's POWER

OVER WINDS AND WAVES WITH MOSES' COM-
MAND OF THE WATERS OF THE RED SEA AND
THE JORDAN. CHRIST's POWER OVER UN-
CLEAN SPIRITS. THE CASE OF THE LEGION.
THE CURE OF THE ISSUE OF BLOOD. THE
MOSAIC UNCLEANNESS ON THIS POINT EX-
PLAINED.

But " what manner of man is this ? for He
commandeth even the winds and water !" '^
Of course He is the new master and proprietor
of the elements, now that the Creator is de-
posed, and excluded from their possession !
Nothing of the kind. But the elements own'*
their own Maker, just as they had been ac-
customed to obey His servants also. Ex-
amine well the Exodus, Marcion.; look at the
rod of Moses, as it waves His command to the
Red Sea, ampler than all the lakes of Judasa.
How the sea yawns from its very depths, then
fixes itself in two solidified masses, and so,
out of the interval between them, '5 makes
a way for the people to pass dry-shod across;
again does the same rod vibrate, the sea re-
turns in its strength, and in the concourse of
its waters the chivalry of Egypt is engulphed !
To that consummation the very winds sub-
served ! Read, too, how that the Jordan was
as a sword, to hinder the emigrant nation in
their passage across its stream; how that its
waters from above stood still, and its current
below wholly ceased to run at the bidding of
Joshua,"^ when his priests began to pass over ! '^


9 Matt. X. 37.

»o Ceterum.

" i.e., the kindred. [N.B. He includes the Mother !]

»2 We have translated Oehler's text of this passage : " Denique
nihil magnum, si fidem .sanguini, quain non habebat." P'or once
we venture to differ from that admirable editor (and that although
he is supported in his view by Fr. Junius), and prefer the reading
of the MSS. and the older editions: " Denique nihil magnum, si
fidem sanguini, quern non habebat." To which we would give an
ironical turn, usual to Tertullian, "After all, it is not to be
wondered at if He preferred faith to flesh and blood, which he did
not himself possess ! " — in allusion to Marcion 's Docetic opinion of
Christ.

13 Luke viii, 25.

*4Agnorant.

»5 Et pari utrinque stupore discriminis fixum.

16 Josh. iii. 9-17.

17 This obscure passage is thus read by Oehlcr, from whom we
have translated: " Lege extorri familia; dirimenda; in transitu ejus
Jordanis machaeram fuisse, cujus impetum atque decursum plane
et Jesus docuerat prophetis transmeantibus stare.'] The mach-
terain (" sword ") is a metaphor for the riiwr. Rigaltius refers
to Virgil's figure, Aineid^ viii. 62, 64, for a justification of the


I


CHAP. XX.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


379


What will you say to this ? If it be your Christ
that is jneafit above, he will not be more potent
than the servants of the Creator. But I should
have been content with the examples I have
adduced without addition,' if a prediction of
His present passage on the sea had not pre-
ceded Christ's coming. As psalm is, in fact,
accomplished by this "" crossing over the lake.
"The Lord," says the psalmist, "is upon
many waters." ^ When He disperses its
waves, Habakkuk's words are fulfilled, where
he says, "Scattering the waters in His pas-
sage."* When at His rebuke the sea is
calmed, Nahum is also verified: He rebuketh
the sea, and maketh it dry,"^ including the
winds indeed, whereby it was disquieted. With
what evidence would you have my Christ vin-
dicated ? Shall it come from the examples,
or from the prophecies, of the Creator ? You
suppose that He is predicted as a military and
armed warrior,^ instead of one who in a figu-
rative and allegorical sense was to wage a
spiritual warfare against spiritual enemies, in
spiritual campaigns, and with spiritual weap-
ons: come now, when in one man alone you
discover a multitude of demons calling itself
Legion,'' of course comprised of spirits, you
should learn that Christ also must be under-
stood to be an exterminator of spiritual foes,
who wields spiritual arms and fights in spirit-
ual strife; and that it was none other than
He,^ who now had to contend with even a
legion of demons. Therefore it is of such a
war as this that the Psalm may evidently
have spoken: "The Lord is strong, The
Lord is mighty in battle." ° For with the
last enemy death did He fight, and through
the trophy of the cross He triumphed. Now
of what God did the Legion testify that Jesus
was the Son ? '° No doubt, of that God whose
torments and abyss they knew and dreaded.
It seems impossible for them to have re-
mained up to this time in ignorance of what
the power of the recent and unknown god was
working in the world, because it is very un-
likely that the Creator was ignorant thereof.
For if He had been at any time ignorant that
there was another god above Himself, He had


simile. Oehler has altered the reading from the ex sorte fam-
ilias," etc., of the MSS. to "• extorri familias," etc. The former
reading would mean probably: " Read out of the story of the na-
tion how that Jordan was as a sword to hinder their passage across
its stream." The Jt^r^f (or, as ^et another variation has it, 'Vi*
sortes^' " the accounts ') meant the national record, as we have it
in the beginning of the book of Joshua. But the passage is almost
hopelessly obscure.
' Solis.

2 Istius.

3 Ps. xxix. 3.

4Hab. iii. 10, accordingBto|the|Septuagint.3

5 Nah. i. 4.

6 See above, book iii, chap, xiii,

7 Luke viii. 30.

8 Atque ita ipsum esse.
9Ps. xxiv. 8.

10 Luke viii. 28.


by this time at all events discovered that
there was one at work "below His heaven.
Now, what their Lord had discovered had by
this time become notorious to His entire
family within the same world and the same
circuit of heaven, in which the strange deity
dwelt and acted." As therefore both the
Creator and His creatures '^ must have had
knowledge of him, if he had been in existence,
so, inasmuch as he had no existence, the
demons really knew none other than the Christ
of their own God. They do not ask of the
strange god, what they recollected they must
beg of the Creator — not to be plunged into
the Creator's abyss. They at last had their
request granted. On what ground ? Because
they had lied ? Because they had proclaimed
Him to be the Son of a ruthless God ? And
what sort of god will that be who helped the
lying, and upheld his detractors ? However,
710 need of this thought, for,'-* inasmuch as they
had not lied, inasmuch as they had acknowl-
edged that the God of the abyss was also
their God, so did He actually Himself affirm
that He was the same whom these demons
acknowledged — Jesus, the Judge and Son of
the avenging God. Now, behold an inkling '^
of the Creator's failings '^ and infirmities in
Christ; for I on my side''' mean to impute to
Him ignorance. Allow me some indulgence
in my effort against the heretic. Jesus is
touched by the woman who had an issue of
blood, '^ He knew not by whom. " Who
touched me?" He asks, when His disciples
alleged an excuse. He even persists in His
assertion of ignorance: "Somebody hath
touched me," He says, and advances some
proof: " For I perceive that virtue is gone out
of me." What says our heretic? Could
Christ have known the person ? And why
did He speak as if He were ignorant ? Why ?
Surely it was to challenge her faith, and to try
her fear. Precisely as He had once ques-
tioned Adam, as if in ignorance: Adam,
where art thou ? " '^ Thus you have both the
Creator excused in the same way as Christ,
and Christ acting similarly to ^ the Creator.
But in this case He acted as an adversary of
the law; and therefore, as the law forbids
contact with a woman with an issue," He de-
sired not only that this woman should touch
Him, but that He should heal her.^= Here,


'I Agentem.

>2 Conversaretur.

13 Substantise: including these demons.

14 Sed enim: the aAAa ya.^ of the Greek.
>5 Aliquid.

16 Pusillitatibus.

17 Ego.

18 Luke viii. 43-46.

JpSee above, book iii. chap. xxv.

20 Adaequatum : on a par with.

21 Lev. XV. It).

22 A Marcionite hypothesis.


38o


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book IV.


then, is a God who is not merciful by nature,
but in hostility ! Yet, if we find that such
was the merit of this woman's faith, that He
said unto her. Thy faith hath saved thee,"'
what are you, that you should detect an hos-
tility to the law in that act, which the Lord
Himself shows us to have been done as a re-
ward of faith ? But will you have it that this
faith of the woman consisted in the contempt
which she had acquired for the law? Who
can suppose, that a woman who had been
hitherto unconscious of any God, uninitiated
as yet in any new law, should violently infringe
that law by which she was up to this time
bound ? On what faith, indeed, was such an
infringement hazarded ? In what God believ-
ing? Whom despising? The Creator? Her
touch at least was an act of faith. And if of
faith in the Creator, how could she have vio-
lated His law,^ when she was ignorant of any
other God ? Whatever her infringement of
the law amounted to-, it proceeded from and
was proportionate to her faith in the Creator.
But how can these two things be compatible ?
That she violated the law, and violated it in
faith, which ought to have restrained her from
such violation ? I will tell you how her faith
was this above all:^ it made her believe that
her God preferred mercy even to sacrifice;
she was certain that her God was working in
Christ; she touched Him, therefore, not as
a holy man simply, nor as a prophet, whom
she knew to be capable of contamination by
reason of his human nature, but as very God,
whom she assumed to be beyond all possibility
of pollution by any uncleanness.'* She there-
fore, not without reason, s interpreted for her-
seJf the law, as meaning that such things as
are susceptible of defilement become defiled,
but not so God, whom she knew for certain to
be in Christ. But she recollected this also,
that what came under the prohibition of the
law^ was that ordinary and usual issue of
blood which proceeds from natural functions
every month, and in childbirth, not that which
was the result of disordered health. Her
case, however, was one of long abounding ^ ill
health, for which she knew that the succour
of God's mercy was needed, and not the
natural relief of time. And thus she may
evidently be regarded as having discerned '^
the law, instead of breaking it. This will
prove to be the faith which was to confer in-
telligence likewise. *' If ye will not believe,"


1 Luke viii. 48.

2 Ecquomodo legem ejus irrupit.

3 Primo.
4.Spurcitia.

5 Non temere.

6 In lege taxari.

7 Ilia autem redundavit.
^Distinxisse.


says (the prophet), "ye shall not under-
stand."» When Christ approved of the faith
of this woman, which simply rested in the
Creator, He declared by His answer to her,**'
that He was Himself the divine object of the
faith of which He approved. Nor can I over-
look the fact that His garment, by being
touched, demonstrated also the truth of His
body; for of course " it was a body, and not a
phantom, which the garment clothed." This
indeed is not our point now; but the remark
has a natural bearing on the question we are
discussing. For if it were not a veritable
body, but only a fantastic one, it could not
for certain have received contamination, as be-
ing an unsubstantial thing. '^ He therefore,
who, by reason of this vacuity of his sub-
stance, was incapable of contamination, how
could he possibly have desired this touch ? '•*
As an adversary of the law, his conduct was
deceitful, for he was not susceptible of a real
pollution.

CHAP. XXI. — Christ's connection with the

CREATOR shown FROM SEVERAL INCIDENTS
IN THE OLD TESTAMENT, COMPARED WITH
ST. LUKE's narrative of THE MISSION OF
THE DISCIPLES. THE FEEDING OF THE MUL-
TITUDE. THE CONFESSION OF ST. PETER.
BEING ASHAMED OF CHRIST. THIS SHAME IS
ONLY POSSIBLE OF THE TRUE CHRIST. MAR-
CIONITE PRETENSIONS ABSURD.

He sends forth His disciples to preach the
kingdom of God.'s Does He here say of what
God ? He forbids their taking anything for
their journey, by way of either food or rai-
ment. Who would have given such a com-
mandment as this, but He who feeds the
ravens and clothes "^ the flowers of the field ?
Who anciently enjoined for the treading ox
an unmuzzled mouth, '^ that he might be at
liberty to gather his fodder from his labour,
on the principle that the worker is worthy of
his hire?'* Marcion may expunge such pre-
cepts, but no matter, provided the sense of
them survives. But when He charges them to
shake off the dust of their feet against such as
should refuse to receive them. He also bids that
this be done as a ivit7iess. Now no one bears
witness except in a case which is decided by
judicial process; and whoever orders inhuman
conduct to be submitted to the trial by testi-


]


9 Isa. vii.^.
'o Luke viii. 48.
" Utique.

" Epiphanius, in Hares, xlii. Re/ut. 14, has the same remark.
'3 Qua res vacua.

M In allusion to the Marcionite hypothesis mentioned above.
'5 Luke ix. 1-6.
16 Vestit.
'7 Libertatem oris.

l8 Dcut. XXV. 4.


CHAP. XXI.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION


381


mony/ does really threaten as a judge.
Again, that it was no new god which recom-
mended ^ by Christ, was clearly attested by
the opinion of all men, because some main-
tained to Herod that Jesus was the Christ;
others, that He was John; some, that He was
Elias; and others, that He was one of the old
prophets. 3 Now, whosoever of all these He
might have been. He certainly was not raised
up for the purpose of announcing another god
after His resurrection. He feeds the multi-
tude in the desert place; -* this, you must
knows was after the manner of the Old Testa-
ment.^ Or else,'' if there was not the same
grandeur, it follows that He is now inferior
to the Creator. For Hc^ not for one day,
but during forty years, not on the inferior
aliment of bread and fish, but with the
manna of heaven, supported the lives ^ of not
five thousand, but of six hundred thousand
human beings. However, such was the great-
ness of His miracle, that He willed the slender
supply of food, not only to be enough, but
even to prove superabundant ;9 and herein He
followed the ancient precedent. For in like
manner, during the famine in Elijah's time,
the scanty and final meal of the widow of
Sarepta was multiplied '° by the blessing of the
prophet throughout the period of the famine.
You have the third book of the Kings." If
you also turn to the fourth book, you will dis-
cover all this conduct '^ of Christ pursued by
that man of God, who ordered ten '^ barley
loaves which had been given him to be dis-
tributed among the people; and when his
servitor, after contrasting the large number
of the persons with the small supply of the food,
answered, "What, shall I set this before
a hundred men ? " he said again, " Give them,
and they shall eat: for thus saith the Lord,
They shall eat, and shall leave thereof, ac-
cording to the word of the Lord. ' ' '* O Christ,
even in Thy novelties Thou art old ! Accord-
ingly, when Peter, who had been an eye-
witness of the miracle, and had compared it
with the ancient precedents, and had dis-
covered in them prophetic intimations of what
should one day come to pass, answered (as
the mouthpiece of them all) the Lord's in-
quiry, "Whom say ye that I am ? " '^ in the


^ In testationem redigi.
^Probatum.

3 Luke ix. 7,8.

4 Luke ix. 10-17.

5 Scilicet.

6 De pristine more.
7Aut.

8 Protelavit.

9 Exuberare.

^° Redundaverant.

'1 1 Kings xvii. 7-16.

12 Ordinem.

'3 1 have no doubt that ten was the word written by our author ;
for some Greek copies read Mko., and Ambrose in his Hexaevte-
ro?i, book vi. chap, ii., mentions the same number (Fr. Junius).

14 2 Kings iv. 42-44. 15 Luke ix, 20.


words, "Thou art the Christ," he could not
but have perceived that He was that Christ,
beside whom he knew of none else in the
Scriptures, and whom he was now surveying'^
in His wonderful deeds. This conclusion He
even Himself confirms by thus far bearing
with it, nay, even enjoining silence respecting
it.'' For if Peter was unable to acknowledge
Him to be any other than the Creator's Christ,
while He commanded them " to tell no man
that saying," surely'^ He was unwilling to
have the conclusion promulged which Peter
had drawn. No doubt of that,'^ you say;
but as Peter's conclusion was a wrong one,
ther^ore He was unwilling to have a lie dis-
seminated. It was, however, a different reason
which He assigned for the silence, even be-
cause " the Son of man must suffer many
things, and be rejected of the elders, and
scribes, and priests, and be slain, and be raised
again the third day."=^ Now, inasmuch as
these stifferings were actually foretold for the
Creator's Christ (as we shall fully show in the
proper place"), so by this application of them
to His own case ''^ does He prove that it is He
Himself of whom they were predicted. At all
events, even if they had not been predicted, the
reason which He alleged for imposing silence
(on the disciples) was such as made it clear
enough that Peter had made no mistake, that
reason being the necessity of His undergoing
these sufferings. "Whosoever," says He,
"will save his life, shall lose it; and whoso-
ever will lose his life for my sake, the same
shall save it. ' ' ^^ Surely ^-^ it is the Son of man ^^
who uttered this sentence. Look carefully,
then, along with the king of Babylon, into his
burning fiery furnace, and there you will dis-
cover one "like the Son of man" (for He
was not yet really Son of man, because not
yet born of man), even as early as then^ ap-
pointing issues such as these. He saved the
lives of the three brethren, ^^ ^yho had agreed
to lose them for God's sake; but He de-
stroyed those of the Chaldaeans, when they
had preferred to save them by the means of
their idolatry. Where is that novelty, which
you pretend, ^"^ in a doctrine which possesses
these ancient proofs ? But all the predictions
have been fulfilled^ concerning martydoms
which were to happen, and were to receive


'6 Recensebat.
'7 Luke ix. 21.

18 Utique.

19 Immo.

20 Luke ix. 22.

=• See below, chaps, xl.-xliii.

22 Sic quoque.

23 Luke ix. 24.

24 Certe.

25 Compare above, chap, x., towards the end.

26 Jam tunc.

27 Dan. iii. 25, 26.
28Ista.

29 Decucurrerunt.


382


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


I BOOK IV.


the recompenses of their reward from God.
" See," says Isaiah, " how the righteous per-
isheth, and no man layeth it to heart; and
just men are taken away, and no man con-
sidereth." ' When does this more frequently
happen than in the persecution of His saints?
This, indeed, is no ordinary matter,"* no com-
mon casualty of the law of nature; but it is
that illustrious devotion, that fighting for the
faith, wherein whosoever loses his life for God
saves it, so that you may here again recognize
the Judge who recompenses the evil gain of
life with its destruction, and the good loss
thereof with its salvation. It is, however, a
jealous God whom He here presents ty me;
one who returns evil for evil. " For whoso-
ever," says He, " shall be ashamed of me, of
him will 1 also be ashamed." ^ Now to none
but my Christ can be assigned the occasion '*
of such a shame as this. His whole course s
was so exposed to shame as to open a way for
even the taunts of heretics, declaiming*^ with
all the bitterness in their power against the
utter disgrace of His birth and bringing-up,
and the unworthiness of His very flesh. ^
But how can that Christ of yours be liable to
a shame, which it is impossible for him to
experience ? Since he was never condensed ^
into human flesh in the womb of a woman,
although a virgin; never grew from human
seed, although only after the law of corporeal
substance, from the fluids'" of a woman; was
never deemed flesh before shaped in the
womb; never called fa'tus^^ aftei^ such shap-
ing; was never delivered from a ten months'
writhing in the womb;" was never shed forth
upon the ground, amidst the sudden pains of
parturition, with the unclean issue which flows
at such a time through the sewerage of the
body, forthwith to inaugurate the light '^ of life
with tears, and with that primal wound which


J Isa. Ivii. I.

a We have, by understanding res, treated these adjectives as
nouns. Rigait. applies them to the docirina of the sentence just
previous. Perhaps, however, ^^ />ersecutione " is the noun.

3 Luke ix. 26.

4 Materia conveniat.

5 Ordo.

6 Perorantibus.

7 Foeditatem.

8 Ipsius etiam carnis indi|;;:nitatem ; because His flesh, being
capable of suffering and subject to death, seemed to them unworthy
of God. So Adv. Judiros, chap, xiv., hesays: " Primo sordidis
indutus est, id est carnis passihilis et mortalis indignitate." Or
His "indignity" may have been (l5of ovx a^iof rvpaci'i^os, His
*''unkingly aspect" (as Origen expresses it. Contra Ceisum,6)\
His " form of a servant," or slave, as St. Paul says. See also Ter-
tullian's Dc J'titicntta, iii. (Rigalt.)

9 Coagulatur. LJ"t» x. 10.]

10 Ex feminse humore.

11 Pecus. Julius Firmicus, iii. i, uses the word in the same way:
" Pecus intra viscera matris artuatim concisum a medicis profere-
tur," [Jul. Firmicus Maternus, floruit circa, a.d. 340.]

12 Such is probably the meaning of " non decem mensium cru-
ciatu deliberatus." For such is the situation of the infant in the
womb, that it seems to writhe {cructari) all curved and contracted
(Rigalt.). Latinius read delibratus instead of deliberatus, which
means, " suspended or poised in the womb as in a scale. This
has my approbation. I would compare De Came C/tristi, chap.
iv, (Fr. Junius.) Oehler reads deliberatus in the sense of liber--
atus.

13 Statim lucem lacrimis auspicatus.


severs the child from her who bears him;^<
never received the copious ablution, nor the
medication of salt and honey; 's nor did he in-
itiate a shroud with swaddling clothes; "^ nor
afterwards did he ever wallow '^ in his own un-
cleanness, in his mother's lap; nibbling at
her breast; long an infant; gradually '^ a boy;
by slow degrees '5 a man.=° But he was re-
vealed" from heaven, full-grown at once, at
once complete; immediately Christ; simply
spirit, and power, and god. But as withal he
was not true, because not visible; therefore
he was no object to be ashamed of from the
curse of the cross, the real endurance ==* of
which he escaped, because wanting in bodily
substance. Never, therefore, could he have
said, *' Whosever shall be ashamed of me."
But as for our Christ, He could do no other-
wise than make such a declaration; =3 " made "
by the Father " a little lower than the an-
gels," ^-^ " a worm and no man, a reproach of
men^ and despised of the people; "^s seeing
that it was His will that " with His stripes we
should be healed," ^ that by His humiliation
our salvation should be established. And
justly did He humble Himself ^^ for His own
creature man, for the image and likeness of
Himself, and not of another, in order that man,
since he had not felt ashamed when bowing
down to a stone or a stock, might with simi-
lar courage give satisfaction to God for the
shamelessness of his idolatry, by displaying
an equal degree of shamelessness in his faith,
in not being ashamed of Christ. Now, Mar-
cion, which^of these courses is better suited
to your Christ, in respect of a meritorious
shame ? =^ Plainly, you ought yourself to blush
with shame for having given him a fictitious
existence. "^

CHAP. XXII. THE SAME CONCLUSION SUPPORTED

BY THE TRANSFIGURATION. MARCION INCON-
SISTENT IN ASSOCIATING WITH CHRIST IN
GLORY TWO SUCH EMINENT SERVANTS OF THE
CREATOR AS MOSES AND tLIJAH. ST. PETER's
IGNORANCE ACCOUNTED FOR ON A MONTAN-
IST PRINCIPLE.

You ought to be very much ashamed of


14 Primo retinaculi sui vulnere : the cutting of the umbilical
nerve.^ [Contrast Jer. Taylor, on the Nativity, Opp. I. p. 34.]

15 Nee sale ac melle medicatus. Of this application in the case
of a recent childbirth we know nothing; it seems to have been
meant for the skin. See Pliny, in his Hist. Nat. xxii. 25.

16 Nee pannis jam sepultur^e involucrum initiatus.

17 Volutatus per immunditias.

18 Vix.

19 Tarde.
soExpositus.

31 i.e., he never passed through stages like these.
M Veritate.

23 Debuit pronuntiasse.

24 Ps. viii. 6.
=5 Ps. xxii. 6.
=6 Isa. liii. 5.
27 Se deposuit.
=8 Ad meritum confusionis.
»9Quod ilium finxisti.


4


CHAP. XXII.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


;83


yourself on this account too, for permitting
him to appear on the retired mountain in the
company of Moses and Elias,' whom he had
come to destroy. This, to be sure,^ was what
he wished to be understood as the meaning
of that voice from heaven: " This is my be-
loved Son, hear Him " ^ — Him, that is, not
Moses or Elias any longer. The voice alone,
therefore, was enough, without the display of
Moses and Elias; for, by expressly mention-
ing whom they were to hear, he nlust have
forbidden alH others from being heard. Or
else, did he mean that Isaiah and Jeremiah
and the others whom he did not exhibit were
to be heard, since he prohibited those whom
he did display ? Now, even if their presence
was necessary, .they surely should not be rep-
resented as conversing together, which is a
sign of familiarity; nor as associated in glory
with him, for this indicates respect and gra-
ciousness; but they should be shown in some
sloughs as a sure token of their ruin, or even
in that darkness of the Creator which Christ
was sent to disperse, far removed from the
glory of Him who was about to sever their
words and writings from His gospel. This,
then, is the way^ how he demonstrates them
to be aliens, 7 even by keeping them in his
own company ! This is how he shows they
ought to be relinquished: he associates them
with himself instead ! This is how he destroys
them : he irradiates them with his glory !
How would their own Christ act ? I suppose
He would have imitated the frowardness (of
heresy),^ and revealed them just as Marcion's
Christ was bound to do, or at least as having
with Him any others rather than His own
prophets ! But what could so well befit the
Creator's Christ, as to manifest Him in the
company of His own fore-announcers ?' — to
let Him be seen with those to whom He had
appeared in revelations ? — to let Him be
speaking with those who had spoken of Him ?
— to share His glory with those by whom He
used to be called the Lord of glory; even with
those chief servants of His, one of whom
was once the moulder'" of His people, the
other afterwards the reformer" thereof; one
the initiator of the Old Testament, the other
the consummator " of the New ? Well there-
fore does Peter, when recognizing the com-


1 Luke ix. 28-36.

2 Scilicet, in ironical allusion to a Marcionite opinion.

3 Luke ix. 35.

4 Quoscunque.

5 In sordibus aliquibus.

6 Sic.

7 To belong to another god.
s Secundum perversitatem.
9 Prsedicatores.

10 Informator, Moses, as having organized the nation.

" Reformator, Elias, the great prophet.

'2 It was a primitive opinion in the Church that Elijah was to
come, with Enoch, at the end of the world. See De A nima,
chap. XXXV. and 1. ; also Irenaius, De H ceres, v. 5. [Vol. I. 530.]


panions of his Christ in their indissoluble con-
nection with Him, suggest an expedient: " It
is good for us to be here" (good: that evi-
dently means to be where Moses and Elias
are); " and let us make three tabernacles, one
for Thee, and one for Moses, and one for
Elias. But he knew not what he said." '^
How knew not ? Was his ignorance the result
of simple error ? Or was it on the principle
which we maintain'* in the cause of the new
prophecy, '5 that to grace ecstasy or rapture'^
is incident. For when a man is rapt in the
Spirit, especially when he beholds the glory
of God, or when God speaks through him, he
necessarily loses his sensation,'' because he
is overshadowed with the power of God, — a
point concerning which there is a question
between us and the carnally-minded.'^ Now,
it is no difficult matter to prove the rapture ''
of Peter. For how could he have known Moses
and Elias, except (by being) in the Spirit?
People could not have had their images, or
statues, or likenesses; for that the law for-
bade. How, if it were not that he had seen
them in the Spirit ? And therefore, because
it was in the Spirit that he had now spoken,
and not in his natural senses, he could not
know what he had said. But if, on the other
hand,^ he was thus ignorant, because he erro-
neously supposed that (Jesus) was their Christ,
it is then evident that Peter, when previously
asked by Christ, "Whom they thought Him
to be," meant the Creator's Christ, when he
answered, " Thou art the Christ; " because if
he had been then aware that He belonged to
the rival god, he would not have made a mis-
take here. But if he was in error here be-
cause of his previous erroneous opinion, =' then
you may be sure that up to that very day no
new divinity had been revealed by Christ,
and that Peter had so far made no mistake,
because hitherto Christ had revealed nothing
of the kind; and that Christ accordingly was
not to be regarded as belonging to any other


13 Luke ix. 33.

14 This I'ertullian seems to have done in his treatise De Ecs-
iasi, which is mentioned by St. Jerome — see his Catalogus
Scriptt. Eccles. (in Tertulliano) ; and by Nicephorus, Hist. Eccles.
iv. 22, 34. On this subject of ecstasy, Tertullian has some obser-
vations in De Ani7tia, chap. xxi. and xlv, (Rigalt. and Oehler.)

15 [Elucidation VII.]

16 Amentiam.

17 Excidat sensu,

18 He calls those the carnally-minded (" psychicos '') who
thought that ecstatic raptures and revelations had ceased in the
church. The term arises from a perverse application of i Cor. ii.
14 : '^vyiKO'; 5e ai'^pwjros ov 5e;^eTat ro. rov Ili'su/uaros toO 0eov.
In opposition to the wild fanaticism of Montanus, into which Ter-
tullian strangely fell, the Catholics believed that the true proph-
ets, who were filled with the Spirit of God, discharged their pro-
phetic functions with a quiet and tranquil mind. See the anony-
mous author. Contra Cataphrygas., in Eusebius, Hist. Eccl. v.
17; Epiphanius, Hceres. 48. See also Routh, Rell. Sacrce, i. p.
100; and Bp. Kaye, On the Writings 0/ Tertullian^ edit. 3, pp.
27-36. (Munter's Primord, Eccles A/ric. p. 138, quoted by
Oehler.)

19 Amentiam.
2oCeterum.

21 According to the hypothesis.


384


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book IV.


than the Creator, whose entire dispensation'
he, in fact, here described. He selects from
His disciples three witnesses of the impending
vision and voice. And this is just the way
of the Creator. " In the mouth of three wit-
nesses," says He, "shall every word be es-
tablished."'' He withdraws to a mountain.
In the nature of the place I see much mean-
ing. For the Creator had originally formed
His ancient people on a mountain both with
visible glory and His voice. It was only
right that the New Testament should be at-
tested 3 on such an elevated spot * as that
whereon the Old Testament had been com-
posed ;s under a like covering of cloud also,
which nobody will doubt, was condensed out
of the Creator's air. Unless, indeed, he^
had brought down his own clouds thither, be-
cause he had himself forced his way through
the Creator's heaven; 7 or else it was only a
precarious cloud, *^ as it were, of the Creator
which he used. On the present (as also on
the former) 5 occasion, therefore, the cloud
was not silent; but there was the accustomed
voice from heaven, and the Father's testi-
mony to the Son; precisely as in the first
Psalm He had said, "Thou art my Son, to-
day have I begotten thee." '° By the mouth
of Isaiah also He had asked concerning Him,
" Who is there among you that feareth God ?
Let him hear the voice of His Son." " When
therefore He here presents Him with the
words, "This is my (beloved) Son," this
clause is of course understood, " whom I have
promised." For if He once promised, and
then afterwards says, " This is He," it is suit-
able conduct for one who accomplishes His
purpose " that He should utter His voice in
proof of the promise which He had formerly
made; but unsuitable in one who is amenable
to the retort. Can you, indeed, have a right
to say, "This is my son," concerning whom
you have given us no previous information, '3
any more than you have favoured us with a
revelation about your own prior existence?
" Hear ye Him," therefore, whom from the
beginning (the Creator) had declared entitled
to be heard in the name of a prophet, since it
was as a prophet that He had to be regarded


1 Totum ordinem, in the three periods represented by Moses,
and Elijah, and Christ.

2 Compare Deut. xix. 15 with Lulte ix. 28.
aConsignari.

4 In eo suggestu.

5 Conscriptum fuerat.

6 Marcions god.

7 Compare above, book i. chap. 15, and book iv. chap. 7.

8 Precario. This word is used in book v. chap. xii. to describe
the transitorincss of the Creator's paradise and world.

9 Nee nunc.
10 Ps. ii. 7.

" Isa. 1. 10, according to the Septuagint.

12 Ejus est exhibentis.

13 Non pra^misisii. Oehler suggests J>romisisti, " have given
us no promise."


by the people. "A prophet," says Moses,
" shall the Lord your God raise up unto you,
of your sons" (that is, of course, after a car-
nal descent'"); "unto Him shall ye hearken,
as unto me."'s "Every one who will not
hearken unto Him, his soul '^ shall be cut off
from amongst his people." '^ So also Isaiah:
" Who is there among you that feareth God ?
Let him hear the voice of His Son." '^ This
voice the Father was going Himself to recom-
mend. For, says he,'^ He establishes the
words of His Son, when He says, " This is
my beloved Son, hear ye Him." Therefore,
even if there be made a transfer of the obedi-
ent "hearing" from Moses and Elias to'-"*
Christ, it is still not from another God, or to
another Christ; but from "" the Creator to His
Christ, in consequence of the departure of
the old covenant and the supervening of the
new. "Not an ambassador, nor an angel,
but He Himself," says Isaiah, "shall save
them;"^= for it is He Himself who is now
declaring and fulfilling the law and the proph-
ets. The Father gave to the Son new disci-
ples,=3 after that Moses and Elias had been
exhibited along with Him in the honour of
His glory, and had then been dismissed as
having fully discharged their duty and office,
for the express purpose of affirming for Mar-
cion's information the fact that Moses and
Elias had a share in even the glory of Christ.
But we have the entire structure ""* of this same
vision in Habakkuk also, where the Spirit in
the person of some ^s of the apostles says, "O
Lord, I have heard Thy speech, and was
afraid." What speech was this, other than
the words of the voice from heaven, This is my
beloved Son, hear ye. Him? " I considered
thy works, and was astonished." When
could tlife have better happened than when
Peter, on seeing His glory, knew not what
he was saying? "In the midst of the two
Thou shalt be known" — even Moses and


14 Censum: Some read sensutn, " sense."

»5 Deut. xviii. 15.

»6 Anima: life.

'7 Deut. xviii. 19.

'8 Isa. 1. 10.

'9 TertuUian, by introducing this statement with an " inqtiit^'
seems to make a quotation of it- but it is only a comment on the
actual quotations. TertuUian s invariable object in this argu-
ment is to match some event or word pertaining to the Christ of
the New Testament with some declaration of the Old Testament.
In this instance the approving words of God upon the mount are
in Heb. i. 5 applied to the Son, while in Ps. ii. 7 the Son applies
them to Himself. Compare the Adversus Praxean, chap. xix.
(Fr. Junius and Oehler.) It is, however, more likely that Ter-
tuUian really means to quote Isa. xliv. 26, " that confirmeth the
word of His servant," which TertuUian reads, " Sistens_ verba filii
sui," the Septuagint being, Kal ivToiv pfifia naiSbv aiirov.

20 In Christo. In with an ablative is often used by our author
for in with an accusative.

2' Or perhaps " />y the Creator."

22 Isa. Ixiii. 9, according to the Septuagint; only he reads yac/V/
for aorist ivmatv.

23 A Marcionite position.

24 Habit urn.
25lnterdum.


CHAr. XXIII.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


385


Elias.' These likewise did Zechariah see
under the figure of the two olive trees and
olive branches. = For these are they of whom
he says, " They are the two anointed ones,
that stand by the Lord of the whole earth."
And again Habakkuk says, " His glory cov-
ered the heavens" (that is, with that cloud),
** and His splendour shall be like the light —
.even the light, wherewith His very raiment
rlistened." And if we would make mention
)f 3 the promise to Moses, we shall find it ac-
jomplished here. For when Moses desired

see the Lord, saying, " If therefore I have
pound grace in Thy sight, manifest Thyself

me, that I may see Thee distinctly," ^ the
sight which he desired to have was of that
:ondition which he was to assume as man,
md which as a prophet he knew was to occur.
^Respecting the face of God, however, he had
already heard, " No man shall see me, and
live." " This thing," said He, " which thou
hast spoken, will I do unto thee." Then
Moses said, " Show me Thy glory." And the
Lord, with like reference to the future, re-
plied, " I will pass before thee in my glory,"
etc. Then at the last He says, "And then
thou shalt see my back."^ Not loins, or
calves of the legs, did he want to behold, but
the glory which was to be revealed in the
latter days.^ He had promised that He would
make Himself thus face to face visible to him,
when He said to Aaron, " If there shall be
prophet among you, I will make myself
:nown to him by vision, and by vision will I
jpeak with him; but not so is my manner to
loses; with hi?n will I speak mouth to mouth,
even apparently " (that is to say, in the form
of man which He was to assume), " and not
in dark speeches." 7 Now, although Marcion
has denied ^ that he is here represented as
speaking with the Lord, but only as standing,
yet, inasmuch as he stood " mouth to mouth,"
he must also have stood " face to face " with
hijH, to use his words, ^ not far from him, in
His very glory — not to say,'° in His presence.
And with this glory he went away enlightened
from Christ, just as he used to do from the
Creator; as fhento dazzle the eyes of the chil-
dren of Israel, so fima to smite those of the
blinded Marcion, who has failed to see how
this argument also makes against him.


' Hab. 111. 2, according to the Septuagint. St, Augustine simi-
larly applied this passage, De Civit. Dei, li. 32.
^Zech. iv. 3, 14.

3Commem6remur: be reminded, or call to mind.
4 Cognoscenter : yj/ajo-TcJs, "so as to know Thee."

5 See Ex. xxxiii. 13-23.

6 Posterioribus temporibns. [The awful ribaldry of Voltaire
upon this glorious revelation is based upou the Vulgate reading of
Exod. xxxiii. 23, needlessly transferred to our Version, but cor-
rected by the late Revisers.]

7 Num. xii. 6-8.
^Noluit.

9 It is difficult to see what this inquit means.
loNedum.

25


CHAP. XXIII. IMPOSSIBLE THAT MARCION's

CHRIST SHOULD REPROVE THE FAITHLESS
GENERATION. SUCH LOVING CONSIDERATION
FOR INFANTS AS THE TRUE CHRIST WAS APT
TO SHEW, ALSO IMPOSSIBLE FOR THE OTHER.
ON THE THREE DIFFERENT CHARACTERS CON-
FRONTED AND INSTRUCTED BY CHRIST IN
SAMARIA.

I take on myself the character" of Israel.
Let Marcion 's Christ stand forth, and ex-
claim, J^' O la[thj ess generation r"~Tiow long
shall r be wTth you ? how long ghai] j suffer
you ? " '3 H e_wi 1 1 i mmediately have to submit
.t£L_tl]Lis.. femoastrance from me:j" Whoever
you are, O stranger, '^ first tell us who you are,
from whom you come, and what right you
have over us. Thus far, all you possess 's be-
longs to the Creator. Of course, if you come
from Him, and are acting for Him, we will
bear your reproof. But if you come from
some other god, I should wish you to tell us
what you have ever committed to us belong-
ing to yourself,'^ which it was our duty to be-
lieve, seeing that you are upbraiding us with
'faithlessness,' who have never yet revealed
to us your own self. How long ago '^ did you
begin to treat with us, that you should be
complaining of the delay? On what points
have you borne with us, that you should ad-
duce'^ your patience? Like ^^sop's ass,
you are just come from the well,'^ and are
filling every place with your braying." I
assume, besides,^ the person of the disciples,
against whom he has inveighed:^' "O per-
verse nation ! how long shall I be with you ?
how long shall I suffer you ? " This outburst
of his I might, of course, retort upon him
most justly in such words as these: "Who-
ever you are, O stranger, first tell us who you
are, from whom you come, what right you
have over us. Thus far, I suppose, you be-
long to the Creator, and so we have followed
you, recognising in you all things which are
His. Now, if you come from Him, we will
bear your reproof. If, however, you are act-
ing for another, prythee tell us what you have
ever conferred upon us that is simply your
own, which it had become our duty to be-
lieve, seeing that you reproach us with ' faith-
lessness,' although up to this moment you
show us no credentials. How long since did
you begin to plead with us, that you are


iJ Personam: " I personate Israel."
" Genitura.

13 Luke ix. 41.

14 eirepxoMfe. The true Christ is 6 lpx6it.f.vo%.
'5 Totum apud te.

'6 De tuo commisisti.

'7 Quam plim.

'8 Imputes.

19 This fable is not extant (Oehler).

=9 Adhuc.

21 Insiliit.


i86


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book IV.


charging us with delay ? Wherein have you
borne with us, that you should even boast of
your patience ? The ass has only just arrived
from y^^sop's well, and he is already braying. ' '
Now who would not thus have rebutted the
unfairness of the rebuke, if he had supposed
its author to belong to him who had had no
right as yet to complain ? Except that not
even He' would have inveighed against them,
if He had not dwelt among them of old in the
law and by the prophets, and with mighty
deeds and many mercies, and had always ex-
perienced them to be "faithless." But, be-
hold, Christ takes" infants, and teaches how
all ought to be like them, if they ever wish to
be greater. 3 The Creator, on the contrary,^
let loose bears against children, in order to
avenge His prophet Elisha, who had been
mocked by them.s This antithesis is impu-
dent enough, since it throws together^ things
so different as infants ^ and children,^ — an age
still innocent, and one already capable of dis-
cretion— able to mock, if not to blaspheme.
As therefore God is a just God, He spared
not impious children, exacting as He does
honour for every time of life, and especially,
of course, from youth. And as God is good.
He so loves infants as to have blessed the
midwives in Egypt,, when they protected the
infants of the Hebrews' which were in peril
from Pharaoh's command.'" Christ therefore
shares this kindness with the Creator. As
indeed for Marcion's god, who is an enemy
to marriage, how can he possibly seem to be
a lover of little children, which are simply the
issue of marriage ? He who hates the seed,
must needs also detest the fruit. Yea, he
ought to be deemed more ruthless than the
king of Egypt." For whereas Pharaoh for-
bade infants to be brought up, he will not
allow them even to be born, depriving them
of their ten months' existence in the womb.
And how much more credible it is, that kind-
ness to little children should be attributed to
Him who blessed matrimony for the procrea-
tion of mankind, and in such benediction in-
cluded also the promise of connubial fruit
itself, the first of which is that of infancy ! "
The Creator, at the request of Elias, inflicts
the blow '3 of fire from heaven in the case of


1 Nisi quod nee ille. This ille, of course, means the Creator's
Christ.

2 Diligit: or, loves.

3 Luke ix. 47, 48.

4 Autem.

5 2 Kings ii. 23, 24.
^Committit.

7 Parvulos.

8 Pueros : [young ladsj.

9 Partus Hebraeos.
»°Ex. ii. 15-21.

^' See a X\V& comparison in book i. chap. xxix. p. 294.
»2Quide infantia primus est: i.e., cujus qui de infantia, etc.
[Elucidation VIII.]
*3 Reprajsentat plagam.


that false prophet (of Baalzebub).'* I recog-
nise herein the severity of the Judge. And
I, on the contrary, the severe rebuke's of
Christ on His disciples, when they were for
inflicting'* a like visitation on that obscure
village of the Samaritans. '^ The heretic, too,
may discover that this gentleness of Christ
was promised by the selfsame severest Judge.
" He shall not contend," says He, " nor shall
His voice be heard in the street; a bruised
reed shall He not crush, and smoking flax
shall He not quench."'^ Being of such a
character, He was of course much the less
disposed to burn men. For even at that time
the Lord said to Elias, '» " He was not in the
fire, but in the still smalll voice." =~ Well,
but why does this most humane and merciful
God reject the man who offers himself to Him
as an inseparable companion?" If it were
from pride or from hypocrisy that he had
said, " I will follow Thee whithersoever Thou
goest, ' then, by judicially reproving an act
of either pride or hypocrisy as worthy of re-
jection. He performed the office of a Judge.
And, of course, him whom He rejected He
condemned to the loss of not following the
Saviour." For as He calls to salvation him
whom He does not reject, or him whom He
voluntarily invites, so does He consign to
perdition him whom He rejects. When, how-
ever, He answers the man, who alleged as an
excuse his father's burial, " Let the dead bury
their dead, but go thou and preach the king-
dom of God, ' ' ="3 He gave a clear confirmation
to those two laws of the Creator — that in Le-
viticus, which concerns the sacerdotal ofiice,
and forbids the priests to be present at the
funerals even of their parents. " The priest,"
says He, " shall not enter where there is any
dead person;'* and for his father he shall not
be defiled "'S; as well as that in Numbers,
which relates to the (Nazarite) vow of separa-
tion; for there he who devotes himself to —
God, among other things, is bidden " not to
come at any dead body," not even of his
father, or his mother, or his brother.** Now
it was, I suppose, for the Nazarite and the
priestly office that He intended this man whom


'4 2 Kings i. Q-12,

IS I translate after Oehler's text, which is supported by the old-
est authorities. Pamelius and Rigaltius, however, read " Christi
lenitatem increpantis eandem animadversionem," etc. (" On the
contrary, I recognize the gentleness of Christ, who rebuked His
disciples when they," etc.) This reading is only conjectural, sug-
gested by the " Christi lenitatem " of the context.

"^ Destinantes.

'" Luke ix. 51-56.

'^ Isa. xlii. 2, 3.

'9 Compare De Pat tent ia, chap. xv.

=» I Kin^s xix. 12.

2' Luke ix. 57, 58. . ,

'^ Salutem : i.e. " Christ, who is our salvation " (Fr. Junius,

=3 Luke ix. 59, 60.

=4 Animam defunctam.

25 Lev. xxi. I, according to our author's reading.

-* Num. vi. 6, /»!


1


chap; XXIV.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


2>^7


He had been inspiring' to preach the king-
dom of God. Or else, if it be not so, he
must be pronounced impious enough who,
without the intervention of any precept of the
law, commanded that burials of parents should
be neglected by their sons. When, indeed,
in the third case before us, (Christ) forbids
the man "to look back" who wanted first
" to bid his family farewell," He only follows
out the rule ^ of the Creator. For this (retro-
spection) He had been against their making,
whom He had rescued out of Sodom. ^


CHAP. XXIV. ON THE MISSION OF THE SEVENTY

DISCIPLES, AND CHRIST's CHARGE TO THEM.
PRECEDENTS DRAWN FROM THE OLD TESTA-
MENT. ABSURDITY OF SUPPOSING THAT MAR-
CION's CHRIST COULD HAVE GIVEN THE POWER
OF TREADING ON SERPENTS AND SCORPIONS.

He chose also seventy other missionaries'*
besides the twelve. Now why, if the twelve
followed the number of the twelve fountains
of Elim,5 should not the seventy correspond
to the like number of the palms of that place ? ^
Whatever be the A?ititheses of the comparison,
it is a diversity in the causes, not in the
powers, which has mainly produced them.
But if one does not keep in view the diversity
of the causes;' he is very apt to infer a differ-
ence oi powers} When the children of Israel
went out of Egypt, the Creator brought them
forth laden with their spoils of gold and silver
vessels, and with loads besides of raiment
and unleavened dough ;9 whereas Christ com-
manded His disciples not to carry even a
staff '° for their journey. The former were
thrust forth into a desert, but the latter were
sent into cities. Consider the difference pre-
sented in the occasions," and you will under-
stand how it was one and the same power
which arranged the mission '^ of His people
according to their poverty in the one case,
and their plenty in the other. He cut down '^
their supplies when they could be replenished
through the cities, just as He had accumu-
lated '■* them when exposed to the scantiness
of the desert. Even shoes He forbade them
to carry. For it was He under whose very


^ Imbuerat.

2 Sectam.

3 Gen. xix. 17.
4Apostolos : Luke X. i.

5 Compare above, book iv. chap. xiii. p. 364.

6 Ex. XV. 27 and Num. xxxiii. 9;

7 Causarum : " occasions" or circumstances.
sPotestatum. In Marcionite terms, "The Gods of the Old

and the New Testaments."

9 Consparsionum. [Punic Latin.] Ex. xii. 34, 35.
^° Virgam, Luke x. 4 and Matt. x. 10.

11 Causarum offerentiam.

12 Expeditionem, with the sense also of " supplies " in the next
clause.

13 Circumcidens.
'4Struxerat.


protection the people wore not out a shoe,**
even in the wilderness for the space of so
many years. "No one," says He, "shall
ye salute by the way. ' ' '^ What a destroyer
of the prophets, forsooth, is Christ, seeing it
is from them that He received his precept
also ! When Elisha sent on his servant
Gehazi before him to raise the Shunammite's
son from death, I rather think he gave him
these instructions:''' " Gird up thy loins, and
take my staff in thine hand, and go thy way:
if thou meet any man, salute him not;'^ and
if any salute thee, answer him not again." '»
For what is a wayside blessing but a mutual
salutation as men meet? So also the Lord
commands: "Into whatsoever house they
enter, let them say. Peace be to it." =° Here-
in He follows the very same example. For
Elisha enjoined upon his servant the same
salutation when he met the Shunammite; he
was to say to her: " Peace to thine husband,
peace to thy child." ^' Such will be rather our
Afitithesesj they compare Christ with, instead
of sundering Him from, the Creator. " The
labourer is worthy of his hire." ^"^ Who could
better pronounce such a sentence than God
the Judge ? For to decide that the workman
deserves his wages, is in itself a judicial act.
There is no award which consists not in a
process of judgment. The law of the Creator
on this point also presents us with a corrobo-
ration, for He judges that labouring oxen are
as labourers worthy of their hire: "Thou
shalt not muzzle," says He, "the ox when
he treadeth out the corn." =3 Now, who ib
so good to man ^'^ as He who is also mercitui
to cattle ? Now, when Christ pronounced
labourers to be worthy of their hire, He, in
fact, exonerated from blame that precept ot
the Creator about depriving the Egyptians or
their gold and silver vessels. =s Yov they who
had built for the Egyptians their houses and
cities, were surely workmen worthy of their
hire, and were not instructed in a fraudulent
act, but only set to claim compensation for
their hire, which they were unable in any
other way to exact from their masters.^ Tnat
the kingdom of God was neither new nor un-
heard of, He in this way affirmed, whilst at
the same time He bids them announce that
it was near at hand.''^ Now it is that which


15 Deut. xxix. 5.

16 Luke X. 4.

17 See 2 Kings iv. 29.

18 Literally, " bless him not, i.e., salute him not."

19 Literally, " answer him not, i.e., return not his s.»Iutation."

20 Luke X. 5.

21 2 Kings iv. 26. He reads the optative instead of the indic-
ative.

22 Luke X. 7.

23 Deut. XXV. 4.

24 Compare above, book ii. chap. 17, p. 311.

25 See this argued at length above, in book ii. chap. ?o. p. 313.

26 Dominatoribus.

27 Luke X. 9.


388


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book IV.


was once far off, which can be properly said
to have become near. If, however, a thing
had never existed previous to its becoming
near, it could never have been said to have
approached, because it had never existed at a
distance. Everything which is new and un-
known is also sudden.' Everything which is
sudden, then, first receives the accident of
time^ when it is announced, for it then first
puts on appearance of form.^ Besides it will
be impossible for a thing either to have been
tardy* all the while it remained unan-
nounced,s or to have approached^ from the
time it shall begin to be announced.

He likewise adds, that they should say to
such as would not receive them: "Notwith-
standing be ye sure of this, that the kingdom
of God is come nigh unto you." ^ If He does
not enjoin this by way of a commination, the
injunction is a most useless one. For what
mattered it to them that the kingdom was at
hand, unless its approach was accompanied
with judgment ? — even for the salvation of
such as received the announcement thereof.
How, if there can be a threat without its ac-
complishment, can you have in a threatening
god, one that executes also, and in both, one
that is a judicial being ?^ So, again. He
commands that the dust be shaken off against
them, as a testimony, — the very particles of
their ground which might cleave' to the san-
dal, not to mention '° any other sort of com-
munication with them." But if their churlish-
ness" and inhospitality were to receive no
vengeance from Him, for what purpose does
He premise a testimony, which surely for-
bodes some threats ? Furthermore, when the
Creator also, in the book of Deuteronomy,
forbids the reception of the Ammonites and
the Moabites into the church, '^ because, when
His people came from Egypt, they fraudu-
lently withheld provisions from them with
inhumanity and inhospitality,'* it will be
manifest that the prohibition of intercourse
descended to Christ from Him. The form
of it which He uses — " He that despiseth
you, despiseth me " 's — the Creator had also
addressed to Moses: " Not against thee have


» Subitum.
"'Accipit tempus,

3 Inducens speciera.

4 Tardasse.

5 The announcement (according to the definition) defining the
beginning of its existence in time.

6 Appropinquasse.

7 Luke X. II.

8 Et judicem in utroque.
9Haerentia.

10 Nedum.
" Luke X. II.

12 Inhumanitas.

13 Ecclesiam. There is force in thus using Christian terms for
Jewish ordinances, full as he is of the identity of the God of the
old with Him of the new covenant.

'4 Deut. xxiii. 3.
»SLukex. 16.


they murmured, but against me."'^ Moses,
indeed, was as much an apostle as the apostles
were prophets. The authority of both offices
will have to be equally divided, as it proceeds
from one and the same Lord, (the God) of
apostles and prophets. Who is He that shall
bestow "the power of treading on serpents
and scorpions ? " '^ Shall it be He who is the
Lord of all living creatures or he who is not
god over a single lizard ? Happily the Crea-
tor has promised by Isaiah to give this power
even to little children, of putting their hand
in the cockatrice den and on the hole of the
young asps without at all receiving hurt.'^
And, indeed, we are aware (without doing
violence to the literal sense of the passage,
since even these noxious animals have actually
been unable to do hurt where there has been
faith) that under the figure of scorpions and
serpents are portended evil spirits, whose very
prince is described '^ by the name of serpent,
dragon, and every other most conspicuous
beast in the power of the Creator.^ This
power the Creator conferred first of all upon
His Christ, even as the ninetieth Psalm says
to Him: " Upon the asp and the basilisk shalt
Thou tread; the lion and the dragon shalt
Thou trample under foot." " So also Isaiah:
" In that day the Lord God shall draw His
sacred, great, and strong sword" (even His
Christ) "against that dragon, that great and
tortuous serpent; and He shall slay him in
that day."='- But when the same prophet
says, "The way shall be called a clean and
holy way; over it the unclean thing shall not
pass, nor shall be there any unclean way; but
the dispersed shall pass over it, and they shall
not err therein; no lion shall be there, nor
any ravenous beast shall go up thereon; it
shall not be found there," "^ he points out the
way of faith, by which we shall reach to God;
and then to this way of faith he promises this
utter crippling ''^ and subjugation of all nox-
ious animals. Lastly, you may discover the
suitable times of the promise, if you read
what precedes the passage: " Be strong, ye
weak hands and ye feeble knees: then the
eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the
ears of the deaf shall hear; then shall the
lame man leap as an hart, and the tongue of
the dumb shall be articulate. ' ' =s When, there-
fore. He proclaimed the benefits of His cures,
then also did He put the scorpions and the


*6 Num. xiv. 27.

'7 Luke X. 19.

'8 Isa. xi. 8, 9.

»9 Deputetur.

20 Penes Creatorem.

2' Ps. xci. i^.

22 Lsa. xxvii. 1, Sept.

23 Isa. XXXV. 8, 9, Sept.

24 Evacuationem.

-3 Isa. xx.\v. 3, 5, 6, Sept.


1


CHAP. XXV.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


389


serpents under the feet of His saints — even
He who had first received this power from
the Father, in order to bestow it upon others,
and then manifested it forth conformably to
the order of prophecy.'

CHAP. XXV. — CHRIST THANKS THE FATHER FOR
REVEALING TO BABES WHAT HE HAD CON-
CEALED FROM THE WISE. THIS CONCEALMENT
JUDICIOUSLY EFFECTED BY THE CREATOR.
OTHER POINTS IN ST. LUKE'S CHAP. X. SHOWN
TO BE ONLY POSSIBLE TO THE CREATOR'S
CHRIST.

Who shall be invoked as the Lord of
heaven, that does not first show Himself^ to
have been the maker thereof ? For He says,
" I thank thee, (O Father,) and own Thee,
Lord of heaven, because those things which
had been hidden from the wise and prudent,
Thou has revealed unto babes." ^ What
things are these ? And whose ? And by whom
hidden ? And by whom revealed ? If it was
by Marcion's god that they were hidden and
revealed, it was an extremely iniquitous pro-
ceeding;* for nothing at all had he ever pro-
duced s in which anything could have been
hidden — no prophecies, no parables, no vis-
ions, no evidences^ of things, or words, or
names, obscured by allegories and figures, or
cloudy enigmas, but he had concealed the
greatness even of himself, which he was with
all his might revealing by his Christ. Now
in what respect had the wise and prudent
done wrong,7 that God should be hidden from
them, when their wisdom and prudence had
been insufficient to come to the knowledge
of Him ? No way had been provided by him-
self,^ by any declaration of his works, or any
vestiges whereby they might become ^ wise
■ and prudent. However, if they had even failed
in any duty towards a god whom they knew
not, suppose him now at last to be known,
[still they ought not to have found a jealous
god in him who is introduced as unlike the
Creator. Therefore, since he had neither
provided any materials in which he could
have hidden anything, nor had any offenders
from whom he could have hidden himself;
since, again, even if he had had any, he ought
not to have hidden himself from them, he will
not now be himself the revealer, who was not
previously the concealer; so neither will any
be the Lord of heaven nor the Father of


' Secundum ordinem praedicationis.

2 Ostenditur.

3 Luke X. 21.

4 Satis inique.
SPrsemiserat.
^ Argumenta.

7 Deliquerant.

8 On the Marcionite hypothesis.
9Deducerentur.


Christ but He in whom all these attributes
consistently meet. '° For He conceals by His
preparatory apparatus of prophetic obscurity,
the understanding of which is open to faith
(for " if ye will not believe, ye shall not un-
derstand " "); and He had offenders in those
wise and prudent ones who would not seek
after God, although He was to be discovered
in His so many and mighty works, '^ or who
rashly philosophized about Him, and thereby
furnished to heretics their arts;'^ and lastly,
He is a jealous God. Accordingly,"* that
which Christ thanks God for doing, He long
ago '5 announced by Isaiah: "I will destroy
the wisdom of the wise, and the understand-
ing of the prudent will I hide."'^ So in
another passage He intimates both that He
has concealed , and that He will also reveal : " I
will give unto them treasures that have been
hidden, and secret ones will I discover to
them." '7 And again: "Who else shall scat-
ter the tokens of ventriloquists,'^ and the de-
vices of those who divine out of their own
heart; turning wise men backward, and mak-
ing their counsels foolish ?" '^ Now, if He
has designated His Christ as an enlightener
of the Gentiles, saying, " I have set thee for
a light of the Gentiles;"^ and ^f we under-
stand these to be meant in the word babes ="' —
as having been once dwarfs in knowledge and
infants in prudence, and even now also babes
in their lowliness of faith — we shall of course
more easily understand how He who had once
hidden " these things," and promised a reve-
lation of them through Christ, was the same
God as He who had now revealed them unto
babes. Else, if it was Marcion's god who re-
vealed the things which had been formerly
hidden by the Creator, it follows == that he
did the Creator's work by setting forth His
deeds. ^3 gut he did it, say you, for His de-
struction, that he might refute them.^'* There-
fore he ought to have refuted them to those
from whom the Creator had hidden them,
even the wise and prudent. For if he had a
kind intention in what he did, the gift of
knowledge was due to those from whom the
Creator had detained it, instead of the babes,
to whom the Creator had grudged no gift.
But after all, it is, I presume, the edifica-


10 In quem competunt omnia.

'I Is^. vii. 9.

'2 Rom. i. 20-23.

i3lngenia.

i4Denique.

15 Olim.

16 Isa. xxix. 14, Sept.

17 Isa. xlv. 3, Sept.

18 Ventriloquorum, Greek kyya,<jTpi\i.vB<iiv.

19 Isa. xliv. 25, Sept.

20 Isa. xlii. 6 and xlix. 6.

21 Luke X. 21.

22 Ergo.

23 Res ejus edisserens.

24 Uti traduceret eas.


390


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[hook IV.


tion ' rather than the demolition " of the law
and the prophets which we have thus far
found effected in Christ. "All things," He
says, " are delivered unto me of my Father." ^
You may believe Him, if He is the Christ of
the Creator to whom all things belong; be-
cause the Creator has not delivered to a Son
who is less than Himself all things, which He
created by ♦ Him, that is to say, by His
Word. If, on the contrary, he is the notori-
ous stranger,s what are the " all things * ' which
have been delivered to him by the Father ?
Are they the Creator's? Then the things
which the Father delivered to the Son are
good, and the Creator is therefore good, since
all His " things " are good; whereas he^ is no
longer good who has invaded another's good
(domains) to deliver it to his son, thus teach-
ing robbery ' of another's goods. Surely he
must be a most mendacious being, who had
no other means of enriching his son than by
helping himself to another's property ! Or
else,^ if nothing of the Creator's has been de-
livered to him by the Father, by what right ^
does he claim for himself (authority over)
man ? Or again, if man has been delivered
to him, and man alone, then man is not *' all
things." B^ut Scripture clearly says that a
transfer of all things has been made to the
Son. If, however, you should interpret this
^''air* of the whole human race, that is, all
natiotts, then the delivery of even these to the
Son is within the purpose of the Creator: '°
** I will give Thee the heathen for Thine in-
heritance, and the uttermost parts of the
earth for Thy possession."" If, indeed, he
has some things of his own, the whole of which
he might give to his son, along with the man
of the Creator, then show some one thing of
them all, as a sample, that I may believe; lest
I should have as much reason not to believe
that all things belong to him, of whom I see
nothing, as I have ground for believing that
even the things which I see not are His, to
whom belongs the universe, which I see. But
*' no man knoweth who the Father is, but the
Son; and who the Son is, but the Father, and
he to whom the Son will reveal Him." " And
so it was an unknown god that Christ
preached ! And other heretics, too, prop
themselves up by this passage; alleging in
opposition to it that the Creator was known to

^ Constructionem.
" Destructionem.

3 Luke X. 22.

4 Per.

5 eTrepxc^efo? tile ; on which see above, chap, xxiii. p. 385
f> Marcion's god.

7 Alieno abstinere.

8 Aut si.

9 Ecquomodo.
'oCreatoris est.
i» Ps. ii. 8.
"Luke X. 22.


all, both to Israel by familiar intercourse, and
to the Gentiles by nature. Well, how is it He
Himself testifies that He was not known to
Israel ? " But Israel doth not know me, and
my people doth not consider me; " '^ nor to
the Gentiles: "For, behold," says He, "of
the nations I have no man." ^* Therefore He
reckoned them " as the drop of a bucket," '^
while " Sion He left as a look-out '* in a vine-
yard. ' ' '7 See, then, whether there be not here
a confirmation of the prophet's word, when
he rebukes that ignorance of man toward God
which continued to the days of the Son of
man. For it was on this account that he in-
serted the clause that the Father is known by
him to whom the Son has revealed Him, be-
cause it was even He who was announced as
set by the Father to be a light to the Gen-
tiles, who of course required to be enlightened
concerning God, as well as to Israel, even by
imparting to it a fuller knowledge of God.
Arguments, therefore, will be of no use for
belief in the rival god which may be suitable'^
for the Creator, because it is only such as are
unfit for the Creator which will be able to
advance belief in His rival. If you look also
into the next words, " Blessed are the eyes
which see the things which ye see, for I tell
you that prophets have not seen the things
which ye see," '' you will find that they follow
from the sense above, that no man indeed had
come to the knowledge of God as he ought
to have done,^ since even the prophets had
not seen the things which were being seen
under Christ. Now if He had not been my
Christ, He would not have made any mention
of the prophets in this passage. For what
was there to wonder at, if they had not seen
the things of a god who had been unknown
to them, and was only revealed a long time
after them ? What blessedness, however,
could theirs have been, who were then seeing
what others were naturally" unable to see,
since it was of things which they had never
predicted that they had not obtained the
sight; =' if it were not because they might just-
ly ="3 have seen the things pertaining to their
God, which they had even predicted, but which
they at the same time =•* had not seen ? This,
however, will be the blessedness of others,
even of such as were seeing the things which


'3 Isa. i. 3.

'4 This passaare it is not easy to identify. [See Is. Ixiii. 3.] The
books point to Isa. Ixv. 5, but there is there no trace of it.
'5 Isii. xl. 15. [Compare Is. Ixiii. 3. Sept.]
'^ Speculam.

'7When the vintage was gathered, Isa. i. 8.
•8 Qua coinpetere possunt.
'9 Luke x. 23, 24,

20 Ut decuit.

21 Merito.

22 Reprsesentationem.

23 /Kque.

24 Tamen.


1


CHAr. X.Wl.J


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


391


others had only foretold. We shall by and
by show, nay, we have already shown, that in
Christ those things were seen which had been
foretold, but yet had been hidden from the
very prophets who foretold them, in order
that they might be hidden also from the wise
and the prudent. In the true Gospel, a cer-
tain doctor of the law comes to the Lord and
asks, " What shall I do to inherit eternal
life?" In the heretical gospel life only is
mentioned, without the attribute eternal; so
that the lawyer seems to have consulted Christ
simply about the life which the Creator in the
law promises to prolong,' and the Lord to
have therefore answered him according to the
law, " Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with
all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with
all thy strength,"^ since the question was con-
cerning the conditions of mere life. But the
lawyer of course knew very well in what way
the life which the law meant ^ was to be ob-
tained, so that his question could have had
no relation to the life whose rules he was him-
self in the habit of teaching. But seeing that
even the dead were now raised by Christ, and
being himself excited to the hope of an eter-
^nal life by these examples of a restored ^ one,
le would lose no more time in merely look-
ing on (at the wonderful things which had
^made him) so high in hope.s He therefore
consulted him about the attainment of eternal
life. Accordingly, the Lord, being Himself
the same,^ and introducing no new precept
tether than that which relates above all others ^
rto (man's) entire salvation, even including
^the present and the future life,^ places before
thim^ the very essence '° of the law — that he
rshould in every possible way love the Lord
ihis God. If, indeed, it were only about a
lengthened life, such as is at the Creator's
iisposal, that he inquired and Christ an-
swered, and not about the eternal life, which
is at the disposal of Marcion's god, how is he
to obtain the eternal one ? Surely not in the
>ame manner as the prolonged life. For in
)roportion to the difference of the reward must
be supposed to be also the diversity of the
services. Therefore your disciple, Marcion,"
will not obtain his eternal life in consequence
of loving your God, in the same way as the
man who loves the Creator will secure the
lengthened life. But how happens it that, if


1 Ex. XX. 12 and Deut. vi. 2.

2 Luke X. 27.

3 Legalem.

4 Recidivae.

5 This is perhaps the meaning of " ne plus aliquid observationis
exigeret sublimior spe."

6 Nee alius.

7 Principaliter.

s Et utramque vitam,

9 Ei opponit.
^<^ Caput.
II Dei tui . . . Marcionites.


He is to be loved who promises the prolonged
life, He is not much more to be loved who
offers the eternal life ? Therefore both one
and the other life will be at the disposal of one
and the same Lord; becayse one and the
same discipline is to be followed" for one and
the other life. What the Creator teaches to
be loved, that must He necessarily maintain''
also by Christ,'* for that rule holds good here,
which prescribes that greater things ought to
be believed of Him who has first lesser proofs
to show, than of him for whom no preceding
smaller presumptions have secured a claim to
be believed in things of higher import. It
matters not 's then, whether the word eternal
has been interpolated by us.'^ It is enough
for me, that the Christ who invited men to the
eternal — not the lengthened — life, when con-
sulted about the temporal life which he was
destroying, did not choose to exhort the man
rather to that eternal life which he was intro-
ducing. Pray, what would the Creator's Christ
have done, if He who had made man for lov-
ing the Creator did not belong to the Creator ?
I suppose He would have said that the Creator
was not to be loved !

CHAP. XXVI. FROM ST. LUKE's ELEVENTH

CHAPTER OTHER EVIDENCE THAT CHRIST
COMES FROM THE CREATOR. THE LORD'S
PRAYER AND OTHER WORDS OF CHRIST. THE
DUMB SPIRIT AND CHRIST'S DISCOURSE ON
OCCASION OF THE EXPULSION. THE EXCLAM-
ATION OF THE WOMAN IN THE CROWD.

When in a certain place he had been pray-
ing to that Father above, '^ looking up with in-
solent and audacious eyes to the heaven of
the Creator, by whom in His rough and cruel
nature he might have been crushed with hail
and lightning — just as it was by Him con-
trived that he was (afterwards) attached to a
cross '^ at Jerusalem — one of his disciples came
to him and said, " Master, teach us to pray,
as John also taught his disciples." This he
said, forsooth, because he thought that differ-
ent prayers were required for different gods !
Now, he who had advanced such a conjecture
as this should first show that another god
had been proclaimed by Christ. For nobody
would have wanted to know how to pray, be-
fore he had learned whom he was to pray to.
If, however, he had already learned this, prove
it. If you find nowhere any proof, let me tell
you '9 that it was to the Creator that he asked


12 Captanda.

»3 Pra;stet.

14 i. e. , he must needs have it taught and recommended by Christ.

'SViderit.

16 As Marcion pretended.

17 Luke xi. i,

18 Suflfigi.
•i9Scito.


392


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book IV.


for instruction in prayer, to whom John's dis-
ciples also used to pray. But, inasmuch as
John had introduced some new order of prayer,
this disciple had not improperly presumed to
think that he pught also to ask of Christ
whether they too must not (according to some
special rule of their Master) pray, not indeed
to another god, but in another manner. Christ
accordingly' would not have taught His dis-
ciple prayer before He had given him the
knowledge of God Himself. Therefore what
He actually taught was prayer to Him whom
the disciple had already known. In short,
you may discover in the import "^ of the prayer
what God is addressed therein. To whom can
I say, " Father ? " ^ To him who had nothing
to do with making me, from whom I do not
derive my origin ? Or to Him, who, by mak-
ing and fashioning me, became my parent?'*
Of whom can I ask for His Holy Spirit ? Of
him who gives not even the mundane spirit; ^
or of Him "who maketh His angels spirits,"
and whose Spirit it was which in the beginning
hovered upon the waters.*^ Whose kingdom
shall I wish to come — his, of whom I never
heard as the king of glory; or His, in whose
hand are even the hearts of kings ? Who shall
give me my daily ' bread ? Shall it be he who
produces for me not a grain of millet-seed;^
or He who even from heaven gave to His
people day by day the bread of angels ?'
Who shall forgive me my trespasses ? '° He
who, by refusing to judge them, does not re-
tain them; or He who, unless He forgives
them, will retain them, even to His judgment?
Who shall suffer us not to be led into tempta-
tion ? He before whom the tempter will never
be able to tremble; or He who from the be-
ginning has beforehand condemned " the angel
tempter? If any one, with such a form," in-
vokes another god and not the Creator, he
does not pray; he only blasphemes. '^ In like
manner, from whom must I ask that I may
receive ? Of whom seek, that I may find ?
To whom knock, that it may be opened to
me ? '* Who has to give to him that asks, but
He to whom all things belong, and whose am
I also that am the asker ? What, however,
have I lost before that other god, that I should
seek of him and find it. If it be wisdom and


1 Proinde.

2 Sensum.

3 Luke xj. 2.
4Generavit.

S Mundialis spiritus : perhaps " the breath of life."
*Gen. i. 2.

7 Luke xi. 3.

8 Milium.

9 Ps. Ixvnii. 25.
10 Luke xi. 4.

" Prsedainnavit.
12 Hoc ordine.
»3 Infamat.
14 Luke xi. 9.


prudence, it is the Creator who has hidden
them. Shall I resort to him, then, in quest
of them ? If it be health 's and life, they are
at the disposal of the Creator. Nor must
anything be sought and found anywhere else
than there, where it is kept in secret that it
may come to light. So, again, at no other
door will I knock than at that out of which
my privilege has reached me.'^ In fine, if to
receive, and to find, and to be admitted, is the
fruit of labour and earnestness to him who
has asked, and sought, and knocked, under-
stand that these duties have been enjoined,
and results promised, by the Creator. As for
that most excellent god of yours, coming as
he professes gratuitously to help man, who
was not his (creature),'^ he could not have
imposed upon him any labour, or (endowed
him with) any earnestness. For he would by
this time cease to be the most excellent god,
were he not spontaneously to give to every
one who does not ask, and permit every one
who seeks not to find, and open to every one
who does not knock. The Creator, on the
contrary,'^ was able to proclaim these duties
and rewards by Christ, in order that man, who
by sinning had offended his God, might toil
on (in his probation), and by his perseverance
in asking might receive, and in seeking might
find, and in knocking might enter. Accord-
ingly, the preceding similitude '' represents
the man who went at night and begged for the
loaves, in -the light of a friend and not a
stranger, and makes him knock at a friend's
house and not at a stranger's. But even if he
has offended, man is more of a friend with the
Creator than with the god of Marcion. At
His door, therefore, does he knock to whom
he had the right of access; whose gate he had
found; whom he knew to possess bread; in bed
now with His children, whom He had willed
to be born.*" Even though the knocking is
late in the day, it is yet the Creator's time.
To Him belongs the latest hour who owns an
entire age " and the end thereof. As for the
new god, however, no one could have knocked
at his door late, for he has hardly yet " seen
the light of morning. It is the Creator, who
once shut the door to the Gentiles, which was
then knocked at by the Jews, that both rises
and gives, if not now to man as a friend, yet
not as a stranger, but, as He says, "because


IS Salutem : perhaps salvation.

»6 Unde sum functus. This obscure clause may mean " the
right of praying," or " the right of access, and boldness to knock."
»7 Ad prsestandum non suo homini.

18 Autem.

19 See Luke xi. 5-8.

20 A sarcastic allusion to the ante-nuptial error of Marcion.
which he has exposed more than once (see book i. chap. xxix. ana
book iv. chap, xxiii. p. 386.).

2» Sseculum.

22 Tantum quod = vixdum (Oehler).


CHAP. XXVII.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


393


of his importunity." ' Importunate^ however,
the recent god could not have permitted any
one to be in the short time (since his appear-
ance).^ Him, therefore, whom you call the
Creator recognise also as "Father." It is
even He who knows what His children require.
For when they asked for bread. He gave them
manna from heaven; and when they wanted
flesh, He sent them abundance of quails — not
a serpent for a fish, nor for an tgg a scor-
pion.^ It will, however, appertain to Him
not to give evil instead of good, who has both
one and the other in His power. Marcion's
god, on the contrary, not having a scorpion,
was unable to refuse to give what he did not
possess; only He (could do so), who, having
a scorpion, yet gives it not. In like manner,
it is He who will give the Holy Spirit, at whose
command * is also the unholy spirit. When
He cast out the " demon which was dumb " s
(and by a cure of this sort verified Isaiah),^
and having been charged with casting out de-
mons by Beelzebub, He said, " If I by Beel-
zebub cast out demons, by whom do your sons
cast them out ? " ^ By such a question what
does He otherwise mean, than that He ejects
the spirits by the same power by which their
sons also did — that is, by the power of the
Creator? For if you suppose the meaning to
be, "If I by Beslzebub, etc., by whom your
sons?" — as if He would reproach them with
having the power of Beelzebub, — you are met
at once by the preceding sentence, that
" Satan cannot be divided against himself."^
So that it was not by Beelzebub that even they
were casting out demons, but (as we have
said) by the power of the Creator; and that
He might make this understood. He adds:
" But if I with the finger of God cast out de-
mons, is not the kingdom of God come near
unto you?"' For the magicians who stood
before Pharaoh and resisted Moses called the
power of the Creator " the finger of God." '° It
was the finger of God, because it was a sign "
that even a thing of weakness was yet abun-
dant in strength. This Christ also showed,
when, recalling to notice (and not obliterating)
those ancient wonders which were really His
own,'^ He said that the power of God must be
understood to be the finger of none other God
than Him, under "^ whom it had received this


1 Luke xi. 8.

2 Tarn cito.

3 Luke xi. 11-13.

4 Apud quem.

5 Luke xi. 14.

6 Isa. xxix. 18.

7 Luke xi. 19.

8 Luke xi. 18.

9 Luke xi. 20.
i°Ex. viii. 19.
" Signilicaret.

I- Vetustatum scilicet suaruni.
13 Apud.


appellation. His kingdom, therefore, was
come near to them, whose power was called
His "finger." Well, therefore, did He con-
nect'-* with the parable of " the strong man
armed," whom "a stronger man still over-
came," '5 the prince of the demons, whom He
had already called Beelzebub and Satan; sig-
nifying that it was he who was overcome by
the finger of God, and not that the Creator
had been subdued by another god. Besides,'*
how could His kingdom be still standing, with
its boundaries, and laws, and functions, whom,
even if the whole world were left entire to
Him, Marcion's god could possibly seem to
have overcome as "the stronger than He," if
it were not in consequence of His law that
even Marcionites were constantly dying, by
returning in their dissolution '^ to the ground,
and were so often admonished by even a scor-
pion, that the Creator had by no means been
overcome?'^ "A (certain) mother of the
company exclaims, ' Blessed is the womb
that bare Thee, and the paps which Thou hast
sucked;' but the Lord said, 'Yea, rather,
blessed are they that hear the word of God,
and keep it.'"'' Now He had in precisely
similar terms rejected His mother or His
brethren, whilst preferring those who heard
and obeyed God.^ His mother, however,
was not here present with Him. On that for-
mer occasion, therefore. He had not denied
that He was her son by birth. ^' On hearing
this (salutation) the second time. He the
second time transferred, as He had done be-
fore,^- the " blessedness " to His disciples from
the womb and the paps of His mother, from
whom, however, unless He had in her (a real
mother) He could not have transferred it.

CHAP. xxviL — Christ's reprehension of the

PHARISEES SEEKING A SIGN. HIS CENSURE OF
THEIR LOVE OF OUTWARD SHOW RATHER THAN
INWARD HOLINESS; SCRIPTURE ABOUNDS
WITH ADMONITIONS OF A SIMILAR PURPORT.
PROOFS OF HIS MISSION FROM THE CREATOR.

I prefer elsewhere refuting ^^ the faults which
the Marcionites find in the Creator. It is
here enough that they are also found in
Christ. ^^ Behold how unequal, inconsistent,
and capricious he is ! Teaching one thing


14 Applicuit.

15 I>uke xi. 21, 22.
i^Ceterum.

17 Defluendo.

18 The scorpion here represents any class of the lowest animals,
especially such as stung. The Marcionites impiously made it a re-
proach to the Creator, that He had formed such worthless and
offensive creatures. Compare book i. chap. 17, note 5.^.283.

19 Luke xi. 27, 28.

20 See above, on Luke viii. 21.

21 Natura.

22 Proinde.

23 Purgare.

2* From the Marcionite point of view.


394


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book iv^


and doing another, he enjoins "giving to
every one that seeks; " and yet he himself re-
fuses to give to those "who seek a sign."'
For a vast age he hides his own Hght from
men, and yet says that a candle must not be
hidden, but affirms that it ought to be set
upon a candlestick, that it may give light to
all.'' He forbids cursing agaifi, and cursing
much more of course; and yet he heaps his
7iioe upon the Pharisees and doctors of the
law.3 Who so closely resembles my God as
His own Christ? We have often already laid
it down for certain,* that He could not have
been branded s as the destroyer of the law if
He had promulged another god. Therefore
even the Pharisee, who invited Him to dinner
in the passage before us,* expressed some
surprise 7 in His presence that He had not
washed before He sat down to meat, in ac-
cordance with the law, since it was the God
of the law that He was proclaiming.^ Jesus
also interpreted the law to him when He told
him that they " made clean the outside of the
cup and the platter, whereas their inward part
was full of ravening and wickedness." This
He said, to signify that by the cleansing of
vessels was to be understood before God the
purification of men, inasmuch as it was about
a man, and not about an unwashed vessel,
that even this Pharisee had been treating in
His presence. He therefore said: "You
wash the outside of the cup," that is, the flesh,
"but you do not cleanse your inside part,"^
that is, the soul; adding: "Did not He that
made the outside," that is, the flesh, "also
make the inward part," that is to say, the
soul ? — by which assertion He expressly de-
clared that to the same God belongs the cleans-
ing of a man's external and internal nature,
both alike being in the power of Him who pre-
fers mercy not only to man's washing,'" but
even to sacrifice." For He subjoins the com-
mand: " Give what ye possess as alms, and
all things shall be clean unto you." " Even if
another god could have enjoined mercy, he
could not have done so previous to his becom-
ing known. Furthermore, it is in this pas-
sage evident that they'^ were not reproved
concerning their God, but concerning a point
of His instruction to them, when He pre-
scribed to them figuratively the cleansing of


» Luke xi. 29.
= Luke xi. 33.

3 Luke vi. 28, also xi. 37-52.

4 Fiximus.

5 Denotari.

6 Tunc.

7 Retractabat.
SCircumferret.
9 Luke xi. 39.

•o I^vacro.

»' iNLitt. ix. 13, xii. 7 ; comp. Hos. viii. 6.

" Luke xi. 41.

^3 The Pharisees and lawyers.


their vessels, but really the works of merciful
dispositions. In like manner. He upbraids
them for tithing paltry herbs,'* but at the same
time " passing over hospitality '5 and the love
of God." '* The vocation and the love of what
God, but Him by whose law of tithes they
used to offer their rue and mint? For the
whole point of the rebuke lay in this, that they
cared about small matters in His service of
course, to whom they failed to exhibit their
weightier duties when He commanded them:
"Thou shalt love with all thine heart, and
with all thy soul, and with all thy strength,
the Lord thy God, who hath called thee out of
Egypt." '7 Besides, time enough had not
yet passed to admit of Christ's requiring so
premature — nay, as yet so distasteful '^ — a love
towards a new and recent, not to say a hardly
yet developed, '9 deity. When, again, He up-
braids those who caught at the uppermost
places and the honour of public salutations,
He only follows out the Creator's course,=~
who calls ambitious persons of this character
" rulers of Sodom," " who forbids us "to put
confidence even in princes," ^^ and pronounces
him to be altogether wretched who places his
confidence in man. But whoever =^3 aims at
high position, because he would glory in the
officious attentions =* of other people, (in every
such case,) inasmuch as He forbade such
attentions (in the shape) of placing hope and
confidence in man. Heat the same time ^s cen-
sured all who were ambitious of high posi-
tions. He also inveighs against the doctors
of the law themselves, because they were
" lading men with burdens grievous to be
borne, which they did not venture to touch
with even a finger of their own; " =* but not as
if He made a mock of'' the burdens of the
law with any feeling of detestation towards it.
For how could He have felt aversion to the
law, who used with so much earnestness to up-
braid them for passing over its weightier mat-
ters, alms-giving, hospitality,'^ and the love
of God ? Nor, indeed, was it only these great
things (which He recognized), but even'' the
tithes of rue and the cleansing of cups. But,


»4 Holuscula.

15 Maroon's jfospel had KXy\ai.v (vocationem, perhaps a general
word for hospitality) instead of <cpi<j-i»', judgincnt, — a quality
which M. did not allow in his Rod. See Epipbanius, Uteres, xlii..
.Schol. 26 (Oehlerand Fr. Junius).

'6 Luke xi. 42.

'7 Deut. vi. 5.

'8 Amaxam.

'9 Nondum palam facto.

=0 Sectam administrat.

=' Lsa. i. 10.

»=» Ps. cxviii. 9.

33 Quodsiquis.

24 0fliciis.

=5 Idem.

26 Luke xi. 46.

27 Suggillans.

28 Vocationem : Marcion's KXy\<Tiv,

29 Nedum.


CHAP. XXVIII.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MAROION.


395


in truth, He would rather have deemed them
excusable for being unable to carry burdens
which could not be borne. What, then, are
the burdens which He censures ? ' None but
those which they were accumulating of their
own accord, when they taught for command-
ments the doctrines of men; for the sake of
private advantage joining house to house, so
as to deprive their neighbour of his own;
cajoling^ the people, loving gifts, pursuing
rewards, robbing the poor of the rights of
judgment, that they might have the widow
for a prey and the fatherless for a spoil. ^ Of
these Isaiah also says, "Woe unto them that
are strong in Jerusalem ! " * and again, " They
that demand you shall rule over you." s And
who did this more than the lawyers ? ^ Now,
if these offended Christ, it was as belonging to
Him that they offended Him. He would
have aimed no blow at the teachers of an alien
law. But why is a '* woe " pronounced against
them for "building the sepulchres of the
prophets whom their fathers had killed ?"7
They rather deserved praise, because by such
an act of piety they seemed to show that they
did not allow the deeds of their fathers. Was
it not because (Christ) was jealous^ of such a
disposition as the Marcionites denounce,^ visit-
ing the sins of the fathers upon the children
unto the fourth generation? What "key,"
indeed, was it which these lawyers had,'° but
the interpretation of the law ? Into the per-
ception of this they neither entered themselves,
even because they did not believe (for "un-
less ye believe, ye shall not understand");
nor did they permit others to enter, because
they preferred to teach them for command-
ments even the doctrines of men. When,
therefore. He reproached those who did not
themselves enter in, and also shut the door
against others, must He be regarded as a dis-
parager of the law, or as a supporter of it ? If
a disparager, those who were hindering the
law ought to have been pleased ; if a supporter.
He is no longer an enemy of the law." But
all these imprecations He uttered in order to
tarnish the Creator as a cruel Being,'^ against
whom such as offended were destined to have
a "woe." And who would not rather have
feared to provoke a cruel Being,'^ by withdraw-


1 Taxat.

2 Clamantes.

3 See Isa. v. s, 23, and x. 2.

4 Isa. xxviii. 14.

5 The books point to Isa. iii. 3, 4 for this ; but there is only a
slight similarity in the latter clause, even in the Septuagint.

^ Legis doctores : the vofJUKoC of the Gospels,

7 I.uke xi. 47.

8 Zelotes.

9 Arguunt.

'° Luke xi. 52.

11 As Marcion held Him to be.

12 A Marcionite position.

13 Saevum.


ing allegiance'* from Him? Therefore the
more He represented the Creator to be an ob-
ject of fear, the'more earnestly would He teach
that He ought to be served. Thus would it
behove the Creator's Christ to act.

CHAP. XXVIII. — EXAMPLES FROM THE OLD TES-
TAMENT, BALAAM, MOSES, AND HEZEKIAH, TO
SHOW HOW COMPLETELY THE INSTRUCTION
AND CONDUCT OB' CHRIST '5 ARE IN KEEPING
WITH THE WILL AND PURPOSE OF THE CREA-
TOR.

Justly, therefore, was the hypocrisy of the
Pharisees displeasing to Him, loving God as
they did with their lips, but not with their
heart. " Beware," He says to the disciples,
"of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is
hypocrisy," not the proclamation of the Cre-
ator. The Son hates those who refused obed-
ience '^ to the Father; nor does He wish His
disciples to show such a disposition towards
ZT/w — not (let it be observed) towards an-
other god, against whom such hypocrisy in-
deed might have been admissible, as that
which He wished to guard His disciples
against. It is the example of the Pharisees
which He forbids. It was in respect of Him
against whom the Pharisees were sinning that
(Christ) now forbade His disciples to offend.
Since, then. He had censured their hypocrisy,
which covered the secrets of the heart, and
obscured with superficial offices the myster-
ies of unbelief, because (while holding the key
of knowledge) it would neither enter in itself,
nor permit others to enter in. He therefore
adds, "There is nothing covered that shall
not be revealed; neither hid, which shall not
be known," '7 in order that no one should sup-
pose that He was attempting the revelation
and the recognition of an hitherto unknown
and hidden god. When He remarks also on
their murmurs and taunts, in saying of Him,
"This man casteth out devils only through
Beelzebub," He means that all these imputa-
tions would come forth to the light of day,
and be in the mouths of men in consequence
of the promulgation of the Gospel. He then
turns to His disciples with these words, "I
say unto you, my friends. Be not afraid of
them which can only kill the body, and after
that have no more power over you." '^ They
will, however, find Isaiah had already said,
" See how the just man is taken away, and no
man layeth it to heart." '^ " But I will show
you whom ye shall fear: fear Him who, after


14 Deficiendo.

15 As narrated by St. Luke xii.

16 Contuinaces.

17 Luke xii. 2.

18 Luke xii 4.

19 Isa. Ivii. r.


396


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book IV.


He hath killed, hath power to cast into hell "
(meaning, of course, the Creator); "yea, I
say unto you, fear Him."' Now, it would
here be enough for my purpose that He for-
bids offence being given to Him whom He
orders to be feared; and that He orders Him
to be respected ^ whom He forbids to be of-
fended; and that He who gives these com-
mands belongs to that very God for whom He
procures this fear, this absence of offence,
and this respect. But this conclusion I can
draw also from the following words: " For I
say unto you, Whosoever shall confess me be-
fore men, him will I also confess before
God." 3 Now they who shall confess Christ
will have to be slain ^ before men, but they
will have nothing more to suffer after they
have been put to death by them. These
therefore will be they whom He forewarns
above not to be afraid of being only killed;
and this forewarning He offers, in order that
He might subjoin a clause on the necessity of
confessing Him: " Every one that denieth me
before men shall be denied before God ' ' s — by
Him, of course, who would have confessed
him, if he had only confessed God. Now, He
who will confess the confessor is the very
same God who will also deny the denier of
Himself. Again, if it is the confessor who
will have nothing to fear after his violent
death, ^ it is the denier to whom' everything
will become fearful after his natural death.
Since, therefore, that which will have to be
feared after death, even the punishment of
hell, belongs to the Creator, the denier, too,
belongs to the Creator. As with the denier,
however, so with the confessor: if he should
deny God, he will plainly have to suffer from
God, although from men he had nothing more
to suffer after they had put him to death.
And so Christ is the Creator's, because He
shows that all those who deny Him ought to
fear the Creator's hell. After deterring His
disciples from denial of Himself, He adds an
admonition to fear blasphemy: "Whosoever
shall speak against the Son of man, it shall be
forgiven him; but whosoever shall speak
against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be for-
given him." ^ Now, if both the remission and
the retention of sin savour of a judicial God,
the Holy Ghost, who is not to be blasphemed,
will belong to Him, who will not forgive the
blasphemy; just as He who, in the preceding
passage, was not to be denied, belonged to
Him who would, after He had killed, also cast


^ Luke xii. 5.,

2 Demereri.

3 Luke xii. 8.

4 Occidi habebunt.

5 Luke xii. j.

6 Post occisionem.

7 Luke xii. 10.


into hell. Now, since it is Christ who averts
blasphemy from the Creator, I am at a loss to
know in what manner His adversary^ could
have come. Else, if by these sayings He
throws a black cloud of censure ' over the
severity of Him who will not forgive blas-
phemy and will kill even to hell, it follows
that the very spirit of that rival god may be
blasphemed with impunity, and his Christ de-
nied; and that there is no difference, in fact,
between worshipping and despising him; but
that, as there is no punishment for the con-
tempt, so there is no reward for the worship,
which men need expect. When " brought be-
fore magistrates," and examined. He forbids
them "to take thought how they shall an-
swer;" "for," says He, " the Holy Ghost
shall teach you in that very hour what ye
ought to say. " '° If such an injunction" as
this comes from the Creator, the precept will
only be His by whom an example was pre-
viously given. The prophet Balaam, in Num-
bers, when sent forth by king Balak to curse
Israel, with whom he was commencing war,
was at the same moment" filled with the
Spirit. Instead of the curse which he was
come to pronounce, he uttered the blessing
which the Spirit at that very hour inspired him
with; having previously declared to the king's
messengers, and then to the king himself,
that he could only speak forth that which
God should put into his mouth. '^ The novel
doctrines of the new Christ are such as the
Creator's servants initiated long before! But
see how clear a difference there is between the
example of Moses and of Christ.'* Moses
voluntarily interferes with brothers '^ who were
quarrelling, and chides the offender: " Where-
fore smitest thou thy fellow?" He is, how-
ever, rejected by him: "Who made thee
a prince or a judge over us?" '^ Christ,
on the contrary, when requested by a cer-
tain man to compose a strife between him
and his brother about dividing an inheri-
tance, refused His assistance, altiiough in
so honest a cause. Well, then, my Moses isj
better than your Christ, aiming as he did at;
the peace of brethren, and obviating their
wrong. But of course the case viiist be differA
ent with Christ, for he is the Christ of the J
simply good and non-judicial god. " Who,"
says he, "made me a judge over you?""
No other word of excuse was he able to find,


8 So full of blasphemy, as he is, against the Creator

9 Infuscat.

10 Luke xii. 11, 12.

i» Documentum.

"Simul.

13 Num. xxii.-xxiv,

»4 A Marcionite objection.

'S " Two men of the Hebrews." — A. V.

'6E)x. ii. 13, 14.

17 Luke xii. 13, 14.


1


CHAP. XXIX.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


397


without using* that with which the wicked
man and impious brother had rejected ' the
defender of probity and piety ! In short, he
approved of the excuse, although a bad one,
by his use of it; and of the act, although a
bad one, by his refusal to make peace between
brothers. Or rather, would He not show His
resentment 3 at the rejection of Moses with
such a word ? And therefore did He not wish
in a similar case of contentious brothers, to
confound them with the recollection of so
harsh a word ? Clearly so. For He had
Himself been present in Moses, who heard
such a rejection — even He, the Spirit of the
Creator/ I think that we have already, in
another passage, s sufficiently shown that the
glory of riches is condemned by our God,
"who putteth down the mighty from their
throne, and exalts the poor from the dung-
hill."^ From Him, therefore, will proceed
the parable of the rich man, who flattered
himself about the increase of his fields, and
to whom God said: "Thou fool, this night
shall they require thy soul of thee; then
whose shall those things be which thou hast
provided? " ^ it was just in the like manner
that the king Hezckiah heard from Isaiah the
sad doom of his kingdom, when he gloried,
before the envoys of Babylon,^ in his treasures
and the deposits of his precious things. '

CHAP. XXIX. PARALLELS FROM THE PROPHETS

TO ILLUSTRATE CHRIST'S TEACHING IN THE
REST OF THIS CHAPTER OF ST. LUKE. THE
STERNER ATTRIBUTES OF CHRIST, IN HIS JUDI-
CIAL CAPACITY, SHOW HIM TO HAVE COME
FROM THE CREATOR. INCIDENTAL REBUKES
OF MARCION's DOCTRINE OF CELIBACY, AND
OF HIS ALTERING OF THE TEXT OF THE GOSPEL.

Who would be unwilling that we should
distress ourselves '° about sustenance for our
life, or clothing for our body," but He who
has provided these things already for man;
and who, therefore, while distributing them
to us, prohibits all anxiety respecting them as
an outrage " against his liberality ? — who has
adapted the nature of " life " itself to a con-
dition " better than meat," and has fashioned
the material of " the body," so as to make it
" more than raiment; " whose " ravens, too.


1 Ne uteretur.

2 Excusserat. Oehler interprets the word by temptaverat.

3 Nunquid indigne tulerit.

4 This is an instance of the title " Spirit " bein^ applied to the
divine nature of the Son. See Bp. Bull's Dey. Nic. Fid. (by the
translator). [See note 13, p. 375, supra.'\

5 Above, chap. xv. of this book, p. 369, supra.

6 Comp. I Sam. ii. 8 with Ps. cxiii. 7 and Luke i. 52

7 Luke xii. 16-20.

8 Apud Persas.

9 Isa. xxxix.

'° Agere curam : take thought. — A. V.
" Luke xii. 22-28.
'2 ^mulam.


neither sow nor reap, nor gather into store-
houses, and are yet fed " by Himself; whose
"lilies and grass also toil not, nor spin, and
yet are clothed " by Him; whose " Solomon,
moreover, was transcendent in glory, and yet
was not arrayed like" the humble flower.'^
Besides, nothing can be more abrupt than that
one God should be distributing His bounty,
while the other should bid us take no thought
about (so kindly a) distribution — and that,
too, with the intention of derogating (from
his liberality). Whether, indeed, it is as de-
preciating the Creator that he does not wish
such trifles to be thought of, concerning which
neither the crows nor the lilies labour, be-
cause, forsooth, they come spontaneously to
hand "^ by reason of their very worthlessness,'5
will appear a little further on. Meanwhile,
how is it that He chides them as being " of
little faith ? " ^^ What faith ? Does He mean
that faith which they were as yet unable to
manifest perfectly in a god who has hardly
yet revealed, '7 and whom they were in process
of learning as well as they could; or that faith
which they for this express reason owed to
the Creator, because they believed that He
was of His own will supplying these wants of
the human race, and therefore took no thought
about them? Now, when He adds, " For all
these things do the nations of the world seek
after," '^ even by their not believing in God
as the Creator and Giver of all things, since
He was unwilling that they should be like
these nations. He therefore upbraided them
as being defective of faith in the same God,
in whom He remarked that the Gentiles were
quite wanting in faith. When He further
adds, " But your Father knoweth that ye have
need of these things," '^ I would first ask,
what Father Christ would have to be here
understood ? If He points to their own Crea-
tor, He also affirms Him to be good, who
knows what His children have need of; but
if He refers to that other god, how does he
know that food and raiment are necessary to
man, seeing that he has made no such pro-
vision for him ? For if he had known the
want, he would have made the provision. If,
however, he knows what things man has need
of, and yet has failed to supply them, he is in
the failure guilty of either malignity or weak-
ness. But when he confessed that these
things are necessary to man, he really affirmed
that they are good. For nothing that is evil is
necessary. So that he will not be any longer


13 Flosculo : see Luke xii. 24-27.

14 Ultro subjectis.

15 Pro sua vilitate.

16 Luke xii. 28.

17 Tantum quod revelato.

18 Luke xii. 30.

19 Luke xii. 30.


398


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book IV.


a depreciator of the works and the indulgences
of the Creator, that I may here complete the
answer ' which I deferred giving above. Again,
if it is another god who has foreseen man's
wants, and is supplying them, how is it that
Marcion' s Christ himself promises them ? - Is
he liberal with another's property P^ "Seek
ye," says he, "the kingdom of God, and all
these things shall be added unto you " — by
himself, of course. But if by himself^ what
sort of being is he, who shall bestow the things
of another? If by the Creator, whose all
things are, then who *• is he that promises what
l)e]ongs to another ? If these things are " ad-
ditions " to the kingdom, they must be placed
in the second rank;5 and the second rank be-
longs to Him to whom the first also does;
His are the food and raiment, whose is the
kingdom. Thus to the Creator belongs the
entire promise, the full reality^ of its parables,
the perfect equalization ^ of its similitudes;
for these have respect to none other than Him
to whom they have a parity of relation in every
point. ^ We are servants because we have a
Lord in our God, We ought "to have our
loins girded: " ^ in other words, we are to be
free from the embarrassments of a perplexed
and much occupied life; "to have our lights
burning," '° that is, our minds kindled by
faith, and resplendent with the works of truth.
And thus " to wait for our Lord," " that is,
Christ. Whence "returning?" If "from
the wedding," He is the Christ oi the Creator,
for the wedding is His. If He is not the
Creator's, not even Marcion himself would
have gone to the wedding, although invited,
for in his god he discovers one who hates the
nuptial bed. The parable would therefore
have failed in the person of the Lord, if He
were not a Being to whom a wedding is con-
sistent. In the next parable also he makes a
flagrant mistake, when he assigns to the person
of the Creator that " thief, whose hour, if the
father of the family had only known, he would
not have suffered his house to be broken
through." " How can the Creator wear in any
way the aspect of a thief. Lord as He is of all
mankind ? No one pilfers or plunders his
own property, but he '' rather acts the part of
one who swoops down on the things of an-
other, and alienates man from his Lord.'*


' Expunxerim. *
'Luke xii. 31.

3 De alieno bonus

4 Qualis.

5 Secundo gradu.

6 Status.

7 Peraequatio.

8Cui per omnia pariaverint.

9 Luke xii. 35.
*o Luke xii. 35.
" Luke xii. 36.


Again, when He indicates to us that the devil
is " the thief," whose hour at the very begin-
ning of the world, if man had" known, he
would never have been broken in upon 's by
him. He warns us "to be ready," for this
reason, because " we know not the hour when
the Son of man shall come " '^ — not as if He
were Himself the thief, but rather as being
the judge of those who prepared not them-
selves, and used no precaution against the
thief. Since, then. He is the Son of man, I
hold Him to be the Judge, and in the Judge
I claim '7 the Creator. If then in this passage
he displays the Creator's Christ under the
title " Son of man," that he may give us some
presage '^ of the thief, of the period of whose
coming we are ignorant, you still have it ruled
above, that no one is the thief of his own prop-
erty; besides which, there is our principle
also unimpaired '' — that in as far as He insists
on the Creator as an object of fear, in so far
does He belong to the Creator, and does the
Creator's work. When, therefore, Peter asked
whether He had spoken the parable "unto
them, or even to all,"=° He sets forth for
them, and for all who should bear rule in the
churches, the similitude of stewards. =" That
steward who should treat his fellow-servants
well in his lord's absence, would on his return
be set as ruler over all his property; but he
who should act otherwise should be severed,
and have his portion with the unbelievers,
when his lord should return on the day when
he looked not for him, at the hour when he
was not aware" — even that Son of man, the
Creator's Christ, not a thief, but a Judge.
He accordingly, in this passage, either pre-
sents to us the Lord as a Judge, and instructs
us in His character, ''^ or else as the simply
good god; if the latter, he now also affirms
his judicial attribute, although the heretic re-
fuses to admit it. For an attempt is made to
modify this sense when it is applied to his
god, — as if it were an act of serenity and mild-
ness simply to sever the man off, and to assign
him a portion with the unbelievers, under the
idea that he was not summoned (before the
judge), but only returned to his own state !
As if this very process did not imply a judicial
act ! What folly ! What will be the end of
the severed ones ? Will it not be the for-
feiture of salvation, since their separation will
be from those who shall attain salvation ?
What, again, will be the condition of the un-


I


" Luke


39-


»3 Sed ille potius.

14 A censure on Marcion's Christ.


'S Suffossu.s.
'6 Luke xi. <;o.
17 Defendo.
'8 Portendat.
J9 Salvo.

20 Luke xii. 41.

21 Actorum.

22 Luke xii. ^1-46.

23 Ilii catechizat.


1


CHAP. XXIX.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


;99


believers ? Will it not be damnation ? Else,
if these severed and unfaithful ones shall have
nothing to suffer, there will, on the other
hand, be nothing for the accepted and the be-
lievers to obtain. If, however, the accepted
and the believers shall attain salvation, it must
needs be that the rejected and the unbelieving
should incur the opposite issue, even the loss
of salvation. Now here is a judgment, and
He who holds it out before us belongs to the
Creator. Whom else than the God of retribu-
tion can I understand by Him who shall " beat
His servants with stripes," either "few or
many," and shall exact from them what He
had committed to them ? Whom is it suita-
ble' for me to obey, but Him who remu-
nerates? Your Christ proclaims, "I am
€ome to send fire on the earth." ^ That^ most
lenient being, the lord who has no hell, not
long before had restrained his disciples from
demanding fire on the churlish village.
Whereas Hc^ burnt up Sodom and Gomorrah
with a tempest of fire. Of Him the psalmist
sang, "Afire shall go out before Him, and burn
up His enemies round about." ^ By Hosea
He uttered the threat, " I will send a fire upon
the cities of Judah;"^ and^ by Isaiah, "A
fire has been kindled in mine anger." He
cannot lie. If it is not He who uttered His
voice out of even the burning bush, it can be
of no importance^ what fire you insist upon
being understood. Even if it be but figurative
fire, yet, from the very fact that he takes from
my element illustrations for His own sense.
He is mine, because He uses what is mine.
The similitude of fire must belong to Him
who owns the reality thereof. But He will
Himself best explain the quality of that fire
wliicli He mc?itioncd, when He goes on to say,
"Suppose ye that I am come to give peace
on earth? I tell you, Nay; but rather di-
vision."^ It is written "« sword,'' ^° but
Marcion makes an emendation" of the word,
just as if a division were not the work of the
sword. He, therefore, who refused to give
peace, intended also the fire of destruction.
As is the combat, so is the burning. As is


1 Decet. _

2 Luke xii. 49.

3 lUe : Marcion's Christ.

4 Iste : the Creator.

5 Ps. xcvii. 3.

6 Hos. viii. 14.

7 Vel : or, " if you please ;" indicating some uncertainty in the
•quotation. The passage is more like Jer. xv. 14 than anything in
Isaiah (see, however, Isa. xxx. 27, 30).

sViderit.

9 Luke xii. 5i.

10 Pamelius supposes that Tertullian here refers to St. Matthew's
account, where the word is /naxaipai', on the ground that the Mss.
and versions of St. Luke's Gospel invariably read Sia/nepio-fioi'.
According to Rigaltius, however, Tertullian means that sword is
•written in Marcion's Gospel of Luke, as if the heretic had adulte-
rated the passage. Tertullian no doubt professes to quote all along
from the Gospel of Luke, according to Marcion's reading.

" St. Luke s word being Siafxepicr/Liov {division), not /maxaipa;/
(siuord).


the sword, so is the flame. Neither is suita-
ble for its lord. He says at last, " The father
shall be divided against the son, and the son
against the father; the mother against the
daughter, and the daughter against the
mother; the mother-in-law against the daugh-
ter-in-law, and the daughter-in-law against the
mother-in-law. " " Since this battle among the
relatives '3 ^yas sung by the propli^t's trumpet
in the very words, I fear that Micah '^ must
have predicted it to Marcion's Christ ! On
this account He pronounced them "hypo-
crites," because they could " discern the face
of the sky and the earth, but could not dis-
tinguish this time, "'5 when of course He
ought to have been recognised, fulfilling (as
he was) all things which had been predicted
concerning them, and teaching them so. But
then who could know the times of him of
whom he had no evidence to prove his ex-
istence ? Justly also does He upbraid them
for "not even of themselves judging what is
right." '^ Of old does He command by Zech-
ariah, "Execute the judgment of truth and
peace; "'7 by Jeremiah, "Execute judgment
and righteousness; " '^ by Isaiah, " Judge the
fatherless, plead for the widow," '^ charging it
as a fault upon the vine of Sorech,^ that when
" He looked for righteousness therefrom,
there was only a cry " =' (of oppression). The
same God who had taught them to act as He
commanded them,=^ was now requiring that
they should act of their own accord. ^^ He
who had sown the precept, was now pressing
to an abundant harvest from it. But how
absurd, that he should now be commanding
them to judge righteously, who was destroy-
ing God the righteous Judge ! For the Judge,
who commits to prison, and allows no release
out of it without the payment of "the very
last mite," -'• they treat of in the person of the
Creator, with the view of disparaging Him.
Which cavil, however, I deem it necessary to
meet with the same answer. ""s For as often
as the Creator's severity is paraded before us,
so often is Christ (shown to be) His, to whom
He urges submission by the motive of fear.


12 Luke xii. 53.

13 Parentes.

14 Mic. vii. 6.
'5 Luke xii. 56.
16 Luke xii. 57.
^7Zech. viii. 16.
i8 Jer. xxii. 3.

19 Isa. i. 17.

20 Tertullian calls by a proper name the vineyard which Isaiah
(in his chap, v.) designates " the vineyard of the Lord of hosts,"
and interprets to be "the house of Israel" (ver. 7). The desig-
nation comes from ver. 2, where the original clause ■"'^^"' *rtn5*1

is translated in the Septuagint, Kai e0vTeu<ra d/iTreAoi' i«op^(c. Ter-
tullian is most frequently in close agreement with the LXX.
=1 Isa. v. 7.

22 Ex prsecepto.

23 Ex arbitrio.

24 Luke xii. 58, 59. •

25 Kodem gradu.


400


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[hook IV.


CHAP. XXX. PARABLES OF THE MUSTARD-SEED,

AND OF THE LEAVEN. TRANSITION TO THE
SOLEMN EXCLUSION WHICH WILL ENSUE WHEN
THE MASTER OF THE HOUSE HAS SHUT THE
DOOR. THIS JUDICIAL EXCLUSION WILL BE
ADMINISTERED BY CHRIST, WHO IS SHOWN
THEREBY TO POSSESS THE ATTRIBUTE OF THE
CREATOR.

When the question was again raised con-
cerning a cure performed on the Sabbath-day,
how did He discuss it: '* Doth not each of
you on the Sabbath loose his ass or his ox
from the stall, and lead him awa.y to water-
ing? " ' When, therefore. He did a work ac-
cording to the condition prescribed by the
law. He affirmed, instead of breaking, the
law, which commanded that no work should
be done, except what might be done for any
living being;" a7id ij for any one, then how
much more ifor a human life ? In the case of
the parables, it is allowed that I ^ everywhere
require a congruity. '* The kingdom of
God," says He, " is like a grain of mustard-
seed which a man took and cast into his gar-
den." Who must be understood as meant
by the man ? Surely Christ, because (although
Marcion's) he was called "the Son of man."
He received from the Father the seed of the
kingdom, that is, the word of the gospel, and
sowed it in his garden — in the world, of
course * — in man at the present day, for in-
stance.s Now, whereas it is said, " z « his
garden,'* but neither the world nor man is his
property, but the Creator's, therefore He who
sowed seed in His own ground is shown to be
the Creator. Else, if, to evade this snare, ^
they should choose to transfer the person of
the mail from Christ to any person who re-
ceives the seed of the kingdom and sows it in
the garden of his own heart, not even this
meaning 7 would suit any other than the Crea-
tor. For how happens it, if the kingdom be-
long to the most lenient god, that it is closely
followed up by a fervent judgment, the sever-
ity of which brings weeping?^ With regard,
indeed, to the following similitude, I have
my fears lest it should somehow ^ presage the
kingdom of the rival god ! For He compared
it, not to the unleavened bread which the
Creator is more familiar with, but to leaven.^''
Now this is a capital conjecture for men who
are begging for arguments. I must, however,


» Luke xiii. 15.
' Otnni animz.

3 Recognoscor.

4 Utique.

5 Puta.

6 Laqueum.

7 Materia.

8 Lacrimosa austeritatc, see Luke xiii.

9 Forte.

10 Luke xiii. 20, 21.


on my side, dispel one fond conceit by an*
other," and contend with even leaven is suita-
ble for the kingdom of the Creator, because
after it comes the oven, or, if you please," the
furnace of hell. How often has He already
displayed Himself as a Judge, and in the
Judge the Creator? How often, indeed,
has He repelled, and in the repulse con-
demned ? In the present passage, for, in-
stance. He says, "When once the master of
the house is risen up; "^3 but in what sense
except that in which Isaiah said, "When He
ariseth to shake terribly the earth ? " '* " And
hath shut to the door," thereby shutting out
the wicked, of course; and when these knock,
He will answer, " I know you not whence ye
are;" and when they recount how "they
have eaten and drunk in His presence," He
will further say to them, " Depart from me,
all ye workers of iniquity; there shall be weep-
ing and gnashing of teeth." 's But where?
Outside, no doubt, when they shall have been
excluded with the door shut on them by Him.
There will therefore be punishment inflicted
by Him who excludes for punishment, when
they shall behold the righteous entering the
kingdom of God, but themselves detained
without. By whom detained outside ? If by
the Creator, who shall be within receiving the
righteous into the kingdom ? The good God.
What, therefore, is the Creator about,'* that
He should detain outside for punishment
those whom His adversary shut out, when He
ought rather to have kindly received them, if
they must come into His hands, '^ for the
greater irritation of His rival ? But when
about to exclude the wicked, he must, of
course, either be aware that the Creator would
detain them for punishment, or not be aware.
Consequently either the wicked will be de-
tained by the Creator against the will of the
excluder, in which case he will be inferior to
the Creator, submitting to Him unwillingly;]
or else, if the process is carried out with his
will, then he himself has judicially determined]
its execution; and then he who is the verj
originator of the Creator's infamy, will not
prove to be one whit better than the Creator.]
Now, if these ideas be incompatible witl
reason — of one being supposed to punish, andj
the other to liberate — then to one only power
will appertain both the judgment and the
kingdom and while they both l)elong to one.
He who executeth judgment can be none else
than the Christ of the Creator.


" Vanitatem vanitate.

"Vel.

»3 Luke xiii. 25.

'4 Isa. ii. i^.

'5 Luke xiii. 25-28.

'6 quid ergo illuc Creatori.

*7Si itique.


1


CHAP. XXXI.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


401


CHAP. XXXI. ^CHRIST S ADVICE TO INVITE THE
POOR IN ACCORDANCE WITH ISAIAH. THE
PARABLE OF THE GREAT SUPPER A PICTORIAL
SKETCH OF THE CREATOR'S OWN DISPENSA-
TIONS OF MERCY AND GRACE. THE REJEC-
TIONS OF THE INVITATION PARALLELED BY
QUOTATIONS FROM THE OLD TESTAMENT.
MARCION's CHRIST COULD NOT FULFIL THE
CONDITIONS INDICATED IN THIS PARABLE.
THE ABSURDITY OF THE MARCIONITE INTER-
PRETATION.

What kind of persons does He bid should
be invited to a dinner or a supper ?' Pre-
cisely such as he had pointed out by Isaiah:
"Deal thy bread to the hungry man; and the
beggars — even such as have no home — bring
in to thine house," =^ because, no doubt, they
are "unable to recompense" your act of
humanity. Now, since Christ forbids the
recompense to be expected now, but promises
it " at the resurrection," this is the very plan 3
of the Creator, who dislikes those who love
gifts and follow after reward. Consider also
to which deity * is better suited the parable of
him who issued invitations: "A certain man
made a great supper, and bade many." s The
preparation for the supper is no doubt a figure
of the abundant provision^ of eternal life. I
first remark, that strangers, and persons un-
connected by ties of relationship, are not usu-
ally invited to a supper; but that members of
the household and family are more frequently
the favoured guests. To the Creator, then,
it belonged to give the invitation, to whom
also appertained those who were to be invited
— whether considered as pien, through their
descent from Adam, or as /am, by reason
of their fathers; not to him who possessed no
claim to them either by nature or prerogative.
My next remark is,^ if He issues the invita-
tions who has prepared the supper, then, in
this sense the supper is the Creator's, who
sent to warn the guests. These had been in-
deed previously invited by the fathers, but
were to be admonished by the prophets. //
certai7ily is not the feast of hint who never sent
a messenger to warn — who never did a thing
before towards issuing an invitation, but came
down himself on a sudden — only then^ be-
ginning to be known, when already^ giving
his invitation; only then inviting, when already
compelling to his banquet; appointing one
and the same hour both for the supper and
the invitation. But when invited, they excuse

'Luke xiv. 12-14.
= Isa. Iviii. 7.

3 Forma.

4 Cui parti.

5 Luke xiv. 16.
^Saturitatem.
7 Dehinc.
^Tantumquod . . . jam.


themselves. 9 And fairly enough, if the in-
vitation came from the other god, because it
was so sudden; if, however, the excuse was
not a fair one, then the invitation was not a
sudden one. Now, if the invitation was not a
sudden one, it must have been given by the
Creator— even by Him of old time, whose
call they had at last refused. They first re-
fused it when they said to Aaron, " Make us
gods, which shall go before us; " '° and again,
afterwards, when "they heard indeed with
the ear, but did not understand "" their call-
ing of God. In a manner most germane"
to this parable. He said by Jeremiah: " Obey
my voice, and I will be your God, and ye
shall be my people; and ye shall walk in
all my ways, which I have commanded you." '3
This is the invitation of God. "But," says
He, " they hearkened not, nor inclined their
ear. "'4 This is the refusal of the people.
"They departed, and walked every one in
the imagination of their evil heart, "'s "i
have bought a field — and I have bought some
oxen — and I have married a wife."'^ And
still He urges them: " I have sent unto you
all my servants the prophets, rising early even
before day-light." '^ The Holy Spirit is here
meant, the admonisher of the guests. "Yet
my people hearkened not unto me, nor in-
clined their ear, but hardened their neck.""^
This was reported to the Master of the family.
Then He was moved (He did well to be
moved; for, as Marcion denies emotion to
his god. He must be therefore my God), and
commanded them to invite out of " the streets
and lanes of the city. "^9 Let us see whether
this is not the same in purport as His words
by Jeremiah: " Have I been a wilderness to
the house of Israel, or a land left unculti-
vated ? " ^ That is to say: " Then have I none
whom I may call to me; have I no place
whence I may bring them?" "Since my
people have said, We will come no more unto
thee." =^ Therefore He sent out to call others,
but from the same city.^^ My third remark is
this,^3 that although the place abounded with
people, He yet commanded that they gather
men from the highways and the hedges. In
other woi-ds, we are now gathered out of the


9 Luke xiv. i8.
'oEx. xxxii. I.
" Isa. vi. 10.
12 Pertinentissime.
'3jer. vii. 23.
'4 Jer. vii. 24.
'5 Jer. xi. 8.
'6 Luke xiv. 18-20.

'7 Jer. vii. 25; also xxv. 4, xxvi. 5, xxxv. 15, xliv. 4.
18 Jer. vii. 26.
'9 Luke xiv. 21.

20 Jer. ii. 31.

21 Jer. ii. ^i.

22 Luke XIV. 23.

23 Dehinc.


402


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[hook IV.


Gentile strangers; with that jealous resent-
ment, no doubt, which He expressed in Deu-
teronomy: " I will hide my face from them,
and I will show them what shall happen in the
last days ' (how that others shall possess their
place); for they are a froward generation,
children in whom is no faith. They have
moved me to jealousy by that which is no god,
and they have provoked me to anger with
their idols; and I will move them to jealousy
with those which are not a people: I will pro-
voke them to anger with a foolish nation " ' —
even with us, whose hope the Jews still en-
tertain.^ But this hope the Lord says they
should not realize;* " Sion being left as a
cottages in a vineyard, as a lodge in a
garden of cucumbers,"^ since the nation re-
jected the latest invitation to Christ. (Now,
I ask,) after going through all this course of
the Creator's dispensation and prophecies,
what there is in it which can possibly be as-
signed to him who has done all his work at
one hasty stroke, ^ and possesses neither the
Creator's" course nor His dispensation in
harmony with the parable ? Or, again in what
will consist his first invitation,' and what his
admonition '° at the second stage ? Some at
first would surely decline; others afterwards
must have accepted." But now he comes to
invite both parties promiscuously out of the
city," out of the hedges, '^ contrary to the
drift'* of the parable. It is impossible for
him now to condemn as scorners of his invita-
tion '5 those whom he has never yet invited,
and whom he is approaching with so much
earnestness. If, however, he condemns them
beforehand as about to reject his call, then
beforehand he also predicts ^^ the election of
the Gentiles in their stead. Certainly '^ he
means to come the second time for the very
purpose of preaching to the heathen. But
even if he does mean to come again, I im-
agine it will not be with the intention of any
longer inviting guests, but of giving to them
their places. Meanwhile, you who interpret


» in <(rx(xTb>v i7M(paiv, Septuagint.
"Deiit. xxxii. 20, 21.

3 Gerunt: althouKh vainly at present (" jam vana in Judaeis" —
Ochler); Semler conjectures ^' gemunt, bewail.'

4 Gustaturos.

5 Specula, " a look-out; " <TKy)vr) is the word in LXX.
6Isa. i. 8.

7 Semel.

8 This is probably the meaninjj of a very involved sentence:
" Quid ex hoc ordine secundum dispensationem et pra::dicationes
Creatoris recensendo competit lUi, cujus (" Crt-a/^r/j' — Oehler;
nee ordinem habet nee dispositionem ad parabolse conspirationem
qui totum opus semel facit ? "

9" By the fathers." See above.
10 " Ky the prophets." See also above. ^

" An obscure sentence, which thus runs in the original: "Ante
debent alii excusare, postea alii convenisse."
12 The Jews.
'3 The Gentiles.
«4 Speculum.
'5 !• astidiosos.
ifiPortendit.
*7 Plane: This is a Marcionite position (Oehler).


the call to this supper as an invitation to a
heavenly banquet of spiritual satiety and
pleasure, must remember that the earthly
promises also of wine and oil and corn, and
even of the city, are equally employed by the
Creator as figures of spiritual things.

CHAP. XXXII. A SORT OF SORITES, AS THE

LOGICIANS CALL IT, TO SHOW THAT THK
PARABLES OF THE LOST SHEEP AND 'Jill,
LOST DRACHMA HAVE NO SUITABLE APPLIC.V-
TION TO THE CHRIST OF MARCION.

Who sought after the lost sheep and the
lost piece of silver ? '' Was it not the loser ?
But who was the loser ? Was it not he who
once possessed '» them ? Who, then, was that ?
Was it not he to whom they belonged ? ^
Since, then, ma?i is the property of none other
than the Creator, He possessed Him who
owned him; He lost him who once possessed
him; He sought him who lost him; He found
him who sought him; He rejoiced who found
him. Therefore the purport^' of neither para-
ble has anything whatever to do with him" to
whom belongs neither the sheep nor the piece
of silver, that is to say, mati. For he lost
him not, because he possessed him not; and
he sought him not, because he lost him not;
and he found him not, because he sought him
not; and he rejoiced not, because he found
him not. Therefore, to rejoice over the sin-
ner's repentance — that is, at the recovery of
lost man — is the attribute of Him who long
ago professed that He would rather that the
sinner should repent and not die.

CHAP. XXXIII. THE MARCIONITE INTERPRETA-
TION OF GOD AND MAMMON REFUTED. THE
PROPHETS JUSTIFY CHRIST's ADMONITION
AGAINST COVETOUSNESS AND PRIDE. JOHN-
BAPTIST THE LINK BETWEEN THE OLD AND
THE NEW DISPENSATIONS OF THE CREATOR. SO
SAID CHRIST — BUT SO ALSO HAD ISAIAH SAl
LONG BEFORE. ONE ONLY GOD, THE CREA
TOR, BY HIS OWN WILL CHANGED THE DISPEN-
SATIONS. NO NEW GOD HAD A HAND IN THE
CHANGE

What the two masters are who. He says,
cannot be served, =3 on the ground that while
one is pleased =** the, other must needs be dis-
pleased,=5 He Himself makes clear, when He
mentions God and mammon. Then, if you
have no interpreter by you, you may leanr


1


^8 Luke XV. i-io.

>9Habuit.

aoCujus fuit: i.e., each of the things respectively.

2" Argumentum.

22 Vacat circa eum.

23 Luke xvi. 13

24 Defendi.
»S Offendi.


CHAP. XXXIII.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


403


again from Himself what He would have un-
derstood by ??iam7nofi^ For when advising us
to provide for ourselves the help of friends in
worldly affairs, after the example of that stew-
ard who, when removed from his office,* re-
lieves his lord's debtors by lessening their
debts with a view to their recompensing him
with their help. He said, "And I say unto
you, Make to yourselves friends of the 7?ia?n-
171071 of unrighteousness," that is to say, of
money, even as the steward had done. Now
we are all of us aware that money is the in-
stigator ^ of unrighteousness, and the lord of
the whole world. Therefore, when he saw the
covetousness of the Pharisees doing servile
worship 4 to it. He hurled s this sentence
against them, "Ye cannot serve God and
mammon."^ Then the Pharisees, who were
covetous of riches, derided Him, when they
understood that by mammon He meant
money. Let no one think that under the
word mammon the Creator was meant, and that
Christ called them off from the service of the
Creator. What/^//v/ Rather learn therefrom
that one God was pointed out by Christ. For
they were two masters whom He named, God
and mammon — the Creator and money. You
cannot indeed serve God — Him, of course,
whom they seemed to serve — and mammon,
to whom they preferred to devote themselves. ^
If, however, he was giving himself out as
another god, it would not be two masters,
but three, that he had pointed out. For the
Creator was a master, and much more of a
master, to be sure,^ than mammon, and more
to be adored, as being more truly our Mas-
ter. Now, how was it likely that He who
had called mammon a master, and had. asso-
ciated him with God, should say nothing of
Him who was really the Master of even these,
that is, the Creator ? Or else, by this silence
respecting Him did He concede that service
might be rendered to Hi77i, since it was to
Himself alone and to mammon that He said
service could not be (simultaneously) rendered?
When, therefore. He lays down the position
that God is one, since He would have been
sure to mention 9 the Creator if He were Him-


^ What in the Punic language is called Mantfuon, says Rigal-
tius, the Latins call lucrum,''^ gain or lucre." See Augustine,
Serm. xxxv. de Verba dontini. I would add Jerome, On the vi.
<»yy1/a/M^«/ where he says : "In the Syriac tongue, riches are
called mammon.'''' And Augustine, in another passage, book ii..
On the Lord's Sermon on the Mount, says: " Riches in Hebrew
are said to be called viaminon. This is evidently a Punic word,
for in that language the synonyme iox gain {lucrum) is mamtnon."
Compare the same author on Ps. ciii. (Oehler).

^Abactu.

3Auctorem.

4 Famulatam.

5 Ammentavit.
*Luke xvi. 13.

7 Magis destinabantur : middle voice.

^ Utique.

9 Nominaturus.


self a rival '° to Him, He did (virtually) name
the Creator, when He refrained from insist-
ing "that He was Master alone, without a rival
god. Accordingly, this will throw light upon
the sense in which it was said, "If ye have
not been faithful in the unrighteous mammon,
who will commit to your trust the true
riches ? " " " In the unrighteous mammon,"
that is to say, in unrighteous riches, not in
the Creator; for even Marcion allows Him to
be righteous: "And if ye have not been faith-
ful in that which is another man's, who will
give to you that which is mine ? " '^ For what-
ever is unrighteous ought to be foreign to the
servants of God. But in what way was the
Creator foreign to the Pharisees, seeing that
He was the proper God of the Jewish nation ?
Forasmuch then as the words, " Who will en-
trust to you the truer riches?" and, "Who
will give you that which is mine ? " are only
suitable to the Creator and not to mammon,
He could not have uttered them as alien to
the Creator, and in the interest of the rival
god. He could only seem to have spoken
them in this sense, if, when remarking 'nheir
unfaithfulness to the Creator and not to mam-
mon, He had drawn some distinctions between
the Creator (in his manner of mentioning
Him) and the rival god — how that the latter
would not commit his own truth to those who
were unfaithful to the Creator. How then can
he possibly seem to belong to another god, if
He be not set forth, with the express intention
of being separated 's from the very thing which
is in question. But when the Pharisees
"justified themselves before men," '^ and
placed their hope of reward in man. He cen-
sured them in the sense in which the prophet
Jeremiah said, " Cursed is the man that trust-
eth in man." '^ Since the prophet went on to
say, " But the Lord knoweth your hearts,"'^
he magnified the power of that God who de-
clared Himself to be as a lamp, "searching
the reins and the heart." '^ When He strikes
at pride in the words: " That which is highly
esteemed among men is abomination in the
sight of God," ^ He recalls Isaiah: " For the
day of the Lord of hosts shall be upon every
one that is proud and lofty, and upon every
one that is arrogant and lifted up, and they
shall be brought low." ="" I can now make out


10 Alius.

" Quem non posuit.
'2 Luke xvi. 11.

■3Meum : Luke xvi. 12, where, however, the word is to iifxerepov,
" that which is your own."

14 Notando.

15 Ad hoc ut separetur.

16 Luke xvi. 15.
'7 Jer. xvii. 5.

18 Jer. xvii. lo, in sense but not in letter.
'9 Jer. XX. 12.

20 Luke xvi. 15.

21 Isa. ii. 12 (Sept).


404


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book IV.


why Marcion's god was for so long an age
concealed. He was, I suppose, waiting until
he had learnt all these things from the Cre-
ator. He continued his pupillage up to the
time of John, and then proceeded forthwith to
announce the kingdom of God, saying: *' The
law and the prophets were until John; since
that time the kingdom of God is proclaimed." '
Just as if we also did not recognise in John a
certain limit placed between the old dispensa-
tion and the new, at which Judaism ceased and
Christianity began — without, however, suppos-
ing that it was by the power of another god
that there came about a cessation = of the law
and the prophets and the commencement of
that gospel in which is the kingdom of God,
Christ Himself. For although, as we have
shown, the Creator foretold that the old state
of things would pass away and a new state
would succeed, yet, inasmuch as John is
shown to be both the forerunner and the pre-
parer of the ways of that Lord who was to
introduce the gospel and publish the kingdom
of God, it follows from the very fact that John
has come, that Christ must be that very Being
who was to follow His harbinger John. So
that, if the old course has ceased and the new
has begun, with John intervening between
them, there will be nothing wonderful in it,
because it happens according to the purpose
of the Creator; so that you may get a better
proof for the kingdom of God from any quar-
ter, however anomalous,^ than from the con-
ceit that the law and the prophets ended in
John, and a new state of things began after
him. "More easily, therefore, may heaven
and earth pass away — as also the law and the
prophets — than that one tittle of the Lord's
words should fail,"'* *' For," as says Isaiah:
'* the word of our God shall stand for ever." s
Since even then by Isaiah it was Christ, the
Word and Spirit*^ of the Creator, who pro-
phetically described John as " the voice of one
crying in the wilderness to prepare the way of
the Lord," ^ and as about to come for the pur-
pose of terminating thenceforth the course of
the law and the prophets; by their fulfilment
and not their extinction, and in order that the
kingdom of God might be announced by
Christ, He therefore purposely added the as-
surance that the elements would more easily
pass away than His words fail; affirming, as
He did, the further fact, that what He had
said concerning John had not fallen to the
ground.


''■ Luke xvi. 16.

2 Sedatio : literally, " a setting to rest," i7p€>i)ari?.

3 Ut undeunde magis probetur . . . regnum Dei.

4 Luke xvi. 17 and xxj. 23.

5 Isa. xl. 8. . ^

6 See above, note on chap, xxviii., towards the end, on this des-
ignation of Christ's divine nature.

7 Isa. xl. 3.


CHAP. XXXIV. — MOSES, ALLOWING DIVORCE,
AND CHRIST PROHIBITING IT, EXPLAINED.
JOHN BAPTIST AND HEROD. MARCION's AT-
TEMPT TO DISCOVER AN ANTITHESIS IN THE
PARABLE OF THE RICH MAN AND THE POOR
MAN IN HADES CONFUTED. THE CREATOR'S
APPOINTMENT MANIFESTED IN BOTH STATES.

But Christ prohibits divorce, saying, " Who-
soever putteth away his wife, and marrieth
another, committeth adultery; and whosoever
marrieth her that is put away from her hus-
band, also committeth adultery."^ In order
to forbid divorce. He makes it unlawful to
marry a woman that has been put away.
Moses, however, permitted repudiation in
Deuteronomy: " When a man hath taken a
wife, and hath lived with her, and it come to
pass that she find no favour in his eyes, be-
cause he hath found unchastity in her; then
let him write her a bill of divorcement and
give it in her hand, and send her away out of
his house. "9 You see, therefore, that there is
a difference between the law and the gospel —
between Moses and Christ ?'° To be sure
there is!" But then you have rejected that
other gospel which witnesses to the same
verity and the same Christ." There, while
prohibiting divorce. He has given us a solu-
tion of this special question respecting it:
"Moses," says He, "because of the hardness
of your hearts, suffered you to give a bill of
divorcement; but from the beginning it was
not so " '3 — for this reason, indeed, because
He who had " made them male and female "
had likewise said, " They twain shall become
one flesh; what therefore God hath joined
together, let not man put asunder."** Now,
by this answer of His (to the Pharisees), He
both sanctioned the provision of Moses, who
was His own (servant), and restored to its
primitive purpose 's the institution of the Cre-
ator,whose Christ He was. Since, however, you
are to be refuted out of the Scriptures which
you have received, I will meet you on your
own ground, as if your Christ were mine.
When, therefore. He prohibited divorce, and
yet at the same time represented '^ the Father,
even Him who united male and female, must
He not have rather exculpated '^ than abol-
ished the enactment of Moses ? But, observe,
if this Christ be yours when he teaches con-
trary to Moses and the Creator, on the same
principle must He be mine if I can show that


1


8 Luke xvi. 18.

9Deut. xxiv. I.
10 A Marcionite challenge.
"Plane.

'2 St. Matthew's Gospel.
>3Matt. xix. 8.
M Matt. xix. 4, 6.
»S Direxit.
'6 Gestans.
17 Excusaverit.


CHAP. XXXIV.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


405


His teaching is not contrary to them. I main-
tain, then, that there was a condition in the
prohibition which He now made of divorce;
the case supposed being, that a man put away
his wife for the express purpose of marry-
ing another. His words are: "Whosoever
putteth away his wife, and marrieth another,
committeth adultery; and whosoever marrietli
her that is put away from her husband, also
committeth adultery," = — "put away," that
is, for the reason wherefore a woman ought
not to be dismissed, that another wife may be
obtained. For he who marries a woman who
is unlawfully put away is as much of an adul-
terer as the man who marries one who is un-
divorced. Permanent is the marriage which
is not rightly dissolved; to marry, ^ therefore,
whilst matrimony is undissolved, is to commit
adultery. Since, therefore. His prohibition
of divorce was a conditional one, He did not
prohibit absolutely; and what He did not ab-
solutely forbid, that He permitted on some
occasions,'^ when there is an absence of the
cause why He gave His prohibition. In very
deed s His teaching is not contrary to Moses,
whose precept He partially^ defends, I will
not 7 say confirms. If, however, you deny that
divorce is in any way permitted by Christ, how
is it that you on your side ^ destroy marriage,
not uniting man and woman, nor admitting to
the sacrament of baptism and of the eucharist
those who have been united in marriage any-
where else,' unless they should agree together
to repudiate the fruit of their marriage, and
so the verj Creator Himself? Well, then,
what is a husband to do in your sect,'" if his
wife commit adultery? Shall he keep her?
But your own apostle, you know," does not
permit " the members of Christ to be joined
to a harlot."" Divorce, therefore, when
justly deserved, '3 has even in Christ a de-
fender. So that Moses for the future must
be considered as being confirmed by Him,
since he prohibits divorce in the same sense
as Christ does, if any unchastity should occur
in the wife. For in the Gospel of Matthew
he says, " Whosoever shall put away his wife,
saving for the cause of fornication, causeth
her to commit adultery."^* He also is
deemed equally guilty of adultery, who mar-

1 Ideo ut.

2 Luke xvi. 18.

SNubere. This verbis here used of both sexes, in a general
sense.

4 Alias.

5 Etiam : first word of the sentence.
^Alicubi.

7 Nondum.

8Tu.

9 Alibi: i.e., than in the Marcionite connection;
I' Apud te.
'' Scilicet.
'- 1 Cor. vi. 15.
'3 Justitia divortii.
i4Matt. V. 32.


ries a woman put away by her husband. The
Creator, however, except on account of adul-
tery, does not put asunder what He Himself
joined together, the same Moses in another
passage enacting that he who had married
after violence to a damsel, should thenceforth
not have it in his power to put away his wife.'s
Now, if a compulsory marriage contracted
after violence shall be permanent, how much
rather shall a voluntary one, the result of
agreement! This has the sanction of the
prophet: " Thou shalt not forsake the wife of
thy youth." "^ Thus you have Christ following
spontaneously the tracks of the Creator every-
where, both in permitting divorce and in for-
bidding it. You find Him also protecting
marriage, in whatever direction you try to es-
cape. He prohibits divorce when He will
have the marriage inviolable; He permits di-
vorce when the marriage is spotted with un-
faithfulness. You should blush when you re-
fuse to unite those whom even your Christ
has united; and repeat the blush when you
disunite them without the good reason why
your Christ would have them separated. I
have '7 now to show whence the Lord derived
this decision'^ of His, and to what end He
directed it. It will thus become more fully
evident that His object was not the abolition
of the Mosaic ordinance '^ by any suddenly
devised proposal of divorce; because it was',
not suddenly proposed, but had its root in the'
previously mentioned John. For John re-
proved Herod, because he had illegally mar-
ried the wife of his deceased brother, who had
a daughter by her (a union which the law per-
mitted only on the one occasion of the brother
dying childless,^ when it even prescribed such
a marriage, in order that by his own brother,
and from his own wife,^' seed might be reck-
oned to the deceased husband),''^ and was in
consequence cast into prison, and finally, by
the same Herod, was even put to death. The
Lord having therefore made mention of John,
and of course of the occurrence of his death,
hurled His censure ^^ against Herod in the
form of unlawful marriages and of adultery,
pronouncing as an adulterer even the man
who married a woman that had been put away
from her husband. This he said in order the
more severely to load Herod with guilt, who
had taken his brother's wife, after she had
been loosed from her husband not less by
death than by divorce; who had been impelled


'5 Deut. xxii. 28, 29.

16 Mai. ii. 15.

»7 Debeo.

18 Sententiam.

'9 Literally, "Moses."

zo lUiberis. [N. B. He supposes Philip to have been dead.]

21 Costa: literally, "rib" or "side."

2--' Deut. XXV. 5, 6

23 Jaculatus est.


4o6


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book IV,


thereto by his lust, not by the prescription of
the (Levirate) law — for, as his brother had left
a daughter, the marriage with the widow could
not be lawful on that very account;' and who,
when the prophet asserted against him the law,
had therefore put him to death. The remarks
I have advanced on this case will be also of
use to me in illustrating the subsequent para-
ble of the rich* man'' tormented in hell, and
the poor man resting in Abraham's bosom. ^
For this passage, so far as its letter goes,
comes before us abruptly; but if we regard its
sense and purport, it naturally '^ fits in with
the mention of John wickedly slain, and of
Herod, who had been condemned by him for
his impious marriage. ^ It sets forth in bold
outline^ the end of both of them, the "tor-
ments" of Herod and the "comfort" of
John, that even now Herod might- hear that
warning: "They have there Moses and the
prophets, let them hear them."^ Marcion,
however, violently turns the passage to an-
other end, and decides that both the torment
and the comfort are retributions of the Creator,
reserved in the next life^ for those who have
obeyed the law and the prophets; whilst he
defines the heavenly bosom and harbour to
belong to Christ and his own god. Our an-
swer to this is, that the Scripture itself which
dazzles' his sight expressly distinguishes be-
tween Abraham's bosom, where the poor man
dwells, and the infernal place of torment.
"Hell" (I take it) means one thing, and
"Abraham's bosom" another. "A great
gulf" is said to separate those regions, and
to hinder a passage from one to the other.
Besides, the rich man could not have " lifted
up his eyes," '" and from a distance too, ex-
cept to a superior height, and from the said
distance all up through the vast immensity
of height and depth. It must therefore be
evident to every man of intelligence who has
ever heard of the Elysian fields, that there is
some determinate place called Abraham's
bosom, and that it is designed for the recep-
tion of the souls of Abraham's children, even
from among the Gentiles (since he is " the
father of many nations, ' ' which must be classed
amongst his family), and of the same faith as
that wherewithal he himself believed God,
without the yoke of the law and the sign of
circumcision. This region, therefore, I call


X The condition being that the deceased brother should have left
no child " see (Deut. xxv. 5).

2 Ad subsequens argumentum divitis.

3 Luke xvi. 19-31.

4 Ipsum.

5 Suggillati Herodis male raaritati.
^Deformans.
7 Luke xvi. 29,


8 Apud inferos. [Note the origin of this doctrine. J

9 Revincente : perhaps "reproves his eyesight," in the


sense of


re/ittation.
10 Luke xvi. 23.


Abraham's bosom. Although it is not in
heaven, it is yet higher than hell," and is ap-
pointed to afford an interval of rest to the )
souls of the righteous, until the consumma- {
tion of all things shall complete the resurrec- '
tion of all men with the " full recompense \
of their reward." " This consummation will I
then be manifested in heavenly promises,
which Marcion, however, claims for his own
god, just as if the Creator had never an
nounced them. Amos, however, tells us of
" those stories towards heaven ""^ which Christ
" builds " — of course for His people. There
also is that everlasting abode of which Isaiah
asks, " Who shall declare unto you the eternal
place, but He (that is, of course, Christ) who
walketh in righteousness, speaketh of the
straight path, hateth inj ustice and iniquity ? " '*
Now, although this everlasting abode is prom-
ised, and the ascending stories (or steps) to
heaven are built by the Creator, who further
promises that the seed of Abraham shall be
even as the stars of heaven, by virtue cer-
tainly of the heavenly promise, why may it
not be possible, '5 without any injury to that
promise, that by Abraham's bosom is meant
some temporary receptacle of faithful souls,
wherein is even now delineated an image of
the future, and where is given some foresight
of the glory '^ of both judgments ? If so, you
have here, O heretics, during your present
lifetime, a warning that Moses and the proph-
ets declare one only God, the Creator, and
His only Christ, and how that both awards of
everlasting punishment and eternc^ salvation
rest with Him, the one only God, who kills
and who makes alive. Well, but the admoni-
tion, says Marcion, of our God from heaven
has commanded us not to hear Moses and the
prophets, but Christ; Hear Him is the com-
mafid.^'' This is true enough. For the apos-
tles had by that time sufficiently heard Moses
and the prophets, for they had followed Christ,
being persuaded by Moses and the prophets.
For even Peter would not have been able'*
to say, "Thou art the Christ," '^ unless he
had beforehand heard and believed Moses
and the prophets, by whom alone Christ had
been hitherto announced. Their faith, in-
deed, had deserved this confirmation by such
a voice from heaven as should bid them hear


" Sublimiorem inferis. [Elucidation VIII.]

»2 Compare Heb. ii. 2 with x. 35 and xi. 26.

'SAscensum in coehim : Sept. a.va.^a.a>.v et? rhv oiipavov, Amos
ix. 6. See on this passage the article Heaven in Kitto's Cyclo-
/(•/■rf/a (3d edit.), vol. ii. p. 245, where the present writer has dis-
cussed tne probable meaning of the verse.

»4 Isa. xxxiii. 14-16, according to the Septuagint, which has but
slight resemblance to the Hebrew.

'5 Cur non capiat.

'6 Candida quaedam prospiciatur : where Candida is a noun sub-
stantive (see above, chap. vii. p. 353).

•7 There seems to be here an allusion to Luke ix. 35.

'8 Nee accepisset.

»9 Luke ix. 20.


CHAP. XXXV.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


407


^/w, whom they had recognized as preaching
peace, announcing glad tidings, promising an
everlasting abode, building for them steps
upwards into heaven,' Down in hell, how-
ever, it was said concerning them: "They
have Moses and the prophets; let them hear
them!" — even those who did not believe them
or at least did not sincerely =" believe that after
death there were punishments for the arro-
gance of wealth and the glory of luxury, an-
nounced indeed by Moses and the prophets,
but decreed by that God, who deposes princes
from their thrones, and raiseth up the poor
from dunghills. 3 Since, therefore, it is quite
consistent in- the Creator to pronounce differ-
ent sentences in the two directions of reward
and punts hifient, we shall have to conclude that
there is here no diversity of gods,-* but only
a difference in the actual matters s before us.

CHAP. XXXV. THE JUDICIAL SEVERITY OF

CHRIST AND THE TENDERNESS OF THE CREA-
TOR, ASSERTED IN CONTRADICTION TO MAR-
CION. THE CURE OF THE TEN LEPERS. OLD
TESTAMENT ANALOGIES. THE KINGDOM OF
GOD WITHIN you; this TEACHING SIMILAR TO
THAT OF MOSES. CHRIST, THE STONE REJECT-
ED BY THE BUILDERS. INDICATIONS OF
SEVERITY IN THE COMING OF CHRIST. PROOFS
THAT HE IS NOT THE IMPASSIBLE BEING MAR-
CION IMAGINED.

Then, turning to His disciples. He says:

*' Woe unto him through whom offences come!

It were better for him if he had not been born,

or if a millstone were hanged about his neck

iand he were cast into the sea, than that he

should offend one of these little ones,"^ that

■ is, one of His disciples. Judge, then, what

'the sort of punishment is which He so sever-

fely threatens. For it is no stranger who is to

'avenge the offence done to His disciples.

Recognise also in Him the Judge, and one,

[too, who expresses Himself on the safety of

iHis followers" with the same tenderness as that

[which the Creator long ago exhibited: " He

that toucheth you toucheth the apple of my

eye." "> Such identity of care proceeds from

one and the same Being. A trespassing

brother He will have rebuked.^ If one failed

in this duty of reproof, he in fact' sinned,

either because out of hatred he wished his

brother to continue in sin, or else spared him

from mistaken friendship,^ although possessing


1 See Isa. lii. 7, xxxiii. 14 (Sept.), and Amos ix. 6.

2 0mnino.

3 See I Sam. ii. 6-8, Ps. cxiii. 7, and Luke i. 52.
4Divinitatum ; " divine powers."

5 Ipsanim materiarum.

6 Luke xvii. i, 2.
7Zech. ii. 8.

8 Luke xvii. 3.

9 Ex acceptione personae. The Greek Trpoo-aiiroArjv!/ia, " respect
of persons."


the injunction in Leviticus: " Thou shalt not
hate thy brother in thine heart; thy neighbor
thou shalt seriously rebuke, and on his ac-
count shalt not contract sin."'° Nor is it to
be wondered at, if He thus teaches who for-
bids your refusing to bring back even your
brother's cattle, if you find them astray in the
road; much more should you bring back your
erring brother to himself. He commands you
to forgive your brother, should he trespass
against you even " seven times." " But that
surely, is a small matter; for with the Creator
there is a larger grace, when He sets no
limits to forgiveness, indefinitely charging you
" not to bear any malice against your
brother," " and to give not merely to him who
asks, but even to him who does not ask. For
His will is, not that you should forgive '^ an of-
fence, but forget it. The law about lepers had
a profound meaning as respects ^^ the forms of
the disease itself, and of the inspection by the
high priest. 's The interpretation of this sense
it will be our task to ascertain. Marcion's
labour, however, is to object to us the strict-
ness'^ of the law, with the view of maintaining
that here also Christ is its enemy — forestall-
ing'^ its enactments even in His cure of the
ten lepers. These He simply commanded to
show themselves to the priest; " and as they
went. He cleansed them " '^ — without a touch,
and without a word, by His silent power and
simple will. Well, but what necessity was
there for Christ, who had been once for all
announced as the healer of our sicknesses and
sins, and had proved Himself such by His acts,''
to busy Himself with inquiries^ into the quali-
ties and details of cures; or for the Creator to
be summoned to the scrutiny of the law in the
person of Christ? If any part of this healing was
effected by Him in a way different from the
law. He yet Himself did it to perfection; for
surely the Lord may by Himself, or by His
Son, produce after one manner, and after
another manner by His servants the prophets,
those proofs of His power and might espe-
cially,which (as excelling in glory and strength,
because they are His own acts) rightly enough
leave in the distance behind them the works
which are done by His servants. But enough


10 Lev. xix. 17. The last clause in A. V. runs, " And not suffer
sin upon him ;" but the Sept. gives this reading, (cal o\i A>ji/>)7 SC
avTov afjiapTtav ; nor need the Hebrew mean other than this. The
prenominal particle ^^^2? may be well rendered Si' auroi on his
account.

11 Luke xvii. 4.

12 Lev. xix. 18.

13 Dones.
i4Erga : /.^. circa.

15 See Lev. xiii. and xiv.

16 Morositatem.

17 Praevenientem.

18 Luke xvii. ii-iq.

19 Or. perhaps. '" had proved the prophecy true by His accom-
plishment of it.'

20 Retractari.


4o8


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book IV.


has been already said on this point in a for-
mer passage.' Now, although He said in a
preceding chapter," that "there were many
lepers in Israel in the days of Eliseus the
prophet, and none of them was cleansed sav-
ing Naaman the Syrian," yet of course the
mere number proves nothing towards a dif-
erence in the gods, as tending to the abase-
ment 3 of the Creator in curing only one, and
the pre-eminence of Him who healed ten.
For who can doubt that many might have
been cured by Him who cured one more eas-
ily than ten by him who had never healed one
before ? But His main purpose in this decla-
ration was to strike at the unbelief or the pride
of Israel, in that (although there were many
lepers amongst them, and a prophet was not
wanting to them) not one had been moved
even by so conspicuous an example to betake
himself to God who was working in His
prophets. Forasm^uch, then, as He was Him-
self the veritable* High Priest of God the
Father, He inspected them according to the
hidden purport of the law, which signified
that Christ was the true distinguisher and ex-
tinguisher of the defilements of mankind.
However, what was obviously required by the
law He commanded should be done: "Go,"
said He, " show yourselves to the priests." s
Yet why this, if He meant to cleanse them
first? Was it as a despiser of the law, in
order to prove to them that, having been cured
already on the road, the law was now nothing
to them, nor even the priests? Well, the
matter must of course pass as it best may,^ if
anybody supposes that Christ had such views
as these! 7 But there are certainly better in-
terpretations to be found of the passage, and
more deserving of belief: how that they were
cleansed on this account, because ^ they were
obedient, and went as the law required, when
they were commanded to go to the priests; and
it is not to be believed that persons who
observed the law could have found a cure from
a god that was destroying the law. Why,
however, did He not give such a command to
the leper who first returned?' Because Eli-
sha did not in the case of Naaman the Syrian,
and yet was not on that account less the
Creator's agent? This is a sufficient answer.
But the believer knows that there is a pro-
founder reason. Consider, therefore, the


1 See above in chap. ix.

2 Praefatus est : see Luke iv. 27.

3 Destructionem.

4 Authenticus. " He was the true^ the original Priest, of whom
the priests under the Mosaic law were only copies " (Bp. Kaye, On
the Writings 0/ Tertullian, pp. 293, 294, and note 8).

5 Luke xvii. 14. •
^Et utique viderit.
7 Tam opiniosus.

8 Qua: " 1 should prefer quia'''' (Oehler).
9 Pristine leprosd : but doubtful.


true motives.'" The miracle was performed
in the district of Samaria, to which country
also belonged one of the lepers." Samaria,
however, had revolted from Israel, carrying
with it the disaffected nine tribes," which, hav-
ing been alienated '^ by the prophet Ahijah,'*
Jeroboam settled in Samaria. Besides, the
Samaritans were always pleased with the
mountains and the wells of their ancestors.
Thus, in the Gospel of John, the woman of
Samaria, when conversing with the Lord at
the well, says, ' ' No doubt 's Thou art greater, ' '
etc.; and again, "Our fathers worshipped in
this mountain; but ye say, that in Jerusalem
is the place where men ought to worship." '^
Accordingly, He who said, " Woe unto them
that trust in the mountain of Samaria," '^
vouchsafing now to restore that very region,
purposely requests the men " to go and show
themselves to the priests," because these
were to be found only there where the temple
was; submitting'^ the Samaritan to the Jew,
inasmuch as " salvation was of the Jews,"''
whether to the Israelite or the Samaritan.
To the tribe of Judah, indeed, wholly apper-
tained the promised Christ,^ in order that
men might know that at Jerusalem were both
the priests and the temple; that there also was
the womb ^' of religion, and its livifig fountain,
not its mere "well." '^'^ Seeing, therefore, that
they recognised =^3 the truth that at Jerusalem
the law was to be fulfilled. He healed them
whose salvation was to come =* of faith =s with-
out the ceremony of the law. Whence also,
astonished that one only out of the ten was
thankful for his release to the divine grace,
He does not command him to offer a gift ac-
cording to the law, because he had already
paid his tribute of gratitude when " he glori-
fied God;=^ for thus did the Lord will that the
law's requirement should be interpreted.
And yet who was the God to whom the Samari-
tan gave thanks, because thus far not even
had an Israelite heard of another god ? Who
else but He by whom all had hitherto been


'oCausas.

'» Luke xvii. 17.

i^Schisma illud ex novetn tribubus. There is another reading
which substitutes the word decctii. " It is, however, immaterial ;
either number will do roundly. If 'ten' be the number, it must
be understood that the tenth is divided, accurately making nine
and a half tribes. If ' nine ' be read, the same amount is still made
up, for Si /neon was reckoned vi'xlhjudah^ and half of the tribe of
Benjamin remained loyal " (Fr. Junius).

isAvulsas.

14 I Kings xi. 29-39 ^"^ ^'- ^5*

isNae.

'<5 John iv. 12, 20.

'7 Amos VI. 1.

'^Subiciens: or " subjecting."

19 John iv. 22.

20 lota promissio Christus.
2» Matricem.

22 Fontem non puteum salutis.

23 Agnovisse.

24 Justificandos.

25 Luke xvii. 19.
=6 Luke xvii. 15,


CHAP. XXXVI.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


409


healed through Christ ? And therefore it was
said to him, "Thy faith hath made thee
whole,"' because he had discovered that
it was his duty to render the true oblation to
Almighty God — even thanksgiving — in His
true temple, and before His true High Priest
Jesus Christ. But it is impossible either that
the Pharisees should seem to have inquired
of the Lord about the coming of the kingdom
of the rival god, when no other god has ever
yet been announced by Christ; or that He
should have answered them concerning the
kingdom of any other god than Him of whom
they were in the habit of asking Him. " The
kingdom of God," He says, " cometh not
with observation; neither do they say, Lo here !
or, lo there ! for, behold, the kingdom of
God is within you." ^ Now, who will not in-
terpret the words ''''ivithinyou'" to mean/wj'^z^r
ha7id^ withi7i your power ^ if you hear, and do
the commandment of God ? If, however, the
kingdom of God lies in His commandment,
set before your mind Moses on the other side,
according to our antitheses, and you will find
the self-same view of the case.^ " The com-
mandment is not a lofty one,^ neither is it far
off from thee. It is not in heaven, that thou
shouldest say, ' Who shall go up for us to
heaven, and bring it unto us, that we may hear
it, and do it ? ' nor is it beyond the sea, that
thou shouldest say, ' Who shall go over the sea
for us, and bring it unto us, that we may hear
it, and do it ? ' But the word is very nigh unto
thee, in thy mouth, and in thy heart, and in
thy hands, to do it."s This means, "Nei-
ther in this place nor that place is the king-
dom of God; for, behold, it is within you." ^
And if the heretics, in their audacity, should
contend that the Lord did not give an answer
about His own kingdom, but only about the
Creator's kingdom, concerning which they
had inquired, then the following words are
against them. For He tells them that " the
Son of man must suffer many things, and be
rejected," before His coming, ^ at which His
kingdom will be really^ revealed. In this
statement He shows that it was His own king-
dom which His answer to them had contempla-
ted, and which was now awaiting His own
sufferings and rejection. But having to be re-
jected and afterwards to be acknowledged, and
taken up^ and glorified. He borrowed the
very word "rejected" from the passage.


1 Luke xvii. 19.

2 Luke xvii. 20, 21.

3 Una sententia.

4 Excelsum : Sept. VTrepoyxos.
SDeut. XXX. 11-13.

6 Luke xvii. 21.

7 Luke xvii. 25.

8 Substantialiter.

9 Assumi.


where, under the figure of a stotie, His twofold
manifestation was celebrated by David — the
first in rejection, the second in honour: " The
stone," says He, "which the builders re-
jected, is become the head-stone of the cor-
ner. This is the Lord's doing." '° Now it
would be idle, if we believed that God had
predicted the humiliation, or even the glory,
of any Christ at all, that He could have de-
signed His prophecy for any but Him whom
He had foretold under the figure of a stone,
and a rock, and a mountai?i.^'^ If, however,
He speaks of His own coming, why does He
compare it with the days of Noe and of Lot,"
which were dark and terrible — a mild and
gentle God as He is? Why does He bid us
" remember Lot's wife," '^ who despised the
Creator's command, and was punished for
her contempt, if He does not come with
judgment to avenge the infraction of His pre-
cepts ? If He really does punish, like the
Creator,''^ if He is my Judge, He ought not
to have adduced examples for the purpose of
instructing me from Him whom He yet de-
stroys, that He 's might not seem to be my
instructor. But if He does not even here
speak of His own coming, but of the coming
of the Hebrew Christ,'^ let us still wait in ex-
pectation that He will vouchsafe to us some
prophecy of His own advent; meanwhile we
will continue to believe that He is none other
than He whom He reminds us of in every
passage.

CHAP. XXXVI. THE PARABLES OF THE IMPOR-
TUNATE WIDOW, AND OF THE PHARISEE AND
THE PUBLICAN. CHRIST's ANSW^ER TO THE RICH
RULER. THE CURE OF THE BLIND MAN. HIS
SALUTATION — SON OF DAVID. ALL PROOFS
OF CHRIST'S RELATION TO THE CREATOR.
MARCION 'S ANTITHESIS BETWEEN DAVID AND
CHRIST CONFUTED.

When He recommends perseverance and
earnestness in prayer. He sets before us the
parable of the judge who was compelled to
listen to the widow, owing to the earnestness
and importunity of her requests. '^ He show us
that it is God the judge whom we must im-
portune with prayer, and not Himself, if He
is not Himself the judge. But He added,
that " God would avenge His own elect. "'^
Since, then. He who judges will also Himself
be the avenger. He proved that the Creator


10 Ps. cxviii. 21.

11 See Isa. viii. 14 and 1 Cor, x. 4.

12 Luke xvii. 26-30.

13 Luke xvii. 32.
MUtille.

15 I lie : emphatic.

16 That is, the Creator's Christ from the* Marcionite point of
view.

17 Luke xviii. i-j •

18 Luke xviii. 7, 8.


4IO


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book iv»


is on that account the specially good God,"
whom He represented as the avenger of His
own elect, who cry day and night to Him.
And yet, when He introduces to our vie^v the
Creator's temple, and describes two men wor-
shipping therein with diverse feelings — the
Pharisee in pride, the publican in humility —
and shows us how they accordingly went down
to their homes, one rejected,* the other justi-
fied,^ He surely, by thus teaching us the
proper discipline of prayer, has determined
that that God must be prayed to from whom
men were to receive this discipline of prayer
— whether condemnatory of pride, or justify-
ing in humility.'^ I do not find from Christ
any temple, any suppliants, any sentence (of
approval or condemnation) belonging to any
other god than the Creator. Him does He
enjoin us to worship in humility, as the lifter-
up of the humble, not in pride, because He
brings down s the proud. What other god has
He manifested to me to receive my supplica-
tions ? With what formula of worship, with
what hope (shall I approach him ?) I trow,
none. For the prayer which He has taught
us suits, as we have proved,^ none but the
Creator. It is, of course, another matter if
He does not wish to be prayed to, because
He is the supremely and spontaneously good
God ! But who is this good God ? There is.
He says, "none but one. "^ It is not as if
He had shown us that one of two gods was
the supremely good; but He expressly asserts
that there is one only good God, who is the
only good, because He is the only God.
Now, undoubtedly,^ He is the good God who
" sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust,
and maketh His sun to rise on the evil and
on the good; "9 sustaining and nourishing
and assisting even Marcionites themselves !
When afterwards "a certain man asked him,
' Good Master, what shall I do to inherit
eternal life?'" (Jesus)' inquired whether he
k7ie7ii (that is, in other words, whether he kept')
the commandments of the Creator, in order
to testify '" that it was by the Creator's pre-
cepts that eternal life is acquired." Then,
when he affirmed that from his youth up he
had kept all the principal commandments,
(Jesus) said to him: "One thing thou yet
lackest: sell all that thou hast, and give to
the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in


» Meliorem Deum.
'Reprobatum.

3 Luke xviii. 10-14.

4 Sive reprobatricem superbiae, sive justificatricem humilitatis.

5 Destructorem.

6 See above, chap. xxvi. p. 392.

7 Luke xviii. 19.
SUtique.

9 Matt. V. 45.
wAd contestandum.
" Luke .xviii. 18-20.


heaven; and come, follow me."" Well now,
Marcion, and all ye who are companions in
misery, and associates in hatred '^ with that
heretic, what will you dare say to this ? Did
Christ rescind the forementioned command-
ments: "Do not kill, Do not commit adul-
tery. Do not steal, Do not beai false witness,
Honour thy father and thy mother ? " Or did
He both keep them, and then add ^* what was
wanting to them ? This very precept, how-
ever, about giving to the poor, was very
largely 's diffused through the pages of the law
and the prophets. This vainglorious ob-
server of the commandments was therefore
convicted "^ of holding money in much higher
estimation (than charity). This verity of the
gospel then stands unimpaired: "I am not
come to destroy the law and the prophets, but
rather to fulfil them."'^ He also dissipated
other doubts, when He declared that the
name of God and of the Good belonged to one
and the same being, at whose disposal were
also the everlasting life and the treasure in
heaven and Himself too — whose command-
ments He both maintained and augmented
with His own supplementary precepts. He
may likewise be discovered in the following
passage of Micah, saying: " He hath showed
thee, O man, what is good; and what doth the
Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to
love mercy, and to be ready to follow the
Lord thy God ? " '^ Now Christ is the man
who tells us what is good^ even the knowledge
of the law. " Thou knowest," says He, " the
commandments." "To do justly" — "Sell
all that thou hast; " "to love mercy " — " Give
to the poor: " " and to be ready to walk with
God" — "And come," says He, "follow
me."'' The Jewish nation was from its be-
ginning so carefully divided into tribes and
clans, and families and houses, that no man
could very well have been ignorant of his de-
scent— even from the recent assessments ofj
Augustus, which were still probably extant at]
this time.=° But the Jesus of Marcion (al-
though there could be no doubt of a person's;
having been born, who was seen to be a man),
as being unborn, could not, of course, have
possessed any public testimonial" of his de-I
scent, but was to be regarded as one of thati
obscure class of whom nothing was in anyway]


'2 Luke xviii. 21, 22,

'3 See above, chap, ix., near the beginning.

14 Adjecit quod deerat.

'SUbique.

'6 Traduceretur.

»7 Matt. V. 17.

18 ^fic. vi. 8. The last clause agrees with the Septuagint : xal I
eTOi/ixof txvai Tov iroptvecrffai fiera Kvpiov 0«ov erov. \

>9The clauses of Christ's words, which are here adapted to |
Micah's, are in every case broken with an inquit. j

30 Tunc pendentibus: i.e., at the time mentioned in the story of j
the blind man.

2' Notitiam.


CHAP. XXXVII.


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION


411


known. Why then did the blind man, on
hearing that He was passing by, exclaim,
" Jesus, Thou Son of David, have mercy on
me?"' unless he was considered, in no un-
certain manner,' to be the Son oif David (in
other words, to belong to David's family)
through his mother and his brethren, who at
some time or other had been made known to
him by public notoriety ? " Those, however,
who went before rebuked the blind man, that
he should hold his peace." ^ And properly
enough; because he was very noisy, not be-
cause he was wrong about the son of David.
Else you must show me, that those who re-
buked him were aware that Jesus was not the
Son of David, in order that they may be sup-
posed to have had this reason for imposing
silence on the blind man. But even if you
could show me this, still (the blind man)
would more readily have presumed that they
were ignorant, than that the Lord could possi-
bly have permitted an untrue exclamation
about Himself. But the Lord " stood pa-
tient."'* Yes; but not as confirming the
error, for, on the contrary. He rather dis-
played the Creator. Surely He could not
have first removed this man's blindness, in
order that he might afterwards cease to re-
gard Him as the Son of David ! However,^
that you may not slander^ His patience, nor
fasten on Him any charge of dissimulation,
nor deny Him to be the Son of David, He
very pointedly confirmed the exclamation of
the blind man — both by the actual gift of
healing, and by bearing testimony to his
faith: " Thy faith," say Christ, " hath made
thee whole." 7 What would you have the
blind man's faith to have been? That Jesus
was descended from that (alien) god (of Mar-
cion), to subvert the Creator and overthrow
the law and the prophets ? That He was not
the destined offshoot from the root of Jesse,
and the fruit of David's loins, the restorer^
also of the blind ? But I apprehend there
were at that time no such stone-blind persons
as Marcion, that an opinion like this could
have constituted the faith of the blind man,
and have induced him to confide in the mere
name,'^ of Jesus, the Son of David. He, who
knew all this of Himself,'" and wished others
to know it also, endowed the faith of this man
— although it was already gifted with a better
sight, and although it was in possession of the

I Luke xviii. 38.
^Non temere.

3 Luke xviii. 39.

4 Luke xviii. 40.

5 Atquin.

6 Infamaretis.

7 Luke xviii. 42.

8 Remunerator.

9 That is, in the sound only, and phantom of the word ; an al-
lusion to the Docetic absurdity of Marcion.

1° That is, that He was " Son of David," etc.


true light — with the external vision likewise,
in order that we too might learn the rule of
faith, and at the same time find its recom-
pense. Whosoever wishes to see Jesus the
Son of David must believe in Him through
the Virgin's birth." He who will not believe
this will not hear from Him the salutation,
"Thy faith hath saved thee." And so he
will remain blind, falling into Antithesis after
Antithesis^ which mutually destroy each
other," just as "the blind man leads the
blind down into the ditch." '^ For (here is
one of Marcion' s ^w/zV/^^j-^j-): whereas David
in old time, in the capture of Sion, was of-
fended by the blind who opposed his admis-
sion (into the stronghold) "* — in which respect
(I should rather say) that they were a type
of people equally blind, 's who in after-times
would not admit Christ to be the son of David
— so, on the contrary, Christ succoured the
blind man, to show by this act that He was
not David's son, and how different in disposi-
tion He was, kind to the blind, while David
ordered them to be slain. '^ If all this were
so, why did Marciofi allege that the blind
man's faith was of so worthless''' a stamp?"
The fact is,'^ the Son of David so acted, '^^
that the Antithesis must lose its point by its
own absurdity.^ Those persons who offended
David were blind, and the man who now pre-
sents himself as a suppliant to David's son is
afflicted with the same infirmity. =' Therefore
the Son of David was appeased with some
sort of satisfaction by the blind man when
He restored him to sight, and added His ap-
proval of the faith which had led him to be-
lieve the very truth, that he must win to his
help^^ the Son of David by earnest entreaty.
But, after all, I suspect that it was the au-
dacity (of the old Jebusites) which offended
David, and not their malady.

CHAP. XXXVIL — CHRIST AND ZACCH^US. THE-
SALVATION OF THE BODY AS DENIED BY MAR-
CION. THE PARABLE OF THE TEN SERVANTS
ENTRUSTED WITH TEN POUNDS. CHRIST A
JUDGE, WHO IS TO ADMINISTER THE WILL OF
THE AUSTERE MAN, I.E. THE CREATOR.

"Salvation comes to the house" of Zac-


" Censum : that is, must believe Him bom of her.

12 This, perhaps, is the meaning in a clause which is itself more
antithetical than clear: " Ruens in antithesim, ruentem et ipsam
antithesim."

13 In book iii. chap. vii. (at the beginning), occurs the same pro-
verb of Marcion and the Jews. See p. 327

14 See 2 Sam. v. 6-8.

15 The Marcionites.

16 See 2 Sam. v. 8.

17 Fidei equidem pravae : see preceding page, note 3.

18 Atquin.

19 Et hoc filius David : \.e..^ pretstitit^ "showed Himself good,'*^
perhaps.

20 De suo retundendam. Instead of contrast, he shows the
similarity of the cases.

21 Ejusdem carnis : i.e., infirtnee (Oehler).
22Exorandum sibi.


412


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[r.uiiK


chaeus even.' For what reason ? Was it be-
cause he also believed that Christ came by
Marcion? But the blind man's cry was still
sounding in the ears of all: *' Jesus, Thou
Son of David, have mercy on me." And
" all the people gave praise unto God " — not
Marcion' s, but David's. Now, although Zac-
chieus was probably a Gentile, ^^ he yet from
his intercourse with Jews had obtained a
smattering 3 of their Scriptures, and, more
than this, had, without knowing it, fulfilled
the precepts of Isaiah: "Deal thy bread,"
said the prophet, "to the hungry, and bring
the poor that are cast out into thine house." *
This he did in the best possible way, by re-
ceiving the Lord, and entertaining Him in
his house. "When thou seest the naked,
cover him." s This he promised to do, in an
equally satisfactory way, when he offered the
half of his goods for all works of mercy. ^ So
also " he loosened the bands of wickedness,
undid the heavy burdens, let the oppressed
go free, and broke every yoke,"^ when he
said, " If I have taken anything from any
man by false accusation, I restore him four-
fold."« Therefore the Lord said, "This
day is salvation come to this house." ' Thus
did He give His testimony, that the precepts
of the Creator spoken by the prophet tended
to salvation.'" But when He adds, " For the
Son of man is come to seek and to save that
which was lost,"" my present contention is
not whether He was come to save what was
lost, to whom it had once belonged, dindfrom
whom what He came to save had fallen away;
but I approach a different question. Ma7i,
there can be no doubt of it, is here the sub-
ject of consideration. Now, since he consists
of two parts," body and soul, the point to
be inquired into is, in which of these two man
would seem to have been lost? If in his
body, then it is his body, not his soul, which
is lost. What, however, is lost, the Son of
man saves. The body,'^ therefore, has the
salvation. If, (on the other hand,) it is in
his soul that man is lost, salvation is designed
for the lost soul; and the body which is not


^ Luke xix. 9.

'The older reading, which we here follow, is : " Enimvero Zac-
chseus etsi allophylus fortasse," etc. Oehler, however, points the
passage thus: "Enimvero Zacchaeus etsi allophylus, fortasse,"
etc., removing the doubt, and making Zacchaeus "of another
race " than the Jewish, for certain. This is probably more than
TertuUian meant to say.

3 Aliqua notitia afflatus.

4lsa. Iviii. 7.

5 In the same passage.

6 For the history of Zacchaeus, see Luke xix. i-io.

7 Isa. Iviii. 6.

8 Luke xix. 8

9 Luke xix. 9.
*°Salutaria esse.

11 Luke xix. 10.

12 Substantiis.

13 Caro : " the flesh," here a synonym with the corpus of the
previous cLnuscs.


lost is safe. If, (to take the only other sup-
position,) man is wholly lost, in both his
natures, then it necessarily follows that salva-
tion is appointed for the entire man; and then
the opinion of the heretics is shivered to
pieces,'^ who say that there is no salvation of
the flesh. And this affords a confirmation
that Christ belongs to the Creator, who fol-
lowed the Creator in promising the salvation
of the whole man. The parable also of the
(ten) servants, who received their several rec-
ompenses according to the manner in which
they had increased their lord's money by
trading, '5 proves Him to be a God of jud<r-
ment — even a God who, in strict account,"'
not only bestows honour, but also takes away
what a man seems to have.'^ Else, if it is the
Creator whom He has here delineated as the
" austere man," who " takes up what he laid
not down, and reaps what he did not sow," '^
my instructor even here is He, (whoever He
may be,) to whom belongs the money He
teaches me fruitfully to expend.'^

CHAP, xxxvin. — Christ's refutations of the

PHARISEES. RENDERING DUES TO C^SAR AND
TO GOD. NEXT OF THE SADDUCEES, RESPECT-
ING MARRIAGE IN THE RESURRECTION. THESE
PROVE HIM NOT TO BE MARCION's BUT THE
creator's CHRIST. MARCION'S TAMPERINGS
IN ORDER TO MAKE ROOM FOR HIS SECOND
GOD, EXPOSED AND CONFUTED.

Christ knew " the baptism of John, whence
it was." =° Then why did He ask them, as if
He knew not ? He knew that the Pharisees
would not give Him an answer; then why did
He ask in vain ? Was it that He might judge
them out of their own mouth, or their own
heart ? Suppose you refer these points to an
excuse of the Creator, or to His comparison
with Christ; then consider what would have
happened if the Pharisees had replied to His
question. Suppose their answer to have
been, that John's baptism was "of men,"j
they would have been immediately stoned t(
death." Some Marcion, in rivalry to Mar-
cion, would have stood up =' and said : O most
excellent God ; how different are his ways
from the Creator's ! Knowing that men would , ^
rush down headlong over it. He placed themU

M Elisa est.

13 Secundum rationem feneratse.

"' Ex parte severitatis.

17 This phrase comes not from the present passage, but from
Luke viii. 18, where the words are b hoKti e^eii'; here the expres-sion
is 6 evei only.

'8 Luke XIX. 22.

19 The original of this obscure sentence is as follows : " Aut si

et hie Creatorem finxerit au.sterum hie quoque me ille in-j

struit eujus pecuniam ut fenerem edocet.

=0 Luke XX. 4.

2' Luke XX. 6.

22 Existeret.


^4


1


L=


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


413


actually' on the very precipice. For thus
do men treat of the Creator respecting His
law of the tree.'' But John's baptism was
*' from heaven." " Why, therefore," asks
Christ, "did ye not believe him ? " ^ He
therefore who had wished men to believe
John, purposing to censure* them because
they had not believed him, belonged to Him
whose sacrament John was administering.
But, at any rate,s when He actually met their
refusal to say what they thought, with such
reprisals as, " Neither tell I you by what au-
thority I do these things,"^ He returned
evil for evil ! " Render unto Caesar the things
which be Caesar's, and unto God the things
which be God's." ' What will be "the
things which are God's?" Such things as
are like Ccesar's denarius — that is to say. His
image and similitude. That, therefore, which
he commands to be "rendered unto God,"
the Creator, is ifian, who has been stamped
with His image, likeness, name, and sub-
stance.^ Let Marcion's god look after his
own mint.' Christ bids the denarius oi man's
imprint to be rendered to His Caesar, (His
Caesar I say,) not the Caesar of a strange god.'°
The truth, however, must be confessed, this
god has not a denarius to call his own ! In
every question the just and proper rule is,
that the meaning of the answer ought to be
adapted to the proposed inquiry. But it is
nothing short of madness to return an answer
altogether different from the question sub-
mitted to you. God forbid, then, that we
should expect from Christ" conduct which
would be unfit even to an ordinary man !
The Sadducees, who said there was no resur-
rection, in a discussion on that subject, had
proposed to the Lord a case of law touching a
certain woman, who, in accordance with the
legal prescription, had been married to seven
brothers who had died one after the other.
The question therefore was, to which husband
must she be reckoned to belong in the resur-
rection ? '^ This, (observe,) was the gist of
the inquiry, this was the sum and substance
of the dispute. And to it Christ was obliged to
return a direct answer. He had nobody to
fear; that it should seem advisable '^ for Him
either to evade their questions, or to make


1 Ipse.

2 " Of knowledge of good and evil." The " /aw " thereof oc-
curs in Gen. iii. 3.

3 Luke XX. 5.

4 Increpaturus.

sCerte. [The word sacrame/tt not technical here.]

6 Luke XX. 8.

7 Luke XX. 25.

8 Materia.

9 Monetam.
'° Non alieno.

'I Quo magis absit a Christo.
12 Luke XX. 27-33.
'3 Ut videatur.


them the occasion of indirectly mooting '-* a
subject which He was not in the habit of
teaching publicly at any other time. He
therefore gave His answer, that " the chil-
dren of this world marry." 's You see how
pertinent it was to the case in point. Be-
cause the question concerned the next world,
and He was going to declare that no one
marries there, He opens the way by laying
down the principle, that here, where there is
death, there is also marriage. "But they
whom God shall account worthy of the pos-
session of that world and the resurrection
from the dead, neither marry nor are given
in marriage; forasmuch as they cannot die
any more, since they become equal to the
angels, being made the children of God and
of the resurrection."'^ If, then, the mean-
ing of the answer must not turn on any other
point than on the proposed question, and
since the question proposed is fully under-
stood from this sense of the answer,'" then
the Lord's reply admits of no other interpre-
tation than that by which the question is
clearly understood.'^ You have both the time
in which marriage is permitted, and the time
in which it is said to be unsuitable, laid before
you, not on their own account, but in conse-
quence of an inquiry about the resurrection.
You have likewise a confirmation of the resur-
rection itself, and the whole question which
the Sadducees mooted, who asked no ques-
tion about another god, nor inquired about
the proper law of marriage. Now, if you
make Christ answer questions which were not
submitted to Him, you, in fact, represent Him
as having been unable to solve the points on
which He was really consulted, and entrapped
of course by the cunning of the Sadducees.
I shall now proceed, by way of supereroga-
tion,'^ and after the rule (I have laid down
about questions and answers),^ to deal with
the arguments which have any consistency in
them." They procured then a copy of the
Scripture, and made short work with its text,
by reading it thus:=" " Those whom the god
of that world shall account worthy." They


14 Subostendisse.
^5 Luke XX. 34.

16 Luke XX. 35, 36.

17 Surely Oehler's responsio ought to be responsionis, as the
older books have it.

iSAbsolvitur.

19 Ex abundanti.

20 We have translated here, post prtescriptionem^ according to
the more frequent sense of X.\iG -word, prcescriptio. But there is
another meaning of the word, which is not unknown to our author,
equivalent to our objection or demttrrer, or (to quote Oehler's
definition) " clausula qua reus adversafii intentionem oppugnat —
the form by which the defendant rebuts the plaintiff's charge."
According to this sense, we read: " I shall now proceed . . . and
after putting in a demurrer (or taking exception) against the tactics
of my opponent."

21 Cohaerentes.

22 Decucurrerunt in legendo: or, " they ran through it, by thus
reading."


414


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book IV.


add the phrase '''' of that world'' to the word
''' gody" whereby they make another god —
"the god of that world;" whereas the pas-
sage ought to be read thus: "Those whom
God shall account worthy of the possession
of that world " (removing the distinguishing
phrase '' of this world'' to the end of the
clause,' in other words, "Those whom God
shall account worthy of obtaining and rising
to that world." For the question submitted
to Christ had nothing to do with the god, but
only with the state, of that world. It was:
" Whose wife should this woman be in that
world after the resurrection?"' They thus
subvert His answer respecting the essential
question of marriage, and apply His words,
"The children of this world marry and are
given in marriage," as if they referred to the
Creator's men, and His permission to them
to marry; whilst they themselves whom the
god of that world — that is, the rival god — ac-
counted worthy of the resurrection, do not
marry even here, because they are not chil-
dren of this world. But the fact is, that, hav-
ing been consulted about marriage in that
world, not in this present one. He had simply
declared the non-existence of that to which
the question related. They, indeed, who
had caught the very force of His voice, and
pronunciation, and expression, discovered no
other sense than what had reference to the
matter of the question. Accordingly, the
Scribes exclaimed, " Master, Thou hast well
said." 3 For He had affirmed the resurrec-
tion, by describing the form* thereof in op-
position to the opinion of the Sadducees.
Now, He did not reject the attestation of
those who had assumed His answer to bear
this meaning. If, however, the Scribes thought
Christ was David's Son, whereas (David) him-
self calls Him Lord,s what relation has this
to Christ? David did not literally confute^
an error of the Scribes, yet David asserted the
honour of Christ, when he more prominently
affirmed that He was his Lord than his Son,
— an attribute which was hardly suitable to
the destroyer of the Creator. But how con-


' We have adapted ,xsx\icx than translated, Tertullian's words
in this parenthesis. His words of course suit the order of the
Latin, which differs from the Eniaihsh. The sentence in Latin is,
" Quos autem dignatus est Deus lUius aevi possessione et resurrec-
tione a mortuis.' The phrase in question '\% illius w^'i. Where
shall it stand ? The Marcionites placed it after " Deus " in govern-
ment, but Tertullian (following the undoubted meaning of the
sentence) says it depends on ^^possessione et resurrecttone,'' i.e.,
" worthy of the possession, etc., of that world." To effect this
construction, he says, " Ut facta hie distinctione post deum ad
sequentia pertineat illius aevi: " i.e, he requests that a stop be
placed after the word " deus, ' whereby the phrase " illius eevf^
will belong to the words which ioWoyi—'''' possessione et resurrec-
ttone a tnortuis."

2 Luke XX. 33.

3 Luke XX. 30.

4 Formam : its condition '' or " process.*

5 Luke XX. 41-44.

6 Non obtundebat.


sistent is the interpretation on our side of the
question ! For He, who had been a little
while ago invoked by the blind man as " the
Son of David," =' then made no remark on
the subject, not having the Scribes in His
presence; whereas He new purposely moots
the point before them, and that of His own
accord,^ in order that He might show Himself
whom the blind man, following the doctrine
of the Scribes, had simply declared to be the
Son of David, to be also his Lord. He thus
honoured the blind man's faith which had ac-
knowledged His Sonship to David; but at the
same time He struck a blow at the tradition
of the Scribes, which prevented them from
knowing that He was also (David's) Lord.
Whatever had relation to the glory of the
Creator's Christ, no other would thus guard
and maintain 5' but Himself the Creator's
Christ.

CHAP. XXXIX. CONCERNING THOSE WHO COME

IN THE NAME OF CHRIST. THE TERRIBLE
SIGNS OF HIS COMING. HE WHOSE COMING IS
SO GRANDLY DESCRIBED BOTH IN THE OLD
TESTAMENT AND THE NEW TESTAMENT, IS
NONE OTHER THAN THE CHRIST OF THE CREA-
TOR. THIS PROOF ENHANCED BY THE PARA-
BLE OF THE FIG-TREE AND ALL THE TREES.
PARALLEL PASSAGES OF PROPHECY.

As touching the propriety of His names, it
has already been seen '° that both of them "
are suitable to Him who was the first both to
announce His Christ to mankind, and to give
Him the further name " of Jcsiis. The impu-
dence, therefore, of Marcion's Christ will be
evident, when he says that many will come in
his name, whereas this name does not at all
belong to ///;//, since he is not the Christ and
Jesus of the Creator, to whom these names do
properly appertain; and more especially when
he prohibits those to be received whose very
equal in imposture he is, inasmuch as he
(equally with them '3) comes in a name which
belongs to another — unless it was his business
to warn off from a mendaciously assume(
name the disciples (of One) who, by reasoi
of His name being properly given to Him,
possessed also the verity thereof. But wher '■
"they shall by and by come and say, I ar
Christ," "» they will be received by you, whc
have already received one altogether like
them. '5 Christ, however, comes in His own


s^

■n,
ei^


7 Luke xviii. 38.

8 Luke XX. 41.

9 Tueretur.

'0 See above : book iii. chap. xv. and xvi. pp. 333, ^34.
"The /V/<x;« here refers to the nominutn propnetas, i.e.,-Hil^

title Christ and His name Jesus.

'2 Transnominaret.

13 Proinde.

^4 Luke xxi. 8.

»5 Con.similem : ot course Marcion's Christ ; the Marcionite being
challenged in the "^<7«."


i


CHAP. XXXIX.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


415


name. What will you do, then, when He
Himself comes who is the very Proprietor of
these names, the Creator's Christ and Jesus?
Will you reject Him ? But how iniquitous,
how unjust and disrespectful to the good God,
that you should not receive Him who comes
in His own name, when you have received
another in His name ! Now, let us see what
are the signs which He ascribes to the times.
"Wars," I observe, "and kingdom against
kingdom, and nation against nation, and pes-
tilence, and famines, and earthquakes, and
fearful sights, and great signs from heav-
en " ' — all which things are suitable for a se-
vere and terrible God. Now, when He goes
on to say that *' all these things must needs
come to pass,"^ what does He represent
Himself to be ? The Destroyer, or the De-
fender of the Creator ? For He affirms that
these appointments of His must fully come
to pass; but surely as the good God, He
would have frustrated rather than advanced
events so sad and terrible, if they had not
been His own (decrees). " But before all
these," He foretells that persecutions and
sufferings were to come upon them, which in-
deed were " to turn for a testimony to them,"
and for their salvation. ^ Hear what is pre-
dicted in Zechariah: "The Lord of hosts'*
shall protect them; and they shall devour
them, and subdue them with sling-stones; and
they shall drink their blood like wine, and
they shall fill the bowls as it were of the altar.
And the Lord shall save them in that day,
even His people, like sheep; because as sacred
stones they roll," s etc. And that you may
not suppose that these predictions refer to such
sufferings as await them from so many wars
with strangers,^ consider the nature (of the
sufferings). In a prophecy of wars which
were to be waged with legitimate arms, no one
would think of enumerating stones as weap-
ons, which are better known in popular crowds
and unarmed tumults. Nobody measures the
copious streams of blood which flow in war
by bowlfuls, nor limits it to what is shed upon
a single altar. No one gives the name of
sheep to those who fall in battle with arms in
hand, and while repelling force with force,
but only to those who are slain, yielding them-
selves up in their own place of duty and with
patience, rather than fighting in self-defence.
In short, as he says, "they roll as sacred
stones," and not like soldiers fight. Stones
are they, even foundation-stones, upon which
we are ourselves edified — "built," as St.


^ Luke xxi. 9-11.

"Compare, in Luke xxi., verses 9, 22, 28, 31-33, 35, and 36.

3 Verses 12, 13.

■♦Omnipotens: rravTOKpaTiop (Sept.) ; of hosts — A. V.

SZech. ix. 15, 16 (Septuagint).

^AUophylis.


Paul says, " upon the foundation of the apos-
tles," 7 who, like " consecrated stones," were
rolled up and down exposed to the attack
of all men. And therefore in this passage
He forbids men "to meditate before what
they answer" when brought before tribu-
nals,^ even as once He suggested to Balaam
the message which he had not thought of,'
nay, contrary to what he had thought; and
promised "a mouth" to Moses, when he
pleaded in excuse the slowness of his speech,'"
and that wisdom which, by Isaiah, He showed
to be irresistible: "One shall say, I am the
Lord's, and shall call himself by the name of
Jacob, and another shall subscribe himself
by the name of Israel." " Now, what plea is
wiser and more irresistible than the simple
and open" confession made in a martyr's
cause, who "prevails with God" — which is
what "Israel" means ?^3 Now, one cannot
wonder that He forbade "premeditation,"
who actually Plimself received from the Fa-
ther the ability of uttering words in season:
" The Lord hath given to me the tongue of
the learned, that I should know how to speak
a word in season (to him that is weary); " '*
except that Marcion introduces to us a Christ
who is not subject to the Father. That per-
secutions from one's nearest friends are pre-
dicted, and calumny out of hatred to His
name,'= I need not again refer to. But "by
patience, " '^ says He, "ye shall yourselves
be saved. "'7 Of this very patience the Psalm
says, "The patient endurance of the just
shall not perish for ever; " '^ because it is
said in another Psalm, " Precious (in the sight
of the Lord) is the death of the just " — aris-
ing, no doubt, out of their patient endurance,
so that Zechariah declares: "A crown shall
be to them that endure." '^ But that you
may not boldly contend that it was as an-


jiPjm£ers.i)i.another^-d.tliaUhe.apQatks._wjere
pprspp.nted by the Jews, remember_that even
the prophets suffered the same treatment of
tli£j-£ws^nd that they were not the-heralds-
of^anjLQther ,god__t,han the Creator. Then,
having shown what was to be the period of the
destruction, even "when Jerusalem should


7 Eph. ii. 20.

8 Luke xxi. i2-iij.

9 Num. xxii.-xxiv
10 Ex. iv. 10-12.

" Isa. xliv. 5.

12 Exserta.

13 See Gen. xxxii. 28.

14 Isa. 1. 4.

15 Luke xxi. 16, 17.

'6 Per tolerantiam : " endurance."

17 Comp. Luke xxi. 19 with Matt. xxiv. 13.

18 Ps. ix. 18.

ipAfter the Septuagint he makes a plural appellative ("eisqui tole-
ravennt," LXX. tois vn-o/xeVovo-i) of the Hebrew 27n^. which in

A. V. and the Vulgate (and also Gesenius and Fuerst) is the dative
of a proper name.


410


TfeRTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book r


begin to be compassed with armies,"' He
described the signs of the end of all things:
" portents in the sun, and the moon, and the
stars, and upon the earth distress of nations
in perplexity — like the sea roaring — by reason
of their expectation of the evils which are
coming on the earth." =* That *'the very
powers also of heaven have to be shaken," ^
you may find in Joel: "And I will show won-
ders in the heavens and in the earth — blood
and fire, and pillars of smoke; the sun shall
be turned into darkness, and the moon into
blood, before the great and terrible day of the
Lord come."-* In Habakkuk also you have
this statement: "With rivers shall the earth
be cleaved; the nations shall see thee, and be
in pangs. Thou shalt disperse the waters
with thy step; the deep uttered its voice; the
height of its fear was raised ;s the sun and
the moon stood still in their course; into light
shall thy coruscations go; and thy shield shall
be (like) the glittering of the lightning's flash;
in thine anger thou shalt grind the earth, and
shalt thresh the nations in thy wrath. "^
There is thus an agreement, I apprehend, be-
tween the sayings of the Lord and of the
prophets touching the shaking of the earth,
and the elements, and the nations thereof.
But what does the Lord say afterwards ?
"And then shall they see the Son of man
coming from the heavens with very great
power. And when these things shall come to
pass, ye shall look up, and raise your heads;
for your redemption hath come near," that
is, at the time of the kingdom, of which the
parable itself treats. ^ " So likewise ye, when
ye shall see these things come to pass, know
ye that the kingdom of God is nigh at
hand."^ This will be the great day of the
Lord, and of the glorious coming of the Son
of man from heaven, of which Daniel wrote:
" Behold, one like the Son of man came with
the clouds of heaven," ^ etc. "And there
was given unto Him the kingly power," '°
which (in the parable) " He went away into a
far country to receive for Himself," leaving
money to His servants wherewithal to trade
and get increase " — even (that universal king-
dom of) all nations, which in the Psalm the
Father had promised to give to Him: Ask of
me^ and I will give Thee the heathen for
Thine inheritance."" "And all that glory


' Luke xxi. 20.
= Luke xxi. 25, 26.

3 Luke xxi. 26.

4 Joel iii. 30, 31.

5 Elata : " fear was raised to its very highest.'
6Hab. iii. 9-12 (Septuagint).

7 Luke xxi. 27, 28.

8 Luke xxi. 31.

9 Dan, vii. 13.
'('Dan. vii. 14.

i^ Luke xix. 12, 13, etc.
"Ps. ii. 8.


shall serve Him; His dominion shall be an
everlasting one, which shall not be tak(
from Him, and His kingdom that which sh
not be destroyed," '^ because in it " men sha:i
not die, neither shall they marry, but be like
the angels." '■» It is about the same advent ol
the Son of man and the benefits thereof thai
we read in Habakkuk: "Thou wentest forth
for the salvation of Thy people, even to save
Thine anointed ones," 's — in other word-,
those who shall look up and lift their heac; ,
being redeemed in the time of His kingdom.
Since, therefore, these descriptions of the
promises, on the one hand, agree together,
as do also those of the great catastrophes, on
the other — both in the predictions of the proph-
ets and the declarations of the Lord, it will
be impossible for you to interpose any dis-
tinction between them, as if the catastrophes
could be referred to the Creator, as the terri-
ble God, being such as the good god (of Mar-
cion) ought not to permit, much less expect
— whilst the promises should be ascribed to
the good god, being such as the Creator, in
His Ignorance of the said god, could not have
predicted. If, however. He did predict these
promises as His own, since they differ in no
respect from the promises of Christ, He will
be a match in the freeness of His gifts with
the good god himself; and evidently no more
will have been promised by your Christ than
by my Son of man. (If you examine) the
whole passage of this Gospel Scripture, from
the inquiry of the disciples '^ down to the par-
able of the fig-tree '^ you will find the sense
in its connnection suit in every point the Son
of man, so that it consistently ascribes to Him
both the sorrows and the joys, and the catas-
trophes and the promises; nor can you sepa-
rate them from Him in either respect. For-
asmuch, then, as there is but one Son of man
whose advent is placed between the two issues
of catastrophe and promise, it must needs fol-
low that to that one Son of man belong both
the judgments upon the nations, and the
prayers of the saints. He who thus comes
in midway so as to be common to both issues,
will terminate one of them by inflicting judg-
ment on the nations at His coming; and will
at the same time commence the other by ful-
filling the prayers of His saints: so that if (on
the one hand) you grant that the coming of
the Son of man is (the advent) of wv Christy
then, when you ascribe to Him the infliction
of the judgments which precede His appear-
ance, you are compelled also to assign to


13 Dan. vii. 14.

14 Luke XX. 35, 36.

15 Hab. iii. 13.

>6 In Luke xxi. 7.
17 Luke xxi. 33.


CHAP. XL.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


417


Him the blessings which issue from the same.
If (on the other hand) you will have it that it
is the coming of your Christ, then, when you
ascribe to him the blessings which are to be
the result of his advent, you are obliged to
impute to him likewise the infliction of the
evils which precede his appearance. For the
evils which precede, and the blessings which
immediately follow, the coming of the Son
of man, are both alike indissolubly connected
with that event. Consider, therefore, which
of the two Christs you choose to place in the
person of the Son of man, to whom you may
refer the execution of the two dispensations.
You make either the Creator a most benefi-
cent God, or else your own god terrible in
his nature ! Reflect, in short, on the picture
presented in the parable: "Behold the fig-
tree, and all the trees ; when they produce
their fruit, men know that summer is at hand.
So likewise ye, when ye see these things come
to pass, know ye that the kingdom of God is
very near."* Now, if the fructification of
the common trees '^ be an antecedent sign of
the approach of summer, so in like manner
do the great conflicts of the world indicate
the arrival of that kingdom which they pre-
cede. But every sign is His, to whom be-
long the thing of which it is the sign; and to
everything is appointed its sign by Him to
whom the thing belongs. If, therefore, these
tribulations are the signs of the kingdom,
just as the maturity of the trees is of the sum-
mer, it follows that the kingdom is the Cre-
ator's to whom are ascribed the tribulations
which are the signs of the kingdom. Since
the beneficent Deity had premised that these
things must needs come to pass, although so
terrible and dreadful, as they had been pre-
dicted by the law and the prophets, therefore
He did not destroy the law and the prophets,
when He affirmed that what had been foretold
therein must be certainly fulfilled. He fur-
ther declares, "that heaven and earth shall
not pass away till all things be fulfilled." ^
What things, pray, are these ? Are they the
things which the Creator made ? Then the
elements will tractably endure the accomplish-
ment of their Maker's dispensation. If, how-
ever, they emanate from your excellent god,
I much doubt whether-* the heaven and earth
will peaceably allow the completion of things
which their Creator's enemy has determined !
If the Creator quietly submits to this, then
He is no " jealous God." But let heaven and
earth pass away, since their Lord has so


I Luke xxi. 29-31.
^Arbuscularum.
3 Luke xxi. 33.
4Nescio an.

27


determined; only let His word remain for
evermore ! And so Isaiah predicted that it
should. 5 Let the disciples also be warned,
" lest their hearts be overcharged with surfeit-
ing and drunkenness, and cares of this world;
and so that day come upon them unawares,
like a snare "^ — if indeed they should forget
God amidst the abundance and occupation of
the world. Like this will be found the ad-
monition of Moses, — so that He who delivers
from " the snare" of that day is none other
than He who so long before addressed to men
the same admonition. ^ Some places there
were in Jerusalem where to teach; other
places outside Jerusalem whither to retire^ —
"In the day-time He was teaching in the
temple;" just as He had foretold by Hosea:
" In my house did they find me, and there did
I speak with them."^ "But at night He
went out to the Mount of Olives." For thus
had Zechariah pointed out: "And His feet
shall stand in that day on the Mount of
Olives." '° Fit hours for an audience there
also were. " Early in the morning" " must
they resort to Him, who (having said by Isa-
iah, " The Lord giveth me the tongue of the
learned") added, "He hath appointed me
the morning, and hath also given me an ear
to hear." '^ Now if this is to destroy the proph-
ets,'^ what will it be \.o fulfil them ?

CHAP. XL. HOW THE STEPS IN THE PASSION OF

THE SAVIOUR WERE PREDETERMINED IN
PROPHECY. THE PASSOVER. THE TREACHERY
OF JUDAS. THE INSTITUTION OF THE LORD's
SUPPER. THE DOCETIC ERROR OF MARCION
CONFUTED BY THE BODY AND THE BLOOD OF
THE LORD JESUS CHRIST.

In like manner does He also know the very
time it behoved Him to suffer, since the law
prefigures His passion. Accordingly, of all
the festal days of the Jews He chose the pass-
over.'* In this Moses had declared that there
was a sacred mystery :'5 "It is the Lord's
passover."'* How earnestly, therefore, does
He manifest the bent of His soul: " With de-
sire I have desired to eat this passover with
you before I suffer." '^ What a destroyer of-
the law was this, who actually longed to keep


5 Isa. xl. 8.

6 Luke xxi. 34, 35. [Here follows a rich selection of parallels to

De
Luke xxi. 37.

One reading of the LXX. is, Iv tw oIkcu [lov


Luke xxi. 34-38.]

7Conip. Deut. vm. 12-14


9 Hosea xii. 4
e{!pe<rai' /u.e.
'°Zech. xiv. 4.
^i Luke xxi. 38.
" Isa. 1. 4.

^3 Literally, " the prophecies.''
14 Luke xxii. i.
'5 Sacramentum.

16 Lev. xxiii. 5.

17 Luke xxii. 15.


4i8


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION,


[hook IV.


its passover ! Could it be that He was so fond
of Jewish lamb ? ' But was it not because
He had to be " led like a lamb to the slaugh-
ter; and because, as a sheep before her shear-
ers is dumb, so was He not to open His
mouth," ^ that He so profoundly wished to
accomplish the symbol of His own redeeming
blood ? He might also have been betrayed
by any stranger, did I not find that even here
too He fulfilled a Psalm: " He who did eat
bread with me hath lifted up^ his heel against
me."-* And without a price might He have
been betrayed. For what need of a traitor
was there in the case of one who offered Him-
self to the people openly, and might quite as
easily have been captured by force as taken
by treachery? This might no doubt have
been well enough for another Christ, but would
not have been suitable in One who was ac-
complishing prophecies. For it was written,
" The righteous one did they sell for silver." s
The very amount and the destination ^ of the
money, which on Judas' remorse was recalled
from its first purpose of a fee,'' and appropri-
ated to the purchase of a potter's field, as
narrated in the Gospel of Matthew, were
clearly foretold by Jeremiah:^ "And they
took the thirty pieces of silver, the price of
Him who was valued,' and gave them for the
potter's field." When He so earnestly ex-
pressed His desire to eat the passover. He
considered it His oum feast; for it would have
been unworthy of God to desire to partake
of what was not His own. Then, having taken
the bread and given it to His disciples. He
made it His own body, by saying, "This is
my body," '° that is, the figure of my body.
A figure, however, there could not have been,
unless there were first a veritable body." An


' Vervecina Judaica. In this rough sarcasm we have of course
our author's contempt of Marcionism.

2 Isa. hii. 7.

3 Levabit : literally, " shall lift up," etc.

4 Ps. xli. 9.

5 Amos ii. 6.

6 Exitum.

7 Revocati.

8 This passage more nearly resembles Zech. xi. 12 and 13 than
anything m Jeremiah, although the transaction in Jer. xxxii. 7-15
is noted by the commentators, as referred to. Tertullian had good
reason for mentioning Jeremiah and not Zechariah, because the
apostle whom he refers to (Matt, xxvii. 3-10) had distinctly attrib-
uted the prophecy to Jeremiah ("Jeremy the prophet," ver. 9).
This is not the place to do more tnan merely refer to the volumi-
nous controversy which has arisen from the apostle's mention of
Jeremiah instead of Zechariah. It is enough to remark that Ter-

tuUian's ar^rument is unaffected by the discrepancy in the name of
the particular prophet. On all hands the prophecy is admitted,
and this at once satisfies our author's argument. For the ms. evi-
dence m favour of the unquestionably correct reading, tot* iitkr\-
puiBr) TO priOiv 610 'lepc/bKOv rov irpo^ryrov, k.t.\., the reader is re-
ferred to Dr. Tregelles' Critical Greek Testament, in loc. ; only
to the convincing amount of evidence collected by the very learned
editor must now be added the subsequently obtained authority of
Tischendorf's Codex Sinaiticus.

9 Appretiati vel honorati. .There is ^nothing in the original or
the Septuagint to meet the second word honorati, which may re-
fer to the " honorarium,'^ or " fee paid on admission to a post of
honour," — a term of Roman law, and referred to by Tertullian
himself.

'<^' Luke xxii. 19. [See Jewell's Challenge, p. 266, sufra.'\

I' Corpus veritatis : meant as a thrust against Marcion s Doc et ism.


empty thing, or phantom, is incapable of a
figure. If, however, (as Marcion might say,)
He pretended the bread was His body, be-
cause He lacked the truth of bodily substance,
it follows that He must have given bread for
us. It would contribute very well to the
support of Marcion's theory of a phantom
body," that bread should have been crucified !
But why call His body bread, and not rather
(some other edible thing, say) a melon, '^
which Marcion must have had in lieu of a
heart ! He did not understand how ancient
was this figure of the body of Christ, who
said Himself by Jeremiah: " I was like a lamb
or an ox that is brought to the slaughter, and
I knew not that "^ they devised a device against
me, saying. Let us cast the tree upon His
bread,'' 's which means, of course, the cross
upon His body. And thus, casting light, as
He always did, upon the ancient prophecies,'*^
He declared plainly enough what He meant
by the bread, when He called the bread His
own body. He likewise, when mentioning the
cup and making the new testament to be sealed
" in His blood," '^ affirms the reality of His
body. For no blood can belong to a body
which is not a body of flesh. If any sort of
body were presented to our view, which is
not one of flesh, not being fleshly, it would
not possess blood. Thus, from the evidence
of the flesh, we get a proof of the body, and a
proof of the flesh from the evidence of the
blood. In order, however, that you may dis-
cover how anciently wine is used as a figure
for blood, turn to Isaiah, who asks, " Who is
this that Cometh from Edom, from Bosor with
garments dyed in red, so glorious in His ap-
parel, in the greatness of his might? Why
are thy garments red, and thy raiment as his
who cometh from the treading of the full wine-
press ? " '^ The prophetic Spirit contemplates
the Lord as if He were already on His way to
His passion, clad in His fleshly nature; and
as He was to suffer therein. He represents the
bleeding condition of His flesh under the
metaphor of garments dyed in red, as if red-
dened in the treading and crushing process of
the winepress, from which the labourers de-
scend reddened with the wine-juice, like men
stained in blood. Much more clearly still
does the book of Genesis foretell this, when


%


" Ad vanitatem Marcionis. [Note 9, p. 289.]

'3 Peponem. In his De Aninia, c. xxxii., he uses this word ia
strong irony: " Cur non magis elpepo, tam insulsus."

MfThis text, imperfectly quoted in the original, is filled out by
Dr. Holmes.l

*SSo the septuagint in Jer. xi. 19, HvAov <i? rov aprov avrov
(A. v. " Let us destroy the tree with the fruit "). See above, book
iii. chap. xix. p. 337.

'(> Illuminator antiquitatum. This general phrase includes typi-
cal (ordinances under the law, as well as the sayings of the proph-
ets.

'7 Luke xxii. 20.

i^ Isa. Ixiii. i (Sept. slightly altered).


(


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


419


(in the blessing of Judah, out of whose tribe
Christ was to come according to the flesh) it
even then delineated Christ in the person of
that patriarch,' saying, "He washed His
garments in wine, and His clothes in the
blood of grapes " * — in His garments and
clothes the prophecy pointed out his flesh, and
His blood in the wine. Thus did He now
consecrate His blood in wine, who then (by
the patriarch) used the figure of wine to de-
scribe His blood.

CHAP. XLI. THE WOE PRONOUNCED ON THE

TRAITOR A JUDICIAL ACT, WHICH DISPROVES
CHRIST TO BE SUCH AS MARCION WOULD HAVE

HIM TO BE. Christ's conduct before the

COUNCIL EXPLAINED. CHRIST EVEN THEN
directs the MINDS OF HIS JUDGES TO THE
PROPHETIC EVIDENCES OF HIS OWN MISSION.
THE MORAL RESPONSIBILITY OF THESE MEN
ASSERTED.

"Woe," says He, "to that man by whom
the Son of man is betrayed ! " ^ Now it is
certain that in this woe must be understood
the imprecation and threat of an angry and
incensed Master, unless Judas was to escape
with impunity after so vast a sin. If he were
meant to escape with impunity, the ''''woe''
was an idle word; if not, he was of course to
be punished by Him against whom he had
committed the sin of treachery. Now, if He
knowingly permitted the man, whom He '^ de-
liberately elected to be one of His companions,
to plunge into so great a crime, you must no
longer use an argumeat against the Creator in
Adam's case, which may now recoil on your
own Godrs either that he was ignorant, and
had no foresight to hinder the future sinner;^
or that he was unable to hinder him, even if
he was ignorant; ^ or else that he was mmnll-
ing, even if he had the foreknowledge and the
ability; and so deserved the stigma of ma-
liciousness, in having permitted the man of
his own choice to perish in his sin. I advise
you therefore (willingly) to acknowledge the
Creator in that god of yours, rather than
against your will to be assimilating your ex-
cellent god to Him. For in the case of Peter,^
too, he gives you proof that he is a jealous
God, when he destined the apostle, after his
presumptuous protestations of zeal, to a flat


' In Juda.

2 Gen. xlix. 11,

3 Luke xxii, 22.]

4 Ipse.

5 This is an argumentum ad hominent against Marcion for his
cavil, which was considered above in book ii. chap, v.-viii. p. 300.

6 Obstitit peccaturo.

7 Si ignorabat. One would have expected " si tton ignorabat,"
hke the " si sciebat " of the next step in the argument.

8 The original of this not very clear sentence is : " Nam et
Petrum praesumptorie aliquid elocutum negationi potius destinando
zeloten deum tibi ostendit."


denial of him, rather than prevent his fall.^
The Christ of the prophets was destined,
moreover, to be betrayed with a kiss,'° for
He was the Son indeed of Him who was
"honoured with the lips'' by the people."
When led before the council. He is asked
whether He is the Christ. '^^ Of what Christ
could the Jews have inquired '3 but their own ?
Why, therefore, did He not, even at that mo-
ment, declare to them the rival (Christ) ? You
reply. In order that He might be able to suf-
fer. In other words, that this most excellent
god might plunge men into crime, whom he
was still keeping in ignorance. But even if
he had told them, he would yet have to suffer.
For he said, "If I tell you, ye will not be-
lieve." '4 And refusing to believe, they would
have continued to insist on his death. And
would he not even more probably still have
had to suffer, if Miad announced himself as Ue,
sent by the rival god, and as being, therefore,
the enemy of the Creator ? It was not, then,
in order that He might suffer, that He at that
critical moment refrained from proclaiming 's
Himself the other Christ, but because they
wanted to extort a confession from His mouth,
which they did not mean to believe even if
He had given it to them, whereas it was their
bounden duty to have acknowledged Him in
consequence of His works, which were fulfill-
ing their Scriptures. It was thus plainly His
course to keep Himself at that moment un-
revealed,'^ because a spontaneous recogni-
tion was due to Him. But yet for all this. He
with a solemn gesture "^ says, "Hereafter
shall the Son of man sit on the right hand of
the power of God."'^ For it was on the
authority of the prophecy of Daniel that He
intimated to them that He was " the Son of
man," '? and of David's Psalm, that He would
" sit at the right hand of God."^ Accord-
ingly, after He had said this, and so sug-
gested a comparison of the Scripture, a ray
of light did seem to show them whom He
would have them understand Him to be; for
they say: "Art thou then the Son of God ? " '"■
Of what God, but of Him whom alone they
knew ? Of what God but of Him whom they
remembered in the Psalm as having said to


9 Luke xxii. 34 and 54-62.
10 Luke xxii. 47-49.
I' Isa. xxix. 13.
12 Luke xxii. 66, 67.

i3 0ehler's admirable edition is also carefully /rj«/<'(/ for the
most part, but surely his queesisset must here be queesissent.
14 Luke xxii. 67.
'5 Supersedit ostendere.

16 i.e., not to answer that question of theirs. This seems to be
the force of the perfect tgnse, " occultasse se^

17 He makes Jesus stretch forth His hand, forrigens manufn
inquit.

18 Luke xxii. 69.

19 Dan. vii. 13.

20 Ps. ex. I.

=1 Luke x.xii. 70.


420


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book IV,


His Son, "Sit Thou on my right hand?"
Then He answered, *' Ye say that I am;"'
as if He meant: It is je who say this — not I.
But at the same time He allowed Himself to
be all that they had said, in this their second
question. = By what means, however, are you
going to prove to us that they pronounced
the sentence ''Ergo tit filius Dei es" inter-
rogatively, and not affirmatively ? 3 Just as,
(on the one hand,) because He had shown
them in an indirect manner,^ by passages
of Scripture, that they ought to regard Him
as the Son of God, they therefore meant
their own words, "Thou art then the Son
of God," to be taken in a like (indirect)
sense, 5 as much as to say, " You do not wish
to say this of yourself plainly,^ so, (on the
other hand,) He likewise answered them, "Ye
say that I am," in a sense equally free from
doubt, even affirmatively; ^ and so completely
was His statement to this effect, that they in-
sisted on accepting that sense which His state-
ment indicated.^

CHAP. XLII. — OTHER INCIDENTS OF THE PASSION
MINUTELY COMPARED WITH PROPHECY. PI-
LATE AND HEROD. BARABBAS PREFERRED TO
JESUS. DETAILS OF THE CRUCIFIXION. THE
EARTHQUAKE AND THE MID-DAY DARKNESS.
ALL WONDERFULLY FORETOLD IN THE SCRIP-
TURES OF THE CREATOR. CHRIST's GIVING
UP THE GHOST NO EVIDENCE OF MARCION's
DOCETIC OPINIONS. IN HIS SEPULTURE THERE
IS A REFUTATION THEREOF.

For when He was brought before Pilate,
they proceeded to urge Him with the serious
charge' of declaring Himself to be Christ the
King; '° that is, undoubtedly, as the Son of
God, who was to sit at God's right hand. They
would, however, have burdened Him" with
some other title, if they had been uncertain
whether He had called l^\vci's,^\i the Sonof God —
if He had not pronounced the words, " Ye say
that I am," so as (to admit) that He was
that which they said He was. Likewise, when
Pilate asked Him, " Art thou Christ (the
King) ? " He answered, as He had before (to
the Jewish council)" "Thou sayest that I
am"'3 in order that He might not seem to


» Lake xxit. 70.

a Or does he suppose that they repeated this same question
twice f His words are, " dum rursus interrogant."

3 Either, " Art thou," or, " Thou art, then, the Son of God."

4 Oblique.

5 Ut, quia .... sic scnserunt.
^Aperte.

7 .tque ita et ille confirmative respondit.

8 Ut perseveraverint in eo quod pronuntiatio sapiebat ....
See Luke xxii. 71. •

90nerare cteperunt.

'o" King Messiah ;" kCyovTo. cavrbf Xpio-rbi' /3a(7i\ea elfai, Luke
xxiii. I, 2.
" Gravassent.
" Proinde.
13 Luke xxiii. 3.


j have been driven by a fear of his power to
i give him a fuller answer. "And so the Lord
I hath stood on His trial."'* And he placed
j His people on their trial. The Lord Himself
; comes to a trial with "the elders and rulers
of the people," as Isaiah predicted. 's And
then He fulfilled all that had been written of
His passion. At that time "the heathen
raged, and the people imagined vain things;
the kings of the earth set themselves, and the
rulers gathered themselves together against
the Lord and against His Christ."'^ The
heathen were Pilate and the Romans; the
people were the tribes of Israel; the kirigs were
represented in Herod, and the rulers in the
chief priests. When, indeed, He was sent to
Herod gratuitously ''' by Pilate,'^ the words of
Hosea were accomplished, for he had prophe-
sied of Christ: "And they shall carry Him
bound as a present to the king." '«> Herod was
" exceeding glad " when he saw Jesus, but he
heard not a word from Him.^ For, " as a
lamb before the shearer is dumb, so He
opened not His mouth," =' because "the
Lord had given to Him a disciplined tongue,
that he might know how and when it behoved
Him to speak " =''' — even that " tongue which
clave to His jaws," as the Psalm ''^ said it
should, through His not speaking. Then
Barabbas, the most abandoned criminal, is
released, as if he were the innocent man;
while the most righteous Christ is delivered
to be put to death, as if he were the mur-
derer. ^'^ Moreover two malefactors are cruci-
fied around Him, in order that He might be
reckoned amongst the transgressors. ^^ Al-
though His raiment was, without doubt, par-
ted among the soldiers, and partly distributed
by lot, yet Marcion has erased it all (from his
Gospel),^ for he had his eye upon the Psalm:
" They parted my garments amongst them,
and cast lots upon my vesture." ^^ You may
as well take away the cross itself! But even
then the Psalm is not silent concerning it:
"They pierced my hands and my feet."'*
Indeed, the details of the whole event are
therein read: "Dogs compassed me about;


14 Constitutus est in judicio. The Septuagint is KaTaomjaerai et?
KpLciv, "shall stand on His trial."

'5 Isa. iii. 13, 14 (Septuagint).

>6Ps. ii. I, 2.

»7 Velut munus. This is a definition, in fact, of the xcnium in
the verse from Hosea. This ^fVioi/ was the Roman /««//«, "a
state entertainment to distinguished foreigners m the city."

'8 Luke xxiii. 7.

'9 Hos. X. 6 (Sept. ^ivKo. T<i ^aaiA«t),

20 Luke xxiii. 8, 9.

2" Isa. liii. 7.

» Isa. 1. 4 (Sept.).

23 Ps. xxii. 15.

24 Luke xxiii. 25.

»SComp. Luke xxiii. 33 with Isa. liii. 12.

26 This remarkable suppression was made to escape the wonder-
ful minuteness of the prophetic evidence to the details of Christ's
death.

»7 Ps. xxii. 18.

a8ps. xxii. 16.


CHAP. XLIII.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


421


the assembly of the wicked enclosed me
around. All that looked upon me laughed
me tb scorn; they did shoot out their lips and
shake their heads, (saying,) He hoped in God,
let Him deliver Him. " ' Of what use now is
(your tampering with) the testimony of His
garments ? If you take it as a booty for your
false Christ, still all the Psalm (compensates)
the vesture of Christ.'' But, behold, the
very elements are shaken. For their Lord
was suffering. If, however, it was their ene-
my to whom all this injury was done, the
heaven would have gleamed with light, the sun
would have been even more radiant, and the
day would have prolonged its course ^ — glad-
ly gazing at Marcion's Christ suspended on
his gibbet! These proofs^ would still have
been suitable for me, even if they had not
been the subject of prophecy. Isaiah says:
" I will clothe the heavens with blackness." s
This will be the day, concerning which Amos
also writes: And it shall come to pass in that
day, saith the Lord, that the sun shall go
down at noon and the earth shall be dark in
the clear day."^ (At noon)^ the veil of
the temple was rent" ^ by the escape of the
cherubim,^ which " left the daughter of Sion
as a cottage in a vineyard, as a lodge in a
garden of cucumbers." '° With what con-
stancy has He also, in Psalm xxx., laboured to
present to us the very Christ! He calls with
a loud voice to the Father, " Into Thine hands
I commend my spirit," " that even when
dying He might expend His last breath in
fulfilling the prophets. Having said this, He
gave up the ghost."" Who? Did the
spirit '3 give itself up; or the flesh the spirit?
But the spirit could not have breathed itself
out. That which breathes is one thing, that
which is breathed is another. If the spirit is
breathed it must needs be breathed by
another. If, however, there had been nothing
there but spirit, it would be said to have
departed rather than expired.^^ What, how-


1 Ps. xxii. 16, 7, 8.

2 We append the original of these.obscure sentences : " Quo jam
testimonium vestimentorum ? Habe falsi tui priedarn ; totus
psalmus vestimenta sunt Christi." The general sense is appar-
ent. If Marcion does suppress the details about Christ's gar-
ments at the cross, to escape the inconvenient proof they afford
that Christ is the object of the prophecies, yet there are so many
other points of agreement between this wonderful Psalm and St.
Luke's history of the crucifixion (not expunged, as it would seem,
by the heretic), that they quite compensate for the loss of this pas-
sage about the garments (Oehler).

sComp. Josh. X. 13.
4 Argumenta.
Sisa. 1. 3.

6 Amos viii. 9.

7 Here you have the meaning of the sixth hour.
^ Luke xxiii. 45.

9 Ezek. xi. 22, 23.
lolsa. i. 8.

11 Comp. Luke xxiii. 46 with Ps. xxxi. 5.

12 Luke xxiii. 46.
i3Spiritus: or "breath."

i4Expirasse : considered actively y "breathed out," in reference
to the " expiravit " of the verse 46 above.


ever, breathes out spirit but the flesh, which
both breathes the spirit whilst it has it, and
breathes it out when it loses it ? Indeed, if it
was not flesh (upon the cross), but a phan-
tom "5 of flesh (and '* a phantom is but spirit,
and '^ so the spirit breathed its own self out,
and departed as it did so), no doubt the
phantom departed, when the spirit which was
the phantom departed: and so the phantom
and the spirit disappeared together, and were
nowhere to be seen.'^ Nothing therefore re-
mained upon the cross, nothing hung there,
after "the giving up of the ghost; " '^ there
was nothing to beg of Pilate, nothing to take
down from the cross, nothing to wrap in the
linen, nothing to lay in the new sepulchre.''
Still it was not nothing"^ that was there.
What was there, then ? If a phantom Christ
was yet there. If Christ had departed, He
had taken away the phantom also. The only
shift left to the impudence of the heretics, is
to admit that what remained there was the
phantom of a phantom! But what if Joseph
knew that it was a body which he treated with
so much piety ?^' That same Joseph "who
had not consented" with the Jews in their
crime ? " The " happy man who walked not in
the counsel of the ungodly, nor stood in the
way of sinners, nor sat in the seat of the
scornful." =^3 ^

CHAP. XLIII. CONCLUSIONS. JESUS AS THE

CHRIST OF THE CREATOR PROVED FROM THE
EVENTS OF THE LAST CHAPTER OF ST. LUKE.
THE PIOUS WOMEN AT THE SEPULCHRE. THE
ANGELS AT THE RESURRECTION. THE MANI-
FOLD APPEARANCES OF CHRIST AFTER THE
RESURRECTION. HIS MISSION OF THE APOS-
TLES AMONGST ALL NATIONS. ALL SHOWN
TO BE IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE WISDOM OF
THE ALMIGHTY FATHER, AS INDICATED IN
PROPHECY. THE BODY OF CHRIST AFTER
DEATH NO MERE PHANTOM. MARCION 's

MANIPULATION OF THE GOSPEL ON THIS
POINT.

It was very meet that the man who buried
the Lord should thus be noticed in prophecy,
and thenceforth be " blessed;" =** since proph-
ecy does not omit the (pious) office of the
women who resorted before day-break to the
sepulchre with the spices which they had pre-


15 A sharp rebuke of Marcion's Docetism here follows.

16 Autem.

17 Nusquam comparuit phantasma cum spiritu.

18 Post expirationem.

19 See these stages in Luke xxiii. 47-55-

20 Non nihil : " a something."

2» This argument is also used by Epiphanius to prove the real-
ity of Chrisrs body, Hares, xl. Confut. 74. The same writer also
employs for the same purpose the incident of the women return-
ing from the sepulchre, which Tertullian is going to adduce in
his next chapter, Con/ut. 75 (Oehler).

22 Luke xxiii. 51.

23Ps. i. I.

24Theyfrj^ word of the passage just applied to Joseph.


422


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book IV.


pared.' For of this incident it is said by
Hosea: *' To seek my face they will watch till
day-light, saying unto me, Come, and let us
return to the Lord: for He hath taken away,
and He will heal us; He hath smitten, and
He will bind us up; after two days will He
revive us: in the third day He will raise us
up."' 'For who can refuse to believe that
these words often revolved ^ in the thought
of those women between the sorrow of that
desertion with which at present they seemed
to themselves to have been smitten by the
Lord, and the hope of the resurrection itself,
by which they rightly supposed that all would
be restored to them ? But when " they found
not the body (of the Lord Jesus),"'* " His
sepulture was removed from the midst of
them," s according to the prophecy of Isaiah.
"Two angels, however, appeared there." ^
For just so many honorary companions ^
were required by* the word of God, which usu-
ally prescribes " /z£/^ 7uttfiesses."^ Moreover,
the women, returning from the sepulchre, and
from this vision of the angels, were foreseen
by Isaiah, when he says, " Come, ye women,
who return from the vision; "' that is,
*'come," to report the resurrection of the
Lord. It was well, however, that the unbelief
of the disciples was so persistent, in order
that to the last we might consistently maintain
that Jesus revealed Himself to the disciples
as none other than the Christ of the prophets.
For as two of them were taking a walk, and
when the Lord had joined their company,
without its appearing that it was He, and
whilst He dissembled His knowledge of what
had just taken place,'° they say: " But we
trusted that it had been He which should have
redeemed Israel," " — meaning their own, that
is, the Creator's Christ. So far had He been
from declaring Himself to them as another
Christ ! They could not, however, deem Him
to be the Christ of the Creator; nor, if He
was so deemed by them, could He have tol-
erated this opinion concerning Himself, un-
less He were really He whom He was sup-
posed to be. OtherAvise He would actually
be the author of error, and the prevaricator
of truth, contrary to the character of the good
God. But at no time even after His resurrec-
tion did He reveal Himself to them as any

' Luke xxiv. i.

'Hos. V. 15 and vi. i, 2,

3 Volutata.

4 Luke xxiv. 3.

5 Isa. Ivii. 2, according to the Septuagint, 17 ra^r\ avrov ^proi U
TOW fxiffov.

6 Luke xxiv. 4.

7 Tot fere laterensibus.

SDcut. xvii. 6, xix. 15, compared with Matt, xviii. 16 and 2 Cor,

Xltl. I.

^ 9 Isa. xxvii. 11, according to the Septuagint, yvvaiKt^ ipx6fx«vai
anh 6iat, StvTt.

'o Luke xxiv. 13-19.

" Luke xxiv. 21.


Other than what, on their own showing, they
had always thought Him to be. He point-
edly" reproached them: "O fools, and'slow
of heart in not believing that which He spake
unto you." '^ By saying this, He proves that
He does not belong to the rival god, but to
the same God. For the same thing was said
by the angels to the women: "Remember
how He spake unto you when He was yet in
Galilee, saying, The Son of man must be de-
livered up, and be crucified, and on the third
day rise again."'* ''''Must be delivered up;
"and why, except that it was so written by
God the Creator? He therefore upbraided
them, because they were offended solely at
His passion, and because they doubted of the
truth of the resurrection which had been re-
ported to them by the women, whereby (they
showed that) they had not believed Him to
have been the very same as they had thought
Him to be. Wishing, therefore, to be be-
lieved by them in thiswise. He declared Him-
self to be just what they had deemed Him to
be — the Creator's Christ, the Redeemer of
Israel. But as touching the reality of His
body, what can be plainer ? When they were
doubting whether He were not a phantom —
nay, were supposing that He was one — He
says to them, " Why are ye troubled, and why
do thoughts arise in your hearts ? See 's my
hands and my feet, that it is I myself; for a
spirit hath not bones, as ye see me have."'*
Now Marcion was unwilling to expunge from
his Gospel some statements which even made
against him — I suspect, on purpose, to have
it in his power from the passages which he
did not suppress, when he could have done
so, either to deny that he had expunged any-
thing, or else to justify his suppressions, if he
made any. But he spares only such passages
as he can subvert quite as well by explaining
them away as by expunging them from the
text. Thus, in the passage before us, he
would have the words, "A spirit hath not
bones, as ye see me have," so transposed, as
to mean, "A spirit, such as ye see me to
be, hath not bones;" that is to say, it is not
the nature of a spirit to liave bones. But
what need of so tortuous a construction, when
He might have simply said, "A spirit hath
not bones, even as you observe that I have
not ? " Why, moreover, does He offer His
hands and His feet for their examination —
limbs which consist of bones — if He had no
bones ? Why, too, does He add, " Know that


" Plane.
'3 Luke xxiv. 25.
14 Luke xxiv. 6, 7.

»5 Videte. The original is much stronger >]iy\\a.^-i\(Ta.ri \j.t »cal
ifiere, " handle me, and see." Two sentences thrown into one.
"''Luke xxiv. 37-39.


CHAP. XI.III.


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


423


it is I myself," ' when they had before known
Him to be corporeal ? Else, if He were al-
together a phantom, why did He upbraid them
for supposing Him to be a phantom? But
whilst they still believed not, He asked them
for some meat,^ for the express purpose of
showing them that He had teeth. ^

And now, as I would venture to believe,"*
we have accomplished our undertaking. We
have set forth Jesus Christ as none other than
the Christ of the Creator. Our proofs we


1 Luke xxiv. 39.

2 Luke xxiv. 41.

3 An additional proof that He was no phantom.
4Ut opinor.


have drawn from His doctrines, maxims,^
affections, feelings, miracles, sufferings, and
even resurrection — as foretold by the proph-
ets.^ Even to the last He taught us (the
same truth of His mission), when He sent
forth His apostles to preach His gospel
"among all nations; "7 for He thus fulfilled
the psalm: " Their sound is gone out through
all the earth, and their words to the end of the
world." ^ Marcion, I pity you; your labour
has been in vain. For the Jesus Christ who
appears in your Gospel is mine.


SSententiis.

6 Prophetarum.

7 Luke xxiv. 47 and Matt, xxviii. 19.
S Ps. xix, 4.


DR. HOLMES' NOTE


Dr. Holmes appends the following as a note to the Fourth Book. (See cap. vi. p 351.)

The following statement, abridged from Dr. Lardner i^The History of Heretics ^ chap.
X. sees. 35-40), may be useful to the reader, in reference to the subject of the preceding
Book: — Marcion received but eleven books of the New Testament, and these strangely
curtailed and altered. He divided them into two parts, which he called -0 Y.vayyk\iw (the
Gospel) and rb ' XtcogtoIlkov (the Apostolicoti).

(i.) The former contained nothing more than a mutilated, and sometimes interpolated,
edition of St. Luke; the name of that evangelist, however, he expunged from the begin-
ning of his copy. Chaps, i. and ii. he rejected entirely, and began at iii. i, reading the
opening verse thus: " In the xv. year of Tiberius Caesar, God descended into Capernaum,
a city of Galilee."

(2.) According to Irenasus, Epiphanius, and Theodoret, he rejected the genealogy and bap-
tism of Christ; whilst from Tertullian's statement (chap, vii.) it seems likely that he con-
nected what part of chap. iii. — vers, i, 2 — he chose to retain, with chap. iv. 31, at a leap.

(3). He further eliminated the history of the tempation. That part of chap. iv. which
narrates Christ's going into the synagogue at Nazareth and reading out of Isaiah he also
rejected, and all afterwards to the end of ver. 30.

(4.) Epiphanius mentions sundry slight alterations in capp. v. 14, 24, vi. 5, 17. In
chap. viii. 19 he expunged 7) fiyTvp aWov, Kala6e7:(^l avTov. From Tertullian's remarks (chap,
xix.), it would seem at first as if Marcion had added to his Gospel that answer of our
Saviour which we find related by St. Matthew, chap. xii. 48: "Who is my mother, and
who are my brethren?" For he represents Marcion (as in De came Christie vii., he repre-
sents other heretics, who deny the nativity) as making use of these words for his favourite
argument. But, after all, Marcion might use these words against those who allowed the
authenticity of Matthew's Gospel, without inserting them in his own Gospel; or else Ter-
tullian might quote from memory, and think that to be in Luke which was only in Matthew'
— as he has done at least in three instances. (Lardner refers two of these instances to
passages in chap. vii. of this Book iv., where Tertullian mentions, as erasures from Luke,
what really are found in Matthew v. 17 and xv. 24. The third instance referred to by
Lardner probably occurs at the end of chap. ix. of this same Book iv., where Tertullian


424 TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION. [book iv.

again mistakes Matt. v. 17 for a passage of Luke, and charges Marcion with expunging
it; curiously enough, the mistake recurs in chap. xii. of the same Book.) In Luke x. 21
Marcion omitted the first Trd-ep and the words Kal -fjg yfjq^ that he might not allow Christ to
call His Father the Lord of earth, or of this world. The second 7rar;)p in this verse, not
open to any inconvenience, he retained. In chap. xi. 29 he omitted the last words concern-
ing the sign of the prophet Jonah; he also omitted all the 30th, 31st, and 32d verses; in
ver. 42 he read K/^an-, ''calling,' instead of Kpiaiv, ' judgtnenf.' He rejected verses 49, 50, 51,
because the passage related to the prophets. He entirely omitted chap. xii. 6; whilst in
ver. 8 he read ejUTrpoaOev tov Qeav instead of e/nrpoadev Tuv ayyk'Kuv tov Oeov. He seems to have
left out all the 28th verse, and expunged i/iuv from verses 30 and 32, reading only 6 Trart/p.

In ver. 38, instead of the words h ry devripa <j>v?uik?J, Kal h TiJ TpiTJ) (jwAaKy, he read kv rrj eoTrepivy

tpv/MKJj. In chap. xiii. he omitted the first five verses, whilst in the 28th verse of the same
chapter, where we read, "When ye shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the
prophets in the kingdom of God, and ye yourselves thrust out," he read (by altering,
adding, and transposing), " When ye shall see all the just in the kingdom of God, and
you yourselves cast out, and bound without, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth."
He likewise excluded all the remaining verses of this chapter. All chap, xv. after the
loth verse, in which is contained the parable of the prodigal son, he eliminated from his
Gospel. In xvii. 10 he left out all the words after Xeysre. He made many alterations in the
story of the ten lepers; he left out part of ver. 12, all ver. 13, and altered ver. 14, reading
thus: "There met Him ten lepers; and He sent them away, saying, Show yourselves to
the priest;" after which he inserted a clause from chap. iv. 27: " There were many lepers
in the days of Eliseus the prophet, but none of them were cleansed, but Naaman the Syrian."
In chap, xviii. 19 he added the words 6 irarijp, and in ver. 20 altered oUa^, thou knmvest, into
the first person. He entirely omitted verses 31-33, in which our blessed Saviour declares
that the things foretold by the prophets concerning His sufferings, and death, and resur-
rection, should all be fulfilled. He expunged nitieteeti verses out of chap, xix., from the end
of ver. 27 to the beginning of ver. 47. In chap. xx. he omitted ten verses, from the end of
ver. 8 to the end of ver. 18. He rejected also verses 37 and 38, in which there is a refer-
ence to Moses. Marcion also erased of chap. xxi. the first eighteen verses, as well as verses
21 and 22, on account of this clause, "that all things which are written may be fulfilled;"
XX. 16 was left out by him, so also verses 35-37, 50, and 51 (and, adds Lardner, conjectu-
rally, not herein following his authority Epiphanius, also vers. 38 and 49). In chap, xxiii.
2, after the words "perverting the nation," Marcion added, "and destroying the law and
the prophets;" and again, after " forbidding to give tribute unto Caesar," he added, "and
perverting women and children." He also erased ver. 43. In chap. xxiv. he omitted that
part of the conference between our Saviour and the two disciples going to Emmaus, which
related to the prediction of His sufferings, and which is contained in verses 26 and 27. These
two verses he omitted, and changed the words at the end of ver. 25, ildlrjaav oi Trpo^f/Tai^ into
iWknaa vfiiv. Such are the alterations, according to Epiphanius, which Marcion made in his
Gospel from St. Luke. Tertullian says (in the 4th chapter of the preceding Book) that
Marcion erased the passage which gives an account of the parting of the raiment of our
Saviour among the soldiers. But the reason he assigns for the erasure — ' respicicns Psabni
prophetiam ' — shows that in this, as well as in the few other instances which we have already
named, where Tertullian has charged Marcion with so altering passages, his memory de-
iceived him into mistaking Matthew for Luke, for the reference to the passage in the Psalm
is only given by St. Matthew xxvii. 35.

(5.) On an impartial review of these alterations, some seem to be but slight; others
might be nothing but various readings; but others, again, are undoubtedly designed perver-


ELUCIDATIONS. 425


sions. There were, however, passages enough left unaltered and unexpunged by the Mar-
cionites, to establish the reality of the flesh and blood of Christ, and to prove that the God
of the Jews was the Father of Christ, and of perfect goodness as well as justice. Tertul-
lian, indeed, observes (chap, xliii.) that " Marcion purposely avoided erasing all the pas-
sages which made against him, that he might with the greater confidence deny having erased
any at all, or at least that what he had omitted was for very good reasons."

(6.) To show the unauthorized and unwarrantable character of these alterations, omis-
sions, additions, and corruptions, the Catholic Christians asserted that their copies of St.
Luke's Gospel were more ancient than Marcion's (so Tertullian in chap. iii. and iv. of this
Book iv.); and they maintained also the genuineness and integrity of the unadulterated
Gospel, in opposition to that which had been curtailed and altered by him (chap. v.).


ELUCIDATIONS.
I.

(Deadly Sins, cap. ix., p. 356.)

To maintain a modern and wholly uncatholic system of Penitence, the schoolmen in-
vented a technical scheme of sins mortal and sins venial^ which must not be read into the
Fathers, who had no such technicalities in mind. By "deadly sins" they meant all such
as St. John recognizes (I. John, v. 16, 17,) and none other; that is to say sins of surprise
and infirmity, sins having in them no malice or wilful disobedience, such as an impatient
word, or a momentary neglect of duty. Should a dying man commit a deliberate sin and
then expire, even after a life of love and obedience, who could fail to recognize the fearful
nature of such an end ? But, should his last word be one of infirmity and weakness, cen-
surable but not involving wilful disobedience, surely we may consider it as provided for by
the comfortable words — " there is a sin not unto death." Yet " all unrighteousness is sin,"
and the Fathers held that all sin should be repented of and confessed before God; because
all sin when it is ji7iished\:>x'v!\gtt\\ forth death."

In St. Augustine's time, when moral theology became systematized in the West, by his
mighty genius and influence, the following were recognized degrees of guilt: (i.) Sins de-
serving excommunication. (2.) Sins requiring to be confessed to the brother offended in
order to God's forgiveness, and (3.) sins covered by God's gracious covenant, when daily con-
fessed in the Lord's Prayer, in public, or in private. And this classification was professedly
based on Holy Scripture. Thus: (i.) on the text — " To deliver such an one unto Satan,
etc." (I. Cor. V. 4, 5). (2,) On the text — (Matt, xviii. 15), "Confess your sins one to
another, brethren" (St. James v. 16), and (3.) on the text — (St. Matt. vi. 12,) " Forgive us
our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us." This last St. Augustine* re-
gards as the "daily medication" of our ordinary life, habitual penitence and faith and the
baptismal covenant being presupposed.

The modern Trent theology has vastly amplified the scholastic teachings and refinements,
and the elevation of Liguori to the rank of a church-doctor has virtually made the whole
system de fide with the Latins. The Easterns know nothing of this modern and uncatholic
teaching, and it is important that the student of the Ante-Nicene Patrologia should be on
his guard against the novel meanings which the Trent theology imposes upon orthodox
(Nicene) language. The long ages during which Eastern orthodoxy has been obscured by

I Opp. Tom. vi. p. 228. Ed. Migne.


426 ELUCIDATIONS.


the sufferings and consequent ignorance of the Greeks, have indeed tainted their doctrinal
and practical system, but it still subsists in amazing contrast with Latin impurity. See, on
the " indulgences," of the latter, the " Orthodox Theology of Macarius, Bishop of Vinnitza,"
Tom. 11. p. 541, Paris, i860.

XL
(Reservation of Baptism, cap. xi., note, p. 361.)

It is important, here, to observe the heretical origin of a sinful superstition which be-
comes conspicuous in the history of Constantine. If the church tolerated it in his case, it
was doubtless in view of this extraordinary instance of one, who was a heathen still, at heart,
becoming a guardian and protector of the persecuted Faithful. It is probable that he was
regarded as a Cyrus or a Nebuchadnezzar whom God had raised up to protect and to deliver
His people; who was to be honoured and obeyed as "God's minister" (Rom. xiii. 4,) in
so far, and for this purpose. The church was scrupulous and he was superstitious; it would
have been difficult to discipline him and worse not to discipline him. Tacitly, therefore,
he was treated as a catechumen^ but was not formally admitted even to that class. He per-
mitted Heathenism, and while he did so, how could he be received as a Christian ? The
Christian church never became responsible for his life and character, but strove to reform
him and to prepare him for a true confession of Christ at some "convenient season." In
this, there seems to have been a great fault somewhere, chargeable perhaps to Eusebius
or to some other Christian counsellor; but, when could any one say — " the emperor is sin-
cere and humble and penitent and ought now to be received into the church." It was a
/<?//V/V<j!/ conversion, and as such was accepted, and Constantine was a heathen till near his
death. As to his final penitence and acceptance — " Forbear to judge." IL Kings, x. 29-31.

Concerning his baptism, see Eusebius, de Vita Cofist. iv. 61, see also, Mosheim's
elaborate and candid views of the whole subject: First Three Centuries^ Vol. II. 460-471.

IIL

(Peter, cap. xiii. p. 365.)
The great Galilean, Launoy, doctor of the Sorbonne, has proved that the Fathers under-
stand the Rock to be Christ, while, only rarely, and that rhetorically^ not dogmatically, St.
Peter is called a stone or a rock; a usage to which neither Luther nor Calvin could object.
Tertullian himself, when he speaks dogmatically, is in accord with other Fathers, and gives
no countenance to the modern doctrine of Rome. See La Papautdy of the Abbe Guettee,
pp. 42-61. It is important, also, to note that the primacy of St. Peter, more or less, whatever
it may have been in the mind of the Fathers, was wholly perso?ial, in their view. Of the
fables which make it hereditary and a purtenance of Rome they knew nothing.

IV.

(Loans, cap. xvii. p. 372.)
The whole subject of usury, in what it consists, etc., deserves to receive more attention
than it does in our times, when nominal Christians are steeped \n the sin of money-traffic to
the injury of neighbours, on a scale truly gigantic. God's word clearly rebukes this sin.
So does the Council of Nice.' Now by what is the sin defined ? Certainly by the spirit oi the
Gospel; but, is it also, by the letter? A sophistical casuistry which maintains the letter,
and then sophisticates and refines so as to explain it all away, is the product of school
divinity and of modern Jesuitry; but even the great Bossuet is its apologist. (See his
Traitd de VUsure. opp. ix. p. 49, etc., ed. Paris, 1846.) But for an exhaustive review of the
whole matter, I ask attention to Huet, Le Rlgtic Social, etc. (Paris, 1853) pp. 334-345.

'Calraet. Opp. i. 483 and Tom. x., p. 525.


I


ELUCIDATIONS.


4^:


V.

(The Baptist, cap. xviii. p. 375.)
The interpretation of Tertullian, however, has the all-important merit (which Bacon
and Hooker recognize as cardinal) of flowing from the Scripture without squeezing, (i.)
Our Lord sent the message to John as a personal and tender assurance to ///;//. (2.) The
story illustrates the decrease of which the Baptist had spoken prophetically (St. John, iii.
30); and (3.) it sustains the great principle that Christ alone is without sin, this being the
one fault recorded of the Baptist, otherwise a singular instance of sinlessness. The B. Vir-
gin's fault (gently reproved by the Lord, St. John ii. 4.), seems in like manner intro-
duced on this principle of exhibiting the only sinless One, in His Divine perfections as
without spot. So even Joseph and Moses (Ps. cvi. n, and Gen. xlvii. 20.) are shewn
" to be but men." The policy of Joseph has indeed been extravagantly censured.

VI.

(Harshness, cap. xix., note 6., p. 378. Also, cap. xxvi. p. 393.)

Tertullianseemswithreflecttheearly viewof the church as to our Lord's total abnegation
of all filial relations with the Virgin,when He gave to her St. John, instead of Himself, on the
Cross. For this purpose He had made him the beloved disciple and doubtless charged him
with all the duties with which he was to be clothed. Thus He fulfilled the figurative law
of His priesthood, as given by Moses, (Deut. xxxiii. 9,) and crucified himself, from the
beginning, according to his own Law (St. Luke, xiv. 26, 27,) which he identifies with the
Cross, here and also in St. Matthew, x. 37, 38. These then are the steps of His own holy
example, illustrating His own precept, for doubtless, as " the Son of man," His filial love
was superlative and made the sacrifice the sharper: (i.) He taught Joseph that He had no
earthly father, when he said — " Wist ye not that I must be in my Father's hoiise^'* (St. Luke
iii. 49, Revised); but, having established this fact, he then became " subject" to both his
parents, till His public ministry began. (2.) At this time, He seems to have admonished
His mother, that He could not recognize her authority any longer, (St. John, ii. 4,)
having now entered upon His work as the Son of God. (3.) Accordingly, He refused,
thenceforth, to know her save only as one of His redeemed, excepting her in nothing from
this common work for all the Human Race, (St. Matt. xii. 48,) in the passage which Tertul-
lian so forcibly expounds. (4.) Finally, when St. Mary draws near to the cross, apparently
to claim the final recognition of the previous understanding (St. John, ii. 4,) to which the
Lord had referred her at Cana — He fulfils His last duty to her in giving her a son instead
of Himself, and thereafter (5) recognizes her no more; not even in His messages after the
Resurrection, nor when He met her with other disciples. He rewards her, instead, with
the infinite love He bears to all His saints, and with the brightest rewards which are be-
stowed upon Faith. In this consists her superlative excellence and her conspicuous glory
among the Redeemed (St. Luke,i. 47, 48,) in Christ's account.


VII.

(Children, cap. xxiii. p. 386.)
In this beautiful testimony of our author to the sanctity of marriage, and the blessedness
of its fruits, I see his austere spirit reflecting the spirit of Christ so tenderly and so faith-
fully, in the love of children, that I am warmly drawn to him. I cannot give him up to
Montanism at this period of his life and labours. Surely, he was as yet merely persuaded
that the prophetic charismata were not extinct, and that they had been received by his


428 ELUCIDATIONS.


Phrygian friends, although he may still have regarded them as prophesymg subject to all
the infirmities which St. Paul attributes even to persons elevated by spiritual gifts. (I. Cor.
xtv.) Why not recognize him in all his merits, until his open and senile lapse is complete ?

VIII.
(Hades, cap. xxxiv. p. 406.)

Here again our author shews his unsettled view as to Sheol or Hades, on which see Kaye,
pp. 247-250. Here he distinguishes between the hiferi and Abraham's bosom; but (in B.
iii. cap. 24.) he has already, more aptly, regarded the Inferi, or Hades, as the common
receptacle of departed spirits, wkere a "great gulf" indeed, separates between the two
classes.

A caricature may sometimes illustrate characteristic features more powerfully than a true
portrait. The French call the highest gallery in theatres, /^ra^Z/V; and I have sometimes ex-
plained it by the fact that the modern drama originated in the monkish Mysteries, revived so
profanely in our own day. To reconcile the poor to a bad place they gave it the name of
Paradise, thus illustrating their Mediaeval conceptions; for trickling down from Tertullian
his vivid notions seem to have suffused all Western theology on this subject. Thus, then,
one vast receptacle receives all the dead. The ///, as we very appropriately call it in
English, answers to the place of lost spirits, where the rich man was in torments. Above,
are ranged the family of Abraham reclining, as it were, in their father's bosom, by turns.
Far above, under skylights, (for the old Mysteries were celebrated in the day-time) is the
Paradise, where the, Martyrs see God, and are represented as " under the altar" of heaven
itself. Now, abandoning our grotesque illustration, but using it for its topography, let us
conceive of our own globe, as having a world-wide concavity such as they imagined, from
literalizing the mider-7vorld of Sheol. In its depths is the Phylace (I. Pet. iii. 19,) of
"spirits in prison." In a higher region repose the blessed spirits in "Abraham's bosom."
Yet nearer to the ethereal vaults, are the martyrs in Paradise, looking out into heavenly
worlds. The immensity of the scale does not interfere with the vision of spirits, nor with
such communications as Abraham holds with his lost son in the history of Dives and Laz-
arus. Here indeed Science comes to our aid, for if the telephone permits such conversations
while we are in the flesh, we may at least imagine that the subtile spirit can act in like
manner, apart from such contrivances. Now, so far as Tertullian is consistent with him-
self, I think these explanations may clarify his words and references. The Eastern The-
ology is less inconsistent and bears the marks alike of Plato and of Origen, But of this
hereafter. Of a place, such as the Mediaeval Purgatory, affirmed as de fide by the Trent
creed, the Fathers knew nothing at all. See Vol. II. p. 490, also 522, this Series.


I


Additional Note.


(Passage not easy to identify, p. 390, note 14.)

Easy enough, by the LXX. See Isaiah Ixiii. 3. Kal tuv e6vo)v ovk tariv avr/p /j.er'' e/xov. The
first verse, referring to Edom, leads our author to accentuate this point of Gentile ignorance.


THE FIVE BOOKS AGAINST MARCION.

Book V.

WHEREIN TERTULLIAN PROVES, WITH RESPECT TO ST. PAUL'S EPISTLES,
WHAT HE HAD PROVED IN THE PRECEDING BOOK WITH RESPECT
TO ST. LUKE'S GOSPEL. FAR FROM BEING AT VARIANCE, THEY WERE
IN PERFECT UNISON WITH THE WRITINGS OF THE OLD TESTAMENT,
AND THEREFORE TESTIFIED THAT THE CREATOR WAS THE ONLY
GOD, AND THAT THE LORD JESUS WAS HIS CHRIST. AS IN THE
PRECEDING BOOKS, TERTULLIAN SUPPORTS HIS ARGUMENT WITH
PROFOUND REASONING, AND MANY HAPPY ILLUSTRATIONS OF HOLY
SCRIPTURE.


CHAP. I. — INTRODUCTORY. THE APOSTLE PAUL
HIMSELF NOT THE PREACHER OF A NEW
GOD. CALLED BY JESUS CHRIST, ALTHOUGH
AFTER THE OTHER APOSTLES, HIS MISSION
WAS FROM THE CREATOR. STATES HOW.
THE ARGUMENT, AS IN THE CASE OF THE
GOSPEL, CONFINING PROOFS TO SUCH POR-
TIONS OF ST. Paul's writings as marcion

ALLOWED.

There is nothing without a beginning but
God alone. Now, inasmuch as the beginning
occupies the first place in the condition of all
things, SO it must necessarily take precedence
in the treatment of them, if a clear knowledge
'is to be arrived at concerning their condition;
for you could not find the means of examining
even the quality of anything, unless you were
certain of its existence, and that after dis-
covering its origin.' Since therefore I am
brought, in the course of my little work, to
this point,^ I require to know of Marcion
the origin of his apostle ^ even — I, who am


1 Cum cognoveris unde sit.

2 Materiam.

3 We have already more than once refened to Marcion's prefer-
ence for SL Paul. " The reason of the preference thus given to
that apostle was his constant and strenuous opposition tothe Juda-
izing Christians, who wished to reimpose the yoke of the Jewish
ceremonies on the necks of their brethren. This opposition the
Marcionites wished to construe into a direct denial of th« authority
of the Mosaic law. They contended also from St. Paul's assertion,
that he received his appointment to the apostolic office not from
man, but from Christ, that he alone delivered the genuine doc-
trines of the gospel. This deference for St. Paul accounts also for
Marcion's accepting St. Luke's Gospel as the only authentic one,


to some degree a new disciple,^ the follower
of no other master; who at the same time^
can believe nothing, except that nothing ought
to be believed hastily ^ (and that I may fur-
ther say is hastily believed, which is believed
without any examination ^ of its beginning) ;
in short, I who have the best reason possible
for bringing this inquiry to a most careful so-
lution,^ since a man is affirmed to me to be
an apostle whom I do not find mentioned in
the Gospel in the catalogue' of the apostles.
Indeed, when I hear that this man was chosen
by the Lord after He had attained His rest in
heaven, I feel that a kind of improvidence is
imputable to Christ, for not knowing before
that this man was necessary to Him; and
because He thought that he must be added to
the apostolic body in the way of a fortuitous
encounter '° rather than a deliberate selection;
by necessity (so to speak), and not voluntary
choice, although the members of the apos-
tolate had been duly ordained, and were now
dismissed to their several missions. Where-


as we saw in the last book of this treatise; it was because that
evangelist had been the companion of St. Paul " (Bp. Kaye, On
the Writings of Tertuiiian, 3d edition, pp. 474, 475).

4 Novus aliqui discipulus.

5 Interim.

6 Temere.

7 Agnitione.

8 Ad sollicitudinem,

9 In albo.

'o Ex incursu: in allusion to St. Paul's sudden conversion, Acts
i.\. 3-8. [On St. Paul's Epistles, see p. 324, J«/rrt.]


430


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book v.


fore, O shipmaster of Pontus,' if you have
never taken on board your small craft ' any
contraband goods or smuggler's cargo, if you
have never thrown overboard or tampered with
a freight, you are still more careful and con-
scientious, I doubt not, in divine things; and
so I should be glad if you would inform us
under what bill of lading ^ you admitted the
Apostle Paul on board, who ticketed him,^
what owner forwarded him,s who handed him
to you,* that so you may land him without
any rr^sgiving,? lest he should turn out to be-
long to him,*^ who can substantiate his claim
to him by producing all his apostolic writ-
ings.' He professes himself to be "an apos-
tle"— to use his own, words — "not of men,
nor by man, but by Jesus Christ." '° Of
course, any one may make a profession con-
cerning himself; but his profession is only
rendered valid by the authority of a second
person. One man signs, another counter-
signs;" one man appends his seal, another
registers in the public records." No one is
at once a proposer and a seconder to himself.
Besides, you have read, no doubt, that " many
shall come, saying, I am Christ." '^ Now if
any one can pretend that he is Christ, how
much more might a man profess to be an
apostle of Christ ! But still, for my own part,
I appear "•* in the character of a disciple and
an inquirer; that so I may even thus's both
refute your belief, who have nothing to sup-
port it, and confound your shamelessness, who
make claims without possessing the means of
establishing them. Let there be a Christ, let
there be an apostle, although of another god;
but what 7nattcr? since they are only to draw
their proofs out of the Testament of the Crea-
tor. Because even the book of Genesis so
long ago promised me the Apostle Paul. For
among the types and prophetic blessings which
he pronounced over his sons, Jacob, when he
turned his attention to Benjamin, exclaimed,
" Benjamin shall ravin as a wolf; in the morn-
ing He shall devour the prey, and at night he
shall impart nourishment.""^ He foresaw


'Marcion is frequently called '■'• Ponticus Nauclcrus''' prob-
ably less on account of his own connection with a seafaring life,
than that of his countrymen, who were great sailors. Comp. book
i. i8. (sub fin.) and book iii. 6. [pp. 284, 335.]

9 In acatos tuas.

3 Quo symbolo.

4Quis ilium tituli charactere percusserit.

5 Quis transmiserit tibi.

6 Quis imposuerit.

7 Constanter.

8Ne illius probetur, i.e., to^the Catholic^ for Marcion did not
admit all St. Paul's epistles (Semler).

9 Omnia apostolatus ejus instrumenta.
J'^Gal. i. I.
" Subscribit.
>2Actis refert.
13 Luke xxi. 8.
J4 Conversor.
13 Jam hinc.
i^tlen.xlix 27, Septuagint, the latter clause being »cal el? to


that Paul would arise out of the tribe of Ben-
jamin, a voracious wolf, devouring his prey
in the morning: in order words, in the early
period of his life he would devastate the
Lord's sheep, as a persecutor of the churches;
but in the evening he would give them nour-
ishment, which means that in his declining
years he would educate the fold of Christ, as
the teacher of the Gentiles. Then, again, in
Saul's conduct towards David, exhibited first
in violent persecution of him, and then in re-
morse and reparation, '7 on his receiving from
him good for evil, we have nothing else than
an anticipation '^ of Paul in Saul — belonging,
too, as they did, to the same tribe — and of
Jesus in David, from whom He descended ac-
cording to the Virgin's genealogy. '^ Should
you, however, disapprove of these types, =° the
Acts of the Apostles," at all events, have
handed down to me this career of Paul, which
you must not refuse to accept. Thence I dem-
onstrate that from a persecutor he became
" an apostle, not of men, neither by man; " "
thence am I led to believe the Apostle himself;
thence do I find reason for rejecting your de-
fence of him,^'^ and for bearing fearlessly
your taunt. "Then you deny the Apostle
Paul." I do not calumniate him whom I
defend. ^'^ I deny him, to compel you to the
proof of him. I deny him, to convince )^ou
that he is mine. If you have regard to our
belief you should admit the particulars which
comprise it. If you challenge us to your be-
lief, (pray) tell us what things constitute its
basis. =s Either prove the truth of what you
believe, or failing in your proof, (tell us) how
you believe. Else what conduct is yours, '^ be-
lieving in opposition to Him from whom alone
comes the proof of that which you believe ?
Take now from my point of view^'' the apos-
tle, in the same manner as you have received
the Christ — the apostle shown to be as much
mme as the Christ is. And here, too, we will
fight within the same lines, and challenge our


»7 Satisfactio.

»8 Non aliud portendebat quam.

»9 Secundum Virginis censum.

2° Figurarum sacramenta.

2» Although St. Luke wrote the Acts of the Apostles, Marcion
does not seem to have admitted this book into his New Testament.
"It is clearly excluded from his catalogue, as given by Kpipha-
nius. The same thing appears from the more ancient authority of
I'ertullian, who begins his Hook v. again.st Marcion with showing
the absurdity of his conduct in rejecting the history and acts of
the apostles, and yet receiving St. Paul as the chief of the apos-
tles, whose name is never mentioned in the Gospel with the other
apostles, especially since the account given by Paul himself in Gal.
i. ii. confirms the account which we have in the Acts. But the
reason why he rejected this book is (as TertuUian says) very evi-
dent, since from it we can plainly show that the God of the Chris-
tians and the God of the Jews, or the Creator, was the same being
and that Christ was sent by Him, and bv no other" (Lardner'
Works, Hist. 0/ Heretics, chap. x. sec. 41).

=2 Gal. i. I.

23 Inde te a defensione ejus expello.

24 An insinuation that Marcion's defence of Paul was, in fact, a
calumny of the apostle,

25 Praestruant earn.
=6Qualis es.

"7 Habe nunc de meo.


CHAP. II.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


43 i


adversary on the mere ground of a simple
rule,' that even an apostle who is said not to
belong to the Creator — nay, is displayed as in
actual hostility to the Creator — can be fairly
regarded as teaching^ nothing, knowing
nothing, wishing nothing in favour of the
Creator whilst it would be a first principle
with him to set forth ^ another god with as
much eagerness as he would use in withdraw-
ing us from the law of the Creator. It is not
at all likely that he would call men away from
Judaism without showing them at the same
time what was the god in whom he invited
them to believe; because nobody could possi-
bly pass from allegiance to the Creator with-
out knowing to whom he had to cross over.
For either Christ had already revealed an-
other god — in which case the apostle's testi-
mony would also follow to the same effect, for
fear of his not being else regarded ^ as an
apostle of the god whom Christ had revealed,
and because of the impropriety of his being
concealed by the apostle who had been al-
ready revealed by Christ — or Christ had made
no such revelation concerning God; the7i there
was all the greater need why the apostle
should reveal a God who could now be made
known by no one else, and who would un-
doubtedly be left without any belief at all, if
he were revealed not even by an apostle. We
have laid down this as our first principle, be-
cause we wish at once to profess that we shall
pursue the same method here in the apostle's
case as we adopted before in Christ's case, to
prove that he proclaimed no new god ;5 that
is, we shall draw our evidence from the epis-
tles of St. Paul himself. Now, the garbled
form in which we have found the heretic's
Gospel will have already prepared us to ex-
pect to find^ the epistles also mutilated by
him with like perverseness — and that even as
respects their number. 7

CHAP. II. ON THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS.

THE ABOLITION OF THE ORDINANCES OF THE
MOSAIC LAW NO PROOF OF ANOTHER GOD.
THE DIVINE LAWGIVER, THE CREATOR HIM-
SELF, WAS THE ABROGATOR. THE APOSTLE's
DOCTRINE IN THE FIRST CHAPTER SHOWN TO
ACCORD WITH THE TEACHING OF THE OLD
TESTAMENT. THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES
SHOWN TO BE GENUINE AGAINST MARCION.
THIS BOOK AGREES WITH THE PAULINE EPIS-
TLES.

The epistle which we also allow to be the


velle.


1 In ipso gradu praescriptionis.

2 Oportere docere . . . sapere

3 Edicere.

4 Ne non haberetur.

5 Nullum alium deum circumlatum.

6Prsejudicasse debebit. _ , , ,

7 Marcion only received ten of St. Paul's epistles, and these al-
tered by himself.


most decisive^ against Judaism, is that
wherein the apostle instructs the Galatians.
For the abolition of the ancient law we fully
admit, and hold that it actually proceeds from
the dispensation of the Creator, — a point
which we have already often treated in the
course of our discussion, when we showed that
the innovation was foretold by the prophets
of our God.s' Now, if the Creator indeed
promised that " the ancient things should pass
away," '° to be superseded by a new course of
things which should arise, whilst Christ marks
the period of the separation when He says,
" The law and the prophets were until John " "
— thus making the Baptist the limit between
the two dispensations of the old things then
terminating — and the new things then begin-
ning, the apostle cannot of course do other-
wise, (coming as he does) in Christ, who was
revealed after John, than invalidate "the old
things" and confirm " the new," and yet pro-
mote thereby the faith of no other god than
the Creator, at whose instance " it was fore-
told that the ancient things should pass away.
Therefore both the abrogation of the law and
the establishment of the gospel help my argu-
ment even in this epistle, wherein they both
have reference to the fond assumption of the
Galatians, which led them to suppose that
faith in Christ (the Creator's Christ, of course)
was obligatory, but without annulling the law,
because it still appeared to them a thing in-
credible that the law should be set aside by
its own author. Again, '3 if they had at all
heard of any other god from the apostle,
would they not have concluded at once, of
themselves, that they must give up the law
of that God whom they had left, in order to
follow another ? For what man would be long
in learning, that he ought to pursue a new
discipline, after he had taken up with a new
god? Since, however,'-* the same God was
declared in the gospel which had always been
so well known in the law, the only change
being in the dispensation, 's the sole point of
the question to be discussed was, whether the
law of the Creator ought by the gospel to be
excluded in the Christ of the Creator ? Take
away this point, and the controversy falls to
the ground. Now, since they would all know
of themselves,'^ on the withdrawal of this
point, that they must of course renounce all
submission to the Creator by reason of their


^ Pnncipalem.

9 See above, in book i. chap, xx., also in book iv. chap. i.
10 Comp. Isa. .xliii. i8, 19, and Ixv. 17, with 2 Cor. v. 17.
" Luke xvi. 16.
12 Apud quem.
'3 Porro.
Mimmo quia.

15 Disciphna.

16 Ultro.


432


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[hook V,


faith in another god, there could have been
no call for the apostle to teach them so earn-
estly that which their own belief must have
spontaneously suggested to them. Therefore
the entire purport of this epistle is simply to
show us that the supersession' of the law
comes from the appointment of the Creator —
a point, which we shall still have to keep in
rnind.^ Since also he makes mention of no
other god (and he could have found no other
opportunity of doing so, more i>uitable than
when his purpose was to set forth the reason
for the abolition of the law — especially as the
prescription of a new god would have afforded
a singularly good and most sufficient reason),
it is clear enough in what sense he writes, " I
marvel that ye are so soon removed from Him
who hath called you to His grace to another
gospel "3 — (He means) *' another" as to the
conduct it prescribes, not in respect of its
worship; "another" as to the discipline it
teaches, not in respect of its divinity; because
it is the office of* Christ's gospel to call men
from the law to grace, not from the Creator
to another god. For nobody had induced
them to apostatize froms the Creator, that
they should seem to " be removed to another
gospel," simply when they return again to
the Creator. When he adds, too, the words,
"which is not another,"^ he confirms the
fact that the gospel which he maintains is the
Creator's. For the Creator Himself promises
the gospel, when He says by Isaiah: "Get
thee up into the high mountain, thou that
bringest to Sion good tidings; lift up thy voice
with strength^ thou that bringest the gospel
to Jerusalem." 7 Also when, with respect to
the apostles personally, He says, "How
beautiful are the feet of them that preach the
gospel of peace, that bring good tidings of
good " ^ — even proclaiming the gospel to the
Gentiles, because He also says, " In His name
shall the Gentiles trust;"' that is, in the
name of Christ, to whom He says, "I have
given thee as a light of the Gentiles. "'° How-
ever, you will have it that it is the gospel of
a new god which was then set forth by the
apostle. So that there are two gospels for"
two gods; and the apostle made a great mistake

» Discessionem.

3 Ut adhuc suggeremua.

3 Gal. i. 6, 7.

4 Deberet.

5 Movcrat illos a.

6 Gal. i. 7.

7 Lsa. xl. 9 (Septuagint).
^Isa. Hi. 7.

9 We have here an instance of the high authority of the Septua-
gint version. It comes from the Seventy: Koi eiri T(i ocofxari
avTou efltT) cAirioOiTii' (Isa. xlii. 4). From this 'lertuUian, as usual,
quoted it. But what is much more important. St. Matthew has
adopted it ; see chap. xii. ver. 21. This beautiful promise of the
Creator does not occur in its well-known form m the Hebrew orig-
inal.

•o Isa. xlii. 6.

" Apud : "administered by."


when he said that "there is not another"
gospel," since there is (on the hypothesis)'^
another; and so he might have made a better
defence of his gospel, by rather demonstrating
this, than by insisting on its being but one.
But perhaps, to avoid this difficulty, you will
say that he therefore added just afterwards,
"Though an angel from heaven preach any
other gospel, let him be accursed," '-* because
he was aware that the Creator was going to
introduce a gospel ! But you thus entangle
yourself still more. For this is now the mesh
in which you are caught. To affirm that
there are two gospels, is not the part of a man
who has already denied that there is another.
His meaning, however, is clear, for he has
mentioned himself first (in the anathema):
" But though we or an angel from heaven
preach any other gospel." 's It is by way of
an example that he has expressed himself. If
even he himself might not preach any other
gospel, then neither might an angel. He said
"angel'" in this way, that he might show
how much more men ought not to be believed,
when neither an angel nor an apostle ought to
be; not that he meant to apply '"^ an angel to
the gospel of the Creator. He then cursorily
touches on his own conversion from a perse-
cutor to an apostle — confirming thereby the
Acts of the Apostles, '7 in which book may be
found the very subject '^ of this epistle, how
that certain persons interposed, and said that
men ought to be circumcised, and that the
law of Moses was to be observed; and how
the apostles, when consulted, determined, by
the authority of the Holy Ghost, that " a yoke
should not be put upon men's necks which
their fathers even had not been able to
bear." '' Now, since the Acts of the Apos-
tles thus agree with Paul, it becomes apparent
why you reject them. It is because they de-
clare no other God than the Creator, and
prove Christ to belong to no other God than
the Creator; whilst the promise of the Holy
Ghost is shown to have been fulfilled in no
other document than the Acts of the Apostles.
Now, it is not very likely that these ~ should
be found in agreem.ent with the apostle, on
the one hand, when they described his career
in accordance with his own statement; but
should, on the other hand, be at variance with
him when they announce the (attribute of)
divinity in the Creator's Christ — as if Paul


"Gal. i. 7.

13 Cum sit.

14 Gal. i. 8.
'5 Gal. i. 8.

16 Referret.

17 A similar remark occurs in Prascript. Hteretic. c. xxiii. p. 253.

18 Ipsa materia.

'9 See Gal. i. n-24, compared with Acts xv. 5-29.
»" The Acts of the Apostles " is always a //«rrt/ phrase in Ter-
tulltan.


CHAP. III.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


433


did not follow^ the preaching of the apostles
when he received from them the prescrip-
tion^ of not teaching the Law.^

CHAP. III. — ST. PAUL QUITE IN ACCORDANCE
WITH ST. PETER AND OTHER APOSTLES OF THE
CIRCUMCISION. HIS CENSURE OF ST. PETER
EXPLAINED, AND RESCUED FROM MARCION 's
MISAPPLICATION. THE STRONG PROTESTS OF
THIS EPISTLE AGAINST JUDAIZERS. YET ITS
TEACHING IS SHOWN TO BE IN KEEPING WITH
THE LAW AND THE PROPHETS. MARCION 's
TAMPERING WITH ST. PAUL's WRITINGS CEN-
SURED.

But with regard to the countenance * of
Peter and the rest of the apostles, he tells us ^
that " fourteen years after he went up to Jeru-
salem," in order to confer with them^ about
the rule which he followed in his gospel, lest
perchance he should all those years have been
running, and be running still, in vain, (which
would be the case,) of course, if his preaching
of the gospel fell short of their method. ^ So
great had been his desire to be approved and
supported by those whom you wish on all oc-
casions^ to be understood as in alliance with
Judaism ! When indeed he says, that
" neither was Titus circumcised," ^ he for the
first time shows us that circumcision was the
only question connected with the mainte-
nance '° of the law, which had been as yet
agitated by those whom he therefore calls
*' false brethren unawares brought in.""
These persons went no further than to insist
on a continuance of the law, retaining un-
questionably a sincere behef in the Creator.
They perverted the gospel in their teaching,
not indeed by such a tampering with the
Scripture '^ as should enable them to ex-
punge '^ the Creator's Christ, but by so re-
taining the ancient regime as not to exclude
the Creator's law. Therefore he says : " Be-
cause of false brethren unawares brought in,
who came in privily to spy out our liberty
which we have in Christ, that they might bring
us into bondage, to whom we gave place by
subjection not even for an hour.""* Let us
only attend to the dear's sense and to the
reason of the thing, and the perversion of the

1 Ut non secutus sit.

2 Formam.

3 Dedocendae legis; i.e. , of Moses.

4 Ad patrocinium.

5 Scribit often takes the place of inquit: naturally enough as
referring to the epistles.

6 Gal. ii. I, 2.

7 Formam.

8 Si quando.

9 Gal. ii. 3.

1° Ex defensione.
" Gal. ii. 4. ■

12 Interpolatione Scripturae.

13 Qua efiingerent,

14 Gal. ii. 4, 5.

15 Ipsi.

28


Scripture will be apparent. When he first
says, *' Neither Titus, who was with me, be-
ing a Greek, was compelled to be circumcised,"
and then adds, *' And that because of false
brethren unawares brought in,"'* etc., he
gives us an insight into his reason '^ for acting
in a clean contrary way,'^ showing us where-
fore he did that which he would neither have
done nor shown to us, if that had not hap-
pened which induced him to act as he did.
But then '^ I want you to tell us whether they
would have yielded to the subjection that was
demanded,^" if these false brethren had not
crept in to spy out their liberty? I appre-
hend not. They therefore gave way (in a
partial concession), because there were per-
sons whose weak faith required consideration. ='
For their rudimentary belief, which was still
in suspense about the observance of the law,
deserved this concessive treatment," when
even the apostle himself had some suspicion
that he might have run, and be still running,
in vain. ^3 Accordingly, the false brethren
who were the spies of their Christian liberty
must be thwarted in their efforts to bring it
under the yoke of their own Judaism before
that Paul discovered whether his labour had
been in vain, before that those who preceded
him in the apostolate gave him their right
hands of fellowship, before that he entered
on the office of preaching to the Gentiles, ac-
cording to their arrangement with him.'* He
therefore made some concession, as was nec-
essary, for a time; and this was the reason
why he had Timothy circumcised, =s and the
Nazarites introduced into the temple, =* which
incidents are described in the Acts. Their
truth may be inferred from their agreement
with the apostle's own profession, how "to
the Jews he became as a Jew, that he might
gain the Jews, and to them that were under


16 Gal. ii. 3, 4.

17 Incipit reddere rationem.

iSContrarii utique facti. [Farrar, St, Paul, pp. 232 and 261.]

19 Denique.

20 See Conybeare and Howson, in loc.

21 Fuerunt propter quos crederetur.

22 The following statement will throw light upon the character
of the two classes of Jewish professors of Christianity referred to by
Tertullian: " A pharisaic section was sheltered in its bosom (of the
church at Jerusalem)^ which continually strove to turn Christianity
into a sect of Judaism. These men were restless agitators, ani-
mated by the bitterest sectarian spirit; and although they were
numerically a small party, yet we know the power of a turbulent
minority. But besides these Judaizing zealots, there was a large
proportion of the Christians at Jerusalem, who.se Christianity,
though more sincere than that of those just mentioned, was yet
very weak and imperfect . . . Many of them still only knew of a
Christ after the flesh— a Saviour of Israel— a Jewish Messiah.
Their minds were in a state of transition between the law and the
gospel ; and it was of great consequence noX to shock their preju-
dices too rudely ; lest they should be tempted to make shipwreck
of their faith and renounce their Christianity altogether." These
were they whose prejudices required to be wisely consulted in
things which did not touch the foundation of the gospel (Conybeare
and Howson's St. Paul, People's Edition, vol. ii. pp. 259, 260.)

23 Gal. ii. 2.

24 Ex censu eorum : see Gal. ii. 9, 10,

25 Acts xvi. 3.

26 Acts xxi. 23-26.


434


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book V,


the law, as under the law," — and so here with
respect to those who come in secretly, — ** and
lastly, how he became all things to all men,
that he might gain all." ' Now, inasmuch as
the circumstances require such an interpreta-
tion as this, no one will refuse to admit that
Paul preached that God and that Christ whose
law he was excluding all the while, however
much he allowed it, owing to the times, but
which he would have had summarily to abol-
ish if he had published a new god. Rightly,
then, did Peter and James and John give their
right hand of fellowship to Paul, and agree
on such a division of their work, as that Paul
should go to the heathen, and themselves to
the circumcision. = Their agreement, also,
*' to remember the poor"- was in complete
conformity with the law of the Creator, which
cherished the poor and needy, as has been
shown in our observations on your Gospel/
It is thus certain that the question was one
which simply regarded the law, while at the
same time it is apparent what portion of the
law it was convenient to have observed.
Paul, however, censures Peter for not walking
straightforwardly according to the truth of
the gospel. No doubt he blames him; but it
was solely because of his inconsistency in the
matter of " eating," s which he varied ac-
cording to the sort of persons (whom he asso-
ciated with) " fearing them which were of the
circumcision,"^ but not on account of any
perverse opinion touching another god. For
if such a question had arisen, others also
would have been "resisted face to face" by
the man who had not even spared Peter on the
comparatively small matter of his doubtful
conversation. But what do the Marcionites
wish to have believed (on the point) ? For
the rest, the apostle must (be permitted to) go
on with his own statement, wherein he says
that " a man is not justified by the works of
the law, but by faith: "^ faith, however, in
the same God to whom belongs the law also.
For of course he would have bestowed no la-
bour on severing faith from the law, when the
difference of the god would, if there had only
been any, have of itself produced such a sev-
erance. Justly, therefore, did he refuse to
*'build up again (the structure of the law)
which he had overthrown."^ The law, in-
deed, had to be overthrown, from the moment
when John "cried in the wilderness, Prepare
ye the ways of the Lord," that valleys' and


' 1 Cor. ix. 20, 22.
a Gal. ii. 9.

3 Gal. ii. 10.

4 See above, book iv. chap. xiv. p. 365.

5 Victus : see Gal. ii. 12 ; or, living^ see ver. 14.
*Gal. ii. 12.

7 Gal. ii. 16.

8 Gal. ii. 18 (see Conybeare and Howson).

9 Rivi : the wiufys of the East.


hills and mountains may be filled up and lev-
elled, and the crooked and the rough ways be
made straight and smooth '° — in other words,
that the difficulties of the law might be
changed into the facilities of the gospel. For
he remembered that the time was come of
which the Psalm spake, " Let us break their
bands asunder, and cast off their yoke from
us; " " since the time when " the nations be-
came tumultuous, and the people imagined
vain counsels; " when *' the kings of the earth
stood up, and the rulers were gathered to-
gether against the Lord, and against His
Christ,"'^ in order that thenceforward man
might be justified by the liberty of faith, not
by servitude to the law,'^ " because the just
shall live by his faith."'-* Now, although the
prophet Habakkuk first said this, yet you
have the apostle here confirming the prophets,
even as Christ did. The object, therefore,
of the faith whereby the just man shall live,
will be that same God to whom likewise be-
longs the law, by doing which no man is
justified. Since, then, there equally are found
the curse in the law and the blessing in faith,
you have both conditions set forth by 's the
Creator: " Behold," says He, " I have set be-
fore you a blessing and a curse." "^ You can-
not establish a diversity of authors because
there happens to be one of things; for the di-
versity is itself proposed by one and the same
author. Why, however, " Christ was made a
curse for us," '^ is declared by the apostle
himself in a way which quite helps our side,
as being the result of the Creator's appoint-
ment. But yet it by no means follows, be-
cause the Creator said of old, "Cursed is
every one that hangeth on a tree," '^ that
Christ belonged to another god, and on that
account was accursed even then in the law.
And how, indeed, could the Creator have
cursed by anticipation one whom He knew
not of ? Why, however, may it not be more
suitable for the Creator to have delivered His
own Son to His own curse, than to have sub-
mitted Him to the malediction of that god of
yours, — in behalf, too, of man, who is an alien
to him? No\\f, if this appointment of the
Creator respecting His Son appears to you to
be a cruel one, it is equally so in the case of
your own god; if, on the contrary, it be in
accordance with reason in your god, it is


«oLuke iii. 4, 5.
" Ps, ii. 3-
'2 Ps. ii. I, 2.
13 Gal. ii. 16 and iii. 11.
MHab. ii. 4.
iSApud.
>6 Deut. xi. 26.
'7 Gal. iii. 13.

18 The LXX. version of Deut. xxi. 23 is quoted by St. Paul in
Gal. iii. 13.


CHAP. IV.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


435


equally so — nay, much more so — in mine.
For it would be more credible that that God
had provided blessing for man, through the
curse of Christ, who formerly set both a bless-
ing and a curse before man, than that he had
done so, who, according to you,' never at any
time pronounced either. *' We have received,
therefore, the promise of the Spirit," as the
apostle says, " through faith," even that faith
by which the just man lives, in accordance
with the Creator's purpose. = What I say,
then, is this, that that God is the object of
faith who prefigured the grace of faith. But
when he also adds, " For ye are all the chil-
dren of faith," 3 it becomes clear that what
the heretic's industry erased was the mention
of Abraham's name; for by faith the apostle
declares us to be ^'' childreti of Abraham,'' ^
and after mentioning him he expressly called
us " children of faith " also. But how are we
children of faith ? and of whose faith, if not
Abraham's? For since "Abraham believed
God, and it was accounted to him for right-
eousness; "^ since, also, he deserved for that
reason to be called "the father of many
nations," whilst we, who are even more like
him^ in believing in God, are thereby justi-
fied as Abraham was, and thereby also obtain
life — since the just lives by his faith, — it
therefore happens that, as he in the previous
passage called us "sons of Abraham," since
he is in faith our (common) father,^ so here
also he named us " children of faith," for it
was owing to his faith that it was promised
that Abraham should be the father of (many)
nations. As to the fact itself of his calling off
faith from circumcision, did he not seek there-
by to constitute us the children of Abraham,
who had believed previous to his circumcision
in the flesh ?^ In short, ^ faith in one of two
gods cannot possibly admit us to the dispen-
sation ^° of the other," so that it should im-
pute righteousness to those who believe in
him, and make the just live through him, and
declare the Gentiles to be his children through
faith. Such a dispensation as this belongs
wholly to Him through whose appointment it
was already made known by the call of this
self-same Abraham, as is conclusively shown "
by the natural meaning. '^


1 Apud te. ■

2 According to the promise of a prophet of the Creator. See
Hab. ii. 4.

3 Gal. iii, 26.

4 Gal. iii. 7, 9, 29.

5 Gal. iii. 6.

6 Magis proinde : as sharing in the faith he had, " being yetun-
circumcised." See Rom. iv. 11.

7 Patris fidei.

8 In integrit^te carnis.
9Denique.

'o Formam : " plan " or " arrangement."

11 Alterius dei . . . dei alterius.

12 Revincatur. '3 Ipso sensu.


CHAP. IV. ANOTHER INSTANCE OF MARCION's

TAMPERING WITH ST. PAUL'S TEXT. THE
FULNESS OF TIME, ANNOUNCED BY THE
APOSTLE, FORETOLD BY THE PROPHETS.
MOSAIC RITES ABROGATED BY THE CREATOR
HIMSELF. MARCION's TRICKS ABOUT ABRA-
HAM'S NAME. THE CREATOR, BY HIS CHRIST,
THE FOUNTAIN OF THE GRACE AND THE LIB-
ERTY WHICH ST. PAUL ANNOUNCED. MAR-
CION'S DOCETISM REFUTED.

"But," says he, "I speak after the manner
of men: when we were children, we were
placed in bondage under the elements of the
world." "* This, however, was not said " after
the manner of men." For there is no fig-
ure 's here, but literal truth. For (with re-
spect to the latter clause of this passage),
what child (in the sense, that is, in which the
Gentiles are children) is not in bondage to
the elements of the world, which he looks up
to '^ in the light of a god ? With regard,
however, to the former clause, there 7uas a
figure (as the apostle wTote it); because after
he had said, " I speak after the manner of
men," he adds), " Though it be but a man's
covenant, no man disannulleth, or addeth
thereto." '^ For by the figure of the perma-
nency of a human covenant he was defending
the divine testament. "To Abraham were
the promises made, and to his seed. He said
not ' to seeds,' as of many; but as of one, ' to
thy seed,' which is Christ." '^ Fie on '» Mar-
cion's sponge! But indeed it is superfluous
to dwell on what he has erased, when he may
be more effectually confuted from that which
he has retained.^ " But when the fulness of
time was come, God sent forth His Son" -' —


14 This apparent quotation is in fact a patching together of two
sentences from Gal. iii. 15 and iv. 3 (Fr. Junius). " If I may be
allowed to guess from the manner In which Tertullian expresseth
himself, I should imagine that Marcion erased the whole of chap,
iii. after the word Aeyoj in ver. 15, and the beginning of chap, iv.,
until you come to the word ore m ver. 3. Then the words will be
connected thus: ' Brethren, I speak after the manner of men . . .
when we were children we were in bondage under the elements of
the world ; but when the fulness of time was come, God sent forth
His Son.' This is precisely what the argument of Tertullian re-
quires, and they are the very words which he connects together "
(Lardner, Hist. 0/ Heretics, x. ^j). Dr. Lardner, touching
Marcion's omissions in this chap, in, of the Epistle to the Ga-
latians, says: " He omitted vers. 6, 7, 8, in order to get rid of the
mention of Abraham, and of the gospel having been preached to
him." This he said after St. Jerome, andthen adds : " He ought
also to have omitted part of ver. 9, <t\jv t<P TriffTw 'Afipaafi, which
seems to have been the case, according to T.'s manner of stating
the argument against him " (Works, History 0/ Heretics, x. 43).

15 Exemplum.
'^Suspicit

17 Gal. iii. 15. This, of course, is consistent in St. Paul's argu-
ment. Marcion, however, by erasing all the intervening verses,
and affixing the phrase " after the manner 0/ men'" to the plain
assertion of Gal. iv. 3, reduces the whole statement to an absur-
dity.

iSGal. iii. x6.

19 Erubescat.

20 So, instead of pursuing the contents of chap, iii., he proceeds
to such of chap. iv. as Marcion reser\'ed.

-' Gal. iv. 4.


436


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book V,


very succession of times which constitutes an
age; who also ordained, as " signs " of time,
suns and moons and constellations and stars;
who furthermore both predetermined and pre-
dicted that the revelation of His Son should
be postponed to the end of the times.' " It
shall come to pass in the last days, that the
mountain (of the house) of the Lord shall be
manifested ";=" "and in the last days I will
pour out of my Spirit upon all flesh" ^ as Joel
says. It was characteristic of Him (only) ^
to wait patiently for the fulness of time, to
whom belonged the end of time no less than
the beginning. But as for that idle god, who
has neither any work nor any prophecy, nor
accordingly any time, to show for himself,
what has he ever done to bring about the ful-
ness of time, or to wait patiently its comple-
tion ? If nothing, what an impotent state to
have to wait for the Creator's time, in servil-
ity to the Creator! But for what end did He
send His Son ? "To redeem them that were
under the law,"^ in other words, to "make
the crooked ways straight, and the rough
places smooth," as Isaiah says*^ — in order
that old things might pass away, and a new
course begin, even " the new law out of Zion,
and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem," ^
and "that we might receive the adoption of
sons,"^ that is, the Gentiles, who once were
not sons. For He is to be " the light of the
Gentiles," and "in His name shall the Gen-
tiles trust. "9 That we may have, therefore,
the assurance that we are the children of
God, " He hath sent forth His Spirit into our
hearts, crying, Abba, Father."'" For "in
the last days," saith He," I will pour out of
my Spirit upon all flesh. "" Now, from whom
comes this grace, but from Him who pro-
claimed the promise thereof? Who is (our)
Father, but He who is also our Maker?
Therefore, after such affluence (of grace),
they should not have returned " to weak and
beggarly elements." " By the Romans, how-
ever, the rudiments of learning are wont to
be called eletnents. He did not therefore
seek, by any depreciation of the mundane
elements, to turn them away from their god,
although, when he said just before, " How-
beit, then, ye serve them which by nature are


' In extremitatem temporum.
2lsa. ii. 2 (Sept).

3 Joel iii. a8, as quoted by St, Peter, Acts ii. 17,

4 Ipsius.

5 Gal. iv. 5.

6 Isa. xl. 4.

7 Isa ii. 3.

8 Gal. iv. 5.

9 Isa. xlii, 4, 6.
10 Gal. iv. 6.

"Joel iii. 38, as given in Acts ii, 17.
"Gal. iv. 9.


no gods," '3 he censured the error of that
physical or natural superstition which holds
the elements to be god ; but at the God of
those elements he aimed not in this censure.'*
He tells us himself clearly enough what he
means by ^^ elements," even the rudiments of
the law: " Ye observe days, and months, and
times, and years" '^ — the sabbaths, I suppose,
and " the preparations," '^ and the fasts, and
the "high days."'^ For the cessation of
even these, no less than of circumcision, was
appointed by the Creator's decrees, who had
said by Isaiah, "Your new moons, and your
sabbaths, and your high days I cannot bear;
your fasting, and feasts, and ceremonies my
soul hateth; " '^ also by Amos, " I hate, I de-
spise your feast-days, and I will not smell in
your solemn assemblies;" '» and again by
Hosea, " I will cause to cease all her mirth,
and her feast-days, and her sabbaths, and her
new moons, and all her solemn assemblies." =^
The institutions which He set up Himself,
you ask, did He then destroy ? Yes, rather
than any other. Or if another destroyed
them, he only helped on the purpose of the
Creator, by removing what even He had con-
demned. But this is not the place to discuss
the question why the Creator abolished His
own laws. It is enough for us to have proved
that He intended such an abolition, that so it
may be affirmed that the apostle determined
nothing to the prejudice of the Creator, since
the abolition itself proceeds from the Creator.
But as, in the case of thieves, something of the
stolen goods is apt to drop by the way, as a
clue to their detection; so, as it seems to me,
it has happened to Marcion; the last mention
of Abraham's name he has left untouched (in
the epistle), although no passage required his
erasure more than this, even in his partial
alteration of the text.=" " For (it is written)
that Abraham had two sons, the one by a
bond maid, the other by a free woman; but
he who was of the bond maid was born after
the flesh, but he of the free woman was by
promise: which things are allegorized"''*
(that is to say, they presaged something be-
sides the literal history)) " for these are the


»3Gal. iy. 8.

'4 Nee sic taxans.

'S Gal. iv. ID.

'^Coenas puras: probably the irapavKevai mentioned in John
xix. 31.

'7 Sec also John xix. 31.

»8 Isa. i. 13, 14.

'9 Amos V. 21.

=«Hos. ii. II.

=• In other words, Marcion has indeed tampered with the pass-
age, omitting some things ; but (strange to say) he has left un-
touched the statement which, from his point of view, most re-
quired suppression.

" Allegorica: on the importance of rendering aAAi7yopovMe''«i by
this participle rather than by the noun " an allegory,' as in A. V.,
see Bp. Marsh's Lectures on the Interpretation o/thc Bible, pp.
351-354-


CHAP. IV.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


437


two covenants," or the two exhibitions (of the
divine plans),' as we have found the word in-
terpreted," the one from the Mount Sinai," in
relation to the synagogue of the Jews, accord-
ing to the law, " which gendereth to bond-
age"— "the other gendereth" (to liberty,
being raised) above all principality, and
power, and dominion, and every name that is
named, not only in this world, but in that
which is to come, "which is the mother of us
all," in which we have the promise of
(Christ's) holy church; by reason of which
he adds in conclusion: " So then, brethren,
we are not children of the bond woman, but
of the free."^ In this passage he has un-
doubtedly shown that Christianity had a noble
birth, being sprung, as the mystery of the
allegory indicates, from that son of Abraham
who was born of the free woman; whereas
from the son of the bond maid came the
legal bondage of Judaism. Both dispensa-
tions, therefore, emanate from that same God
by whom, 3 as we have found, they were both
sketched out beforehand. When he speaks
of " the liberty wherewith Christ hath made
us free," "^ does not the very phrase indicate
that He is the Liberator who was once the
Master ? For Galba himself never liberated
slaves which were not his own, even when
about to restore free men to their liberty. ^
By Him, therefore, will liberty be bestowed,
at whose command lay the enslaving power
of the law. And very properly. It was not
meet that those w^ho had received liberty
should be " entangled again with the yoke of
bondage " ^ — that is, of the law; now that the
Psalm had its prophecy accomplished: "Let
us break their bands asunder, and cast away
their cords from us, since the rulers have
gathered themselves together against the
Lord and against His Christ." ^ All those,
therefore, who had been delivered from the
yoke of slavery he would earnestly have to
obliterate the very mark of slavery — even cir-
cumcision, on the authority of the prophet's
prediction. He remembered how that Jere-
miah had said, " Circumcise the foreskins of
your heart; "^ as Moses likewise had en-
joined, " Circumcise your hard hearts" 9— not


1 Ostensiones : revelationes perhaps.

2 Gal. iv. 21-26, 31.
SApud quem.

4 Gal. V. I.

5 Tertullian, in his terse style, takes the case of the emperor, as
the highest potentate, who, if any, might make free with his
power. He seizes the moment when Galba was saluted emperor
on Nero's death, and was the means of delivering so many out of
the hands of the tyrant, in order to sharpen the point of his illus-
tration.

6Gal. V. I.
7 Ps. ii. 3, 2
8Jer. iv. 4.
9Deut. X. 16.


the literal flesh. If, now, he were for exclud-
ing circumcision, as the messenger of a new
god, why does he say that " in Christ neither
circumcisoin availeth anything, nor uncircum-
cision ?" '° For it was his duty to prefer the
rival principle of that which he was abolishing,
if he had a mission from the god who was the
enemy of circumcision. Furthermore, since
both circumcision and uncircumcision were
attributed to the same Deity, both lost their
power" in Christ, by reason of the excellency
of faith — of that faith concerning which it
had been written, "And in His name shall
the Gentiles trust ? " "—of that faith "which,"
he says " worketh by love." '^ By this say-
ing he also shows that the Creator is the
source of that grace. For whether he speaks
of the love which is due to God, or that which
is due to one's neighbor — in either case, the
Creator's grace is meant: for it is He who
enjoins the first in these words, "Thou shalt
love God with all thine heart, and with all
thy soul, and with all thy strength; " '-» and
also the second in another passage: "Thou
shalt love thy neighbour as thyself." '^ " But
he that troubleth you shall have to bear
judgment." '^ From what God ? From (Mar-
cion's) most excellent god ? But he does not
execute Judgment. From the Creator ? But,
neither will He condemn the maintainer o^
circumcision. Now, if none other but the
Creator shall be found to execute judgment,
it follows that only He, who has determined
on the cessation of the law, shall be able to
condemn the defenders of the law; and what,
if he also affirms the law in that portion of it
where it ought (to be permanent)? "For,"
says he, "all the law is fulfilled in you by
this: ' Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thy-
self.' " '7 If, indeed, he will have it that by
the words ^'' it is fulfilled'' it is implied that
the law no longer has to be fulfilled, then of
course he does not mean that I should any
more love my neighbour as myself, since this
precept must have ceased together with the
law. But no ! we must evermore continue to
observe this commandment. The Creator's
law, therefore, has received the approval of
the rival god, who has, in fact, bestowed upon
it not the sentence of a summary dismissal,'^
but the favour of a compendious acceptance; ''


10 Gal. V. 6.

11 Utraque vacabat.
»2 Isa. xlii. 4.

13 Gal. V. 6.
MDeut. vi. 5.
»S Lev. xix. 18.

16 Gal. V. lo.

17 Gal. V. 14.

18 Dispendium.

19 Compendium : the terseness of the original cannot be pre-
served in the translation.


43S


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[iJOOK V.


the gist of it all being concentrated in this one
precept ! But this condensation of the law
is, in fact, only possible to Him who is the
Author of it. When, therefore, he says,
*' Bear ye one another's burdens, and so ful-
fill the law of Christ,"* since this cannot
be accomplished except a man love his neigh-
bour as himself, it is evident that the precept,
"Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself"
(which, in fact, underlies the injunction,
"Bear ye one another's burdens"), is really
" the law of Christ," though literally the law
of the Creator. Christ, therefore, is the
Creator's Christ, as Christ's law is the Crea-
tor's law. " Be not deceived,' God is not
mocked." 3 But Marcion's god can be
mocked; for he knows not how to be angry,
or how to take vengeance. " For whatsoever
a man soweth, that shall he also reap."-* It
is then the God of recompense and judgment
who threatens 5 this. " Let us not be weary
in well-doing;"*^ and "as we have opportu-
nity, let us do good." 7 Deny now that the
Creator has given a commandment to do good,
and then a diversity of precept may argue a
difference of gods. If, however. He also an-
nounces recompense, then from the same God
must come the harvest both of death ^ and
of life. But "in due time we shall reap;"^
because in Ecclesiastes it is said, " For every-
thing there will be a time." '° Moreover,
" the world is crucified unto me," who am a
servant of the Creator — "the world," (I say,)
but not the God who made the world — " and
I unto the world," " not unto the God who
made the world. The worlds in the apostle's
sense, here means life and conversation ac-
cording to worldly principles; it is in renounc-
ing these that we and they are mutually cru-
cified and mutually slain. He calls them
" persecutors of Christ." " But when he
adds, that " he bare in his body the scars ^^
of Christ" — since scars, of course, are acci-
dents of body '* — he therefore expressed the
truth, that the flesh of Christ is not putative,
but real and substantial, 's the scars of which
he represents as borne upon his body.


I Gal. vi. 2.

a Erratis: literally, " yc are deceived."

3 Gal. vi. 7.

4 Gal. vi. 7.

5 Intentat.

6 Gal. vi. 9.

7 Gal. vi. 10.

8 Corruptionis.

9 Gal. VI. g.
*oEccles. iii. 17.
" Gal, vi. 14.

"See Gal. vi. 17, kottovs /xoi \t.-i\ht\<i Trapexerto, "let no one
harass me."

'3 Stigmata: the scars not of circumcision, but of wounds suf-
fered for His sake (Conybeare and Howson).

«4 Corporalia.

isSolidam.

»6 Prastructio.


CHAP. V. THE FIRST EPISTLE TO THE CORINTH-
IANS. THE PAULINE SALUTATION OF GRACE
AND PEACE SHOWN TO BE ANTI-MARCIONITE.
THE CROSS OF CHRIST PURPOSED BY THE CRE-
ATOR. MARCION ONLY PERPETUATES THE
OFFENCE AND FOOLISHNESS OF CHRIST's
CROSS BY HIS IMPIOUS SEVERANCE OF THE
GOSPEL FROM THE CREATOR. ANALOGIES
BETWEEN THE LAW AND THE GOSPEL IN THE
MATTER OF WEAK THINGS, AND FOOLISH
THINGS AND BASE THINGS.

My preliminary remarks '^ on the preceding
epistle called me away from treating of its
superscription, '7 for I was sure that another
opportunity would occur for considering the
matter, it being of constant recurrence, and
in the same form too, in every epistle. The
point, then, is, that it is not (the usual) health
which the apostle prescribes for those to
whom he writes, but " grace and peace." '* I
do not ask, indeed, what a destroyer of Juda-
ism has to do with a formula which the Jews
still use. For to this day they salute each
other '9 with the greeting of "peace," and
formerly in their Scriptures they did the
same. But I understand him by his prac-
tice^ plainly enough to have corroborated the
declaration of the Creator: " How beautiful
are the feet of them that bring glad tidings of
good, who preach the gospel of peace ! " ="'
For the herald of good^ that is, of God's
"grace" was well aware that along with it
" peace " also was to be proclaimed." Now,
when he announces these blessings as " from
God the Father and the Lord Jesus," '^ he
uses titles that are common to both, and which
are also adapted to the mystery of our faith ;=♦
and I suppose it to be impossible accurately
to determine what God is declared to be the
Father and the Lord Jesus, unless (we con-
sider) which of their accruing attributes are
more suited to them severally. 's First, then,
I assert that none other than the Creator and
Sustainer of both man and the universe can
be acknowledged as Father afui Lord; next,
that to the Father also the title of Lord ac-
crues by reason of His power, and that the
Son too receives the same through the Father;
then that "grace and peace" are not only
His who had them published, but His likewise
to whom offence had been given. For neither
does grace exist, except after offence; nor
peace, except after war. Now, both the


'7 Titulo.

'8 I Cor. i. 3.

>9 Appellant.

» Officio.

2» Isa. Hi. 7.

" Pacem quam praeferendam.

as I Cor. i. 3.

24Competentibus nostroquoque sacramento.

»5 Nisi ex accedentibus cui magis competant.


CHAP, v.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


439


people (of Israel) by their transgression of
His laws,' and the whole race of mankind by
their neglect of natural duty,' had both sinned
and rebelled against the Creator. Marcion's
god, however, could not have been offended,
both because he was unknown to everybody,
and because he is incapable of being irritated.
What grace ^ therefore, can be had of a god
who has not been offended ? What peace from
one who has never experienced rebellion ?
" The cross of Christ," he says, " is to them
that perish foolishness; but unto such as shall
obtain salvation, it is the power of God and
the wisdom of God."^ And then, that we
may known from whence this comes, he adds:
" For it is written, ' I will destroy the wisdom
of the wise, and will bring to nothing the un-
derstanding of the prudent.' "* Now, since
these are the Creator's words, and since what
pertains to the doctrine ^ of the cross he ac-
counts as foolishness, therefore both the cross,
and also Christ by reason of the cross, will
appertain to the Creator, by whom were pre-
dicted the incidents of the cross. But if^
the Creator, as an enemy, took away their
wisdom in order that the cross of Christ, con-
sidered as his adversary, should be accounted
foolishness, how by any possibility can the
Creator have foretold anything about the
cross of a Christ who is not His own, and of
whom He knew nothing, when He published
the prediction ? But, again, how happens it,
that in the system of a Lord^ who is so very
good, and so profuse in mercy, some carry
off salvation, when they believe the cross to
be the wisdom and power of God, whilst others
incur perdition, to whom the cross of Christ
is accounted folly; — (how happens it, I re-
peat,) unless it is in the Creator's dispensa-
tion to have punished both the people of Is-
rael and the human race, for some great of-
fence committed against Him, with the loss
of wisdom and prudence ? What follows will
confirm this suggestion, when he asks,
" Hath not God infatuated the wisdom of this
world ? " ^ and when he adds the reason why:
" For after that, in the wisdom of God, the
world by wisdom knew not God, it pleased
God 9 by the foolishness of preaching to save
them that believe." " But first a word about
the expression '^ the world;'' because in this
passage particularly," the heretics expend a


1 Disciplinse.

2 Per naturae dissimulationem. This Fr. Junius explains by tJji/
</)u<rea>? a</)o<n'<o(7H', in the sense of " or/>/«a/ «« " (a^oo-iouo-flai
seems to point to sin requiring expiation).

3 I Cor. i. i8.

4 I Cor. i. 19, from Isa. xxix. 14.

5 Causam.

6 Aut si: introducing a Marcionite cavil.

7 Apud dominum.

8 I Cor. i. 20.

9 Boni duxit Deas, evSoKijo-ef 6 0e6s.

oi Cor. i. 21. II Hie vel maxime.


great deal of their subtlety in showing that
by world is meant the lord of the world. We,
however, understand the term to apply to any
person that is in the world, by a simple idiom
of human language, which often substitutes
that which contains for that which is con-
tained. *' The circus shouted," " The forum
spoke," and "The basilica murmured," are
well-known expressions, meaning that the
people in these places did so. Since then the
man, not the god,. of the world " in his wis-
dom knew not God, whom indeed he ought
to have known (both the Jew by his knowl-
edge of the Scriptures, and all the human
race by their knowledge of God's works),
therefore that God, who was not acknowl-
edged in His wisdom, resolved to smite
men's knowledge with His foolishness, by
saving all those who believe in the folly of
the preached cross. *' Because the Jews re-
quire signs," who ought to have already made
up their minds about God, "and the Greeks
seek after wisdom,"'^ who rely upon their own
wisdom, and not upon God's. If, however, it
was a new god that was being preached, what
sin had the Jews committed, in seeking after
signs to believe; or the Greeks, when they
hunted after a wisdom which they would prefer
to accept ? Thus the very retribution which
overtook both Jews and Greeks proves that
God is both a jealous God and a Judge, inas-
much as He infatuated the world's wisdom by
an angry ^ and a judicial retribution. Since,
then, the causes 's are in the hands of Him
who gave us the Scriptures which we use, it
follows that the apostle, when treating of the
Creator, (as Him whom both Jew and Gentile
as yet have) not known, means undoubtedly
to teach us, that the God who is to become
known (in Christ) is the Creator. The very
" stumbling-block " which he declares Christ
to be" to the Jews," '^ points unmistakeably '^
to the Creator's prophecy respecting Him,
when by Isaiah He says: "Behold I lay in
Sion a stone of stumbling and a rock of of-
fence."'^ This rock or stone is Christ. '^
This stumbling-stone Marcion retains still.'"


12 That is, " man who lives in the world, not God who made the
world."

13 I Cor. i. 22.
M^^mula.

15 Causae : the reasons of His retributive providence.

16 I Cor. i. 23.

17 Consi^nat.

18 Isa. viii. 14.
10 Isa. .xxviii. 16

20 " Etiam Marcion servat." These words cannot mean, as they
have been translated, that " Marcion even retains these words " of
prophecy ; for whenever Marcion fell in with any traces of this
prophecy of Christ, he seems to have expunged them. In Luke 11.
34 holy Simeon referred to it, but Marcion rejected this chapter of
the evangelist ; and although he admitted much of chap, xx., it is
remarkable that he erased the ten verses thereof from the end of
the eighth to the end of the eighteenth. Now in vers. 17, 18, Mar-
cion found the prophecy again referred to. See Epiphanius, Adv.
Ifa-res. xlii. Schol. 55,


440


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book v.


Now, what is that " foolishness of God which
is wiser than men," but the cross and death
of Christ? What is that ''weakness of God
which is stronger than men,"' but the na-
tivity and incarnation =• of God ? If, how-
ever, Christ was not born of the Virgin, was
not constituted of human flesh, and thereby
really suffered neither death nor the cross,
there was nothing in Him either of foolish-
ness or weakness; nor is it any longer true,
that "God hath chosen the foolish things of
the world to confound the wise;" nor, again,
hath " God chosen the weak things of the
world to confound the mighty;" nor "the
.base things" and the least things "in the
world, and things which are despised, which
are even as nothing" (that is, things which
really 3 are not), "to bring to nothing things
which are" (that is, which really are)/ For
nothing in the dispensation of God is found
to be mean, and ignoble, and contemptible.
Such only occurs in man's arrangement.
The very Old Testament of the Creator s it-
self, it is possible, no doubt, to charge with
foolishness, and weakness, and dishonour,
and meanness, and contempt. What is more
foolish and more weak than God's require-
ment of bloody sacrifices and of savoury holo-
causts ? What is weaker than the cleansing
of vessels and of beds?^ What more dis-
honourable than the discoloration of the red-
dening skii>? 7 What so mean as the statute
of retaliation ? What so contemptible as the
exception in meats and drinks ? The whole
of the Old Testament, the heretic, to the best
of my belief, holds in derision. For God has
chosen the foolish things of the world to con-
found its wisdom. Marcion's god has no such
discipline, because he does not take after ^
(the Creator) in the process of confusing op-
posites by their opposites, so that "no flesh
shall glory; but, as it is written. He that glori-
eth, let him glory in the Lord."' In what
Lord? Surely in Him who gave this pre-
cept.'° Unless, forsooth, the Creator en-
joined us to glory in the god of Marcion '


' I Cor. i. 25.

2 Caro.

3 Vere.

*i Cor. i. 27,

5 Apud Creatorem etiam Vetera: (vetera, i.e.) " veteris testa-
menti institutiones " (Oehler).

6 Lex. xv.pnssitfi.

7 Lev. xiii. 2-6.
^i'Emulatur.

9 I Cor. i. 29, 31.
«o By Jeremiah, chap. ix. 23, 24.
" I Cor. ii. 6, 7.
"Infatuavit.
n laa. xlii. 6.
M Isa. xlv. 3 (Septuagint)
15 Nedum.
i^Sacramenta.
'7 Palam decurrentia.
^^ Delitescebat.
*9 I Cor. ii. 7.
=°Gen. i. 14, inexactly quoted.


CHAP. VI. — THE DIVINE WAY OF WISDOM, AND
GREATNESS, AND MIGHT. GOD's HIDING OF
HIMSELF, AND SUBSEQUENT REVELATION.
TO marcion's god SUCH A CONCEALMENT
AND MANIFESTATION IMPOSSIBLE. GOD's
PREDESTINATION. NO SUCH PRIOR SYSTEM
OF INTENTION POSSIBLE TO A GOD PREVIOUSLY
UNKNOWN AS WAS MARCION 's. THE POWERS
OF THE WORLD WHICH CRUCIFIED CHRIST.
ST. PAUL, AS A WISE MASTER-BUILDER, ASSO-
CIATED WITH PROPHECY. SUNDRY INJUNC-
TIONS OF THE APOSTLE PARALLEL WITH THE
TEACHING OF THE OLD TESTAMENT.

By all these statements, therefore, does he
show us what God he means, when he says,
"We speak the wisdom of God among them
that are perfect."" It is that God who has
confounded the wisdom of the wise, who has
brought to nought the understanding of the
prudent, who has reduced to folly " the
world's wisdom, by choosing its foolish things,
and disposing them to the attainment of sal-
vation. This wisdom, he says, once lay hid-
den in things that were foolish, weak, and
lacking in honour; once also was latent under
figures, allegories, and enigmatical types; but
it was afterwards to be revealed in Christ, who
was set " as a light to the Gentiles," '^ by the
Creator who promised through the mouth of
Isaiah that He would discover "the hidden
treasures, which eye had not seen."^* Now,
that that god should have ever hidden any-
thing who had never made a covert wherein
to practise concealment, is in itself a wholly
incredible idea. If he existed, concealment
of himself was out of the question — to say
nothing's of any of his religious ordinances.'^
The Creator, on the contrary, was as well
known in Himself as His ordinances were.
These, we know, were publicly instituted '^ in
Israel; but they lay overshadowed with latent
meanings, in which the wisdom of God was
concealed,'^ to be brought to light by and by
amongst " the perfect," when the time should
come, but " pre-ordained in the counsels of
God before the ages."'' But whose ages, if
not the Creator's? For because ages consist
of times, and times are made up of days, and
months, and years; since also days, and
months, and years are measured by suns, and
moons, and stars, which He ordained for this
purpose (for "they shall be," says He, "for
signs of the months and the years "),*" it
clearly follows that the ages belong to the
Creator, and that nothing of what was fore-
ordained before the ages can be said to be the
property of any other being than Him who
claims the ages also as His own. Else let Mar-
cion show that the ages belong to his god.
He must then also claim the world itself for


CHAP. VI.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


441


him; for it is in it that the ages are reckoned,
the vessel as it were ' of the times, as well as
the signs thereof, or their order. But he has
no such demonstration to show us. I go
back therefore to the point, and ask him this
question: Why did (his god) fore-ordain our
glory before the ages of the Creator ? I could
understand his having predetermined it before
the ages, if he had revealed, it at the com-
mencement of time.^ But when he does this
almost at the very expiration of all the ages ^
of the Creator, his predestination before the
ages, and not rather within the ages, was in
vain, because he did not mean to make any
revelation of his purpose until the ages had
almost run out their course. For it is wholly
inconsistent in him to be so forward in plan-
ning purposes, who is so backward in reveal-
ing them. In the Creator, however, the two
courses were perfectly compatible — both the
predestination before the ages and the revela-
tion at the end thereof, because that which
He both fore-ordained and revealed He also
in the intermediate space of time announced
by the pre-ministration of figures, and sym-
bols, and allegories. But because (the apos-
tle) subjoins, on the subject of our glory, that
*' none of the princes of this world knew it,
" for had they known it they would not have
crucified the Lord of glory," ^ the heretic
argues that the princes of this world crucified
the Lord (that is, the Christ of the rival, god)
in order that this blow might even recoil s on
the Creator Himself. Any one, however,
who has seen from what we have already said
how our glory must be regarded as issuing
from the Creator, will already have come to
the conclusion that, inasmuch as the Creator
settled it in His own secret purpose, it properly
enough was unknown to all the princes ^ and
powers of the Creator, on the principle that
servants are not permitted to know their mas-
ters' plans, much less the fallen angels and
the leader of transgression himself, the devil;
for I should contend that these^ on account
of their fall, were greater strangers still to
any knowledge of the Creator's dispensations.
But it is no longer open to me^ even to in-
terpret the princes and powers of this world
as the Creator's, since the apostle imputes
ignorance to thein, whereas even the devil ac-
cording to our Gospel recognised Jesus in the
temptation,^ and, according to the record
which is common to both (Marcionites and


I Quodammodo.

2lntroductione saeculi.

3 Paene jam totis saeculis prodactis.

4 1 Cor. ii. 8.

5 Ut et hoc recidat

^ Virtutibus.

7 Sed jam nee mihi competit.

8 Matt. iv. i-ii.


ourselves) the evil spirit knew that Jesus was
the Holy One of God, and that Jesus was
His name, and that He was come to destroy
them,' The parable also of the strong man
armed, whom a stronger than he overcame
and seized his goods, is admitted by Marcion
to have reference to the Creator: '° therefore
the Creator could not have been ignorant any
longer of the God of glory, since He is over-
come by him;" nor could He have crucified
him whom He was unable to cope with. The
inevitable inference, therefore, as it seems to
me, is that we must believe that the princes
and powers of the Creator did knowingly cru-
cify the God of glory in His Christ, with that
desperation and excessive malice with which
the most abandoned slaves do not even hesi-
tate to slay their masters. For it is written
in my Gospel" that "Satan entered into
Judas." '3 According to Marcion, however,
the apostle in the passage under considera-
tion ^"^ does not allow the imputation of igno-
rance, with respect to the Lord of glory, to
the powers of the Creator; because, indeed,
he will have it that these are not meant by
"the princes of this world." But (the apos-
tle) evidently "5 did not speak of spiritual
princes; so that he meant secular ones, those
of the princely people, (chief in the divine dis-
pensation, although) not, of course, amongst
the nations of the world, and their rulers, and
king Herod, and even Pilate, and, as repre-
sented by him,'^ that power of Rome which
was the greatest in the world, and then pre-
sided over by him. Thus the arguments of
the other side are pulled down, and our own
proofs are thereby built up. But you still
maintain that our glory comes from your god,
with whom it also lay in secret. Then why
does your god employ the self-same Scrip-
ture '7 which the apostle also relies on ? What
has your god to do at all with the sayings of
the prophets? "Who hath discovered the
mind of the Lord, or who hath been His
counsellor?"*^ So says Isaiah. What has
he also to do with illustrations from our God ?
For when (the apostle) calls himself " a wise
master-builder," '» we find that the Creator by
Isaiah designates the teacher who sketches =*
out the divine discipline by the same title, " I
will take away from Judah the cufming artifi-


9 Luke iv. 34.

10 In Creatoris accipitur apud Marcionem.
" Considered, in the hypothesis, as Marcion's god,

12 Apud me,

13 Luke xxii. 3,
M I Cor. ii, 8,

15 Videtur.

16 Et quo.
i7lnstrumento,

18 Isa. xl. 13.

19 I Cor. iii, 10,
2" Depalatorem.


442


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[hook v.


f^/-," * etc. And was it not Paul himself who
was there foretold, destined **to be taken
away from Judah " — that is, from Judaism —
for the erection of Christianity, in order '*to
lay that only foundation, which is Christ ? " "
Of this work the Creator also by the same
prophet says, "Behold, I lay in Sion for a
foundation a precious stone and honourable;
and he that resteth thereon shall not be con-
founded." 3 Unless it be, that God professed
Himself to be the builder up of an earthly
work, that so He might not give any sign of
His Christ, as destined to be the foundation
of such as believe in Him, upon which every
man should build at will the superstructure of
either sound or worthless doctrine; forasmuch
as it is the Creator's function, when a man's
work shall be tried by fire, (or) when a re-
ward shall be recompensed to him by fire;
because it is by fire that the test is applied to
the building which you erect upon the founda-
tion which is laid by Him, that is, the founda-
tion of His Christ.* " Know ye not that ye
are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of
God dwelleth in you ? " s Now, since man is
the property, and the work, and the image
and likeness of the Creator, having his flesh
formed by Him of the ground, and his soul
of His afflatus^ it follows that Marcion's god
wholly dwells in a temple which belongs to
another, if so be we are not the Creator's
temple. But " if any man defile the temple
of God, he shall be himself destroyed"^ — of
course, by the God of the temple. ' If you
threaten an avenger, you threaten us with the
Creator. "Ye must become fools, that ye
may be wise. "^ Wherefore? " Because the
wisdom of this world is foolishness with
God."' With what God? Even if the an-
cient Scriptures have contributed nothing in
support of our view thus far,'° an excellent
testimony turns up in what (the apostle) here
adjoins: " For it is written, He taketh the
wise in their own craftiness; and again, The
Lord knoweth the thoughts of the wise, that


'So the A. V. of I.sa. iii. 3; but the Septuagint and St. Paul
use the self-same term, ao^o% ap\iriKT<i>v.

2 I Cor. iii. 11.

3 Isa. xxviii. 16.

4 We add the original of this sentence: '• Nisi si structorem se
terreni operis Deus profitebatur, ut non de suoChristosignificaret,
qui futurus esset fundamentum credentinm in eum, super quod
prout quisque superstruxerit, dignam scilicet vel indignam doc-
trinam si opus ejus per ignem probabitur, si merces illi per ignem
rependetur, creatoris est, quia per ignem judicatur vestra super-
sedificatio, utique sui fundamenti, id est sui Christi." TertuUian is
arguing upon an hypothesis suggested by Marcion's withdrawal of
/lis Christ from everything " terrene." Such a process as is de-
scribed by St. Paul in this passage, i Cor. i. 12-15, must be left to
the Creator and Hts Christ.

5 1 Cor. iii. 16.

6 The text has vitiabitur, " shall be defiled:'

7 I Cor. iii. 17.

8 I Cor. iii. 18.

9 I Cor. iii. 19.

'°The older reading, '■'■ adhuc sensum pristina prseiudicave-
runt," we have preferred to Oehler's " ad hunc sensum,' etc.


they are vain." " For in general we may
conclude for certain that he could not possi-
bly have cited the authority of that God whom
he was bound to destroy, since he would not
teach for Him." "Therefore," says he,
" let no man glory in man; " '^ an injunction
which is in accordance with the teaching of
the Creator, "wretched is the man that trust-
eth in man;"'4 ^gain, "It is better to trust
in the Lord than to confide in man;"'s and
the same thing is said about glorying (in
princes).'*

CHAP. VII. — ST. Paul's phraseology often

SUGGESTED BY THE JEWISH SCRIPTURES.

• CHRIST OUR PASSOVER A PHRASE WHICH

INTRODUCES US TO THE VERY HEART OF
THE ANCIENT DISPENSATION. CHRIST's

TRUE CORPOREITY. MARRIED AND UNMAR-
RIED STATES. MEANING OF THE TIME IS
SHORT. IN HIS EXHORTATIONS AND DOC-
TRINE, THE APOSTLE WHOLLY TEACHES AC-
CORDING TO THE MIND AND PURPOSES OF THE
GOD OF THE OLD TESTAMENT. PROHIBITION
OF MEATS AND DRINKS WITHDRAWN BY THE
CREATOR.

"And the hidden things of darkness He
will .Himself bring to light," '^ even by
Christ; for He has promised Christ to be a
Light, '^ and Himself He has declared to be a
lamp, "searching the hearts and reins."''
FrornjHim also shall " praise be had by every
man,"^ from whom proceeds, as from a
judge, the opposite also of praise. But here,
at least, you say he interprets the world to
be the God thereof, when he says: "We are
made a spectacle unto the world, and to an-
gels, and to men."" For if by world he had
meant the people thereof, he would not have
after^vards specially mentioned";;/^//." To
prevent, however, your using such an argu-
ment as this, the Holy Ghost has providenti-
ally explained the meaning of the passage
thus: "We are made a spectacle to the
world," i.e. " both to <z«^<'/f," who minister
therein, "and to ;«^«," who are the objects
of their ministration. =^ Of course, '^ a man of
the noble courage of our apostle (to say noth-
ing of the Holy Ghost) was afraid, when writ-
ing to the children whom he had begotten in


*' I Cor. iii. lo, 20 ; Job v. 13 ; Ps. xciv. 11.

'= Si non illi doceret.

'3 1 Cor. iii. 21.

'4 Jer. xvii. 5.

»5 Ps. cxviii, 8.

>6 Ps. cxviii. 9.

«7 I Cor. iv, s.

«« Isa. xlii. 6.

19 Ps. vii. 9.

20 I Cor. iv. 5.
" I Cor. iv. 9,

9« Our author's version is no doubt right. The Greek does not
admit the co-ordinate, triple conjunction of the A.V.: ©eaTpoi/
iyei'Tj^Tj^ec rio KoiTixm — koX ayyrfAoij Ka'i avOpiitiroit.

23 Ximirum : introducing a strong ironical sentence against
Marcion's conceit.


CHAr. VII.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION


443


the gospel, to speak freely of the God of the
world; for against Him he could not possibly
seem to have a word to say, except only in a
straightforward manner ! * I quite admit,
that, according to the Creator's law,' the man
was an offender " who had his father's wife." ^
He followed, no doubt,* the phnciples of
natural and public law. When, however, he
condemns the man "to be delivered unto
Satan," ^ he becomes the herald of an aveng-
ing God. It does not matter^ that he also
said, " For the destruction of the flesh, that
the spirit may be saved in the day of the
Lord,"/ since both in the destruction of the
flesh and in the saving of the spirit there is,
on His part, judicial process; and when he
bade " the wicked person be put away from
the midst of them,"^ he only mentioned
what is a very frequently recurring sentence
of the Creator. " Purge out the old leaven,
that ye may be a new lump, as ye are unleav-
ened."' The unleavened bread was there-
fore, in the Creator's ordinance, a figure of
us (Christians). " For even Christ our pass-
over is sacrificed for us."'° But why is
Christ our passover, if the passover be not
a type of Christ, in the similitude of the blood
which saves, and of the Lamb, which is
Christ ? " Why does (the apostle) clothe us
and Christ with symbols of the Creator's sol-
emn rites, unless they had relation to our-
selves ? When, again, he warns us against
fornication, he reveals the resurrection of the
flesh. "The body," says he, "is not for
fornication, but for the Lord; and the Lord
for the body,"" just as the temple is for
God, and God for the temple. A temple will
therefore pass away "^ with its god, and its god
with the temple. You see, then, how that
" He who raised up the Lord will also raise
us up." ^* In the body will He raise us, be-
cause the body is for the Lord, and the Lord
for the body. And suitably does he add the
question: " Know ye not that your bodies are
the members of Christ ?"'5 What has the
heretic to say? That these members of
Christ will not rise again, for they are no
longer our own? "For," he says, "ye are


bought with a price.


A price ! surely


1 Nisi exserte.

2 Lev. xviii. 8.

3 I Cor. V. I.

4 Secutus sit.

5 I Cor. V. 5,

6 Viderit.

7 I Cor. V. 5.

8 I Cor. V. 13.

9 I Cor. V. 7.
10 T Cor. V. 7.
" Ex. xii.

I- I Cor. vi. 13.

13 Peribit.

14 I Cor. vi. 14.

15 1 Cor. vi. 15.
^6 I Cor. vi. 20.


none at all was paid, since Christ was a phan-
tom, nor had He any corporeal substance
which He could pay for our bodies ! But, in
truth, Christ had wherewithal to redeem us;
and since He has redeemed, at a great price,
these bodies of ours, against which fornica-
tion must not be committed (because they
are now members of Christ, and not our own),
surely He will secure, on His own account,
the safety of those whom He made His own
at so much cost ! Now, how shall we glorify,
how shall we exalt, God in our body,''' which
is doomed to perish ? We must now en-
counter the subject of marriage, which Mar-
cion, more continent '^ than the apostle, pro-
hibits. For the apostle, although preferring
the grace of continence,'' yet permits the con-
traction of marriage and the enjoyment of
it,^° and advises the continuance therein
rather than the dissolution thereof." Christ
plainly forbids divorce, Moses unquestionably
permits it.^'' Now, when Marcion wholly pro-
hibits all carnal intercourse to the faithful (for
we will say nothing ^^ about his catechumens),
and when he prescribes repudiation of all en-
gagements before marriage, whose teaching
does he follow, that of Moses or of Christ ?
Even Christ,^* however, when He here com-
mands " the wife not to depart from her hus-
band, or if she depart, to remain unmarried
or be reconciled to her husband," 's both per-
mitted divorce, which indeed He never abso-
lutely prohibited, and confirmed (the sanc-
tity) of marriage, by first forbidding its dis-
solution; and, if separation had taken place,
by wishing the nuptial bond to be resumed
by reconciliation. But what reasons does (the
apostle) allege for continence ? Because
" the time is short." ^ I had almost thought
it was because in Christ there was another
god! And yet He from whom emanates this
shortness of the time, will also send what suits
the said brevity. No one makes provision
for the time which is another's. You degrade
your god, O Marcion, when you make him
circumscribed at all by the Creator's time.
Assuredly also, when (the apostle) rules that
marriage should be "only in the Lord,"''
that no Christian should intermarry with a


^7 I Cor. vi. 20. _

iSConstantior: ironically predicated.

19 I Cor. vii. 7, 8.

20 I Cor. vii. 9, 13, 14.

21 I Cor. vii. 27.

22 One of Marcion's A ntitheses.

23 Viderint.

24 Et Christus: Pamelius and Rigaltius here read "Christi
apostolus^ Oehler defends the text as the author's phrase sug-
gested (as Fr. Junius says) by the preceding words, " Moses or
Christ.^'' To which we may add, that in this particular ^lace St.
Paul mentions his injunction as Christ's especially, ov/t eydi, <xAA'
6 Kupio?, I Cor. vii. 10.

25 I Cor. vii. 10. II.

26 I Cor. vii. 29.

27 I Cor. vii. 39.


444


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[kook v.


heathen, he maintains a law of the Creator,
who everywhere prohibits marriage with
strangers. But when he says, *' although
there be that are called gods, whether in
heaven or in earth,"' the meaning of his
words is clear — not as if there were gods in
reality, but as if there were some who are
called gods, without being truly so. He in-
troduces his discussion about meats offered
to idols with a statement concerning idols
(themselves): " We know that an idol is noth-
ing in the world." ^ Marcion, however, does
not say that the Creator is not God; so that
the apostle can hardly be thought to have
ranked the Creator amongst those who are
called gods, without being so; since, even if
they had been gods, "to us there is but one
God, the Father. "3 Now, from whom do
all things come to us, but from Him to whom
all things belong? And pray, what things
are these ? You have them in a preceding
part of the epistle: "All things are yours;
whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the
world, or life, or death, or things present, or
things to come."* He makes the Creator
then the God of all things, from whom pro-
ceed both the world and life and death, which
cannot possibly belong to the other god.
From Him, therefore, amongst the " «//
thmgs " comes also Christ. ^ When he teaches
that every man ought to live of his own in-
dustry,^ he begins with a copious induction
of examples — of soldiers, and shepherds, and
husbandmen. 7 But he^ wanted divine au-
thority. What was the use, however, of ad-
ducing the Creator's, which he was destroy-
ing? It was vain to do so; for his god
had no such authority ! (The apostle) says:
"Thou shalt not muzzle the ox that treadeth
out the corn,"' and adds: "Doth God take
care of oxen?" Yes, of oxen, for the sake
of men ! For, says he, " it is written for our
sakes." " Thus he showed that the law had
a symbolic reference to ourselves, and that it
gives its sanction in favour of those who live
of the gospel. (He showed) also, that those
who preach the gospel are on this account
sent by no other god but Him to whom be-
longs the law, which made provision for them,
when he says: " For our sakes was this writ-
ten."" Still he declined to use this power
which the law gave him, because he preferred


working without any restraint." Of this he
boasted, and suffered no man to rob him of
such glory '^ — certainly with no view of de-
stroying the law, which he proved that another
man might use. For behold Marcion, in his
blindness, stumbled at the rock whereof our
fathers drank in the wilderness. For since
"that rock was Christ,"''' it was, of course,
the Creator's, to whom also belonged the
people. But why resort to the figure of a
sacred sign given by an extraneous god ? 's
Was it to teach the very truth, that ancient
things prefigured the Christ who was to be
educed '^ out of them ? For, being about to
take a cursory view of what befell the people
(of Israel) he begins with saying: "Now
these things happened as examples for us."'^
Now, tell me, were these examples given by
the Creator to men belonging to a rival god ?
Or did one god borrow examples from another,
and a hostile one too ? He withdraws me to
himself in alarm '^ from Him from whom he
transfers my allegiance. Will his antagonist
make me better disposed to him ? Should I
now commit the same sins as the people, shall I
have to suffer the same penalties, or not ? '' But
if not the same, how vainly does he propose to
me terrors which I shall not have to endure !
From whom, again, shall I have to endure
them ? If from the Creator, what evils does
it appertain to Him to inflict ? And how will
it happen that, jealous God as He is. He
shall punish the man who offends His rival,
instead of rather encouraging =° him. If, how-
ever, from the other god — but he knows not
how to punish. So that the whole declaration
of the apostle lacks a reasonable basis, if it is
not meant to relate to the Creator's discipline.
But the fact is, the apostle's conclusion corre-
sponds to the beginning: "Now all these
things happened unto them for ensamples;
and they are written for our admonition, upon
whom the ends of the world are come."='
What a Creator ! how prescient already, and
considerate in warning Christians who belong
to another god ! Whenever cavils occur the
like to those which have been already dealt
with, I pass them by; certain others I de-
spatch briefly. A great argument for another
god is the permission to eat of all kinds of
meats, contrary to the law." Just as if we
did not ourselves allow that the burdensome


' I Cor. viii. 5.
' I Cor. viii. 4.

3 1 Cor. viii. 6.

4 I Cor. iii. 21, 22.

5 I Cor. iii. 23.

6 I Cor. ix. 13.

7 I Cor. ix. 7.

8 He turns to Marcion's god.

9 I Cor. IX. 9 and Deut. xxv. 4.
»° I Cor. xi. 10.

'» Comp. I Cor. ix. 13, 14, with Deut. xviii.


»a Gratis.

»3i Cor ix. 15.

»4 I Cor. X. 4.

15 Figuram extranei sacramenti.

16 Recensendum.
»7 1 Cor. X. 6.

18 Me terret sibi.
'9 I Cor. X. 7-10.
^ Magis quam foveat.
^' I Cor. X. II.
22 I Cor. X. 25-27.


CHAP. VIII.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


445


ordinances of the law were abrogated — but by
Him who imposed them, who also promised
the new condition of things.^ The same,
therefore, who prohibited meats, also restored
the use of them, just as He had indeed al-
lowed them from the beginning. If, however,
some strange god had come to destroy our
God, his foremost prohibition would certainly
have been, that his own votaries should ab-
stain from supporting their lives on the re-
sources of his adversary.

CHAP. VIII. MAN THE IMAGE OF THE CREATOR,

AND CHRIST THE HEAD OF THE MAN. SPIRIT-
UAL GIFTS. THE SEVENFOLD SPIRIT DE-
SCRIBED BY ISAIAH. THE APOSTLE AND THE
PROPHET COMPARED. MARCION CHALLENGED
TO PRODUCE ANYTHING LIKE THESE GIFTS
OF THE SPIRIT FORETOLD IN PROPHECY IN
HIS GOD.

"The head of every man is Christ."^
What Christ, if He is not the author of man ?
The head he has here put for mctJwrity; now
" authority " will accrue to none else than the
"author." Of what man indeed is He the
head ? Surely of him concerning whom he
adds soon afterwards: "The man ought not
to cover his head, forasmuch as he is the
image of God. "^ Since then he is the im-
age of the Creator (for He^ when looking on
Christ His Word, who was to become man,
said, " Let us make man in our own image,
after our likeness"-*), how can I possibly
have another head but Him whose image I
am ? For if I am the image of the Creator,
there is no room in me for another head.
But wherefore "ought the woman to have
power over her head, because of the an-
gels ?"s If it is because "she was created
for the man," ^ and taken out of the man,
according to the Creator's purpose, then in
this way too has the apostle maintained the
discipline of that God from whose institution
he explains the reasons of His discipline. He
adds: " Because of the angels." ^ What an-
gels ? In other words, whose angels ? If he
means the fallen angels of the Creator,^
there is great propriety in his meaning. It
is right that that face which was a snare to
them should wear some mark of a humble
guise and obscured beauty. If, however, the
angels of the rival god are referred to, what
fear is there for them ? for not even Marcion's
disciples, (to say nothing of his angels,) have


1 Novationem.

2 I Cor. xi. 3.

3 I Cor. XI. 7.

4 Gen. i. 26.

5 I Cor. xi. 10.

6 I Cor. xi. 9.

7 I Cor. xi. 10.

8 See more concerning these in chap, xviii. of this book. Comp.
Gen. vi. 1-4.


any desire for women. We have often shown
before now, that the apostle classes heresies
as evil 9 among "works of the flesh," and
that he would have those persons accounted
estimable '° who shun heresies as an evil
thing. In like manner, when treating of the
gospel," we have proved from the sacrament
of the bread and the cup " the verity of the
Lord's body and blood in opposition to Mar-
cion's phantom; whilst throughout almost the
whole of my work it has been contended that
all mention of judicial attributes points con-
clusively to the Creator as to a God who
judges. Now, on the subject of "spiritual
gifts," '3 I have to remark that these also
were promised by the Creator through Christ;
and I think that we may derive from this a
very just conclusion that the bestowal of a
gift is not the work of a god other than Him
who is proved to have given the promise.
Here is a prophecy of Isaiah " There shall
come forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse,
and a flower^'* shall spring up from his root;
and upon Him shall rest the Spirit of the
Lord." After which he enumerates the special
gifts of the same "The spirit of wisdom
and understanding, the spirit of counsel and
might, the spirit of knowledge and of re-
ligion.'s And with the fear of the Lord '^
shall the Spirit fill Him." '^ In this figure of
aflmvcr he shows that Christ was to arise out
of the rod which sprang from the stem of
Jesse; in other words, from the virgin of the
race of David, the son of Jesse. In this
Christ the whole si/bstantia of the Spirit would
have to rest, not meaning that it would be as
it were some subsequent acquisition accruing
to Him who was always, even before His in-
carnation, the Spirit of God;'^ so that you
cannot argue from this that the prophecy has
reference to that Christ who (as mere man of
the race only of David) was to obtain the
Spirit of his God. (The prophet says,) on
the contrary, that from the time when (the
true Christ) should appear in the flesh as the
flower predicted,'"^ rising from the root of
Jesse, there would have to rest upon Him the
entire operation of the Spirit of grace, which,
so far as the Jews were concerned, would
cease and come to an end. This result the
case itself shows; for after this time the Spirit


9 I Cor. xi. 18, 19.

10 Probabiles : " approved."

11 See above, in book iv. chap. xl.

12 Luke xxii. 15-20 and 1 Cor. xi. 23-29.

13 I Cor. xii. I.

14 Flos: Sept. avflos.

15 Religionis : Sept. eiio-e/Sei'a?.

16 Timor Dei : Sept. ^6/3of ©«ou.
»7 Isa. xi. 1-3.

18 We have more than once shown that by Tertullian and other
ancient fathers, the divine nature of Christ was frequently desig-
nated " Spirit."

19 F"loruisset in carne.


446


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book V


of the Creator never breathed amongst them.
From Judah were taken away " the wise man,
and the cunning artificer, and the counsellor,
and the prophet;"' that so it might prove
true that " the law and the prophets were until
John.''^* Now hear how he declared that by
Christ Himself, when returned to heaven,
these spiritual gifts were to be sent: "He
ascended up on high," that is, into heaven;
" He led captivity captive," meaning death
or slavery of man; " He gave gifts to the sons
of men," ^ that is, the gratuities, which we call
charismata. He says specifically '''' so7is of
///d'«,"*and not men promiscuously; thus ex-
hibiting to us those who were th6 children of
men truly so called, choice men, apostles.
*' For," says he, " I have begotten you
through the gospel; "s and " Ye are my chil-
dren, of whom I travail again in birth." ^
Now was absolutely fulfilled that promise of
the Spirit which was given by the word of
Joel: " In the last days will I pour out of my
Spirit upon all flesh, and their sons and their
daughters shall prophesy; and upon my ser-
vants and upon my handmaids will I pour out
of my Spirit." 7 Since; then, the Creator
promised the gift of His Spirit in the latter
days; and since Christ has in these last days
appeared as the dispenser of spiritual gifts
(as the apostle says, "When the fulness of
the time was come, God sent forth His
Son;"^ and again, "This I say, brethren,
that the time is short ' '«), it evidently fol-
lows in connection with this prediction of the
last days, that this gift of the Spirit belongs
to Him who is the Christ of the predicters.
Now compare the Spirit's specific graces, as
they are described by the apostle, and prom-
ised by the prophet Isaiah. "To one is
given," says he, " by the Spirit the word of
wisdom;" this we see at once is what Isaiah
declared to be " the spirit of wisdom." " To
another, the word of knowledge;" this will
be " the (prophet's) spirit of understanding
and counsel." "To another, faith by the
same Spirit; " this will be " the spirit of relig-
ion and the fear of the Lord." " To an-
other, the gifts of healing, and to another the
working of miracles; " this will be " the spirit
of might." "To another prophecy, to an-
other discerning of spirits, to another divers
kinds of tongues, to another the interpretation
of tongues; " this will be " the spirit of knowl-


» See Isa. iii. 2, 3.
' Luke xvi. 16.

3 x-Cor. xii. 4-11 ; Eph. iv. 8, and Ps.lxviii. 18.

4 He argrucs from his own reading, yf/m hominum.

5 1. Cor. iv. 15.

6 Gal. iv. 19.

7 Joel ii. 28, 29, applied by St. Peter, Acts ii. 17, 18.

8 Gal. iv. 4.

9 I Cor. \ni. 29. [^The verse filled out by the, translator.]
'o Comp. I Cor. xii. 8-11 and Isa. xi. 1-3.


edge."'° See how the apostle agrees with
the prophet both in making the distribution
of the one Spirit, and in interpreting His
special graces. This, too, I may confidently
say: he who has likened the unity of our
body throughout its manifold and divers
members to the compacting together of the
various gifts of the Spirit," shows also that
there is but one Lord of the human body and
of the Holy Spirit. This Spirit, (according
to the apostle's showing,) " meant not '^ that
the service "* of these gifts should be in the
body,'5 nor did He place them in the human
body); and on the subject of the superiority
of love '^ above all these gifts. He even taught
the apostle that it was the chief command-
ment,'7 just as Christ has shown it to be:
"Thou shalt love the Lord with all thine
heart and soul,'^ with all thy strength, and
with all thy mind, and thy neighbour as thine
own self." '9 When he mentions the fact that
" // iswritteri in the law ^'' ^ how that the Cre-
ator would speak with other tongues and other
lips, whilst confirming indeed the gift of ton-
gues by such a mention, he yet cannot be
thought to have affirmed that the gift was
that of another god by his reference to the
Creator's prediction. =' In precisely the same
manner,^^ when enjoining on women silence
in the church, that they speak not for the
mere sake ^^ of learning ^ (although that even
they have the right of prophesying, he has
already shown ^^ when he covers the woman
that prophesies with a veil), he goes to the
law for his sanction that woman should be un-
der obedience.^ Now this law, let me say
once for all, he ought to have made no other
acquaintance with, than to destroy it. But
that we may now leave the subject of spiritual
gifts, facts themselves will be enough to prove
which of us acts rashly in claiming them for
his God, and whether it is possible that they
are opposed to our side, even M"^ the Creator
promised them for His Christ who is not yet
revealed, as being destined only for the Jews,
to have their operations in His time, in His
Christ, and among His people. Let Marcion


" I Cor. xii. 12-30, compared with Eph. iv. 16.

12 This seems to be the force of the subjunctive verb noluerit.

»3 Noluerit.

M Meritum.

>S They are spiritual gifts, not endowments of body.

'6 De dilectione praeferenda.

17 Compare i Cor. xii. 31, xiii. i, 13.

'8 Totis praecordiis.

'9 Luke X. 27.

*> " Here, as in John x. 14, xii. 34, xv. 25, ' M<? law ' is used for
the Old Testament generally, instead of being, as usual, confined
to the Pentateuch. The passage is from Isa. xxviii. n " (Dean
Stanley, On the Corinthians, in loc).

2' I Cor. xiv. 21.

a^i^que.

■'S Duntaxat gratia.

24 I Cor. xiv. 34, 35.

23 I Cor. xi. 5, 6. [See Kaye, p. 228.]

^ I Cor. xiv. 34, where Gen. iii. 16 is referred to.

=7 Et si : These words introduce the Marcionite theory.


CHAP. IX.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


447


then exhibit, as gifts of his god, some prophets,
such as have not spoken by human sense, but
with the Spirit of God, such as have both pre-
dicted things to come, and have made mani-
fest' the secrets of the heart;' let him pro-
duce a psalm, a vision, a prayer ^ — only let it
be by the Spirit,'^ in an ecstasy, that is, in
a rapture, 5 whenever an interpretation of ton-
gues has occurred to him; let him show to
me also, that any woman of boastful tongue ^
in his community has ever prophesied from
amongst those specially holy sisters of his.
Now all these signs (ftf spiritual gifts) are forth-
coming from my side without any difficulty,
and they agree, too, with the rules, and the
dispensations, and the instructions of the Cre-
ator; therefore without doubt the Christ, and
the Spirit, and the apostle, belong severally ^
to my God. Here, then, is my frank avowal
for any one who cares to require it.

CHAP. IX. THE DOCTRINE OF THE RESURREC-
TION. THE BODY WILL RISE AGAIN. CHRIST'S
JUDICIAL CHARACTER. JEWISH PERVERSIONS
OF PROPHECY EXPOSED AND CONFUTED.
MESSIANIC PSALMS VINDICATED. JEWISH AND
RATIONALISTIC INTERPRETATIONS ON THIS
POINT SIMILAR. JESUS — NOT HEZEKIAH OR
SOLOMON — THE SUBJECT OF THESE PROPHE-
CIES IN THE PSALMS. NONE BUT HE IS THE
CHRIST OF THE OLD AND THE NEW TESTA-
MENTS.

Meanwhile the Marcionite will exhibit noth-
ing of this kind; he is by this time afraid to
say which side has the better right to a Christ
who is not yet revealed. Just as my Christ
is to be expected,^ who was predicted from
the beginning, so his Christ therefore has no
existence, as not having been announced from
the beginning. Ours is a better faith, which
believes in a future Christ, than the heretic's,
which has none at all to believe in. Touch-
ing the resurrection of the dead,^ let us first
inquire how some persons then denied it. No
doubt in the same way in which it is even now
denied, since the resurrection of the flesh
has at all times men to deny it. But many
wise men claim for the soul a divine nature,
and are confident of its undying destiny, and
even the multitude worship the dead ^° in the


' Traduxerint.

2 I Cor. xiv. 25.

3 I Cor. xiv. 26.

4 Duntaxat spiritalem : These words refer to the previous ones,
" not spolcen by human sense, but with the Spirit of God." [Of
course here is a touch of his fanaticism ; but, he bases it on (i
Cor. xiv.) a mere question of fact: had theie cAarismaia ceased ?]

5 Amentia.

6 Magnidicam.
7Erit.

8 He here argues, as it will be readily observ^ed, from the Mar-
cionite theory alluded to, near the end of the last chapter.

9 I Cor. XV. 12.

10 See his treatise, De Resur. Carnis, chap. i. (Oehler).
" An allusion to the deaths of martyrs.


presumption which they boldly entertain that
their souls survive. As for our bodies, how-
ever, it is manifest that they perish either at
once by fire or the wild beasts," or even when
most carefully kept by length of time. When,
therefore, the apostle refutes those who deny
the resurrection of the flesh, he indeed de-
fends, in opposition to them, the precise mat-
ter of their denial, that is, the resurrection of
the body. You have the whole answer wrapped
up in this." All the rest is superfluous.
Now in this very point, which is called the
resurrection of the dead, it is requisite that
the proper force of the words should be ac-
curately maintained. '3 The word dead ex-
presses simply what has lost the vital princi-
ple,''* by means of which it used to live. Now
the body is that which loses life, and as the
result of losing it becomes dead. To the body,
therefore, the term dead is only suitable. More-
over, as resurrection accrues to what is dead,
and dead is a term applicable only to a body,
therefore the body alone has a resurrection
incidental to it. So again the word Resurrec-
tion, or {rising again), embraces only that
which has fallen down. " To rise," indeed,
can be predicated of that which has never fal-
len down, but had already been always lying
down. But " to rise again" is predicable only
of that which has fallen down; because it is
by rising again, in consequence of its having
fallen down, that it is said to have r^-risen.'^
For the syllable RE always implies iteration
(or happening again). We say, therefore,
that the body falls to the ground by death, as
indeed facts themselves show, in accordance
with the law of God. For to the body it was
said, (" Till thou return to the ground, for out
of it wast thou taken; for) dust thou art, and
unto dust shalt thou return."'^ That, there-
fore, which came from the ground shall return
to the ground. Now that falls down which
returns to the ground; and that rises again
which falls down. " Since by man came death,
by man came also the resurrection." '^ Here
in the word man, who consists of bodily sub-
stance, as we have often shown already, is
presented to me the body of Christ. But if
we are all so made alive in Christ, as we die
in Adam, it follows of necessity that we are
made alive in Christ as a bodily substance,
since we died in Adam as a bodily substance.
The similarity, indeed, is not complete, un-
less our revival '^ in Christ concur in identity

12 Compendio.

13 Defendi.

14 Animam.

15 The reader will readily see how the English fails to complete
the illustration with the ease of the Latin, '•'■surgcrCy' " iterutn
surg^cre" " resurgere."

16 Gen. iii. 19. f' Was not said unto the Soul —says our own
Longfellow, in corresponding words.]

17 I Cor. XV. 21. '8 Vi\-ificatio.


448


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


of substance with our mortality Mn Adam.
But at this point ' (the apostle) has made a
parenthetical statement ^ concerning Christ,
which, bearing as it does on our present dis-
cussion, must not pass unnoticed. For the
resurrection of the body will receive all the
better proof, in proportion as I shall succeed
in showing that Christ belongs to that God
who is believed to have provided this resur-
rection of the flesh in His dispensation. When
he says, " For He must reign, till He hath
put all enemies under His feet,"* we can see
at once s from this statement that he speaks
of a God of vengeance, and therefore of Him
who made the following promise to Christ:
" Sit Thou at my right hand, until I make
Thine enemies Thy footstool. The rod of
Thy strength shall the Lord send forth from
Sion, and He shall rule along with Thee in
the midst of Thine enemies." '^ It is neces-
sary for me to lay claim to those Scriptures
which the Jews endeavour to deprive us of,
and to show that they sustain my view. Now
they say that this Psalm ^ was a chant in
honour of Hezekiah,^ because "he went up
to the house of the Lord," » and God turned
back and removed his enemies. Therefore,
(as they further hold,) those other words,
** Before the morning star did I beget thee
from the womb," '° are applicable to Heze-
kiah, and to the birth of Hezekiah. We on
our side" have published Gospels (to the
credibility of which we have to thank" them '^


1 Mortificatio.

2 Adhuc.

3 Interposuit aliquid.

4 1 Cor. xv. 25, 27.

5 Jam quidem.

^ Ps. ex. 1, 2, and viii. 6.

7 Ps. ex.

B In Ezechiam cecinisse.

9 2 Kinjfs xix.14 ; but the words are, " cjuia is sederit ad dex-
teram templi," a sentence which occurs neither in the LXX. nor
the original.

'oTertullian, as usual, argues from the Septuaginty which in
the latter clause of Ps. ex. 3 has « yaa-rp'o^ irpo iioa^opov iyivvr^aoL
at ; and so the Vulgate version has it. This Psalm has been vari-
ously applied by the Jews. Raschi (or Rabbi Sol. Jarchi) thinks
it is most suitable to Abraham, and possibly to David, in which
latter view D. Kimchi agrees with him. Others find in Solomon
the best application ; but more frequently is Hezekiah thought to
be the subject of the Psalm, as Tertullian observes. Justin Mar-
tyr (in Dial, cum Tryph.) also notices this application of the
Psalm. But Tertullian in the next sentence appears to recognize
the sounder opinion of the older Jews, who saw m this Ps. ex. a
prediction of Messiah. This opmion occurs in the Jerusalem
Talmud, in the tract Berachoth, $. Amongst the vtore recent
Jews who also hold the sounder view, may be mentioned Rabbi
Saadias Gaon, on Dan. vii. 13, and R. Moses Hadarsan (singularly
enough quoted by Raschi in another part of his commentary (Gen.
XXXV. 8), with others who are mentioned by Wetstein, On the
New Testament, Matt. xxii. ^4. Modern Jews, such as Moses
Mendelsohn, reject the Messianic sense ; and they are followed by
the commenUtors of the Rationalist school amongst ourselves and
in Germany. J. Olshausen, after Hitzig, comes down in his inter-
pretation of the Psalm as late as the Maccabees, and sees a suitable
accomplishment of its words in the honours heaped upon Jonathan
by Alexander .son of Antiochus Epiphanes (see i Mace. x. 20).
For the refutation of so inadequate a commentary, the reader is
referred to Delitzsch on Ps. ex. The variations of opinion, how-
ever, in this school, are as remarkable as the fluctuations of the Jew-
ish writers. The latest work on the Psalms wMfch has appeared
amongst us (Psalms, chronologically arranged, bjr four Friends),
after Ewald, places the accomplishment of Ps. ex. in what may be
allowed to have been its occasion — David's victories over the neigh-
boring heathen. " Nos.


for having given some confirmation, indeed,
already in so great a subject'-*); and these
declare that the Lord was born at night, that
so it might be " before the morning star," as
is evident both from the star especially, and
from the testimony of the angel, who at night
announced to the shepherds that Christ had
at that moment been born,'s and again from
the place of the birth, for it is towards night
that persons arrive at the (eastern) "inn."
Perhaps, too, there was a mystic purpose in
Christ's being born at night, destined, as He
was, to be the light of the truth amidst the
dark shadows of ignorance. Nor, again,
would God have said, " I have begotten
Thee," except to His true Son. For although
He says of all the people (Israel), " I have
begotten'^ children," '^ yet He added not
"from the womb." Now, why should He
have added so superfluously this phrase
" from the womb" (as if there could be any
doubt about any one's having been born from
the womb), unless the Holy Ghost had wished
the words to be with especial care '^under-
stood of Christ? "I have begotten Thee
from the womb," that is to s^y, from a womb
only, without a man's seed, making it a con-
dition of a fleshly body'^ that it should come
out of a womb. What is here added (in the
Psalm), "Thou art a priest for ever," =° re-
lates to (Christ) Himself. Hezekiah was no
priest; and even if he had been one, he would
not have been a priest for ever. "After the
order," says He, "of Melchizedek." Now
what had Hezekiah to do with Melchizedek,
the priest of the most high God, and him un-
circumcised too, who blessed the circumcised
Abraham, after receiving from him the offer-
ing of tithes? To Christ, however, "the
order of Melchizedek " will be very suitable;
for Christ is the proper and legitimate High
Priest of God. He is the Pontiff of the priest-
hood of the uncircumcision, constituted such,
even then, for the Gentiles, by whom He was
to be more fully received, although at His
last coming He will favour with His accept-
ance and blessing the circumcision also, even
the race of Abraham, which by and by is to
acknowledge Him. Well, then, there is also
another Psalm, which begins with these words:
"Give Thy judgments, O God, to the King,''
that is, to Christ who was to come as King,
"and Thy righteousness unto the King's
son," "that is, to Christ's people; for His


»2 Debemus.

13 Istos : that is, the Jews (Rigalt.).

14 Utique jam in tanto opere.
'5 Natum esse quum maxime.
'6 Generavi : Sept. iyivtn\aa..
'7 Isa. i. 2.

'^ Curio-sius.

19 Deputans carni : a note against Docetism.


"Ps.


ex. 4.


=' Ps. Ixxii.


CHAP. X.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


449


sons are they who are born again in Him.
But it will here be said that this Psalm has
reference to Solomon. However, will not
those portions of the Psalm which apply to
Christ alone, be enough to teach us that all
the rest, too, relates to Christ, and not to
Solomon ? " He shall come down," says He,
" like rain upon a fleece,' and like dropping
showers upon the earth," = describing His
descent from heaven to the flesh as gentle
and unobserved. 3 Solomon, however, if he
had indeed any descent at all, came not down
like a shower, because he descended not from
heaven. But I will set before you more lit-
eral points. 4 " He shall have dominion,"
says the Psalmist, " from sea to sea, and from
the river unto the ends of the earth." s To
Christ alone was this given; whilst Solomon
reigned over only the moderately-sized king-
dom of Judah. "Yea, all kings shall fall
down before Him." Whom, indeed, shall
they all thus worship, except Christ? "All
nations shall serve Him."^ To whom shall
all thus do homage, but Christ? " His name
shall endure for ever." Whose name has this
eternity of fame, but Christ's ? " Longer than
the sun shall His name remain," for longer
than the sun shall be the Word of God, even
Christ. "And in Him shall all nations
be blessed." 7 In Solomon was no nation
blessed; in Christ every nation. And what if
the Psalm proves Him to be even God ?
"They shall call lA^ixn. bless ed^^ (On what
ground?) Because '"' blessed \'s> the Lord God
of Israel, who only doeth wonderful things. "^
'''' Blessed 2l\so is His glorious name, and with
His glory shall all the earth be filled." ^° On
the contrary, Solomon (as I make bold to
affirm) lost even the glory which he had from
God, seduced by his love of women even into
idolatry. And thus, the statement which oc-
curs in about the middle of this Psalm, " His
enemies shall lick the dust"" (of course, as
having been, (to use the apostle's phrase,)
"put under His feet""), will bear upon the
very object which I had in view, when I both
introduced the Psalm, and insisted on my
opinion of its sense, — namely, that I might
demonstrate both the glory of His kingdom
and the subjection of His enemies in pursu-

'f Super vellus : so Sept. eirl noKov,

2 Ps. Ixxii. 6.

3 Similarly the Rabbis Saadias Gaon and Hadarsan, above men-
tioned in our note, beautifully applied to Messiah's placid birth,
" without a human father,"the figures of Ps. ex. 3, " womb of the
morning," " dew of thy birth."

4 Simpliciora.

5 Ps. Ixx. 8.

6 Ps. Ixx. II.

7 Ps. Ixx. 17.

8 Ps. Ixx. 17.

9 Ps. Ixx. 18.
'o Ps. Ixx. 10.
" Ps. Ixx. 9.

"I Cor. XV. 25, 27.

29


ance of the Creator's own plans, with the view
of laying down '3 this conclusion, that none
but He can be believed to be ihe Christ of the
Creator.

CHAP. X. — DOCTRINE OF THE RESURRECTION OF
THE BODY, CONTINUED. HOW ARE THE DEAD
RAISED ? AND WITH WHAT BODY DO THEY
COME ? THESE QUESTIONS ANSWERED IN SUCH
A SENSE AS TO MAINTAIN THE TRUTH OF THE
RAISED BODY, AGAINST MARCION. CHRIST AS
THE SECOND ADAM CONNECTED WITH THE
CREATOR OF THE FIRST MAN. LET US BEAR
THE IMAGE OF THE HEAVENLY. THE TRIUMPH
OVER DEATH IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE
PROPHETS. HOSEA AND ST. PAUL COMPARED.

Let us now return to the resurrection, to
the defence of which against heretics of all
sorts we have given indeed sufficient attention
in another work of ours.'^ But we will not
be wanting (in some defence of the doctrine)
even here, in consideration of such persons
as are ignorant of that little treatise. " What,"
asks he, " shall they do who are baptized for
the dead, if the dead rise not?"*s Now,
never mind ^^ that practice, (whatever it may
have been.) The Februarian lustrations '7 will
perhaps'^ answer him (quite as well), by
praying for the dead.'^ Do not then suppose
that the apostle here indicates some new god
as the author and advocate of this (baptism
for the dead. His only aim in alluding to it
was) that he might all the more firmly insist
upon the resurrection of the body, in pro-
portion as they who were vainly baptized for
the dead resorted to the practice from their
belief of such a resurrection. We have the
apostle in another passage defining " but one
baptism. " ^ To be " baptized for the dead ' '
therefore means, in fact, to be baptized for
the body;" for, as we have shown, it is the


13 Consecuturus.

14 He refers to his De Resurrect. Carnis. See chap, xlviii.

15 I Cor. XV. 29.

16 Viderit.

17 " Kalendae Februariae. The ijreat expiation or lustration,
celebrated at Rome in the month which received its name from the
festival, is described by Ovid, Fasti, book ii., lines 19-28, and 267-
452, in which latter passage the same feast is called Lupercalia.
Of course as the rites were held on the 15th of the month, the
word kalendee here has not its more usual meaning (Paley's edi-
tion of the Fasti^ pp. 52-76). Ochler refers also to Macrobius,
Sattcrn. i. 13 ; Cicero, De Legibus, ii. 21 ; Plutarch, Numa.^ p.
132. He well remarks (note in loc), that TertuUianj by intimating
that the heathen rites of the Februa will afford quite as satisfac-
tory an answer to the apostle's question, as the Christian supersti-
tion alluded to, not only means no authorization of the said super-
stition for himself, but expresses his belief that St. Paul's only ob-
ject was to gather some evidence for the great doctrine of the res-
surrection from the faith which underlay the practice alluded to.
In this respect, however, the heathen festival would afford a much
less pointed illustration ; for though it was indeed a lustration for
the dead, Trepi viKpmv, and had for its object their happiness and
welfare, it went no further than a vague notion of an indefinite
immortality, and it touched not the recovery of the body. There
is therefore force in Tertullian's si forte,

18 Si_ forte.

'9 TcS ev;^e(r0ai VTrep rmv veKpQiv (Rigalt.).

20 Eph. IV. 5.

21 Pro corporibus.


450


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book


body which becomes dead. What, then, shall
they do who are baptized for the body,' if the
body = rises not again ? We stand, then, on
firm ground (when we say) that^ the next
question which the apostle has discussed
equally relates to the body. But *' some man
will say, 'How are the dead raised up? With
what body do they come ? ' " * Having estab-
lished the doctrine of the resurrection which
was denied, it was naturals to discuss what
would be the sort of body (in the resurrec-
tion), of which no one had an idea. On this
point we have other opponents with whom to
engage. For Marcion does not in any wise
admit the resurrection of the flesh, and it is
only the salvation of the soul which he prom-
ises; consequently the question which he
raises is not concerning the sort of body, but
the very substance thereof. Notwithstand-
ing,* he is most plainly refuted even from
what the apostle advances respecting the
quality of the body, in answer to those who
ask, " How are the dead raised up ? with what
body do they come ? " For as he treated of
the sort of body, he of course ipso facto pro-
claimed in the argument that it was a body
which would rise again. Indeed, since he
proposes as his examples "wheat grain, or
some other grain, to which God giveth a
body, such as it hath pleased Him;"^ since
also he says, that "to every seed is its own
body;"^ that, consequently,' " there is one
kind of flesh of men,whilst there is another of
beasts, and (another) of birds; that there are
also celestial bodies and bodies terrestrial; and
that there is one glory of the sun, and another
glory of the moon, and another glory of the
stars " '° — does he not therefore intimate that
there is to be " a resurrection of the flesh or
body, which he illustrates by .fleshly and cor-
poreal samples ? Does he not also guarantee
that the resurrection shall be accomplished
by that God from whom proceed all the (crea-
tures which have served him for) examples ?
"So also," says he, "is the resurrection of
the dead."" How? Just as the grain, which
is sown a body, springs up a body. This
sowing of the body he called the dissolving
thereof in the ground, " because it is sown in
corruption," (but "is raised) to honour and
power." '3 Now, just as in the case of the


» Eph. iv. 5.
a Corpora.

3 Ut. with the subjunctive verb induxerit.

4 I Cor. XV. 35.

5 Consequens erat.
*> Porro.

7 I Cor. XV. 37, 38.

* I Cor. XV. 38.

9Ut.

*° I Cor. XV. 39-41
»» Portendit.
«a X Cor. XV. 42.
*3 1 Cor. XV. 42, 43.


grain, so here: to Him will belong the work
in the revival of the body, who ordered the
process in the dissolution thereof. If, how-
ever, you remove the body from the resurrec-
tion which you submitted to the dissolution,
what becomes of the diversity in the issue ?
Likewise, " although it is sown a natural body,
it is raised a spiritual body."'* Now, al-
though the natural principle of life 's and the
spirit have each a body proper to itself, so
that the " natural body " may fairly be taken'**
to signify the soul,'^ and " the spiritual body "
the spirit, yet that is no reason for suppos-
ing'^ the apostle to say that the soul is to be-
come spirit in the resurrection, but that the
body (which, as being born along with the
soul, and as retaining its life by means of the
soul, '9 admits of being called animal (or 7iatu-
ral^) 7vill become spiritual, since it rises
through the Spirit to an eternal life. In short,
since it is not the soul, but the flesh which is
" sown in corruption," when it turns to decay
in the ground, it follows that (after such dis-
solution) the soul is no longer the natural
body, but the flesh, which was the natural
body, (is the subject of the future change),
forasmuch as of a natural body it is made a
spiritual body, as he says further down, " That
was not first which is spiritual. ' ' =" For to this
effect he just before remarked of Christ Him-
self: " The first man Adam was made a living
soul, the last Adam was made a quickening
spirit."-" Our heretic, however, in the ex-
cess of his folly, being unwilling that the state-
ment should remain in this shape, altered
"last Adam" into "last Lord;"='3 because
he feared, of course, that if he allowed the
Lord to be the last (or second) Adam, we
should contend that Christ, being the second
Adam, must needs belong to that God who
owned also the first Adam. But the falsifica-
tion is transparent. For why is there a first
Adam, unless it be that there is also a second
Adam ? For things are not classed together
unless they be severally alike, and have an
identity of either name, or substance, or ori-
gin.=•* Now, although among things which
are even individually diverse, one must be
first and another last, yet they must have one
author. If, however, the author be a different


»4 I Cor. XV. 44.

'5 Anitria : we will call it soul in the context.

'6 Possit videri.

17 Animam.

'8 Non ideo.

'9 .Animam.

30 Animale. The terseness of his arjjument, by his use of the
same radical terms y4 «/wa and Anittinlc,\% lost in the English.
[See Cap. 15 infra. Also, Kaye p. 180. St. Augustine seems to
tolerate our author's views of a corporal spirit in his treatise de
H<presihiis.'\

=" I Cor. .w. 46.

22 1 Cor. XV. 45.

23 o fO-xoTO? 'Afiafi into o i<xxa.TO<i Kupios.
'4 Vel auctoris.


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


45


one, he himself indeed maybe called the last.
But the thing which he introduces is the
first, and that only can be the last, which is
like this first in nature.' It is, however, not
like the first in nature, when it is not the
work of the same author. In like manner
(the heretic) will be refuted also with the
word " mati: " *' The first man is of the earth,
earthy; the second man is the Lord from
heaven."^ Now, since the first was a ;/m«,
how can there be a second, unless he is
a ma7i also ? Or, else, if the second is *' Lord,"
was the first " Lord " also 1^ It is, however,
quite enough for me, that in his Gospel he
admits the Son of man to be both Christ and
Man; so that he will not be able to deny Him
(in this passage), in the "Adam" mid the
man" (of the apostle). What follows will
also be too much for him. For when the
apostle says, "As is the earthy," that is,
ma7ij " such also are they that are earthy " —
men again, of course; "therefore as is the
heavenly," meaning the Man, from heaven,
" such are the men also that are heavenly." *>
For he could not possibly have opposed to
earthly me7i any heavenly beings that were
not me7i also; his object being the more ac-
curately to distinguish their state and expec-
tation by using this name in common for them
both. For in respect of their present state
and their future expectation he calls men
earthly and heavenly, still reserving their
parity of name, according as they are reckoned
(as to their ultimate condition s) in Adam
or in Christ. Therefore, when exhorting
them to cherish the hope of heaven, he says:
"As we have borne the image of the earthy,
so let us also bear the image of the heaven-
ly,"^— language which relates not to any
condition of resurrection life, but to the rule
of the present time. He says. Let us bear,
as a precept; not IVe shall bear, in the sense
of a promise — wishing us to walk even as he
himself was walking, and to put off the like-
ness of the earthly, that is, of the old man,
in the works of the flesh. For what are this
next words? "Now this I say, brethren,
that flesh and blood cannot inherit the king-


iPar.

2 1 Cor. XV. 47.

3 Marcion seems to have changed 7iian into Lord, oc rather to
have omitted the avOponroq of the second clause, letting the verse
run thus : 6 TrpuJTos dv9pu}Tro<; sk y^9 xotKo^, 6 Seiirepo? Kvpios ef
ovpavov. Anything to cut off all connection with the Creator.

4 The oi enovpavLOi, the " de caslo homines" of this ver. 48 are
Christ's risen people ; comp. Phil. iii. 20, 21 (Alford).

5 Secundum exitum.

6 I Cor. XV. 49. T. argues from the reading (^opeo-tofxei/ (instead
of <})opeaoij.€v) , which indeed was read by many of the fathers, and
(what is still more important) is found in the Codex- SinaiiicJts.
We add the critical note of Dean Alford on this reading: "ACDFKL
rel latt copt goth, Theodotus, Basil, Caesarius, Cyril, Macarius,
Methodius (who prefixes eca), Chrysostom, Epiphanius, Ps. Athan-

^asius, Damascene, Irenseus (int), Tertullian, Cyprian, Hilary,
"Jerome." Alford retains the usual <^opi<TOft.€v , on the strength
chiefly of the Codex Vaticanus,


dom of God." ' He means the works of the
flesh and blood, which, in his Epistle to the
Galatians, deprive men of the kingdom of
God.^ In other passages also he is accus-
tomed to put the natural condition instead of
the works that are done therein, as when he
says, that " they who are in the flesh cannot
please God."' Now, when shall we be able
to please God except whilst we are in this
flesh ? There is, I imagine, no other time
wherein a man can work. If, however, whilst
we are even naturally living in the flesh, we
yet eschew the deeds of the flesh, then we
shall not be in the flesh; since, although we
are not absent from the substance of the flesh,
we are notwithstanding strangers to the sin
thereof. Now, since in the woxA flesh we are
enjoined to put off, not the substance, but the
works of the flesh, therefore in the use of the
same word the kingdom of God is denied to
the works of the flesh, not to the substance
thereof. For not that is condemned in which
evil is done, but only the evil which is done
in it. To administer poison is a crime, but
the cup in which it is given is not guilty. So
the body is the vessel of the works of the
flesh, whilst the soul which is within it mixes
the poison of a wicked act. How then is it,
that the soul, which is the real author of the
works of the flesh, shall attain to'° the king-
dom of God, after the deeds done in the body
have been atoned for, whilst the body, which
was nothing but (the soul's) ministering agent,
must remain in condemnation ? Is the cup
to be punished, but the poisoner to escape ?
Not that we indeed claim the kingdom of God
for the flesh: all we do is, to assert a resur-
rection for the substance thereof, as the gate
of the kingdom through which it is entered.
But the resurrection is one thing, and the
kingdom is another. The resurrection is first,
and afterwards the kingdom. We say, there-
fore, that the flesh rises again, but that when
changed it obtains the kingdom. " For the
dead shall be raised incorruptible," even
those who had been corruptible when their
bodies fell into decay; "and we shall be
changed, in a moment, in the twinkling of an
eye." For this corruptible" — and as he
spake, the apostle seemingly pointed to his
own flesh — "must put on incorruption, and
this mortal must put on immortality," " in
order, indeed, that it may be rendered a fit
substance for the kingdom of God. " For we
shall be Hke the angels." '^ This will be the


7 1 Cor. XV. 50.

8 Gal. V. 19-21.

9 Rom. viii. 8.
10 Merebitur.

" I Cor. XV. 52.
'2 I Cor. XV. 53.
13 Matt. xxii. 30 and Luke xx. 36.


452


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book v.


perfect change of our flesh — only after its
resurrection.' Now if, on the contrary, =
there is to be no flesh, how then shall it put
on incorruption and immortality ? Having
then become something else by its change, it
will obtain the kingdom of God, no longer the
(old) flesh and blood, but the body which God
shall have given it. Rightly then does the
apostle declare, *' Flesh and blood cannot in-
herit the kingdom of God;"^ for this
(honour) does he ascribe to the changed con-
dition* which ensues on the resurrection.
Since, therefore, shall then be accomplished
the word which was written by the Creator,
"O death, where is thy victory" — or thy
struggle?s "O death,. where is thysting?"^
— written, I say, by the Creator, for He wrote
them by His prophet ^ — to Him will belong
the gift, that is, the kingdom, who proclaimed
the word which is to be accomplished in the
kingdom. And tc none other God does he
tell us that " thanks " are due, for having
enabled us to achieve "the victory" even
over death, than to Him from whom he re-
ceived the very expression^ of the exulting
and triumphant challenge to the mortal foe.

CHAP. XI. THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE

CORINTHIANS. THE CREATOR THE FATHER
OF MERCIES. SHOWN TO BE SUCH IN THE OLD
TESTAMENT, AND ALSO IN CHRIST. THE NEW-
NESS OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. THE VEIL OF
OBDURATE BLINDNESS UPON ISRAEL, NOT
REPREHENSIBLE ON MARCION'S PRINCIPLES.
THE JEWS GUILTY IN REJECTING THE CHRIST
OF THE CREATOR. SATAN, THE GOD OF THIS
WORLD. THE TREASURE IN EARTHEN VESSELS
EXPLAINED AGAINST MARCION. THE CREA-
TOR'S RELATION TO THESE VESSELS, I.E. OUR
BODIES.

If, owing to the fault of human error, the
word God has become a common name (since
in the world there are said and believed to
be "gods many "9), yet "the blessed God,"
(who is " the Father) of our Lord Jesus
Christ," '' will be understood to be no other
God than the Creator, who both blessed all
things (that He had made), as you find in
Genesis," and is Himself "blessed by all
things," as Daniel tells us." Now, if the title


I Sed resuscitatae.
a Aut si.

3 I Cor. XV. 50.

4 Demutationi.

5 Suggested by the io-xvcrat of Sept. in Isa. xxv. 8.
6 1 Cor. XV. 55.

7 Isa. xxv. 8 and (especially) Hos. xiii. 14.

8 The Septuagint version of the passage in Hosca is, ttoD i\ Uk-i\
trov, Oavart; nov to Ktvrvov vov, ^irj, which is very like the form
of the apostrophe in i Cor. xv. 55.

9 I Cor. viii. 5.
'o 2 Cor. i. 3.

" Gen. i. 22.

" Dan. ii. 19, 20, iii. 28, 29, iv. 34, 37.


of Father may be claimed for (Marcion's)
sterile god, how much more for the Creator ?
To none other than Him is it suitable, who is
also "the Father of mercies," '^ and (in the
prophets) has been described as " full of
compassion, and gracious, and plenteous in
mercy." •'* In Jonah you find the signal act
of His mercy, which He showed to the pray-
ing Ninevites.'s How inflexible was He at the
tears of Hezekiah ! '^ How ready to forgive
Ahab, the husband of Jezebel, the blood of
Naboth, when he deprecated His anger. '^
How prompt in pardoning David on his con-
fession of his sin'^ — preferring, indeed, the
sinner's repentance to his death, of course
because of His gracious attribute of mercy.'*
Now, if Marcion's god has exhibited or pro-
claimed any such thing as this, I will allow
him to be "the Father of mercies." Since,
however, he ascribes to him this title only
from the time he has been revealed, as if he
were the father of mercies from the time only
when he began to liberate the human race,
then we on our side, too,=° adopt the same
precise date of his alleged revelation; but it
is that we may deny him ! It is then not
competent to him to ascribe any quality to
his god, whom indeed he only promulged by
the fact of such an ascription; for only if it
were previously evident that his god had an
existence, could he be permitted to ascribe an
attribute to him. The ascribed attribute is
only an accident; but accidents" are pre-
ceded by the statement of the thing itself of
which they are predicated, especially when an-
other claims the attribute which is ascribed to
him who has not been previously shown to
exist. Our denial of his existence will be all
the more peremptory, because of the fact that
the attribute which is alleged in proof of it
belongs to that God who has been already re-
vealed. Therefore "the New Testament"
will appertain to none other than Him who
promised it — if not "its letter, yet its
spirit; """ and herein will lie \X.%ne7vness. In-
deed, He who had engraved its letter in stones
is the same as He who had said of its spirit,
" I will pour out of my Spirit upon all flesh." =^
Even if "the letter killeth, yet the Spirit
giveth life;"'* and both belong to Him who
says: "I kill, and I make alive; I wound.


»3 2 Cor. i. 3. ,

MPs. Ixxxvi. 15, cxii. 4, cxlv. 8 ; Jonah iv. 2.

'5 Jonah iii. 8.

'6 2 Kings XX. 3, 5.

'7 I Kings xxi. 27, 29.

'82 Sam. xii. 13.

*9 Ezek. xxxiii. 11.

=° Atquin et nos.

2' The Contingent qualities in logic.

^ 2 Cor. iii. 6.

23 Joel ii. 28.

*♦ 2 Cor. iii. 6.


CHAP. XI. j


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


and I heal."' We have already made good
the Creator's claim to this twofold character
of judgment and goodness' — " killing in the
letter" through the law, and "quickening in
the Spirit " through the Gospel. Now these
attributes, however different they be, cannot
possibly make two gods; for they have already
(in the prevenient dispensation of the Old
Testament) been found to meet in One.^ He
alludes to Moses' veil, covered with which
" his face could not be stedfastly seen by the
children of Israel."^ Since he did this to
maintain the superiority of the glory of the
New Testament, which is permanent in its
glory, over that of the Old, " which was to be
done away," s this fact gives support to my
belief which exalts the Gospel above the law;
and you must look well to it that it does not
even more than this. For only there is su-
periority possible where was previously the
thing over which superiority can be affirmed.
But then he says, " But their minds were
blinded"^ — of the world; certainly not the
Creator's mind, but the minds of the people
which are in the world. ^ Of Israel he says,
Even unto this day the same veil is upon their
heart; "^ showing that the veil which was on
the face of Moses was a figure of the veil
which is on the heart of the nation still; be-
cause even now Moses is not seen by them
in heart, just as he was not then seen by them
in eye. But what concern has Paul with the
veil which still obscures Moses from their
Yiew, if the Christ of the Creator, whom Moses
predicted, is not yet come? How are the
hearts of the Jews represented as still covered
and veiled, if the predictions of Moses relat-
ing to Christ, in whom it was their duty to
believe through him, are as yet unfulfilled?
What had the apostle of a strange Christ to
complain of, if the Jews failed in understand-
ing the mysterious announcements of their
own God, unless the veil which was upon their
hearts had reference to that blindness which
concealed from their eyes the Christ of
Moses ? Then, again, the words which fol-
low. But when it shall turn to the Lord, the
evil shall be taken away,"^ properly refer to
the Jew, over whose gaze Moses' veil is
spread, to the effect that, when he is turned
to the faith of Christ, he will understand how
Moses spoke of Christ. But how shall the
veil of the Creator be taken away by the


1 Deut. xxxii. 39.

2 See above in book ii. [cap. xi. p. 306.]

3 Apud unum recenseri praevenerunt.

4 2 Cor. iii. 7, 13.

5 2 Cor. iii. 7, 8.

^Obtunsi : " blunted," 2 Cor. iii. i.-.

7 He seems to have read the clause as applying to the world,
but St. Paul certainly refers only to the obdurate Jews. The text
is : " Sed obtunsi sunt sensus mundi.

82 Cor. iii. 15.

9 2 Cor. iii. 16.


Christ of another god, whose mysteric tne
Creator could not possibly have veiled — un-
known mysteries, as they were of an un-
known god ? So he says that " we now with
open face " (meaning the candour of the heart,
which in thejews had been covered with a veil),
" beholding Christ, are changed into the same
image, from that glory" (wherewith Moses
was transfigured as by the glory of the Lord)
" to another glory." '° By thus setting forth
the glory which illumined the person of Moses
from his interview with God, and the veil
which concealed the same from the infirmity
of the people, and by superinducing thereupon
the revelation and the glory of the Spirit in
the person of Christ — " even as," to use his
words, *'by the Spirit of the Lord"" — he
testifies that the whole Mosaic system " was
a figure of Christ, of whom the Jews indeed
were ignorant, but who is known to us Chris-
tians. We are quite aware that some passages
are open to ambiguity, from the way in which
they are read, or else from their punctuation,
when there is room for these two causes of
ambiguity. The latter method has been
adopted by Marcion, by reading the passage
which follows, "in whom the God of this
world," '3 as if it described the Creator as the
God of this world, in order that he may, by
these words, imply that there is another God
for the other world. We, however, say that
the passage ought to be punctuated with a
comma after God, to this effect: " In whom
God hath blinded the eyes of the unbelievers
of this world." "* "In whom" means the
Jewish unbelievers, from some of whom the
gospel is still hidden under Moses' veil. Now
it is these whom God had threatened for
" loving Him indeed with the lip, whilst their
heart was far from Him,"'s in these angry
words: "Ye shall hear with your ears, and
not understand; and see with your eyes, but
not perceive;"'^ and, " If ye will not believe,
ye shall not ' understand; " '=' and again, "I
will take away the wisdom of their wise men.


W2 Cor. iii. 18.

" 2 Cor. iii. 18, but T.'s reading is " tanquam a domino spirituum'*
(" even as by the Lord of the Spirits," probably the sevenfold
Spirit). The original is, Ka.B6.-ntp kith Kvpiov IIveufiaToy, " by the
Lord the Spirit."

•2 Moysi ordinem totura.

13 2 Cor. iv. 4.

'4 He would stop off the phrase toC aitii'o? toutov from 6 0«o?,
and remove it to the end of the sentence as a qualification of -tiov
aniaruy. He adds another interpretation just afterwards, which,
we need not say, is both more consistent with the sense of the pas-
sage and with the consensus of Christian writers of all ages, al-
though " it is historically curious" (as Dean Alford has remarked)
"that Irenseus (r/cercs. iv. 48, Origen, Tertuliian (v. 11, contrtt-
Marcion), Chrysostom, CEcumenius, Theodoret, Theophylact. all
repudiate, in their zeal against the Marciomtes and the Manich-
a;ans, the grammatical rendering, and take riov airiarmv tov atwi-os
TOUTOV together" (Greek Testament, in ioc). fl have corrected
Alford's reference to Tertuliian which he makes B. iv. ii.J

15 Isa. xxix. 13.

'6 Isa. vi. 10 (only adapted).

J 7 Isa. vii. 9, Sept.


454


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book v.


and bring to nought* the understanding of
their prudent ones. " , But these words, of
course, He did not pronounce against them
for conceahng the gospel of the unknown God.
At any rate, if there is a God of this world, =*
He blinds the heart of the unbelievers of this
world, because they have not of their own
accord recognised His Christ, who ought to
be understood from His Scriptures. ^ Con-
tent with my advantage, I can willingly refrain
from noticing to any greater length^ this
point of ambiguous punctuation, so as not to
give my adversary any advantage, ^ indeed, I
might have wholly omitted the discussion. A
simpler answer I shall find ready to hand in
interpreting *' the god of this world " of the
devil, who once said, as the prophet describes
him: "I will be like the Most High; I will
exalt my throne in the clouds."^ The whole
superstition, indeed, of this world has got into
his hands,7 so that he blinds effectually the
hearts of unbelievers, and of none more than
the apostate Marcion's. Now he did not ob-
serve how much this clause of the sentence
made against him: " For God, who com-
manded the light to shine out of darkness,
hath shined in our hearts, to (give) the light
of the knowledge (of His glory) in the face of
(Jesus) Christ."^ Now who was it that said,
" Let there be light ? " " And who was it that
said to Christ concerning giving light to the
world: *'I have set Thee as a light to the
Gentiles"*" — to them, that is, "who sit in
darkness and in the shadow of death ? " "
(None else, surely, than He), to whom' the
Spirit in the Psalm answers, in His foresight
of the future, saying, "The light of Thy
countenance, O Lord, hath been displayed
upon us." " Now the countenance (or per-
son '3 ) of the Lord here is Christ. Wherefore
the apostle said above: Christ, who is the
image of God. " '* Since Christ, then, is the
person of the Creator, who said, " Let there be
light," it follows that Christ and the apostles,
and the gospel, and the veil, and Moses — nay,
the whole of the dispensations — belong to the
God who is the Creator of this world, accord-
ing to the testimony of the clause (above


' Sept. itpvffno, " will hide."

a Said concessively, in reference to M.'s position above men-
tioned.

3 Marcion's "God of this world " being the God of the Old
Testament.

4 Hactenus : pro non amptiut (Oehler) tractasse.

5" A fuller criticism on this slight matter might give his oppo-
nent the advantage, as apparently betraying a penury of weightie.-
and more ccruim arguments" (Oehler).

* Isa. xiv. 14.

7 Mancipata est illi.

8 2 Cor. iv. 6.

9 Gen. i, 3.

10 Isa. xlix. 6 (Sept. quoted in Acts xiii. 47).

" Isa. ix. 2 and Matt. iv. 16.

" Ps. iv. 7 (Sept.).

'3 Persona : the naoaianov of the Septuairint

U 2 Cor. iv. 4. r s •


adverted to), and certainly not to him who
never said, " Let there be light. " I here
pass over discussion about another epistle,
which we hold to have been written to the
Ephesians, but the heretics to the Laodiceans.
In it he tells 's them to remember, that at the
time when they were Gentiles they were with-
out Christ, aliens from (the commonwealth of)
Israel, without intercourse, without the cove-
nants and any hope of promise, nay, without
God, even in his own world, '* as the Creator
thereof. Since therefore he said, that the
Gentiles were without God, whilst their god
was the devil, not the Creator, it is clear that
he must be understood to be the lord of this
world, whom the Gentiles received as their
god — not the Creator, of whom they were in
ignorance. But how does it happen, that
" the treasure which we have in these earthen
vessels of ours " '^ should not be regarded as
belonging to the God who owns the vessels ?
Now since God's glory is, that so great a
treasure is contained in earthen vessels, and
since these earthen vessels are of the Creator's
make, it follows that the glory is the Creator's;
nay, since these vessels of His smack so
much of the excellency of the power of God,
that power itself must be His also ! Indeed,
all these things have been consigned to the
said "earthen vessels " for the very purpose
that His excellence might be manifested forth.
Henceforth, then, the rival god will have no
claim to the glory, and consequently none to
the power. Rather, dishonour and weakness
will acrue to him, because the earthen vessels
with which he had nothing to do have received
all the excellency! Well, then, if it be in these
very earthen vessels that he tells us we have
to endure so great sufferings,*^ in which we
bear about with us the very dying of God,''
(Marcion's) god is really ungrateful and un-
just, if he does not mean to restore this, same
substance of ours at the resurrection, wherein
so much has been endured in loyalty to him,
in which Christ's very death is borne about,
wherein too the excellency of his power is
treasured. =^ For he gives prominence to the
statement, " That the life also of Christ may
be manifested in our body,"='as a contrast
to the preceding, that His death is borne
about in our body. Now of 7a/ia^ life of Christ
does he here speak ? Of that which we are
now living ? Then how is it, that in the words
which follow he exhorts us not to the things

15 Ait.

*6 Kph. ii. 12.

»7 2 Cor. iv. 7.

'^ 2 Cor. iv. 8-12.

'pOehlei-, after Fr. Junius, defends the reading " mortificationem
^t7," instead of Domini, in reference to Marcion, who seems to-
, have so corrupted the reading.
i =0 2 Cor. iv. 10.

-' 2 Cor. iv. 10.


CHAr. XII.]


TERTULLIAX AGAINST MARCION.


455


which are seen and are temporal, but to those
which are not seen and are eternal' — in
other words, not to the present, but to the
future ? But if it be of the future Hfe of
Christ that he spealcs, intimating tliat it is to
be made manifest in our body,=' then he has
clearly predicted the resurrection of the
flesh. 3 He says, too, that " our outward man
perishes," "^ not meaning by an eternal per-
dition after death, but by labours and suffer-
ings, in reference to which he previously said,
*' For which cause we will not faint. "s
Now, when he adds of "the inward man"
also, that it "is renewed day by day," he
demonstrates both issues here — the wasting
away of the body by the wear and tear^ of
its trials, and the renewal of the soul ^ by its
contemplation of the promises.

CHAP. XII. THE ETERNAL HOME IN HEAVEN.

BEAUTIFUL EXPOSITION BYTERTULLIAN OF THE
apostle's CONSOLATORY TEACHING AGAINST
THE FEAR OF DEATH, SO APT TO ARISE UNDER
ANTI-CHRISTIAN OPPRESSION. THE JUDGMENT-
SEAT OF CHRIST THE IDEA, ANTI-MARCION-

ITE. PARADISE. JUDICIAL CHARACTERISTICS
OF CHRIST WHICH ARE INCONSISTENT WITH
THE HERETICAL VIEWS ABOUT HIM; THE APOS-
TLE'S SHARPNESS, OR SEVERITY, SHOWS HIM
TO BE A FIT PREACHER OF THE CREATOR'S
CHRIST.

As to the house of this our earthly dwell-
ing-place, wh«n he says that "we have an
eternal home in heaven, not made with
hands," ^ he by no means would imply that,
because it was built by the Creator's hand, it
must perish in a perpetual dissolution after
death. 9 He treats of this subject in order to
offer consolation against the fear of death and
the dread of this very dissolution, as is even
more manifest from what follows, when he
adds, that " in this tabernacle of our earthly
body we do groan, earnestly desiring to be
clothed upon with the vesture which is from
heaven, '° if so be, that having been un-
clothed," we shall not be found naked; " in
other words, shall regain that of which we
have been divested, even our body. And
again he says: " We that are in this taber-
nacle do groan, not as if we were oppressed "
with an unwiUingness to be unclothed, but


(we wish) to be clothed upon."'' He here
says expressly, what he touched but lightly '♦
in his first epistle, (where he wrote:) "The
dead shall be raised incorruptible " (meaning
those who had undergone mortality), "and
we shall be changed " (whom God shall find
to be yet in the flesh). 's Both those shall be
raised incorruptible, because they shall regain
their body — and that a renewed one, from
which shall come their incorruptibility; and
these also shall, in the crisis of the last mo-
ment, and from their instantaneous death,
whilst encountering the oppressions of anti-
christ, undergo a change, obtaining therein
not so much a divestiture of body as "a
clothing upon " with the vesture which is from
heaven.'^ So that whilst these shall put on
over their (changed) body this heavenly rai-
ment, the dead also sKall for their part '' re-
cover their body, over which they too have
a supervesture to put on, even the incorrup-
tion of heaven;'^ because of these it was that
he said: "This corruptible must put on in-
corruption, and this mortal must put on im-
mortality."'^ The one put on this (heavenly)^
apparel,^ when they recover their bodies; the
others put it on as a supervesture,*' when they
indeed hardly lose them (in the suddenness
of their change). It was accordingly not
without good reason that he described them
as "not wishing indeed to be unclothed,"
but (rather as wanting) "to be clothed
upon;"=" in other words, as wishing not to
undergo death, but to be surprised into life,=''
" that this mortal (body) might be swallowed
up of life,"^ by being rescued from death
in the supervesture of its changed state.
This is why he shows us how much better it
is for us not to be sorry, if we should be sur-
prised by death, and tells us that we even
hold of God "the earnest of His Spirit " =5
(pledged as it were thereby to have "the
clothing upon," which is the object of our
hope), and that "so long as we are in the
flesh, we are absent from the Lord; " ^ more-
over, that we ought on this account to prefer ^^
" rather to be absent from the body and to
be present with the Lord,"=^ and so to be
ready to meet even death with joy. In this


I 2 Cor. iv. 16-18.
2 2 Cor. iv. II.

3 2 Cor. iv. 14.

4 2 Cor. iv. 16.

5 2 Cor. iv. 16.

6 Vexatione.

7 Animi.

8 2 Cor. V. I.

9 As Marcion would have men believe.
1° 2 Cor. v. 2, 3.

" Despoliati.
12 Gravemur.


13 2 Cor. V. 4.

14 Strinxit.

15 I Cor. XV. 52.

16 Superinduti majns quod de coelo quam exuti corpus.
»7 Utique et mortui.

18 De cceIo.

19 I Cor. XV. S3.

20 Induunt.

21 Superinduunt.
222 Cor. v. 4. _

23 Vita praiveniri.

24 2 Cor. v. 4 ; and see his treatise, De Resurrect. Carnis,
cap. xh'i.

25 2 Cor. V. 5.

26 2 Cor. V. 6.

27 Boni ducere.

28 2 Cor. v. 8.


45^


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book v.


view it is that he informs us how **we must
all appear before the judgment-seat of Christ,
that every one may receive the things done
in his body, according as he hath done either
good or bajd."' Since, however, there is
then to be a retribution according to men's
merits, how will any be able to reckon with'
God ? But by mentioning both the judgment-
seat and the distinction between works good
and bad, he sets before us a Judge who is to
award both sentences, ^ and has thereby af-
firmed that all will have to be present at the
tribunal in their bodies. For it will be im-
possible to pass sentence except on the body,
for what has been done in the body. God
would be unjust, if any one were not punished
or else rewarded in that very condition, -»
wherein the merit was itself achieved. " If
therefore any man be in Christ, he is a new
creature; old things are passed away; behold,
all things are become new; " s and so is ac-
complished the prophecy of Isaiah.^ When
also he (in a later passage) enjoins us "to
cleanse ourselves from all filthiness of flesh
and blood "^ (since this substance enters not
the kingdom of God^); when^ again, he
'* espouses the church as a chaste virgin to
Christ," 5 a spouse to a spouse in very deed,'°
an image cannot be combined and compared
with what is opposed to the real nature of
the thing (with which it is compared). So,
when he designates " false apostles, deceitful
workers transforming themselves" into like-
nesses of himself," of course by their hypoc-
risy, he charges them with the guilt of dis-
orderly conversation, rather than of false
doctrine." The contrariety, therefore, was
one of conduct, not of gods.'^ If "Satan
himself, too, is transformed into an angel of
light," '* such an assertion must not be used
to the prejudice of the Creator. The Crea-
tor is not an angel, but God. Into a god of
light, and not an angel of light, must Satan
then have been said to be transformed, if he
did not mean to call him " the angel," which
both we and Marcion know him to be. 0?i
Paradise is the title of a treatise of ours, in
which is discussed all that the subject admits
of. '5 I shall here simply wonder, in connec-


* a Cor. V. lo.

« Deputari cum.

3 2 Cor. V. ID.

•4 Per id, per quod, i. e., corpus.

5 2 Cor. V. 17.

* Isa. xliii. 19.

7 His reading of 2 Cor. vii. i.

8 I Cor. XV. 50.

9 2 Cor. xi. 2.

'o Utique ut sponsam sponso.

»' 2 Cor. xi. 13.

>= Praedicationis adulteratae.

13 A reference to Marcion's other god of the New TesUnnent, of
which he tortured the epistles (and this passage among them) to
produce the evidence.

143 Cor. xi. 14.


tion with this matter, whether a god who has
no dispensation of any kind on earth could
possibly have a paradise to call his own —
without perchance availing himself of the
paradise of the Creator, to use it as he does
His world — much in the character of a men-
dicant."^ And yet of the removal of a man
from earth to heaven we have an instance af-
forded us by the Creator in Elijah. '^ But
what will excite my surprise still more is the
case (next supposed by Marcion), that a God
so good and gracious, and so averse to blows
and cruelty, should have suborned the angel
Satan — not his own either, but the Creator's
— " to buffet " the apostle,'^ and then to have
refused his request, when thrice entreated to
liberate him ! It would seem, therefore, that
Marcion's god imitates the Creator's con-
duct, who is an enemy to the proud, even
" putting down the mighty from their seats." ''
Is he then the same God as He who gave
Satan power over the person of Job that his
" strength might be made perfect in weak-
ness ? " ^ How is it that the censurer of the
Galatians^^ still retains the very formula of
the law: *' In the mouth of two or three wit-
nesses shall every word be established?""
How again is it that he threatens sinners
"that he will not spare" them*^ — he, the
preacher of a most gentle god ? Yea, he even
declares that " the Lord hath given to him
the power of using sharpness in their pres-
ence !" ="* Deny now, O heretic, (at your
cost,) that your god is an object to be feared,
when his apostle was for making himself so
formidable !

CHAP. XIII. THE EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS.

ST. PAUL CANNOT HELP USING PHRASES WHICH
BESPEAK THE JUSTICE OF GOD, EVEN WHEN
HE IS EULOGIZING THE MERCIES OF THE GOS-
PEL. MARCION PARTICULARLY HARD IN HIS
MUTILATION OF THIS EPISTLE. YET OUR
AUTHOR ARGUES ON COMMON GROUND. THE
JUDGMENT AT LAST WILL BE IN ACCORD-
ANCE WITH THE GOSPEL. THE JUSTIFIED BY
FAITH EXHORTED TO HAVE PEACE WITH GOD.
THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE OLD AND THE
NEW DISPENSATIONS IN ONE AND THE SAME
HAND.

Since my little work is approaching its ter-


'5 Patitur. The w^rk here referred to is not extant ; it is, how-
ever, referred to in the De Anivta, c. Iv.

»6 Precario : " that which one must beg for." See, however,
above, book iv. chap. xxii. p. 384, note 8, for a different turn to
this word.

17 2 Kmgs ii. II.

182 Cor. xii. 7, 8.

'9 I Sam ii. 7, 8 ; Ps. cxlvii. 6 ; Luke i. 52.

20 Job i. 12 and 2 Cor. xii. 9.

3« Gal. i. 6;-9.

22 2 Cor. xiii. 1.

=3 2 Cor. xiii. 2.

24 2 Cor. xiii. 10.


CHAP. XIII.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


457


mination/ I must treat but briefly the points
which still occur, whilst those which have so
often turned up must be put aside. I regret
still to have to contend about the law — after
I have so often proved that its replacement
(by the gospel) ^ affords no argument for an-
other god, predicted as it was indeed in Christ,
and in the Creator's own plans ^ ordained for
His Christ. (But I must revert to that dis-
cussion) so far as (the apostle leads me, for)
this very epistle looks very much as if it abro-
gated-* the law. We have, however, often
shown before now that God is declared by the
apostle to be a Judge; and that in the Judge
is implied an Avenger; and in the Avenger,
the Creator. And so in the passage where he
says: *' I am not ashamed of the gospel (of
Christ): for it is the power of God unto salva-
tion to every one that believeth; to the Jew
first, and also to the Greek; for therein. is the
righteousness of God revealed from faith to
faith," s he undoubtedly ascribes both the
gospel and salvation to Him whom (in ac-
cordance with our heretic's own distinction) I
have called the just God, not the good one.
It is He who removes (men) from confidence
in the law to faith in the gospel — that is to
say, ^ His own law and His own gospel.
When, again, he declares that " the wrath (of
God) is revealed from heaven against all un-
godliness and unrighteousness of men, who
hold the truth in unrighteousness," ^ (I ask)
the wrath of what God ? Of the Creator cer-
tainly. The truth, therefore, will be His,
whose is also the wrath, which has to be re-
vealed to avenge the truth. Likewise, when
adding, "We are sure that the judgment of
God is according to truth," ^ he both vindi-
cated that wrath from which comes this judg-
ment for the truth, and at the same time af-
forded another proof that the truth emanates
from the same God whose wrath he attested,
by witnessing to His judgment. MarcioiC s
averment is quite a different matter, that^ the
Creator in anger avenges Himself on the truth
of the rival god which had been detained in
unrighteousness. But what serious gaps
Marcion has made in this epistle especially,
by withdrawing whole passages at his will,
will be clear from the unmutilated text of our
own copy.'° It is enough for my purpose to
accept in evidence of its truth what he has seen
fit to leave unerased, strange instances as they


1 Profligatur.

2 Concessionem.

3 Apiid Creatorem.

4 Excludere.

5 Rom. i. i6, 17

6 Utique.

7 Rom. i. 18.

8 Rom. ii. 2.

9 Aliud est si.
loNostri instrument!.


are also of his negligence and blindness. If,
then, God will judge the secrets of men — both
of those who have sinned in the law, and of
those who have sinned without law (inasmuch
as they who know not the law yet do by nat-
ure the things contained in the law) " — surely
the God who shall judge is He to whom be-
long both the law, and that nature which is
the rule" to them who know not the law.
But how will He conduct this judgment?
" According to my gospel," says {the apostle),
" t>y (yi?J2^J") Christ." '3 So that both the gospel
and Christ must be His, to whom appertain
the law and the nature which are to be vindi-
cated by the gospel and Christ — even at that
judgment of God which, as he previously
said, was to be according to truth.'* The
wrath, therefore, which is to vindicate truth,
can only be revealed from heaven by the God
of wrath; ^5 go that this sentence, which is
quite in accordance with that previous one
wherein the judgment is declared to be the
Creator's,'^ cannot possibly be ascribed to
another god who is not a judge, and is incapa-
ble of wrath. It is only consistent in Him
amongst whose attributes are found the judg-
ment and the wrath of which I am speaking,
and to whom of necessity must also appertain
the media whereby these attributes are to be
carried into effect, even the gospel and Christ.
Hence his invective against the transgressors
of the law, who teach that men should not
steal, and yet practise theft themselves. '^
(This invective he utters) in perfect homage *^
to the law of God, not as if he meant to cen-
sure the Creator Himself with having com-
manded'' a fraud to be practised against the
Egyptians to get their gold and silver at the
very time when He was forbidding men to
steal, ^ — adopting such methods as they are
apt (shamelessly) to charge upon Him in
other particulars also. Are we then to sup-
pose^' that the apostle abstained through fear
from openly calumniating God, from whom
notwithstanding He did not hesitate to with-
draw men? Well, but he had gone so far in
his censure of the Jews, as to point against
them the denunciation of the prophet,
" Through you the name of God is blas-
phemed (among the Gentiles)." =° But how
absurd, that he should himself blaspheme
Him for blaspheming whom he upbraids them


11 Rom. ii. 12-16.

12 Instar legis : " which is as good as a law to them," etc.

13 Rom. ii. 16.

14 Rom. ii. 2.

15 Rom. i. 18.

16 See the remarks on verses 16 and 17 above.

17 Rom. ii. 21.

18 Ut homo.
19EX. iii. 22.

■x> Ex. XX. 15 ; see above, book iv. chap. xxiv. p. 387.
=1 Scilicet verebatur.
22 Rom. ii. 24.


458


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book V


as evil-doers ! He prefers even circumcision
of heart to neglect of it in the flesh. Now it
is quite within the purpose of the God of the
law that circumcision should be that of the
heart, not in the flesh; in the spirit, and not
in the letter.' Since this is the circumcision
recommended by Jeremiah: ** Circumcise
(yourselves to the Lord, and- take away) the
foreskins of your heart;"" and even of
Moses: "Circumcise, therefore, the hardness
of your heart," 3 — the Spirit which circum-
cises the heart will proceed from Him who
prescribed the letter also which clips'* the
flesh; and *' the Jew which is one inwardly "
will be a subject of the self-same God as he
also is who is " a Jew outwardly; " s because
the apostle would have preferred not to have
mentioned a Jew at all, unless he were a ser-
vant of the God of the Jews. It was once ^
the law; now it is " the righteousness of God
which is by the faith of (Jesus) Christ." ^
What means this distinction ? Has your god
been subserving the interests of the Creator's
dispensation, by affording time to Him and
to His law? Is the " Naiu" in the hands of
Him to whom belonged the " Then " ? Sure-
ly, then, the law was His, whose is now the
righteouness of God. It is a distinction of
dispensations, not of gods. He enjoins those
who are justified by faith in Christ and not
by the law to have peace with God.^ With
what God ? Him whose enemies we have
never, in any dispensation,' been ? Or Him
against whom we have rebelled, both in re-
lation to His written law and His law of nat-
ure ? Now, as peace is only possible towards
Him with whom there once was war, we shall
be both justified by Him, and to Him also will
belong the Christ, in whom we are justified
by faith, and through whom alone God's"
enemies can ever be reduced to peace.
'* Moreover," says he, *' the law entered, that


' Rom. ii. 39.
3 Jcr. iv. 4.

3 Deut. X. 16 (Sept.).

4 Metens.

5 Rom. ii. 28.

6 Tunc.

7 Rom. iii. at, 22.

8 Tertullian, by the word ^^ enjoins " (monet), seems to have read
the passage in Rom. v. 1 in the hortatory sense with ix^ofitv, " iet
ut have peace with God." If so, his authority must be added to
that exceedingly strong .ms. authority which Dean Alford (Greek
Test, in loc.) regrets to find overpowering the received reading of
ixoyLtv, " we /iazr," etc. We subjoin Alford's critical note in
support of the cxu/uiei', which (with Lachmann) he yet admits
into his more recent text : *' AH (originally) CDKLfh (originally)
m 17 latt (including F-lnt); of the versions the older Syriac (Pes-
chito) and Copt ; of the fathers, Chrysostom, Cyril, Theodoret,
Damascene, Theophylact, CEcumenius. Rufinus, Pelagius, Oro-
sius, Augustine, Cassiodorus," before whom I would insert Ter-
tullian, and the Codex Sinaiticus, in its original state ; although,
Hke its great rival in authority, the Codex Vaticanus, it afterwards
received the reading i\oy.iv. These second readings of these Mss.,
and the later Syriac (Philoxenian), with Epiphanius, Didymus,
and Sedulius. are the almost only authorities quoted for the re-
ceived text. [Dr. H. over-estimates the " rival " Codices.\

9Nusquam.
10 Ejus.


the offence might abound. ' ' " And wherefore
this? "In order," he says, "that (where
sin abounded), grace might much more
abound." " Whose grace, if not of that God
from whom also came the law ? Unless it be,
forsooth, thaf the Creator intercalated His
law for the mere purpose of '•* producing some
employment for the grace of a rival god, an
enemy to Himself (I had almost said, a god
unknown to Him), " that as sin had " in His
own dispensation 's " reigned unto death, even
so might grace reign through righteousness
unto (eternal) life by Jesus Christ,"'^ His
own antagonist ! For this (I suppose it was,
that) the law of the Creator had " concluded
all under sin," '^ and had brought in "all
the world as guilty (before God)," and had
" stopped every mouth, '^ so that none could
glory through it, in order that grace might
be maintained to the glory of the Christ, not
of the Creator, but of Marcion ! I may here
anticipate a remark about the substance of
Christ, in the prospect of a question which
will now turn up. For he says that "we are
dead to the law."'' It may be contended
that Christ's body is indeed a body, but not
exactly =^ flesh. Now, whatever may be the
substance, since he mentions "the body of
Christ," ="' whom he immediately after states
to have been " raised from the dead," " none
other body can be understood than that of the
flesh, =^3 in respect of which the law was called
(the law) of death. =-* But, behold, he bears
testimony to the law, and excuses it on the
ground of sin: " What shall we say, therefore ?
Is the law sin? God forbid." 's Fie on you,
Marcion. "God forbid!" (See how) the
apostle recoils from all impeachment of the
law. I, however, have no acquaintance with
sin except through the law."* But how high
an encomium of the law (do we obtain) from


" Rom. v. 20.

12 Rom. V. 20.

13 Nisi si : an ironical particle.

14 Ideo ut.

'5 Apud ipsum.
16 Rom. y. 21.
'7 Gal. iii. 22.

18 Rom. iii. 19.

19 Rom. vii. 4, also Gal. ii. ip. This (although a quotation) is
here a Marcionite argument ; out there is no need to suppose,
with Pamelius, that Marcion tampers with Rom. vi. 2. (.)ehler
also supposes that this is the passage quoted. But no doubt it is
a correct quotation from the seventh chapter, as we have in-
dicated.

20 Statim (or, perhaps, in respect of the derivation,) " firmly " or
" stedfastly."

2' Ejus.
"Rom. vii. 4.

23 In this argument Tertullian applies with good effect the
terms " flesh " and " body," making the first (which he elsewhere
calls the '• terrena materia " of our nature (ad Uxor. \. 4) ) the
proof of the reality of the second, in opposition to Marcion's
Docetic error. " 2opf is not = viofia, but as in Tohn i. 14, the
material of which man is in the body compounded " (Alford).

24 Compare the first part of ver. 4 with vers. 5 and 6 and viii.

25 Rom. vu. 7.

26 This, which is really the second clause of Rom. vii. 7, seems
to be here put as a Marcionite argument of disparagement to the
law.


CHAP. XIV.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


459


this fact, that by it there comes to light the
latent presence of sin ! ' It was not the law,
therefore, which led me astray, but "sin,
taking occasion by the commandment.""
Why then do you, (O Marcion,) impute to the
God of the law what His apostle dares not
impute even to the law itself ? Nay, he adds
a climax: " The law is holy, and its command-
ment just and good." ^ Now if he thus rever-
ences the Creator's law, I am at a loss to
know how he can destroy the Creator Himself.
Who can draw a distinction, and say that there
are two gods, one just and the other good,
when He ought to be believed to be both one
and the other, whose commandment is both
'''just and good'^ " Then, again, when affirm-
ing the law to be "spiritual"'' he thereby
implies that it is prophetic, and that it is fig-
urative. Now from even this circumstance I
am bound to conclude that Christ was pre-
dicted by the law but figuratively, so that indeed
He could not be recognised by all the Jews.

chap. xiv. — the divine power shown in
Christ's incarnation. meaning of st.
Paul's phrase, likeness of sinful flesh.
no docetism in it. resurrection of our
real bodies. a wide chasm made in the
epistle by marcion 's erasure. when the
jews are upbraided by the apostle for
their misconduct to godj inasmuch as
that god was the creator, a proof 13 in

FACT GIVEN THAT ST. PAUL'S GOD WAS THE
CREATOR. THE PRECEPTS AT THE END OF
THE EPISTLE, WHICH MARCION ALLOWED,
SHOWN TO BE IN EXACT ACCORDANCE WITH
THE creator's SCRIPTURES.

If the Father "sent His Son in the like-
ness of sinful flesh," s it must not therefore
be said that the flesh which He seemed to have
was but a phantom. For he in a previous verse
ascribed sin to the flesh, and made it out to
be " the law of sin dwelling in his members,"
and "warring against the law of the mind." '^
On this account, therefore, (does he mean to
say that) the Son was sent in the likeness of
sinful flesh, that He might redeem this sinful
flesh by a like substance, even a fleshly one,
which bare a resemblance to sinful flesh, al-
though it was itself free from sin. Now this
will be the very perfection of divine power to
effect the salvation (of man) in a nature like
his own. 7 For it would be no great matter if
the Spirit of God remedied the flesh; but when


1 Per quam liquuit delictum latere : a playful paradox, in the
manner of our author, between liquere and latere.

2 Rom. vii. 8.

3 Rom. vii. 13.

4 Rom. vii. 14.

5 Rom, viii. 3.

6 Sensus vo6% in Rom. vii. 23.

7 Pari.


a flesh, which is the very copy' of the sinning
substance — itself flesh also — only without sin,
(effects the remedy, then doubtless it is a
great thing). The like?iess, therefore, will
have reference to the quality' of the sinful-
ness, and not to any falsity '° of the substance.
Because he would not have added the attribute
"sinful,"" if he meant the " likeness " to
be so predicated of the substance as to deny
the verity thereof; in that case he would only
have used the word " flesh," and omitted the
"sinful." But inasmuch as he has put the
two together, and said "sinful flesh," (or
" flesh of sin,") "he has both affirmed the
substance, that is, the flesh and referred the like-
ness to the fault of the substance, that is, to its
sin. But even suppose '^ that the likeness
was predicated of the substance, the truth of
the said substance will not be thereby denied.
Why then call the true substance like ? Be-
cause it is indeed true, only not of a seed of
like condition '* with our own; but true still,
as being of a nature '^ not really unlike ours."*
And again, in contrary things there is no like-
ness. Thus the likeness of flesh would not
be called spirit, because flesh is not suscepti-
ble of any likeness to spirit; but it would be
called phantom, if it seemed to be that which
it really was not. It is, however, called like-
?iess, since it is what it seems to be. Now it
is (what it seems to be), because it is on a par
with the other thing (with which it is com-
pared).'^ But a phantom, which is merely
such and nothing else,'^ is not a likeness.
The apostle, however, himself here cofnes to
our aid; for, while explaining in what sense
he would not have us "live in the flesh,"


SConsimilis.
sTituIum.

loMendacium.

"This vindication of these terms of the apostle from Doceiism
is important. The word which our A.V. has translated sinful is
a stronger term in the original. It is not the adjective a/uapTwAow,
but the substantive a/aapTia?, amounting to " flesh of sin," i.e. (as
Dean Alford interprets it) " the flesh whose attnbute and char-
acter is sin." " The words ei* Ofxono/uoTt Qo.pKO'; aixapriai, De
Wette observes, appear almost to border on Docetism, but in
reality contain a perfectly true and consistent sentiment ; <Tap$
ajuapTiaj; is flesh, or human nature, possessed with sin. . . .
The likeness, predicated in Rom. viii. ^, must be referred not
only to <rap^, but also to the epithet -njs o^aprias " {Greek Testa-
ment^ in loc).

laCarnis peccati.

13 Puta nunc.

14 Statu.

15 Censu : perhaps " birth." This word, which originally means
the censor's registration, is by our author often used for origv and
natiira, because in the registers were inserted the birthdays and
the parents' names (Oehler).

16 It is better that we should give the original of this sentence.
Its structure is characteristically difficult, although the general
sense, aS Oehler suggests, is clear enough : " Quia vera quidem,
sed non ex semine de statu simili (similis, Latinius and Junius
and Semler), sed vera de censu non vero dissimili (dissimilis, t/ic
older reading AnA Sevtlcr's).'' We add the note of Fr. Junius:
" The meaning is, that Christ's flesh is true indeed, in what they
call the identity of its substance, although not of its origin
(ortus) and qualities— not of its origin, because not of a (father's)
seed, as in the case of ourselves ; not of qualities, because these
have not in Him the like condition which they have in us."

17 Dum aiterius par est.

18 (^)ua hoc tantum est.


460


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book v.


although in the flesh — even by not living in
the works of the flesh ' — he shows that when
he wrote the words, " Flesh and blood cannot
inherit the kingdom of God,"' it was not
with the view of condemning the substance
(of the flesh), but the works thereof; and be-
cause it is possible for these not to be com-
mitted by us whilst we are still in the flesh,
they will therefore be properly chargeable, ^
not on the substance of the flesh, but on its
conduct. Likewise, if " the body indeed is
dead because of sin " (from which statement,
we see that not the death of the soul is meant,
but that of the body), " but the spirit is life
because of righteousness," -^ // /(^/Z^^a^j- that
ihis life accrues to that which incurred death
because of sin, that is, as we have just seen,
the body, ^ow the body ^\^ only restored to
him who had lost it; so that the resurrection
of the dead implies the resurrection of their
bodies. He accordingly subjoins: " He that
raised up Christ from the dead, shall also
quicken your mortal bodies."^ In these
words he both affirmed the resurrection of the
flesh (without which nothing can rightly be
called 7 body, nor can anything be properly
regarded as mortal), and proved the bodily
substance of Christ; inasmuch as our own
mortal bodies will be quickened in precisely
the same way as He was raised; and that was
in no other way than in the body. I have
here a very wide gulf of expunged Scripture
to leap across;^ however, I alight on the
place where the apostle bears record of
Israel "that they have a zeal of God" —
their own God, of course — "but not accord-
ing to knowledge. For," says he, "being
ignorant of (the righteousness of) God, and
going about to establish their own righteous-
ness, they have not submitted themselves unto
the righteousness of God; for Christ is the
end of the law for righteousness to every one
that believeth." ' Hereupon we shall be con-
fronted with an argument of the heretic, that
the Jews were ignorant of the superior God,'°
since, in opposition to him, they set up their
own righteousness — that is, the righteousness
of their law — not receiving Christ, the end (or

' See Rom. viji. 5-13.
= 1 Cor. XV. 50.

3 Non ad reatum substantia sed ad conversationis pertinebunt.

4 Rom. viii. 10.

5 Understand "<rt7r/«j" (Oehler).
* Rom. viii. 11.

7 Dici capit: capit, like the Greek ivhi\fTa.t.^ means, " is capable
or susceptible ; '" often so in Tertullian.

8 We do not know from either Tertullian or Epiphanius what
mutilations Marcion made in this epistle. This particular gap
did not extend further than from Rom. viii. 11 to x. 2. " How-
ever, we are informed by Ori>ren (or rather Rufinus in his edition
of Origen's commentary on this epistle, on xiv. 23) that Marcion
omitted the last two chapters as spurious, ending this epistle
of his Apostolicon with the 23d verse of chap. xiv. It is also
observable that Tertullian quotes no passage from chaps, xv. xvi.
in his confutation of Marcion from this epistle "' (Lardner).

9 Rom. X. 2-4.

10 The god of the New Testament, according to Marcion.


finisher) of the law. But how then is it that
he bears testimony to their zeal for their own
God, if it is not in respect of the same God
that he upbraids them for their ignorance ?
They were affected indeed \vith zeal for God,
but it was not an intelligent zeal: they were,
in fact, ignorant of Him, because they were
ignorant of His dispensations by Christ, who
was to bring about the consummation of the
law; and in this way did they maintain their
own righteousness in opposition to Him. But
so does the Creator Himself testify to their
ignorance concerning Him: " Israel hath not
known me; my people have not understood
me; " " and as to their preferring the estab-
lishment of their own righteousness, (the Cre-
ator again describes them as) "teaching for
doctrines the commandments of men;" "
moreover, as " having gathered themselves
together against the Lord and against His
Christ " '3 — from ignorance of Him, of course.
Now nothing can be expounded of another
god which is applicable to the Creator; other-
wise the apostle would not have been just in
reproaching the Jews with ignorance in respect
of a god of whom they knew nothing. For
where had been their sin, if they only main-
tained the righteousness of their own God
against one of whom they were ignorant?
But he exclaims: " O the depth of the riches
and the wisdom of God; how unsearchable
also are His ways ! " ''^ Whence this outburst
of feeling? Surely from the recollection of
the Scriptures, which he had been previously
turning over, as well as from his contempla-
tion of the mysteries which he had been set-
ting forth above, in relation to the faith of
Christ coming from the law.'s If Marcion
had an object in his erasures, '** why does his
apostle utter such an exclamation, because
his god has no riches for him to contemplate ?
So poor and indigent was he, that he created
nothing, predicted nothing — in short, pos-
sessed nothing; for it was mto the world of
another God that he descended. The truth
is, the Creator's resources and riches, which
once had been hidden, were now disclosed.
For so had He promised: "I will give to
them treasures which have been hidden, and
which men have not seen will I open to
them." '7 Hence, then, came the exclama-


" Isa. i. 3.

»2 Isa. XXIX. 13 (Sept.)

»3 Ps. ii. 2.

14 Rom. xi. 33.

15 In fidem Christi ex lege venientem. By the law he means
the Old Testament in general, and probably refers to Rom. x. 17.

'6 Rigaltius (after Fulvius Ursinus) read " Hon enisit, but wUh
insufficient authority ; besides, the context shows that he was re-
ferring to the large erasure which he had already mentioned, so
that the non is inadmissible. Marcion must, of course, be under-
stood to have retained Rom, xi. 33 ; hence the argument in this
sentence.

>7 Isa. xiv. 3.


CHAl'. XV.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


461


tion, " O the depth of the riches and the wis-
dom of God ! " For His treasures were now
opening out. This is the purport of what
Isaiah said, and of (the apostLe's own) sub-
sequent quotation ot the self-same passage,
of the prophet: " Who hath known the mind
of the Lord ? or who hath been His counsel-
lor? Who hath first given to Him, and it
shall be recompensed to him again?"'
Now, (Marcion,) since you have expunged
so much from the Scriptures, why did you
retain these words, as if they too were not
the Creator's words? But come now, let us
see without mistake^ the precepts of your
new god: "Abhor that which is evil, and
cleave to that which is good." ^ Well, is the
precept different in the Creator's teaching?
" Take away the evil from you, depart from
it, and be doing good."^ The7i again: "Be
kindly affectioned one to another with broth-
erly love.'.'s Now is not this of the same
import as: "Thou shalt love thy neighbour
as thy self?"^ (Again, your apostle says:)
"Rejoicing in hope; " ^ that is, of God.
So says the Creator's Psalmist: "It is better
to hope in the Lord, than to hope even in
princes."^ "Patient in tribulation." ^ You
have (this in) the Psalm: "The Lord hear
thee in the day of tribulation." '° "Bless,
and curse not," " (says your apostle.) But
what better teacher of this will you find
than Him who created all things, and blessed
them? "Mind not high things, but conde-
scend to men of low estate. Be not wise in
your own conceits." '^^ For against such a
disposition Isaiah pronounces a woe.'^ " Rec-
ompense to no man evil for evil.""* (Like
unto which is the Creator's precept:) " Thou
shalt not remember thy brother's evil
against thee." '5 (Again:) "Avenge not your-
selves; "'^ for it is ivritte7i, "Vengeance is
mine, I will repay, saith the Lord." '? " Live
peaceably with all men."'^ The retaliation
of the law, therefore, permitted not retribu-
tion for an injury; it rather repressed any
attempt thereat by the fear of a recompense.
Very properly, then, did he sum up the en-


1 Isa. xl. 13, quoted (according to the Sept.) by the apostle in
Rom. xi. 34, 35.

2 Plane : ironically.

3 Rom. xii. 9.

4 Ps. xxxiv. 14.

5 Rom. xii. 10.

6 Lev. xix. 18.

7 Rom. xii. 12.

8 Ps. cxviii. 9.

9 Rom. xii. 12.
10 Ps. XX. I.

" Rom. xii. 12.

12 Rom. xii. 16.

13 Isa. V. 21.

14 Rom. xii. 17.

15 Lev. xix. 17, 18.

16 Rom. xii. 19.

17 Rom. xii. 19, quoted from Deut. xxxii. 25.

18 Rom. xii. 18.


tire teaching of the Creator in this precept of
His: " Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thy-
self." '9 Now, if this is the recapitulation of
the law from the very law itself, I am at a loss
to know who is the God of the law. I fear
He must be Marcion's god (after all).* If
also the gospel of Christ is fulfilled in this
same precept, but not the Creator's Christ,
what is the use of our contending any longer
whether Christ did or did not say, " I am not
come to destroy the law, but to fulfil it?""
In vain has (our man of) Pontus laboured to
deny this statement. =" If the gospel has not
fulfilled the law, then all I can say is,'^ the
law has fulfilled the gospel. But it is well
that in a later \ersG. he threatens us with "the
judgment-seat of Christ," — the Judge, of
course, and the Avenger, and therefore the
Creator's (Christ). This Creator^ too, how-
ever much he may preach up another god, he
certainly sets forth for us as a Being to
be served, =^ if he holds Him thus up as an
object to be feared.

CHAP. XV. THE FIRST EPISTLE TO THE THESSA-

LONIANS. THE SHORTER EPISTLES PUNGENT
IN SENSE AND VERY VALUABLE. ST. PAUI^
UPBRAIDS THE JEWS FOR THE DEATH FIRST
OF THEIR PROPHETS AND THEN OF CHRIST.
THIS A PRESUMPTION THAT BOTH CHRIST
AND THE PROPHETS PERTAINED TO THE SAME
GOD. THE LAW OF NATURE, WHICH IS IN
FACT THE creator's DISCIPLINE, AND THE
GOSPEL OF CHRIST BOTH ENJOIN CHASTITY.
THE RESURRECTION PROVIDED FOR IN THE
OLD TESTAMENT BY CHRIST. MAN'S COM-
POUND NATURE.

I shall not be sorry to bestow attention on
the shorter epistles also. Even in brief works
there is much pungency. =s The Jews had
slain their prophets.^ I may ask. What has
this to do with the apostle of the rival god,
one so amiable withal, who could hardly be
said to condemn even the failings of his own
people; and who, moreover, has himself some
hand in making away with the same prophets


19 Rom. xiii. 9.

=0 Ironically said. He has been quoting all along from Mar-
cion^ s text of St. Paul, turning its testimony against Marcion.

2' Matt. V. 17.

22 For although he rejected St. Matthew's Gospel, which con-
tains the statement, he retained St. Paul's epistle, from which the
statement is clearly proved.

»3 Ecce.

24 Promerendum.

25 Sapor. We have here a characteristic touch of his diligent
and also intrepid spirit. Epiphanius says this short epistle " was
so entirely corrupted by Marcion, that he had himself selected
nothing from it whereon to found any refutations of him or of his
doctrine." Tertullian, however, was of a different mind ; for he
has made it evident, that though there were alterations made by
Marcion, yet sufficient was left untouched by him to show the ab-
surdity of his opinions. Epiphanius and lertullian entertained,
respectively, similar opinions of Marcion's treatment of the second
epistle, which the latter discusses in the next chapter (Lardner).

26 I Thess. ii. 15.


462


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book v.


whom he is destroying? What injury did
Israel commit against him in slaying those
whom he too has reprobated, since he was
the first to pass a hostile sentence on them ?
But Israel sinned aginst their own God. He
upbraided their iniquity to whom the injured
God pertains; and certainly he is anything
but the adversary of the injured Deity. Else
he would not have burdened them with the
charge of killing even the Lord, in the words,
** Who both killed the Lord Jesus and their
own prophets," although (the pronoun) their
own be an addition of the heretics.' Now,
what was there so very acrimonious' in their
killing Christ the proclaimer of the new god,
after they had put to death also the prophets
of their own god ? The fact, however, of their
having slain the Lord and His servants, is
put as a case of climax. ^ Now, if it were the
Christ of one god and the prophets of another
god whom they slew, he would certainly have
placed the impious crimes on the same level,
instead of mentioning them in the way of a
climax; but they did not admit of being put
on the same level: the climax, therefore,
was only possible * by the sin having been in
fact committed against one and the same
Lord in the two respective circumstances. ^
To one and the same Lord, then, belonged
Christ and the prophets. What that " sanc-
tification of ours " is, which he declares to be
"the will of God," you may discover from
the opposite conduct which he forbids. That
we should "abstain from fornication," not
from marriage; that every one " should know
how to possess his vessel in honour."^ In
what way ? " Not in the lust of concupiscence,
even as the Gentiles." ^ Concupiscence,
however, is not ascribed to marriage even
among the Gentiles, but to extravagant, un-
natural, and enormous sins.^ The law of
nature' is opposed to luxury as well as to
grossness and uncleanness;'° it does not for-
bid connubial intercourse, but concupiscence;
and it takes care of" our vessel by the hon-
ourable estate of matrimony. This passage
(of the apostle) I would treat in such a way
as to maintain the superiority of the other and
higher sanctity, preferring continence and
virginity to marriage, but by no means pro-


»A11 the best mss., including; the Codices Alex., Vat., and
Sinait., omit the ifiiov?, as do TertiilHan and Origen. Marcion
has Chrysostom and the received text, followed by our A. V., with
him.

' Amarum,

3 Status exaggerationis.

4 Ergo exaggerari non potuit nisi.

5 Ex utroque titulo..

6 I Thess. iv. 3, 4.

7 I Thess. iv. 5.

8 Portentuosis.

9 The rule of Gentile life.

10 We have here followed Oehler' s reading, which b more in-
telligible than the four or five others given by him.
" Tractet.


hibiting the latter. For my hostility is di-
rected against " those who are for destroying
the God of marriage, not those who follow
after chastity. He says that those who " re-
main unto the coming of Christ," along with
"the dead in Christ, shall rise first," being
"caught up in the clouds to meet the Lord
in the air." '3 I find it was in their foresight
of all this, that the heavenly intelligences
gazed with admiration on "the Jerusalem
which is above," "'» and by the mouth of Isaiah
said long ago: "Who are these that fly as
clouds, and as doves with their young ones,
unto me ? " 's Now, as Christ has prepared
for us this ascension into heaven, He must
be the Christ of whom Amos '* spoke: "It is
He who builds His ascent up to the heav-
ens,"'7 even for Himself and His people.-
Now, from whom shall I expect (the fulfil-
ment of) all this, except from Him whom I
have heard give the promise thereof ? What
" spirit " does he forbid us to " quench," and
what " prophesyings " to " despise ? " '^ Not
the Creator's spirit, nor the Creator's prophe-
syings, Marcion of course replies. For he
has already quenched and despised the thing
which he destroys, and is unable to forbid
what he has despised. '^ It is then incum-
bent on Marcion now to display in his church
that spirit of his god which must not be
quenched, and the prophesyings which must
not be despised. And since he has made
such a display as he thinks fit, let him know
that we shall challenge it whatever it may be
to the rule =~ of the grace and power of the
Spirit and the prophets — namely, to foretell
the future, to reveal the secrets of the heart,
and to explain mysteries. And when he shall
have failed to produce and give proof of any
such criterion, we will then on our side bring
out both the Spirit and the prophecies of the
Creator, which utter predictions according to
His will. Thus it will be clearly seen of
what the apostle spoke, even of those things
which were to happen in the church of his
God; and as long as He endures, so long also
does His Spirit work, and so long are His
promises repeated." Come now, you who
deny the salvation of the flesh, and who, when-
ever there occurs the specific mention of body
in a case of this sort," interpret it as meaning


" Retundo.

'3i Thess. iv. 15-17.

M Gal. iv. 26.

JS Isa. Ix. 8.

'6 Oehler and Fr. Junius here read Amos, but all the other
readings give Hosen : but see above, book iii. chap, xxiv., where
Amos was read by all.

'7 Amos ix. 6.

18 1 Thess. v. 19, 20.

»9 Nihil fecit. This is precisely St. Paul's tfowflevelf, " to an-
nihilate " (A.V, "^^j//j^"), in I Thess. v, 20.

■■«' Formam.

21 Celebratur.

" Si quando corpus in hujus modi prarnominatur.


'CHAP. XVI.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


463


anything rather than the substance of the
flesh, (tell me) how is it that the apostle has
given certain distinct names to all (our facul-
ties), and has comprised them all in one prayer
for their safety, desiring that our " spirit and
soul and body may be preserved blameless
unto the coming of our Lord and Saviour
(Jesus) Christ ? " ' Now he has here pro-
pounded the soul and the body as two several
and distinct things, = For although the soul
has a kind of body of a quality of its own,^
just as the spirit has, yet as the soul and the
body are distinctly named, the soul has its
own peculiar appellation, not requiring the
common designation of body. This is left for
"the flesh," which having no proper name
(in this passage), necessarily makes use of the
•common designation. Indeed, I see no other
substance in man, after spirit and sotil^ to
which the term body can be applied except
"the flesh." This, therefore, I understand
to be meant by the word "body" — as often
as the latter is not specifically named. Much
more do I so understand it in the present
passage, where the flesh '• is expressly called
by the name " body."

CHAP. XVI. — THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE
THESSALONIANS. AN ABSURD ERASURE OF
MARCION; ITS OBJECT TRANSPARENT. THE
FINAL JUDGMENT ON THE HEATHEN AS WELL
AS THE JEWS COULD NOT BE ADMINISTERED

BY MARCION'S CHRIST. THE MAN OF SIN

WHAT ? INCONSISTENCY OF MARCION 'S VIEW.
THE ANTICHRIST. THE GREAT EVENTS OF
THE LAST APOSTASY WITHIN THE PROVIDENCE
AND INTENTION OF THE CREATOR, WHOSE
ARE ALL THINGS FROM THE BEGINNING.
SIMILARITY OF THE PAULINE PRECEPTS WITH
THOSE OF THE CREATOR.

We are obliged from tim.e to time to recur


1 I Thess. V. 23. For a like application of this passage, see also
our author's treatise, De Resurrect. Cartiis, cap. xlvii. [Eluci-
dation I.]

2 It is remarkable that our author quotes this text of the three
principles, in defence only of two of them. But he was strongly
opposed to the idea cf any absolute division between the soul and
the spirit. A distinction between these united parts, he might,
under limitations, have admitted ; but all idea of an actual separ-
ation and division he opposed and denied. See his De Anitiin,
cap. X. St. Augustine more fully still maintained a similar opin-
ion. See also his De Aniuia, iv. 32. Bp. EUicott, in his inter-
esting sermon On the Threefold Nature 0/ Man,^ has given
these references, and also a sketch 'oi patristic opinion on this
subject. The early fathers, Justin Martyr, Clement of Ale.\.,
Origen, as well as Didymus of Alex., Gregory Nyssen., and Basil,
held distinctly the threefold. nature. Our own divines, as is
natural, are also divided in view. Bp. Bull, Hammond, and
Jackson hold the trichotomy^ as the triple nature is called ;
others, like Bp. Butler, deny the possibilityof dividing our im-
material nature into two parts. This variation of opinion seems
to have still representatives among our most recent commentators:
while Dean Alford holds the triplicity of our nature literally with
St. Paul, Archdeacon Wordsworth seems to agree with Bp. Butler
in regarding soul and spirit as component parts of one principle.
See also Bp. Ellicott's Destiny 0/ the Creature., sermon v. and
notes. • r,

3 On this paradox, that souls are corporeal, see his treatise De
Anitna, v., and following chapters (Oehler). [See also cap. x.
supra."]

4 Quae = caro.


to certain topics in order to affirm truths
which are connected with them. We repeat
then here, that as the Lord is by the apostle
proclaimed s as the awarder of both weal and
woe,*^ He must be either the Creator, or (as
Marcion would be loth to admit) One like the
Creator — "with whom it is a righteous thing
to recompense tribulation to them who afflict
us, and to ourselves, who are afflicted, rest,
when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed as com-
ing from heaven with the angels of His might
and in flaming fire."'' The heretic, however,
has erased the Jlaming fire, no doubt that he
might extinguish all traces herein of our own
God. But the folly of the obliteration is clearly
seen. For as the apostle declares that the
Lord will come " to take vengeance on them
that know not God and that obey not the gos-
pel, who," he says, " shall be punished with
everlasting destruction from the presence of
the Lord, and from the glory of His power " ^
— it follows that, as He comes to inflict pun-
ishment, He must require " the flaming fire."
Thus on this consideration too we must, not-
withstanding Marcion's opposition, conclude
that Christ belongs to a God who kindles the
flames' (of vengeance), and therefore to the
Creator, inasmuch as He takes vengeance
on such as know not the Lord, that is, on the
heathen. For he has mentioned separately
" those who obey not the gospel of our Lord
Jesus Christ," '° whether they be sinners among
Christians or among Jews. Now, to inflict
punishment on the heathen, who very likely
have never heard of the Gospel, is not the
function of that God who is naturally unknown,
and who is revealed nowhere els'e than in the
Gospel, and therefore cannot be known by all
men." The Creator, however, ought to be
known even by (the light of) nature, for He
may be understood from His works, and may
thereby become the object of a more widely
spread knowledge. Ho Him, therefore, does
it appertain to punish such as know not God,
for none ought to be ignorant of Him. In
the (apostle's) phrase, " From the presence
of the Lord, and from the glory of His
power," " he uses the words of Isaiah, who
for the express reason makes the self-same
Lord "arise to shake terribly the earth." '^
Well, but who is " the man of sin, the son of
perdition," who must first be revealed before
the Lord comes; "who opposeth and exalteth


of both the eternal sentences.


5 Circumferri.

6 Utriusque meriti ;

7 2 Thess. i. 6-8.
82 Thess. i. 8, 9.
9Crematoris Dei.

10 2 Thess. i. 8.

" Non omnibus scibilis.

1=2 Thess. i. 9.

13 Isa. ii. 19. The whole verse is to the point.


464


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book v.


himself above all that is called God, or that
is worshipped; who is to sit in the temple of
God, and boast himself as being God ? " ' Ac-
cording indeed to our view, he is Antichrist;
as it is taught us in both the ancient and the
new prophecies,^ and especially by the Apos-
tle John, who says that *' already many false
prophets are gone out into the world," the
fore-runners of Antichrist, who deny that
Christ is come in the flesh, ' and do not ac-
knowledge* Jesus (to be the Christ), meaning
in God the Creator. According, however, to
Marcion's view, it is really hard to know
whether He might not be (after all) the Crea-
tor's Christ; because according to him He is
not yet come. But whichsoever of the two it
is, I want to know why he comes "in all
power, and with lying signs and wonders ? " s
"Because," he says, "they received not the
love of the truth, that they might be saved;
for which cause God shall send them an in-
stinct of delusion^ (to believe a lie), that they
all might be' judged who believed not the
truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness." ^
If therefore he be Antichrist, (as we hold),
and comes according to the Creator's purpose,
it must be God the Creator who sends him to
fasten in their error those who did not believe
the truth, that they might be saved; His
likewise must be the truth and the salvation,
who avenges (the contempt of) them by send-
ing error as their substitute^ — that is, the
Creator, to whom that very wrath is a fitting
attribute, which deceives with a lie those who
are not captivated with truth. If, however,
he is not Antichrist, as we suppose (him to
be) then He is the Christ of the Creator, as
Marcion will have it. In this case how hap-
pens it that he 9 can suborn the Creator's
Christ to avenge his truth ? But should he
after all agree with us, that Antichrist is here
meant, I must then likewise ask how it is that
he finds Satan, an angel of the Creator, nec-
essary to his purpose? Why, too, should


* 2 Thess. ii. 3, 4.

= The prophets of the Old and the New Testament.
3 1 John iv. 1-3.

* Solventes Jesum. This expression receives some explanation
from the Vulgate version of i John iv. i : " Et omnis spiritus qui
solvit Jesum Christum ex Deo non est. From Irenseus, Vol. I.,
443 (Harvey, ii. 89), wc learn that the Gnostics e/t'vtded Jesus from
Chnst : " Alterum quidem Jesum intelligunt, alterum autem
Christum,"— an error which was met in that clause of the creed
expressing faith in " One Lore/Jesus Christ.''' Grabe, after So-
crates, Hist. Eccles.^ ^"vSS. says that the oldest Mss. of St. John's
epistle read wof frccv^a o Aiiet t'ov '\y\aovv. If so, Tertullian must
be regarded as combining the two readings, viz., that which we
find in the received text and this just quoted. Thus Grabe. It
would be better to say that T. read ver. 2 as we have it, only
omitting '\i\xiovv; and mver. 3.''ead the old lection to which So-
crates refers instead of irai/ ■ttvt\i\i.a. 0 /nij o/u.oAoYel.

5 a Thess. ii. 9.

* Instinctum fallaciae.
7 2 Thess. ii. 10-12.
^Summissu erroris.

9 Marcion. or rather his Christ, who on the hypothesis absurdly
employs the Creator's Christ on the flagrantly inconsistent mission
of avenging his truth, i.e. Marcionism.


Antichrist be slain by Him, whilst commis-
sioned by the Creator to execute the func-
tion '° of inspiring men with their love of un-
truth ? In short, it is incontestable that the
emissary," and the truth, and the salvation
belong to Him to whom also appertain the
wrath, and the jealousy," and " the sending
of the strong delusion," '^ on those who de-
spise and mock, as well as upon those who
are ignorant of Him; and therefore even
Marcion will now have to come down a step,
and concede to us that his god is " a jealous
god." (This being then an unquestionable
position, I ask) which God has the greater
right to be angry? He, as I suppose, who
from the beginning of all things has given to
man, as primary witnesses for the knowledge
of Himself, nature in her (manifold) works,
kindly providences, plagues,''^ and indications
(of His divinity), 's but who in spite of all this
evidence has not been acknowledged; or he
who has been brought out to view ^"^ once for
all in one only copy of the gospel — and even
that without any sure authority — which actu-
ally makes no secret of proclaiming another
god ? Now He who has the right of inflicting the
vengeance, has also sole claim to that which
occasions '7 the vengeance, I mean the Gospel;
(in other words,) both the truth and (its ac-
companying) salvation. The charge, that
"if any would not work, neither should he
eat," '^ is in strict accordance with the precept
of Him who ordered that " the' mouth of the
ox that treadeth out the corn should not be
muzzled." '^

CHAP. XVII. — THE EPISTLE TO THE LAODICEANS.
THE PROPER DESIGNATION IS TO THE EPHE-
SIANS. RECAPITULATION OF ALL THINGS IN
CHRIST FROM THE BEGINNING OF THE CREA-
TION. NO ROOM FOR MARCION's CHRIST
HERE. NUMEROUS PARALLELS BETWEEN THIS
EPISTLE AND PASSAGES IN THE OLD TESTA-
MENT. THE PRINCE OF THE POWER OF THE

AIR, AND THE GOD OF THIS WORLD WHO ?

CREATION AND REGENERATION THE WORK OF
ONE GOD. HOW CHRIST HAS MADE THE LAW
OBSOLETE. A VAIN ERASURE OF MARCION's.
THE APOSTLES AS WELL AS THE PROPHETS
FROM THE CREATOR.

We have it on the true tradition =° of the
Church, that this epistle was sent to the Ephe-


10 Habens fungi . . . Creatori.
" Angelum : the Antichrist sent by the Creator.
'2 yEmulatio.
132 Thess. ii. 11.

'4 Plagis : " heavy strokes," in opposition to the previous " bene-
ficiis.''^

'5 Praedicationibus : see Rom. i. 20.

'6 Productus est.

«7 Materia.

18 2 Thess. iii. 10.

»9 Deut. XXV. 4.

aoVeriuti.


CHAP. XVII.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


465


sians, not to the Laodiceans. Marcion, how-
ever, was very desirous of giving it the new
title (of Laodicean)/ as if he were extremely
accurate in investigating such a point. But
of what consequence are the titles, since in
writing to a certain church the apostle did in
fact write to all ? It is certain that, whoever
they were to whom he wrote, = he declared
Him to be God in Christ with whom all things
agree which are predicted. ^ Now, to what
god will most suitably belong all those things
which relate to "that good pleasure, which
God hath purposed in the mystery of His will,
that in the dispensation of the fulness of
times He might recapitulate " (if I may so say,
according to the exact meaning of the Greek
word'^) "all things in Christ, both which are
in heaven and which are on earth," s but to
Him whose are all things from their begin-
ning, yea the beginning itself too; from whom
issue the times and the dispensation of the
fulness of times, according to which all things
up to the very first are gathered up in Christ ?
What beginning, however, has the other god;
that is to say, how can anything proceed from
him, who has no work to show ? And if there
be no beginning, how can there be times ? If
no times, what fulness of times can there be ?
And if no fulness, what dispensation ? Indeed,
what has he ever done on earth, that any long
dispensation of times to be fulfilled can be put
to his account, for the accomplishment of all
things in Christ, even of things in heaven?
Nor can we possibly suppose that any things
whatever have been at any time done in heaven
by any other God than Him by whom, as all
men allow, all things have been done on
earth. Now, if it is impossible for all these
things from the beginning to be reckoned to,
any other God than the Creator, who will be-
lieve that an alien god has recapitulated them
in an alien Christ, instead of their own proper
Author in His own Christ ? If, again, they
belong to the Creator, they must needs be
separate from the other god; and if separate,
then opposed to him. But then how can op-
posites be gathered together into him by
whom they are in short destroyed? Again,
what Christ do the following words announce,
when the apostle says: "That we should be
to the praise of His glory, who first trusted
in Christ?"^ Now who could have first
trusted — i.e. previously trusted ^ — in God,
before His advent, except the Jews to whom


I Titulum interpolare gestiit : or, " of corrupting its title.
= Certe tamen.

3 For a discussion on the title of this epistle in a succinct shape,
the reader is referred to Dean Alford's Gf. Test. vol. iii. Prolc-
£^ofnena, chap. ii. sec. 2.

4 (xfa/cet/iaAaiaJo-ao-Sat, " to sum up into a head."

5 Eph. i. 9, 10.
^Eph. i. 12.

7 He explains " prsesperasse by ante sperasse."

30


Christ was previously announced, from the
beginning ? He who was thus foretold, was
also foretrusted. Hence the apostle refers
the statement to himself, that is, to the Jews,
in order that he may draw a distinction with
respect to the Gentiles, (when he goes on to
say:) " In whom ye also trusted, after that ye
heard the word of truth, the gospel (of your
salvation); in whom ye believed, and were
sealed with His Holy Spirit of promise."*
Of v/hat promise? That which was made
through Joel: "In the last days will I pour
out of my Spirit upon all flesh," ^ that is, on
all nations. Therefore the Spirit and the
Gospel will be found in the Christ, who was
foretrusted, because foretold. Again, "the
Father of glory " '° is He whose Christ, when
ascending to heaven, is celebrated as "the
King of Glory " in the Psalm: " Who is this
King of Glory ? the Lord of Hosts, He is the
King of Glory." " From Him also is besought
" the spirit of wisdom," " at whose disposal is
enumerated that sevenfold distribution of the
spirit of grace by Isaiah. '' He likewise will
grant " the enlightenment of the eyes of the
understanding," '-^ who has also enriched our
natural eyes with light; to whom, moreover,
the blindness of the people is offensive: "And
who is blind, but my servants ? . . . yea,
the servants of God have become blind." 's
In His gift, too, are " the riches (of the glory)
of His inheritance in the saints," "^ who prom-
ised such an inheritance in the call of the
Gentiles: "Ask of me, and I will give Thee
the heathen for Thine inheritance." '^ Jt was
He who " wrought in Christ His mighty power,
by raising Him from the dead, and setting
Him at His own right hand, and putting all
things under His feet " '^ — even the same who
said: "Sit Thou on my right hand, until I
make Thine enemies Thy footstool." '' For
in another passage the Spirit says to the
Father concerning the Son: "Thou hast put
all things under His feet."*' Now, if from
all these facts which are foi>nd in the Creator
there is yet to be deduced ^' another god and
another Christ, let us go in quest of the Cre-
ator. I suppose, forsooth, == we find Him,
when he speaks of such as " were dead in
trespasses and sins, wherein they had walked


8 Eph. i. 13.

9 loel ii. 28.
loRph. ii. 17.
'I Ps. xxiv. 10.

12 Eph. i. 17.

13 Isa. xi. 2.

14 Eph. j. 18.

15 Isa. xlii. 19 (Sept.).

16 Eph. i. 18.

17 Ps. ii. 8.

18 Eph. i. 19-22.

19 Ps. ex. I.

20 Ps. viii. 7.

21 Infertur.

22 Plane.


466


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book v.


according to the course of this world, accord-
ing to the prince of the power of the air, who
worketh in the children of disobedience." '
But Marcion must not here interpret the world
as meaning the God of the world. =" For a
creature bears no resemblance to the Creator;
the thing made, none to its Maker; the world,
none to God. He, moreover, who is the
Prince of the power of the ages must not be
thought to be called the prince of the power
of the air; for He who is chief over the higher
powers derives no title from the lower powers,
although these, too, may be ascribed to Him.
Nor, again, can He possibly seem to be the
instigator 3 of that unbelief which He Him-
self had rather to endure at the hand of the
Jews and the Gentiles alike. We may there-
fore simply conclude that Mhese designations
are unsuited to the Creator. There is an-
other being to whom they are more applicable
— and the apostle knew very well who that
was. Who then is he ? Undoubtedly he who
has raised up "children of disobedience"
against the Creator Himself ever since he took
possession of that " air'' of His; even as the
prophet makes him say: " I will set my throne
above the stars; . . . J will go up above the
clouds; I will belike the Most High."s This
must mean the devil, whom in another passage
(since such will they there have the apostle's
meaning to be) we shall recognize in the ap-
pellation the god of this world. * For he has
filled the whole world with the lying pretence
of his own divinity. To be sure,^ if he had
not existed, we might then possibly have ap-
plied these descriptions to the Creator. But
the apostle, too, had lived in Judaism; and
when he parenthetically observed of the sins
(of that period of his life), " in which also we
all had our conversation in times past," ^ he
must not be understood to indicate that the
Creator was the lord of sinful men, and the
prince of this air; but as meaning that in his
Judaism he had been one of the children of
disobedience, having the devil as his instigator
— when he persecuted the church and the
Christ of the Creator. Therefore he says:
*' We also were the children of wrath," but
"by nature." 9 Let the heretic, however, not
contend that, because the Creator called the
Jews childrcfi., therefore the Creator is the lord
of wrath." For when (the apostle) says," We


* Eph. ii. 1, 2.

2 Deo mundi : i.e. the God who made the world.

3 Operator : in reference to the expression in ver. 2, " who now
ivorketh^^ etc.

4 Sufficit igitur si.

5 Isa. xiv. 13, 14. An inexact quotation from the SeJ>tuag!nt.
^ On this and another meaning given to the phrase in 2 Cor. iv.

4, see above, chap. xi.

7 Plane : an ironical particle here.
8Eph. ii. 3.
9 Eph. ii. 3.


were by nature the children of wrath," inas-
much as the Jews were not the Creator's chil-
dren by ?iature, but by the election of their
fathers, he (must have) referred their being
children of wrath to nature, and not to the
Creator, adding this at last," even as others," "
who, of course, were not children of God. It
is manifest that sins, and lusts of the flesh,
and unbelief, and anger, are ascribed to the
common nature of all mankind, the devil
however leading that nature astray," which
he has already infected with the implanted
germ of sin. "We," says he, "are His
workmanship, created in Christ." '^ It is one
thing to make (as a workman), another thing
to create. But he assigns both to One. Man
is the workmanship of the Creator. He
therefore who made man (at first), created
him also in Christ. As touching the sub-
stance of nature. He " made" him; as touch-
ing the work of grace. He "created" him.
Look also at what follows in connection with
these words: "Wherefore remember, that
ye being in time past Gentiles in the flesh,
who are called uncircumcision by that which
has the name of circumcision in the flesh
made by the hand — that at that time ye were
without Christ, being aliens from the com-
monwealth of Israel, and strangers from the
covenants of promise,"* having no hope, and
without God in the world." 's Now, without
what God and without what Christ were these
Gentiles? Surely, without Him to whom the
commonwealth'^ of Israel belonged, and the
covenants and the promise. " But now in
Christ," says he, " ye who were sometimes far
off are made nigh by His blood." '7 From
whom were they far off before ? From the
(privileges) whereof he speaks above, even
from the Christ of the Creator, from the com-
monwealth of Israel, from the covenants, from
the hope of the promise, from God Himself.
Since this is the case, the Gentiles are conse-
quently now in Christ made nigh to these
(blessings), from which they were once far off.
But if we are in Christ brought so very nigh
to the commonwealth of Israel, which com-
prises the religion of the divine Creator, and
to the covenants and to the promise, yea to
their very God Himself, it is quite ridiculous
(to suppose that) the Christ of the other god
has brought us to this proximity to the Crea-
tor from afar. The apostle had in mind that
it had been predicted concerning the call of


10 In Marcion's sense.

" Eph. ii. 3.

'^Captante.

13 Eph. ii. 10.

M Literally, " the covenants and their promise.

'5 Eph. ii. II, 12.

»6 Conversatio : rather, " intercourse with Israel."

»7 Eph. ii. 13.


CHAP. XVIII.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


467


the Gentiles from their distant alienation in
words like these: " They who were far off from
me have come to my righteousness."' For
the Creator's righteousness no less than His
peace was announced in Christ, as we have
often shown already. Therefore he says;
*' He is our peace, who hath made both one " "^
— that IS, the Jewish nation and the Gentile
world. What is near, and what was far off,
now that "the middle wall has been broken
down " of their " enmity," (are made one) " in
His flesh." 3 But Marcion erased the pro-
noun His, that he might make the enmity
refer to flesh, as if (the apostle spoke) of a
carnal enmity, instead of the enmity which
was a rival to Christ. "* And thus you have
(as I have said elsewhere) exhibited the stu-
pidity of Pontus, rather than the adroitness
of a Marrucinian,s for you here deny him
Jlesh to whom in the verse above you allowed
blood! Since, however. He has made the law
obsolete^ by His own precepts, even by Him-
self fulfilling the law (for superfluous is,
" Thou shalt not commit adultery," when He
says, " Thou shalt not look on a woman to
lust after her;" superfluous also is, "Thou
shalt do no murder," when He says, " Thou
shalt not speak evil of thy neighbour,") it is
impossible to make an adversary of the law
out of one who so completely promotes it.^
"For to create^ in Himself of twain," for
He who had made is also the same who creates
(just as we have found it stated above: " For
we are His workmanship, created in Christ
Jesus"),^ "one new man, making peace"
(really new, and really man — no phantom —
but new, and newly born of a virgin by the
Spirit of God), " that He might reconcile both
unto God " '° (even the God whom both races
had offended — both Jew and Gentile), "in
one body," says he, " having in it slain the
enmity by the cross."" Thus we find from
this passage also, that there was in Christ a
fleshly body, such as was able to endure the
cross, "When, therefore. He came and
preached peace to them that were near and
to them which were afar off," we both ob-
tained " access to the Father," being " now
no more strangers and foreigners, but fellow-
citizens with the saints, and of the household


'■ This is rather an allusion to, than a quotation of, Isa. xlvi. 12,

'Eph. ii. 14.
! Eph. ii. 15.

^ " The law of commandments contained in ordinances."
i He expresses the proverbial adage very tersely, " non Marru-
:, sed Pontice."
'Vacuam fecit.
' Ex adjutore.

' Conderet : " create," to keep up the distinction between this
facer e, "to make."
' Eph. ii. 10.
' Eph. ii. 15-16.
Eph ii. 16.


of God " (even of Him from whom, as we have
shown above, we were aliens, and placed far
off), " built upon the foundation of the apos-
tles " "—(the apostle added), " and the proph-
ets; " these words, however, the heretic erased,
forgetting that the Lord had set in His Church
not only apostles, but prophets also. He
feared, no doubt, that our building was to stand
in Christ upon the foundation of the ancient
prophets,'^ since the apostle himself never fails
to build us up everywhere with (the words of)
the prophets. For whence did he learn to
call Christ "the chief corner-stone,"'* but
from the figure given him in the Psalm: " The
stone which the builders rejected is become
the head (stone) of the corner ? " 's

CHAP. XVIII. — ANOTHER FOOLISH ERASURE OF
MARCION 'S EXPOSED. CERTAIN FIGURATIVE
EXPRESSIONS OF THE APOSTLE, SUGGESTE©
BY THE LANGUAGE OF THE OLD TESTAMENT.
COLLATION OF MANY PASSAGES OF THIS EPIS-
TLE, WITH PRECEPTS AND STATEMENTS IN
THE PENTATEUCH, THE PSALMS, AND THE
PROPHETS. ALL ALIKE TEACH US THE WILL
AND PURPOSE OF THE CREATOR.

As our heretic is so fond of his pruning-
knife, I do not wonder when syllables are ex-
punged by his hand, seeing that entire pages
are usually the matter on which he practises
his effacing process. The apostle declares
that to himself, " less than the least of all
saints, was the grace given " of enlightening
all men as to "what was the fellowship of the
mystery, which during the ages had been hid
in God, who created all things." '<* The here-
tic erased the preposition />/, and made the
clause run thus: (" what is the fellowship of
the mystery) which hath for ages been hidden
from the God who created all things." '^ The
falsification, however, is flagrantly'^ absurd.
For the apostle goes on to infer (from his own
statement): "in order that unto the princi-
palities and powers in heavenly places might
become known through the church the mani-
fold wisdom of God."'^ Whose principalities
and powers does he mean ? If the Creator's,


'2 Eph. ii. 17-20,

'3" Because, if our building as Christians rested in part upon
that foundation, our God and the God of the Jews must be the
same, which Marcion denied" (Lardner).

M Eph. ii. 20.

'5 Ps. cxviii. 22,

16 Eph. iii. 8, 9.

17 The passage of St. Paul, as Tertullian expresses it, Quae
dispensatio sacramenti occulti ab aevis in Deo, qui omnia condidit."
According to Marcion's alteration, the latter part runs, ^^Occuiti
ab tevisDeo, qui omnia condidit.'^ The oripnal is, Ti? r\ oIkov-
Ofiia ToO fjivarrijiiov rov airo»ce#tpvjLi^eVov ano rHv aiiiviav iv rtu ©««
(compare Col, lii. 3) t<L to. ndvra. Kriaayri. Marcion's removal of
the £1' has no warrant of ms. authority ; it upsets St. Paul's doct-
rine, as attested in other passages, and destroys the grammatical
structure.

'8 Emicat,

'9 Eph. lii. 10. *


468


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book V,


how does it come to pass that such a God as
He could have meant His wisdom to be dis-
played to the principalities and powers, but
not to Himself? For surely no principalities
could possibly have understood anything with-
out their sovereign Lord. Or if (the apostle)
did not mention God in this passage, on the
ground that He (as their chief) is Himself
reckoned among these (principalities), then he
would have plainly said that the mystery had
been hidden from the principalities and powers
of Him who had created all things, including
Him amongst them. But if he states that it
was hidden from them, he must needs be un-
derstood ' as having meant that it was mani-
fest to Him. From God^ therefore, the mys-
tery was not hidden ; but it was hidden in God,
the Creator of all things, from His principali-
ties and powers. For "who hath known the
mind of the Lord, or who hath been His coun-
sellor ?"= Caught in this trap, the heretic
probably changed the passage, with the view
of saying that his god wished to make known
to his principalities and powers the fellowship
of his own mystery, of which God, who created
all things, had been ignorant. But what was
the use of his obtruding this ignorance of the
Creator, who was a stranger to the superior
god, 3 and far enough removed from him,
when even his own servants had krtown noth-
ing about him ? To the Creator, however,
the future was well known. Then why was
not that also known to Him, which had to be
revealed beneath His heaven, and on His
earth ? From this, therefore, there arises a
confirmation of what we have already laid
down. For since the Creator was sure to
know, some time or other, that hidden mystery
of the superior god, even on the supposition
that the true reading was (as Marcion has it)
— " hidden from the God who created all
things " — he ought then to have expressed the
conclusion thus: "in order that the manifold
wisdom of God might be made known to Him,
and then to the principalities and powers of
God, whosoever He might be, with whom the
Creator was destined to share their knowl-
edge." So palpable is the erasure in this pas-
sage, when thus read, consistenly with its own
true bearing. I, on my part, n9w wish to en-
gage with you in a discussion on the allegori-
cal expressions of the apostle. W hat figures
of speech could the novel god have found in
the prophets (fit for himself) ? " He led cap-
tivity captive," says the apostle.* With what
arms ? In what conflicts ? From the devas-


» Debebat.
a Isa. xl. 13.

3 Marcion's god, of course.

4 Eph. iv. 8 and Ps. Ixviii. 19.


tation of what country ? From the overthrow
of what city ? What women, what children,
what princes did the Conqueror throw into
chains ? For when by David Christ is sung as
"girded with His sword upon His thigh," ^
or by Isaiah as "taking away the spoils of
Samaria and the power of Damascus,"^ you
make Him out to be ^ really and truly a war-
rior confest to the eye.^ Learn then now,
that His is a spiritual armour and warfare,
since you have already discovered that the
captivity is spiritual, in order that you may
further learn that this also belongs to Him,
even because the apostle derived the mention
of the captivity from the same prophets as
suggested to him his precepts likewise: " Put-
ting away lying," (says he,) " speak every
man truth with his neighbour; "^ and again,
using the very words in which the Psalm '° ex-
presses his meaning, (he says,) " Be ye angry,
and sin not;"" " Let not the sun go down
upon your wrath."" "Have no fellowship
with the unfruitful works of darkness; " '^ for
(in the Psalm it is written,) "With the holy
man thou shalt be holy, and with the perverse
thou shalt be perverse;"'* and, "Thou shalt
put away evil from among you."'s Again,
"Go ye out from the midst of them; touch
not the unclean thing; separate yourselves,
ye that bear the vessels of the Lord."'^
(The apostle says further:) " Be not drunk
Avith wine, wherein is excess," '^ — a precept
which is suggested by the passage (of the
prophet), where the seducers of the consecrated
(Nazarites) to drunkenness are rebuked: " Ye
gave wine to my holy ones to drink." '^ This
prohibition from drink was given also to the
high priest Aaron and his sons, " when they
went into the holy place." '' The command,
to "sing to the Lord with psalms and
hymns," '° comes suitably from him who knew
that those who " drank wine with drums and
psalteries " were blamed by God." Now,
when I find to what God belong these pre-
cepts, whether in their germ or their develop-
ment, I have no difficulty) in knowing to whom
the apostle also belongs. But he declares
that " wives ought to be in subjection to their


5 Ps. xly. 3.

6 Isa. viii. 4.

7 Extundis.

8 See above, book iii. chap. xiii. and xiv. p. 33a.

9 Eph. iv. 25.
loPs. iv. 4.

" Eph. iv. 26.

'3 Eph. iv. 26.

•3 Eph. V. II.

'4 Ps. xviii. 26.

i5Deut. xxi. 2T, quoted also in i Cor. v. 13.

'6 Isa. Hi. II, quoted in 2 Cor. vi. 17.

»7 Eph. y. 18.

•8 Amos ii. 12.

'9 Lev. x. 9,

2" Eph. v. 19.

=' Isa. V. II, 12.


CHAP. XVIII.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


469


husbands:"' what reason does he give for
this? "Because," says he, "the husband is
the head of the wife."' Pray tell me, Mar-
cion, does your god build up the authority of
his law on the work of the Creator ? This,
however, is a comparative trifle; for he actu-
ally derives from the same source the condi-
tion of his Christ and his Church; for he says:
" even as Christ is the head of the Church; " ^
and again, in like manner: " He who loveth
his wife, loveth his own flesh, even as Christ
loved the Church." '^ You see how your
Christ and your Church are put in comparison
with the work of the Creator. How much
honour is given to the flesh in the name of the
church ! " No man," says the apostle, " ever
yet hated his own flesh " (except, of course,
Marcion alone), "but nourisheth and cherish-
eth it, even as the Lord doth the Church." s
But you are the only man that hates his flesh,
for you rob it of its resurrection. It will be
only right that you should hate the Church
also, because it is loved by Christ on the
same principle.* Yea, Christ loved the
flesh even as the Church. For no man will
love the picture of his wife without taking
care of it, and honouring it and crown-
ing it. The likeness partakes^ with the
reality in the privileged honour. I shall
now endeavour, from my point of view,' to
prove that the same God is (the God) of the
man ^ and of Christ, of the woman and of the
Church, of the flesh and the spirit, by the
apostle's help who applies the Creator's in-
junction, and adds even a comment on it:
" For this cause shall a man leave his father
and his mother, (and shall be joined unto his
wife), and they two shall be one flesh. This
is a great mystery." 9 In passing,'" (I would
say that) it is enough for me that the works
of the Creator are great mysteries" in the
estimation of the apostle, although they are
so vilely esteemed by the heretics. "But I
am speaking," says he, "of Christ and the
Church." " This he says in explanation. of the
mystery, not for its disruption. He shows us
that the mystery was prefigured by Him who
is also the author of the mystery. Now what
is Marcion's opinion ? The Creator could not
possibly have furnished figures to an unknown
god, or, if a known one, an adversary to Him-
self. The superior god, in fact, ought to


^ Eph. V. 22, 24.

2 Eph. V. 23.

3 Eph. V. 23.

4 Eph. V. 25, 28.
SEph. V. 29.

6 Proinde.

7 Ego.

8 Masculi.

9 Eph. V. 31, 32.
^° Inter ista.

" Magna sacramenta.
*2 Eph. V. 32.


have borrowed nothing from the inferior; he
was bound rather to annihilate Him. " Chil-
dren should obey their parents." '^ Now, al-
though Marcion has erased (the next clause),
"which is the first commandment with prom-
ise," "* still the law says plainly, " Honour thy
father and thy mother." 's Again, (the apos-
tle writes:) " Parents, bring up your children
in the fear and admonition of the Lord.""*
For you have heard how it was said to them
of old time: " Ye shall relate these things to
your children; and your children in like man-
ner to their children." '^ Of what use are two
gods to me, when the discipline is but one ?
If there must be two, I mean to follow Him
who was the first to teach the lesson. But as
our struggle lies against " the rulers of this
world," "^ what a host of Creator Gods there
must be! '^ For why should I not insist upon
this point here, that he ought to have men-
tioned but one "ruler of this world," if he
meant only the Creator to be the being to
whom belonged all the powers which h^ pre-
viously mentioned ? Again, when in the pre-
ceding verse he bids us " put on the whole
armour of God, that we may be able to stand
against the wiles of the devil," ^ does he not
show that all the things which he mentions
after the devil's name really belong to the
devil — " the principalities and the powers, and
the rulers of the darkness of this world," '"^
which we also ascribe to the devil's authority ?
Else, if " the devil " means the Creator, who
will be the devil in the Creator's dispensa-
tion P^"* As there are two gods, must there
also be two devils, and a plurality of powers
and rulers of this world ? But how is the
Creator both a devil and a god at the same
time, when the devil is not at once both god
and devil ? For either they are both of them
gods, if both of them are devils; or else He
who is God is not also devil, as neither is he
god who is the devil. I want to know indeed
by what perversion ="3 the word devil is at all
applicable to the Creator. Perhaps he per-
verted some purpose of the superior god —
conduct such as He experienced Himself from
the archangel, who lied indeed for the pur-
pose. For He did not forbid (our first parents)
a taste of the^ miserable tree,=* from any ap-
prehension that they would become gods;


'3 Eph. vi. I.

14 Eph. vi. 2. " He did this (says I^rdner) in order that the
Mosaic law might not be thought to be thus estabUshed."

15 Ex. XX. 12.

16 Eph. vi. 4.
'7 Ex. X. 2.

'8 Eph. vi. 12.

19 An ironical allusion to Marcion's interpretation, which he has
considered in a former chapter, of the title Cod oj" this world.

20 Eph. vi. II.

21 Eph. vi. 12.
22Apud Creatorem.

23 Ex qua delatura.

24 Illius arbusculae.


470


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book v.


His prohibition was meant to pj;event their
dying after the transgression. But "the
spiritual wickedness " ' did not signify the
Creator, because of the apostle's additional
description, "in heavenly places;"" for the
apostle was quite aware that " spiritual wicked-
ness" had been at work in heavenly places,
when angels were entrapped into sin by the
daughters of men.^ But how happened it
that (the apostle) resorted to ambiguous de-
scriptions, and I know not what obscure
enigmas, for the purpose of disparaging* the
Creator, when he displayed to the Church
such constancy and plainness of speech in
" making known the mystery of the gospel
for which he was an ambassador in bonds,"
owing to his liberty in preaching — and actually
requested (the Ephesians) to pray to God
that this "open-mouthed utterance" might
be continued to himP^

CHAP. XIX. — THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS.
TIME THE CRITERION OF TRUTH AND HERESY.
APPLICATION OF THE CANON. THE IMAGE OF
THE INVISIBLE GOD EXPLAINED. PRE-EXIST-
ENCE OF OUR CHRIST IN THE CREATOR'S
ANCIENT DISPENSATIONS. WHAT IS INCLUDED
IN THE FULNESS OF CHRIST. THE EPICUREAN
CHARACTER OF MARCION's GOD. THE CATH-
OLIC TRUTH IN OPPOSITION THERETO. THE
LAW IS TO CHRIST WHAT THE SHADOW IS TO
THE SUBSTANCE.

I am accustomed in my prescription against
all heresies, to fix my compendious criterion ^
(of truth) in the testimony of time; claiming
priority therein as our rule, and alleging late-
fiess to be the characteristic of every heresy.
This shall now be proved even by the apostle,
when he says: " For the hope which is laid
up for you in heaven, whereof ye heard before
in the word of the truth of the gospel; which
is come unto you, as it is unto all the world. " ^
For if, even at that time, the tradition of the
gospel had spread everywhere, how much
more now ! Now, if it is our gospel which has
spread everywhere, rather than any heretical
gospel, much less Marcion's, which only dates
from the reign of Antoninus, ^ then ours will
be the gospel of the apostles. But should
Marcion's gospel succeed in filling the whole
world, it would not even in that case be entitled


I Spiritalia nequitise : " wicked spints."
' Eph vi. 12.

3 Gen. vi. 1-4. See also TertulHan, De Idol. 9; De Habit. Mul.
2 ; De cultu Femin. 10 ; De I'el. Virg. 7 ; Apolog. 22. See also
Augiistin, De Civit. Dei. xv. 23.

4 Ut taxaret. Of course he alludes to Marcion's absurd exposi-
tion of the 12th verse, in applying St. Paul's description of wicked
spirits to the Creator.

5 Eph. vi. 19, 20.

6 Compendium figere.

7 Col. 1. ^,6.

^ Antontniani Marcionis : see above in book i. chap. xix.


to the character of apostolic. For this quality,
it will be evident, can only belong to that
gospel which was the first to fill the world; in
other words, to the gospel of that God who of
old declared this of its promulgation: "Their
sound is gone out through all the earth, and
their words to the end of the world. " » He
calls Christ " the image of the invisible God." '**
We in like manner say that the Father of
Christ is invisible, for we know that it was the
Son who was seen in ancient times (whenever
any appearance was vouchsafed to men in
the name of God) as the image of (the Father)
Himself. He must not be regarded, however,
as making any difference between a visible and
an invisible God; because long before he
wrote this we find a description of our God
to this effect: " No man can see the Lord, and
live."" If Christ is not " the first-begotten
before every creature, "" as that " Word of
God by whom all things were made, and with-
out whom nothing was made;"'^ if "all
things were" not "in Him created, whether
in heaven or on earth, visible and invisible,
whether they be thrones or dominions, or
principalities, or powers;" if "all things
were" not "created by Him and for Him "
(for these .truths Marcion ought not to allow
concerning Him), then the apostle could not
have so positively laid it down, that " He is
before all.""* For how is He before all, if
He is not before all things ? 's How, again, is
He before all things, if He is not "the first-
born of every creature " — if He is not the Word
of the Creator ? '^ Now how will he be proved
to have been before all things, who appeared
after all things? W^ho can tell whether he
had a prior existence, when he has found no
proof that he had any existence at all ? In
what way also could it have " pleased (the
Father) that in Him should all fulness
dwell? "'7 For, to begin with, what fulness
is that which is not comprised of the constitu-
ents which Marcion has removed from it, —
even those that were "created in Christ,
whether in heaven or on earth," whether an-
gels or men ? which is not made of the things
that are visible and invisible? which consists
not of thrones and dominions and principalities
and powers ? If , on the other hand,'^ our false
apostles and Judaizing gospellers'' have in-


9 Ps. xix. 4.

10 Col. i. 15.

»' Ex. xxxiii. 20.

"Col. i. 15. Our author's " primogenitus conditionis" is St.
Paul's 7rpa>TOTo(co9 TraoTj? »cri<rews, for the meaning of which see-
Bp. Ellicott, in loc.

>3 John i. 3.

»4 Ante omnes.

»S Ante amina.

'6 Creatoris is our author's word.

17 Col. i. 19.

'SAutsi.

»9 Evangelizatores.


CHAP, xi:


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


4/1


troduced all these things out of their own
stores, and Marcion has applied them to con-
stitute the fulness of his own god, (this hy-
pothesis, absurd though it be, alone would
justify him;) for how, on any other supposi-
tion,' could the rival and the destroyer of the
Creator have been willing that His fulness
should dwell in his Christ? To whom, again,
does He " reconcile all things by Himself,
making peace by the blood of His cross," =
but to Him whom those very things had alto-
gether ^ offended, against whom they had re-
belled by transgression, (but) to whom they
had at last returned ? * Coficiliated they might
have been to a strange god; but recoticiled
they could not possibly have been to any other
than their own God. Accordingly, ourselves
"who were sometime alienated and enemies
in our mind by wicked works " s does He
reconcile to the Creator, against whom we
had committed offence — worshipping the creat-
ure to the prejudice of the Creator. As,
however, he says elsewhere,^ that the Church
is the body of Christ, so here also (the apos-
tle) declares that he "fills up that which is
behind of the afflictions of Christ in his flesh
for His body's sake, which is the Church." ^
But you must not on this account suppose
that on every mention of His body the term
is only a metaphor, instead of meaning real
flesh. For he says above that we are " recon-
ciled in His body through death; "^ mean-
ing, of course, that He died in that body
wherein death was possible through the flesh:
(therefore he adds,) not through the Church'^
{J>er ecclesiaiii)^ but expressly /(^r the sake of
the ChurcJi {propter ^^r^/d-j-mw), exchanging body
for body — one of flesh for a spiritual one.
When, again, he warns them to "beware of
subtle words and philosophy, " as being "a
vain deceit, " such as is " after the rudiments
of the world " (not understanding thereby the
mundane fabric of sky and earth, but worldly
learning, and " the tradition of men," subtle in
their speech and their philosophy), '° it would
be tedious, and the proper subject of a sepa-
rate work, to show how in this sentence (of
the apostle's) all heresies are condemned, on
the ground of their consisting of the resources
of subtle speech and the rules of philosophy.
But (once for all) let Marcion know that the
principle term of his creed comes from the


school of Epicurus, implying that the Lord is
stupid and indifferent;" wherefore he refuses
to say that He is an object to be feared. More-
over, from the porch of the Stoics he brings
out matter^ and places it on a par with the
Divine Creator." He also denies the resur-
rection of the flesh, — a truth which none of
the schools of philosophy agreed together to
hold. '3 But how remote is our (Catholic)
verity from the artifices of this heretic, when
it dreads to arouse the anger of God, and
firmly believes that He produced all things
out of nothing, and promises to us a restoration
from the grave of the same flesh (that died)
and holds without a blush that Christ was born
of the virgin's womb ! At this, philosophers,
and heretics, and the very heathen, laugh and
jeer. For " God hath chosen the foolish things
of the world to confound the wise " '* — that
God, no doubt, who in reference to this very
dispensation of His threatened long before
that He would "destroy the wisdom of the
wise. " '5 Thanks to this simplicity of truth,
so opposed to the subtlety and vain deceit of
philosophy, we cannot possibly have any relish
for such perverse opinions. Then, if God
"quickens us together with Christ, forgiving
us our trespasses, " '^ we cannot suppose that
sins are forgiven by Him against whom, as
having been all along unknown, they could
not have been committed. Now tell me,
Marcion, what is your opinion of the apostle's
language, when he says, " Let no man judge
you in meat, or in drink, or in respect of a
holy day, or of the new moon, or of the sab-
bath, which is a shadow of things to come, but
the body is of Christ ?"'7 We do not now
treat of the law, further than (to remark) that
the apostle here teaches clearly how it has
been abolished, even by passing from shadow
to substance — that is, from figurative types to
the reality, which is Christ. The shadow,
therefore, is His to whom belongs the body
also; in other words, the law is His, and so is
Christ. If you separate the law and Christ,
assigning one to one god and the other to
another, it is the same as if you were to at-


1 Ceterum quale.

2 Col. i. 20.

3 " Una ipsa " is Oehlei's reading instead of universa.

4 Gujus novissime fuerant.

5 Col. i. 21.

6 Eph. i. 23.

7 Col. i. 24.

8 Col. i. 22.

9 As if only in a metaphorical body, in which sense the Church
is " His body."

10 Col. ii. 8.


i»"Dominum inferens hebetem ;" with which may be com-
pared Cicero {De Divin. ii. 50, 103) : " Videsne Epicurum quern
hebetem et nidem dicere solent Stoici. . . . qui negat, quid-
quam deos ncc alieni curare, necsui." The otiose and inert
character of the god of Epicurus is referred to by Tertullian not
unfrequently ; see above, in book iv. chap. xv. ; Apolog. 47, and
Ad iXationts, ii. 2 ; whilst in De Anima, 3, he characteriaes the
philosophy of Epicurus by a similar term : " Prout aut Platonis
honor, aut Zenonis vigor, aut Aristotelis tenor, aut Epicuri stupor
aut Heracliti niaeror, aut Empedoclis furor persuaserunt."

=2 The Stoical dogma of tke eternity of matter and its equal-
ity with God was also held by Herniogenes ; see his Adv. Hervio-
genevt. c. 4, "Materiam parem Deo infert."

i3Plmy, Nat. Hist. vii. 55, refers to the peculiar opinion of
Democritus on this subject (Fr. Junius).

14 I Cor. i. 27,

13 Isa. xxix. 14, quoted i Cor. i. 19 ; comp. Jer. viii. 9 and Job v.
12, 13.

16 Col. ii. 13.

17 Col. ii. 16, 17.


472


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[book v.


1


tempt to separate the shadow from the body
of which it is the shadow. Manifestly Christ
has relation to the law, if the body has to its
shadow. But when he blames those who
alleged visions of angels as their authority for
saying that men must abstain from meats —
" you must not touch, you must not taste" —
in a voluntary humility, (at the same time)
'* vainly puffed up in the fleshly mind, and
not holding the Head, " ' (the apostle) does
not in these terms attack the law or Moses, as
if it was at the suggestion of superstitious
angels that he had enacted his prohibition of
sundry aliments. For Moses had evidently
received the law from God. When, therefore,
he speaks of their " following the comm-and-
ments and doctrines of men, " ^ he refers to
the conduct of those persons who " held not
the Head," even Him in whom all things are
gathered together; 3 for they are all recalled
to Christ, and concentrated in Him as their
initiating principle •* — even the meats and
drinks which were indifferent m their nature.
All the rest of his precepts, s as we have
shown sufficiently, when treating of them as
they occurred in another epistle, ^ emanated
from the Creator, who, while predicting that
" old things were to pass away, " and that He
would " make all things new,"^ commanded
men '*to break up fresh ground for them-
selves," ^ and thereby taught them even then
to put off the old man and put on the new.

CHAP. XX. — THE EPISTLE TO THE PHILIPPIANS.
THE VARIANCES AMONGST THE PREACHERS OF
CHRIST NO ARGUMENT THAT THERE WAS
MORE THAN ONE ONLY CHRIST. ST. PAUL's
PHRASES — FORM OF A SERVANT, LIKENESS,
AND FASHION OF A MAN — NO SANCTION OF
DOCETISM. NO ANTITHESIS (SUCH AS MAR-
CION alleged) IN THE GOD OF JUDAISM
AND THE GOD OF THE GOSPEL DEDUCIBLE
FROM CERTAIN CONTRASTS MENTIONED IN
THIS EPISTLE. A PARALLEL WITH A PASSAGE
IN GENESIS. THE RESURRECTION OF THE
BODY, AND THE CHANGE THEREOF.

When (the apostle) mentions the several
motives of those who were preaching the
gospel, how that some, "waxing confident by
his bonds, were more fearless in speaking the
word," while otliers *' preached Christ even out
of envy and strife, and again others out of


» Col. ii. i8, 19, ax.
= Col. ii. 22.

3 Recensentur : Eph. i. 10.

4 Initium.

5 Contained in Vol. iii. and iv.

6 In the Epistle to the I^odiceans or Ephesians ; see his remarks
in the preceding chapter of this book v.

7 Isa. xliii. 18, i^, and Ixv. 17 ; 2 Cor. v. 17.

8 Jer. iv. 3. This and the passage of Isaiah just quoted are also
cited together above, book iv. chap. i. and ii. p. 345.


good-will " many also *' out of love," and cer-
tain " out of contention," and some *' in riv-
alry to himself, "s> he had a favourable
opportunity, no doubt, '° of taxing what they
preached with a diversity of doctrine, as if it
were no less than this which caused so great a
variance in their tempers. But while he ex-
poses these tempers as the sole cause of the
diversity, he avoids inculpating the regular
mysteries of the faith," and affirms that there
is, notwithstanding, but one Christ and His
one God, whatever motives men had in preach-
ing Him. Therefore, says he, it matters not
to me " whether it be in pretence or in truth
that Christ is preached," " because one Christ
alone was announced, whether in their " pre-
tentious " or their " truthful " faith. For it
was to the faithfulness of their preaching that
he applied the word fru//i, not to the rightness
of the rule itself, because there was indeed
but one rule; whereas the conduct of the
preachers varied: in some of them it was true,
/. e. single-minded, while in others it was
sophisticated with over-much learning. This
being the case, it is manifest that that Christ
was the subject of their preaching who was
always the theme of the prophets. Now, if it
were a completely different Christ that was
being introduced by the apostle, the novelty
of the thing would have produced a diversit)'-
(in belief). For there would not have been
wanting, in spite of the novel teaching, '3 men
to interpret the preached gospel of the Crea-
tor's Christ, since the majority of persons
everywhere now-a-days are of our way of
thinking, rather than on the heretical side.
So that the apostle would not in such a pas-
sage as the present one have refrained from
remarking and censuring the diversity. Since,
however, there is no blame of a diversity,
there is no proof of a novelty. Of course '*
the Marcionites suppose that they have the
apostle on their side in the following passage
in the matter of Christ's substance — that in
Him there was nothing but a phantom of
flesh. For he says of Christ, that, " being
in the form of God, He thought it not robbery
to be equal with God;'s but emptied"^ Him-
self, and took upon Him the form of a ser-
vant," no^ the reality, "and was made in the
likefiess of man," not a man, " and was found
in fashion as a man," '^ not in his substnnce,
that is to say, his flesh; just as if to a sub-


9 Phil. i. 14-17.
JoUtique.

" Regulas sacramentorum.
" Phil. i. 18.
13 Nihilominus.
M Plane.

'S Compare the treatise, De Resur. Carnis, c. vi. (Oehler).
»6 Exhausit iKivtixrt,
17 Phil. ii. 6, 7.


CHAP. XXI.]


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


473


stance there did not accrue both form and
likeness and fashio?i. It is well for us that in
another passage (the apostle) calls Christ
*' the image of the invisible God." ^ For will
it not follow with equal force from that pas-
sage, that Christ is not truly God, because the
apostle places Him in the image of God, if,
(as Marcion contends,) He is not truly man
because of His having taken on Him tJie form
or image of a man ? For in both cases the
true substance will have to be excluded, if
image (or " fashion ") and likeness ^ndforjn
shall be claimed for a phantom. But since
he is truly God, as the Son of the Father, in
His fashion and image, He has been already
by the force of this conclusion determined to
be truly man, as the Son of man, " found in
the fashion " and image " of a man." For when
he propounded^ Him as thus '"'' found" in the
manner 3 of a man, he in fact affirmed 'Him
to be most certainly human. For what is
found, manifestly possesses existence. There-
fore, as He was found to be God by His
mighty power, so was He found to be man by
reason of His flesh, because the apostle could
not have pronounced Him to have "become
obedient unto death," '* if He had not been
constituted of a mortal substance. Still more
plainly does this appear from the apostle's
additional words, "even the death of the
cross." 5 For he could hardly mean this to
be a climax ^ to the human suffering, to extol
the virtue ^ of His obedience, if he had known
it all to be the imaginary process of a phan-
tom, which rather eluded the cross" than ex-
perienced it, and which displayed no virtue ^
in the suffering, but only illusion. But
" those things which he had once accounted
gain," and which he enumerates in the pre-
ceding verse — " trust in the flesh," the sign
of " circumcision," his origin as " an Hebrew
of the Hebrews," his descent from " the tribe
of Benjamin," his dignity in the honours of
the Pharisee 5 — he now reckons to be only
" loss " to himself; '° (in other words,) it was
not the God of the Jews, but their stupid ob-
duracy, which he repudiates. These are also
the things " which he counts but dung for the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ" " (but
by no means for the rejection of God the
Creator); "whilst he has not his own right-
eousness, which is of the law, but that which


1 Col. i. 15.

2 Posuit.

3 Inventum ratione.
4Phil. ii. 8.

5 Phil. ii. 8.

6 Non enim exaggeraret.

7 Virtutem: perhaps the power.

8 See the preceding note.

9 Candida; pharisaeae : see Phil. iii. 4-6.
19 Phil. iii. 7.

"Phil.. iii. 8.


is through Him," i.e. Christ, "the righteous-
ness which is of God." " Then, say you, ac-
cording to this distinction the law did not
proceed from the God of Christ. Subtle
enough ! But here is something still more
subtle for you. For when (the apostle) says,
" Not (the righteousness) which is of the law,
but that which is through Him," he would
not have used the phrase through Him of any
other than Him to whom the law belonged.
"Our conversation," says he, "is in heav-
en." '3 I here recognise the Creator's ancient
promise to Abraham: "I will multiply thy
seed as the stars of heaven." '* Therefore
"one star differeth from another star in
glory." '5 If, again, Christ in His advent
from heaven "shall change the body of our
humiliation, that it may be fashioned like
unto His glorious body," '^ it follows that this
body of ours shall rise again, which is now in
a state of humiliation in its sufferings and ac-
cording to the law of mortality drops into the
ground. But how shall it be changed, if it
shall have no real existence ? If, however,
this is only said of those who shall be found
in the flesh "' at the advent of God, and who
shall have to be changed,'^ what shall they
do who will rise first ? They will have no
substance from which to undergo a change.
But he says (elsewhere), " We shall be caught
up together with them in the clouds, to meet
the Lord (in the air)." '' Then, if we are to
be caught up alone with them, surely we shall
likewise be changed together with them.

CHAP. XXI. — THE EPISTLE TO PHILEMON. THIS
EPISTLE NOT MUTILATED. MARCION's INCON-
SISTENCY IN ACCEPTING THIS, AND REJECTING
THREE OTHER EPISTLES ADDRESSED TO INDI-
VIDUALS. CONCLUSIONS. TERTULLIAN VIN-
DICATES THE SYMMETRY AND DELIBERATE
PURPOSE OF HIS WORK AGAINST MARCION.

To this epistle alone did its brevity avail to
protect it against the falsifying hands of Mar-
cion. I wonder, however, when he received
(into his Apostolicon) this letter which was
written but to one man, that he rejected the
two epistles to Timothy and the one to Titus,
which all treat of ecclesiastical discipline.
His aim, was, I suppose, to carry out his in-
terpolating process even to the number of (St.


12 Phil. iii. 9.
is.Phil. iii. 20.
'4 Gen. xxii. 17.

15 1 Cor. XV. 41.

16 Phil. iii. 21. [I have adhered to the original Greek, by a trifling
verbal change, because Tertullian's argument requires it.]

17 I Cor. XV. 5i, 52.

»8 Deputari , which is an old reading, should certainly be demu-
tari, and so say the best authorities. Oehler reads the former,
but contends for the latter.

19 I Thess. iv, 16, 17.


474


TERTULLIAN AGAINST MARCION.


[hook V-


Paul's) epistles. And now, reader,' I beg
you to remember that we have here adduced
proofs out of the apostle, in support of the
subjects which we previously = had to handle,
and that we have now brought to a close ^
the topics which we deferred to this (portion
of our) work. (This favour I request of you,)
that you may not think that any repetition


I Inspector : perhaps critic.

a Retro : in the former portions of this treatise.

3 Expunxeriinus.


here has been superfluous, for we have only
fulfilled our former engagement to you; nor
look with suspicion on any postponement
there^ where we merely set forth the essential
points (of the argument). -^ If you carefully
examine the entire work, you will acquit us.
of either having been redundant here, or dif-
fident there, in your own honest judgment.^


4 Qtia eruimus ipsa ista,

5 [Elucidation 11.]


ELUCIDATIONS.


(Soul and Spirit, cap, xv. and notes I and 2, p. 463.)

Dr. Holmes, in the learned note which follows, affords me a valuable addition to my
scanty remarks on this subject in former volumes. See (Vol. I. pp. 387, 532,) references to
the great work of Professor Delitzsch, in notes on Irenaeus. In Vol. II. p. 102, I have
also mentioned M. Heard's work, on the Tripartite Nature of Man. With reference to the
disagreement of the learned on this great matter, let me ask is it not less real than apparent ?
The dichotomy to which Tertullian objected, and the trichotofny which Dr. Holmes makes a
name of " the triple nature,'' are terms which rather suggest a process of " dividing asunder
of soul and spirit," and which involve an ambiguity that confuses the inquiry. Now, while
the gravest objections may be imagined, or even demonstrated, against a process which
seems to destroy the unity and individuality of a Man, does not every theologian accept the
analytical formula of the apostle and recognize the bodily, the atiiitial and the spiritual \\\ the
life of man? If so is there not fundamental agreement as to I. Thess. v. 23, and difference
only, relatively, as to functions and processes, or as to the way in which truth on these three
points ought to be stated ? On this subject there are good remarks in the Speaker's Coin-
mentary on the text aforesaid, but the exhaustive work of Delitzsch deserves study.

Man's whole nature in Christ, seems to be sanctified by the Holy Spirit's suffusion of
man's spirit; this rules and governs the psychic nature and through it the body.


II.

(The entire work, cap. xxi. p. 474.)
He who has followed Tertullian through the mazes in which Marcion, in spite of shifts
and turnings innumerable, has been hunted down, and defeated, must recognize the great
work performed by this author in behalf of Christian Orthodoxy. It seems to have been the
plan of Christ's watchful care over His Church, that, in the earliest stages of its existence the
enemy should be allowed to display his utmost malice and to bring out all his forces against
Truth. Thus, before the meeting of Church-councils the language of faith had grown up,
and clear views and precise statements of doctrine had been committed to the idioms of
human thought. But, the labours of Tertullian are not confined to these diverse purposes.
With all the faults of his acute and forensic mind, how powerfully he illuminates the Script-
ures and glorifies them as containing the whole system of the Faith. How rich are his
quotations, and how penetrating his conceptions of their uses. Besides all this, what an
introduction he gives us to the modes of thought which were becoming familiar in the West,.


ELUCIDATIONS. 475


and which were converting the Latin tongue to new uses, and making it capable of express-
ing Augustine's mind and so of creating new domains of Learning among the nations of
Europe.

If I have treated tenderly the reputation of this great Master, in my notes upon his Mar-
cion, it is with a twofold purpose, (i.) It seems to me due to truth that his name should
be less associated with his deplorable lapse than with his long and faithful services to the
Church, and (2.) that the student should thus follow his career with a pleasure and with a
confidence the lack of which perpetually annoys us when we give the first place to the Mon-
tanist and not to the Catholic. Let this be our spirit in accompanying him into his fresh
campaigns against " the grievous wolves" foreseen by St. Paul with tears. Acts xx. 29, 30.

But as our Author invokes a careful examination of his *' entire work," let the student
recur to Irenaeus (Vol. I. p. 352, etc.) and observe how formidable, from the beginning, was-
the irreligion of Marcion. His doctrines did truly "eat like a canker," assailing the Script-
ures by mutilations and corruptions of the text itself. No marvel that Tertullian shows
him no quarter, though we must often regret the forensic violence of his retort. As to the
Dualism which, through Marcion, thus threatened the first article of the Creed, consult' the
valuable remarks of t\\^ Encyc. Britmmica^ ("Mithras"). Mithras became known to the
Romans circa B.C. 70, and his worship flourished under Trajan and his successors. An able
writer remarks that it was natural "Dualism should develop itself out of primitive Zoro-
astrianism. The human mind has ever been struck with a certain antagonism of which it
has sought to discover the cause. Evil seems most easily accounted for by the supposition
of an evil Person; and the continuance of an equal struggle, without advantage to either
side, seems to imply the equality of that evil Person with the author of all good. Thus
Dualism had its birth. Many came to believe in the existence of two co-eternal and co-
equal Persons, one good and the other evil, between whom there has been from all eternity
a perpetual conflict, and between whom the same conflict must continue to rage through all
coming time."


III.


AGAINST HERMOGENES.

CONTAINING AN ARGUMENT AGAINST HIS OPINION THAT MATTER IS

ETERNAL.

[TRANSLATED BY DR. HOLMES.]


CHAP. I. — THE OPINIONS OF HERMOGENES, BY
THE PRESCRIPTIVE RULE OF ANTIQUITY,
SHOWN TO BE HERETICAL. NOT DERIVED
FROM CHRISTIANITY, BUT FROM HEATHEN
PHILOSOPHY. SOME OF THE TENETS MEN-
TIONED.

We are accustomed, for the purpose of
shortening argument,' to lay down the rule
against heretics of the lateness of their date.^
For in as far as by our rule, priority is given
to the truth, which also foretold that there
would be heresies, in so far must all later
opinions be prejudged as heresies, being
such as were, by the more ancient rule of
truth, predicted as (one day) to happen.
Now, the doctrine of Hermogenes has this^
taint of novelty. He is, in short,* a man
livhig in the world at the present time; by
his very nature a heretic, and turbulent
withal, who mistakes loquacity for eloquence,
and supposes impudence to be firmness, and
judges it to be the duty of a good conscience
to speak ill of individuals. ^ Moreover, he
despises God's law in his painting,^ maintain-
ing repeated marriages, ^ alleges the law of
God in defence of lust,^ and yet despises it
in respect of his art.^ He falsifies by a two-
fold process — with his cautery and his pen.'°


1 Compendii gratia. [The reference here to the De Preescript.
forbids us to date this tract earlier than 207 a.d. Of this Herniog-
enes, we only know that he was probably a Carthaginian,
a painter, and of a versatile and clever mind.]

2 This is the criterion prescribed in the Prescript. Hceret.
xxxi. xxxiv., and often applied by TertuUian. See our ^«^?-
Marcion, pp. 272, 345, 470 and passz'm.

3 The (atn novella is a relative phrase, referring to the fore-
mentioned ru/e.

4Denique.

5 Maledicere singulis.

6 Probably by painting idols (Rigalt.; and so Neander).

7 It is uncertain whether TertuUian means to charge Hermog-
enes with defending /^/y^rtw/j', or only second marriages, in the
phrase nubit assidtie. Probably the latter, which was offensive
to the rigorous TertuUian ; and so Neander puts it.

8 Quoting Gen. i. 28, " Be fruitful and multiply " (Rigalt.).

9 Disregarding the law when it forbids the representation of
idols. (Rigalt.)

10 Et cauterio et stilo. The former instrument was used by the
encaustic painters for burning in the wax colours into the ground
of their pictures (Westropp's Handbook of Archaeology, p. 219).
TertuUiau charges Hermogenes with using his encaustic art to
the injury of the Scriptures, by practically violating their pre-
cepts in his artistic works ; and with usinghis pen (stilus) in cor-
rupting the doctrine thereof by his heresy.


He is a thorough adulterer, both doctrinally
and carnally, since he is rank indeed with the
contagion of your marriage-hacks," and has
also failed in cleaving to the rule of faitli as
much as the apostle's own Hermogenes.'^
However, never mind the man, when it is his
doctrine which I question. He does not ap-
pear to acknowledge any other Christ as
Lord, '3 though he holds Him in a different
way; but by this difference in his faith he
really makes Him another being, — nay, he
takes from Him everything which is God,
since he will not have it that He made all
things of nothing. For, turning away from
Christians to the philosophers, from the
Church to the Academy and the Porch, he
learned there from the Stoics how to place
Matter (on the same level) with the Lord,
just as if it too had existed ever both unborn
and unmade, having no beginning at all nor
end, out of which, according to him,'-* the
Lord afterwards created all things.

CHAP. II. — HERMOGENES, AFTER A PERVERSE
INDUCTION FROM MERE HERETICAL ASSUMP-
TIONS, CONCLUDES THAT GOD CREATED ALL
THINGS OUT OF PRE-EXISTING MATTER.

Our very bad painter has coloured this his
primary shade absolutely without any light,
with such arguments as these: He begins
with laying down the premiss, '^ that the Lord
made all things either out of Himself, or out
of nothing, or out of something; in order that,
after he has shown that it was impossible for
Him to have made them either out of Himself
or out of nothing, he might thence affirm the
residuary proposition that He made them out
of something, and therefore that that some-
thing was Matter. He could not have made all
things, he says, of Himself; because whatever


II By the nubentium contagium, TertuUian, in his Montanist
rigour censures those who married more than once.
122 Tim. i. 15.

13 Thus differing from Marcion.

14 The force of the subjunctive, ex qnayecerit.

15 Praestruens.


478


AGAINST HERMOGENES.


[chap. hi.


things the Lord made of Himself would have
been parts of Himself; but' He is not dis-
soluble into parts,' because, being the Lord,
He is indivisible, and unchangeable, and always
the same. Besides, if He had made anything
out of Himself, it would have been something
of Himself. Everything, however, both which
was made and which He made must be ac-
counted imperfect, because it was made of a
part, and He made it of a part; or if, again,
it was a whole which He made, who is a
whole Himself, He must in that case have
been at once both a whole, and yet not a
whole; because it behoved Him to be a whole,
that He might produce Himself,^ and yet
not a whole, that He might be produced out
of Himself.* But this is a most difficult
position. For if He were in existence, He
could not be made, for He was in existence
already; if, however, he were not in existence,
He could not make, because He was a nonen-
tity. He 7fiaintains, moreover, that He who
always exists, does not co7)ie i?ito existence, ^
but exists for ever and ever. He accordingly
concludes that He made nothing out of Him-
self, since He never passed into such a con-
dition^ as made it possible for Him to make
anything out of Himself. In like manner, he
contends that He could not have made all
things out of nothing — thus: He defines the
Lord as a being who is good, nay, very good,
who must will to make things as good and
excellent as He is Himself; indeed it were
impossible for Him either to will or to make
anything which was not good, nay, very good
itself. Therefore all things ought to have
been made good and excellent by Him, after
His own condition. Experience shows, ^ how-
ever, that things which are even evil were
made by Him: not, of course, of His own
will and pleasure; because, if it had been of
His own will and pleasure. He would be sure
to have made nothing unfitting or unworthy
of Himself. That, therefore, which He made
not of His own will must be understood to
have been made from the fault of something,
and that is from Matter, without a doubt.

CHAP. III. — AN ARGUMENT OF HERMOGENES.
THE answer: while god is A TITLE ETER-
NALLY APPLICABLE TO THE DIVINE BEING,
LORD AND FATHER ARE ONLY RELATIVE AP-
PELLATIONS, NOT ETERNALLY APPLICABLE.
AN INCONSISTENCY IN THE ARGUMENT OF
HERMOGENES POINTED OUT

He adds also another point: that as God

I Porro.

= In partes non devenire.

3 Ut faceret semetipsum.

4 Ut fieret de semetipso.

5 Non fieri.


was always God, there was never a time when
God was not also Lord. But^itwas in no
way possible for Him to be regarded as al-
ways Lord, in the same manner as He had
been always God, if there had not been al-
ways, in the previous eternity,' a something
of which He could be regarded as evermore
the Lord. So he concludes '° that God always
had Matter co-existent with Himself as the
Lord thereof. Now, this tissue " of his I
shall at once hasten to pull abroad. I have
been willing to set it out in form to this
length, for the information of those who are
unacquainted with the subject, that they may
know that his other arguments likewise need
only be " understood to be refuted. We
affirm, then, that the name of God always ex-
isted with Himself and in Himself — but not
eternally so the Lord. Because the condition
of the one is not the same as that of the
other. God is the designation of the sub-
stance itself, that is, of the Divinity; but
Lord is (the name) not of substance, but of
power. I maintain that the substance existed
always with its own name, which is God ; the
title Lord was afterwards added, as the indi-
cation indeed '^ of something accruing. For
from the moment when those things began to
exist, over which the power of a Lord was to
act, God, by the accession of that power, both
became Lord and received the name thereof.
Because God is in lik^e manner a Father, and
He is also a Judge; but He has not always
been Father and Judge, merely on the ground
of His having always been God. For He
could not have been the Father previous to
the Son, nor a Judge previous to sin. There
was, however, a time when neither sin existed
with Him, nor the Son; the former of which
was to constitute the Lord a Judge, and the
latter a Father. In this way He was not
Lord previous to those things of which He
was to be the Lord. But He was only to be-
come Lord at some future time: just as He
became the Father by the Son, and a Judge
by sin, so also did He become Lord by means
of those things which He had made, in order
that they might serve Him. Do I seem to
you to be weaving arguments,'-* Hermogenes ?
How neatly does Scripture lend us its aid,'s
when it applies the two titles to Him with a
distinction, and reveals them each at its proper
time ! For (the title ) God, indeed, which


6 Non ejus fieret conditionis.

7 Invcniri.

8 Porro.

9 Retro.
»o Itaque.

»' Conjecturam.

""Y&m. . . quam.

'3 Scilicet.

14 Argumentari : in the sense of argiitari.

'S Naviter nobis patrocinatur.


CHAP, v.]


AGAINST HERMOGENES.


479


always belonged to Him, it names at the very-
first: " In the beginning God created the
heaven and the earth;"' and as long as He
continued making, one after the other, those
things of which He was to be the Lord, it
merely mentions God. "And God said,"
*' and God made," " and God saw; " " but no-
where do we yet find the Lord. But when
He completed the whole creation, and es-
pecially man himself, who was destined to
understand His sovereignty in a way of special
propriety, He then is designated ^ Lord.
Then also the Scripture added the name
Lord: "And the Lord God, Deus Dominus, took
the man, whom He had formed; " ^ "And the
Lord God commanded Adam,"5 Thence-
forth He, who was previously God only, is the
Lord, from the time of His having something
of which He might be the Lord. For to Him-
self He was always God, but to all things was
He only then God, when He became also
Lord. Therefore, in as far as (Hermogenes)
shall suppose that Matter was eternal, on the
ground that the Lord was eternal, in so far
will it be evident that nothing existed, because
it is plain that the Lord as stick did not always
exist. Now I mean also, on my own part,^ to
add a remark for the sake of ignorant persons,
of whom Hermogenes is an extreme instance, ^
and actually to retort against him his own
arguments.^ For when he denies that Matter
was born or made, I find that, even on these
terms, the title Lord is unsuitable to God in
respect of Matter, because it must have been
free, 9 when by not having a beginning it had
not an author. The fact of its past existence
it owed to no one, so that it could be a sub-
ject to no one. Therefore ever since God
exercised His power over it, by creating (all
things) out of Matter, although it had all along
experienced God as its Lord, yet Matter does,
after all, demonstrate that God did not exist
in the relation of Lord to it,'° although all the
while He was really so."

CHAP. IV. HERMOGENES GIVES DIVINE ATTRI-
BUTES TO MATTER, AND SO MAKES TWO GODS.

At this point, then, I shall begin to treat
of Matter, how that, (according to Hermog-

iGen. i. i.

2 Gen. i. 3, etc.

3 Cognominatur: as if by way of surname^ Deus Doininus.

4 Gen. ii. 15.

5 Gen. ii. 16.

6 Et ego.

7 E.xtrema linea. Rhenanus sees in this phrase a slur against
Hermogenes, who was an artist. TertuUian, I suppase, meant that
Hermogenes was extremely ignorant.

8 Experimenta.

9 Libera : and so not a possible subject for the Lordship of God.
iti Matter having, by the hypothesis, been independent 0/ God,

and so incapable of giving Him any title to Lordship.

II Fuit hoc utique. In Hermogenes' own opinion, which is thus
shown to have been contradictory to itself, and so absurd. '

J2 Quod, with the subjunctive comparet.


enes,)" God compares it with Himself as
equally unborn, equally unmade, equally
eternal, set forth as being without a beginning,
without an end. For what other estimate '^
of God is there than eternity ? What other
condition has eternity than to have ever ex-
isted, and to exist yet for evermore by virtue
of its privilege of having neither beginning
nor end ? Now, since this is the property of
God, it will belong to God alone, whose prop-
erty it is — of course'^' on this ground, that if
it can be ascribed to any other being, it will
no longer be the property of God, but will
belong, along with Him, to that being also
to which it is ascribed. For " although there
be that are called gods " in name, "whether
in heaven or in earth, yet to us there is
but one God the Father, of whom are all
things; "'5 whence the greater reason why,
in our view,"^ that which is the property '^ of
God ought to be regarded as pertaining to
God alone, and why (as I have already said)
that should cease to be such a property, when
it is shared by another being. Now, since
He is God, it must necessarily be a unique
mark of this quality,'^ that it be confined to
One. Else, what will be unique and singular,
if that is not which has nothing equal to it ?
What will be principal, if that is not which is
above all things, before all things, and from
which all things proceed ? By possessing
these He is God alone, and by His sole pos-
session of them He is One. If another also
shared in the possession, there would then be
as many gods as there were possessors of
these attributes of God. Hermogenes, there-
fore, introduces two gods: he introduces Mat-
ter as God's equal. God, however, must be
One, because that is God which is supreme;
but nothing else can be supreme than that
which is unique; and that cannot possibly be
unique which has anything equal to it; and
Matter will be equal with God when it is
held to be '^ eternal.

CHAP. V. HERMOGENES COQUETS WITH HIS OWN

ARGUMENT, AS IF RATHER AFRAID OF IT.
AFTER INVESTING MATTER WITH DIVINE
QUALITIES, HE TRIES TO MAKE IT SOMEHOW
INFERIOR TO GOD.

But God is God, and Matter is Matter. As
if a mere difference in their names prevented
equality, =° when an identity of condition is
claimed for them ! Grant that their nature is


13 Census.

14 Scilicet.

'S I Cor. viii. 5.

16 Apud nos.

17 The property of being eternal.
'8 Unicum sit necesse est.

19 Censetur.

2° Comparatioiii.


48o


AGAINST HERMOGENES.


[chap. VI.


different; assume, too, that their form is not
identical, — what matters it so long as their
absolute state have but one mode ? ' God is
unborn; is not Matter also unborn? God ever
exists; is not Matter, too, ever existent?
Both are without beginning; both are without
end; both are the authors of the universe —
both He who created it, and the Matter of
which He made it. For it is impossible that
Matter should not be regarded as the author"
of all things, when the 'universe is composed
of it. What answer will he give ? Will he
say that Matter is not then comparable with
God as soon as^ it has something belonging
to God; sincCj by not having total (divinity),
it cannot correspond to the whole extent of
the comparison ? But what more has he re-
served for God, that he should not seem to
have accorded to Matter the full amount of
the Deity?* He says in reply, that even
though this is the prerogative of Matter,
both the authority and the substance of God
must remain intact, by virtue of which He is
regarded as the sole and prime Author, as
well as the Lord of all things. Truth, how-
ever, maintains the unity of God in such a
way as to insist that whatever belongs to God
Himself belongs to Him alone. For so will
it belong to Himself if it belong to Him alone;
and therefore it will be impossible that an-
other god should be admitted, when it is per-
mitted to no other being to possess anything
of God. Well, then, you say, we ourselves
at that rate possess nothing of God. But in-
deed we do, and shall continue to do — only
it is from Him that we receive it, and not from
ourselves. For we shall be even gods, if we
shall deserve to be among those of whom He
declared, " I have said. Ye are gods," s and,
"God standeth in the congregation of the
gods."^ But this comes of His own grace,
not from any property in us, because it is He
alone who can make gods. The property of
Matter, however, he ^ makes to be that which
it has in common with God. Otherwise, if it
received from God the property which belongs
to God, — I mean its attribute^ of eternity, —
one might then even suppose that it both pos-
sesses an attribute in common with God, and
yet at the same time is not God. But what
inconsistency is it for him' to allow that there
is a conjoint possession of an attribute with


1 Ratio.

2 Auctrix.

3 Statim si.

4 Totum Dei.
SPs. Ixxxii. 6.
6Ver. I.

7 Hermogenes.

8 Ordinem : or course.

9 Quale autem est : " how comes it to pass that.


refuse to Matter should be, after all, the ex-
clusive privilege of God !

CHAP. VI. THE SHIFTS TO WHICH HERMOGENES

IS REDUCED, WHO DEIFIES MATTER, AND YET
IS UNWILLING TO HOLD HIM EQUAL WITH THE
DIVINE CREATOR.

He declares that God's attribute is still
safe to Him, of being the only God, and the
First, and the Author of all things, and the
Lord of all things, and being incomparable
to any — qualities which he straightway ascribes
to Matter also. He is God, to be sure. God
shall also attest the same; but He has also
sworn sometimes by Himself, that there is no
other God like Him.'° Hermogenes, how-
ever, will make Him a liar. For Matter will
be such a God as He — being unmade, un-
born, without beginning, and without end.
God will say, " I am the first ! " " Yet how is
He the first, when Matter is co-eternal with
Him ? Between co-eternals and contempo-
raries there is no sequence of rank." Is then.
Matter also the first? " I," says the Lord,
"have stretched out the heavens alone." '^
But indeed He was not alone, when that like-
wise stretched them out, of which He made
the expanse. When he asserts the position
that Matter was <?/<?;'«^/, without any encroach-
ment on the condition of God, let him see to
it that we do not in ridicule turn the tables
on him, that God similarly was eternal with-
out any encroachment on the condition of
Matter — the condition of Both being still com-
mon to Them. The position, therefore, re-
mains unimpugned '* both in the case of Mat-
ter, that it did itself exist, only along with
God; and that God existed alone, but with
Matter. It also was first with God, as God,
too, was first with it; it, however, is not com-
parable with God, as God, too, is not to be
compared with it; with God also it was the
Author (of all things), and with God their
Sovereign. In this way he proposes that God
has something, and yet not the whole, of
Matter. For Him, accordingly, Hermogenes
has reserved nothing which he had not equally
conferred on Matter, so that it is not Matter
which is compared with God, but rather God
who is compared with Matter. Now, inas-
much as those qualities which we claim as
peculiar to God — to have always existed, with-
out a beginning, without an end, and to have
been the First, and Alone, and the Author
of all things — are also compatible to Matter,
I want to know what property Matter possesses

JO Isa. xlv. 23..

" Isa. xli. 4, xHv. 6, xlviii. 12.

12 Ordo.

J3lsa. xliv. 24

14 Salvutn ergo erit.


CHAP. VIII.]


AGAINST HERMOGENES.


481


different and alien from God, and hereby
special to itself, by reason of which it is inca-
pable of being compared with God ? That
Being, in which occur ' all the properties of
God, is sufficiently predetermined without
any further comparison. •

CHAP. VII. HERMOGENES HELD TO HIS THEORY

IN ORDER THAT ITS ABSURDITY MAY BE EX-
POSED ON HIS OWN PRINCIPLES.

When he contends that matter is less than
God, and inferior to Him, and therefore di-
verse from Him, and for the same reason not
a fit subject of comparison with Him, who is
a greater and superior Being, I meet him with
this prescription, that what is eternal and un-
born is incapable of any diminution and infe-
riority, because it is simply this which makes
even God to be as great as He is, inferior
and subject to none — nay, greater and higher
than all. For, just as all things which are
born, or which come to an end, and are there-
fore not eternal, do, by reason of their expos-
ure at once to an end and a beginning, admit
of qualities which are repugnant to God — I
mean diminution and inferiority, because they
are born and made — so likewise God, for this
very reason, is unsusceptible of these acci-
dents, because He is absolutely unborn,^ and
also unmade. And yet such also is the con-
dition of Matter.3 Therefore, of the two
Beings which are eternal, as being unborn and
unmade — God and Matter — by reason of the
identical mode of their common condition
(both of them equally possessing that which
admits neither of diminution nor subjection
— that is, the attribute of eternity), we affirm
that neither of them is less or greater than
the other, neither of them is inferior or supe-
rior to the other; but that they both stand on
a par in greatness, on a par in sublimity, and
on the same level of that complete and perfect
felicity of which eternity is reckoned to con-
sist. Now we must not resemble the heathen
in our opinions; for they, when constrained
to acknowledge God, insist on having other
deities below Him. The Divinity, however,
has no degrees, because it is unique; and if
it shall be found in Matter — as being equally
unborn and unmade and eternal — it must be
resident in both alike, ^ because in no case
can it be inferior to itself. In what way,
then, will Hermogenes have the courage to
draw distinctions; aud thus to subject matter
to God, an eternal to the Eternal, an unborn
to the Unborn, an author to the Author ?

^ Recensentur.

2 Nee natus omnino.

3 Of course, according to Hermogenes, whom Tertullian refutes
with an arguinentuni ad hominem.

4 Aderit utrobique.

31


seeing that it dares to say, I also am the first;
I too am before all things; and I am that from
which all things proceed; equal we have been,
together we have been — both alike without be-
ginning, without end; both alike without an
Author, without a God.s What God, then,
is He who subjects me to a contemporaneous,'
co-eternal power? If it be He who is called
God, then I myself, too, have my own (divine)
name. Either I am God, or He is Matter,
because we both are that which neither of us is.
Do you suppose, therefore, that he^ has not
made Matter equal with God, although, for-
sooth, he pretends it to be inferior to Him ?

CHAP. VIII. — ON HIS OWN PRINCIPLES, HERMOG-
ENES MAKES MATTER, ON THE WHOLE, SUPE-
RIOR TO GOD.

Nay more, 7 he even prefers Matter to God,
and rather subjects God to it, when he will
have it that God made all things out of Mat-
ter. For if He drew His resources from it^
for the creation of the world. Matter is already
found to be the superior, inasmuch as it fur-
nished Him with the means of effecting His
works; and God is thereby clearly subjected
to Matter, of which the substance was indis-
pensable to Him. For there is no one but
requires that which he makes use of;' no
one but is subject to the thing which he re-
quires, for the very purpose of being able to
make use of it. So, again, there is no one
who, from using what belongs to another, is
not inferior to him of whose property he makes
use; and there is no one who imparts '° of his
own for another's use, who is not in this re-
spect superior to him to whose use he lends
his property. On this principle," Matter it-
self, no doubt," was not in want of God, but
rather lent itself to God, who was in want of
it — rich and abundant and liberal as it was
— to one who was, I suppose, too small, and
too weak, and too unskilful, to form what
He willed out of nothing. A g^-and service,
verily, '3 did it confer on God in giving Him
means at the present time whereby He might
be known to be God, and be called Almighty
— only that He is no longer Almighty, since
He is not powerful enough for this, to pro-
duce all things out of nothing. To be sure,'*
Matter bestowed somewhat on itself also —
even to get its own self acknowledged with
God as God's co-equal, nay more, as His


5 That is, having no God superior to themseli

6 Hermogenes.

7 Atquin etiam.

8 Ex ilia usus est.

9 De cujus utitur.
10 Praistat.

" Itaque.
i2Quidem.
13 Revera.
MSane.


482


AGAINST HERMOGENES.


[chap. X.


helper; only there is this drawback, that Her
mogenes is the only man that has found out
this fact, besides the philosophers — those
patriarchs of all heresy.' For the prophets
knew nothing about it, nor the apostles thus
(ar, nor, I suppose, even Christ.

CHAP. IX. SUNDRY INEVITABLE BUT INTOLER

ABLE CONCLUSIONS FROM THE PRINCIPLES OF
HERMOGENES.

He cannot say that it was as its Lord that
God employed Matter for His creative works,
for He could not have been the Lord of a
substance which was co-equal with Himself.
Well, but perhaps it was a title derived from
the will of another, = which he enjoyed — a
precarious holding, and not a lordship, 3 and
that to such a degree, that * although Matter
was evil. He yet endured to make use of an
evil substance, owing, of course, to the re-
straint of His own limited power, s which made
Him impotent to create out of nothing, not
in consequence of His power; for if, as God,
He had at all possessed power over Matter,
which He knew to be evil. He would first have
converted it into good — as its Lord and the
good God — that so He might have a good
thing to make use of, instead of a bad one.
But being undoubtedly good, only not the
Lord withal. He, by using such power "^ as He
possessed, showed the necessity He was under
of yielding to the condition of Matter, which
He would have amended if He had been its
Lord. Now this is the answer which must be
given to Hermogenes when he maintains that
it was by virtue of His Lordship that God
used Matter — even of His non-possession of
any right to it, on the ground, of course, of
His not having Himself made it. Evil then,
on your terms,' must proceed from God Him-
self, since He is — I will not say the Author
of evil, because He did not form it, but — the
permitter thereof, as having dominion over
it.^ If indeed Matter shall prove not even
to belong to God at all, as being evil, it fol-
lows,' that when He made use of what be-
longed to another, He used it either on a
precarious title '° because He was in need of
it, or else by violent possession because He
was stronger than it. For by three methods
is the property of others obtained, — by right.


» They are so deemed in the de Priescript. Haret. c. vii.
2 We have rather paraphrased the word " precario " — " obtained
by prayer." [See p. 456.]

3 Domino : opposed to " precario."

4 Ideo. . . ut.

5 Mediocritatis.

6 Tali: i. e. potestate.

7 Jam ergo : introducing an argument um ad hotninem against
Hermogenes.

8 Quia dominator.

9 Ergo.

*o Aot precario : " as having begged for it."


by permission, by violence; in other words,
by lordship, by a title derived from the will
of another," by force. Now, as lordship is
out of the question. Hermogenes must choose
which (of the other methods) is suitable to
God. Did He, tncn, make al) things out of
Matter, by permission, or by force .? But, in
truth, would not God have more wisely de-
termined that nothing at all should be created,
than that it should be created by the mere
sufferance of another, or by violence, and
that, too, with" a substance which was eviK>

CHAP. X.— TO WHAT STRAITS HERMOGENES AB-
SURDLY REDUCES THE DIVINE BEING. HE
DOES NOTHING SHORT OF MAKING HIM THE
AUTHOR OF EVIL.

Even if Matter had been the perfection of
good, '3 would it not have been equally indec-
orous in Him to have thought of the prop-
erty of another, however good, (to effect
His purpose by the help of it)? It was, there-
fore, absurd enough for Him, in the interest
of His own glory, to have created the world
in such a way as to betray His own obligation
to a substance which belonged to another — and
that even not good. Was He then, asks (Her-
mogenes),to make all things out of nothing,that
so evil things themselves might be attributed
to His will ? Great, in all conscience,'-* must
be the blindness of our heretics which leaves
them to argue in such a way that they either
insist on the belief of another God supremely
good, on the ground of their thinking the
Creator to be the author of evil, or else they
set up Matter with the Creator, in order that
they may derive evil from Matter, not from
the Creator. And yet there is absolutely no
god at all that is free from such a doubtful
plight, so as to be able to avoid the appear-
ance even of being the author of evil, who-
soever he is that — I will not say, indeed, has
made, but still — has permitted evil to be made
by some author or other, and from some
source or other. Hermogenes, therefore,
ought to be told 's at once, although we post-
pone to another place our distinction concern-
ing the mode of evil,'^ that even he has
effected no result by this device of his.''
For observe how God is found to be, if not
the Author of, yet at any rate the conniver
at,'^ evil, inasmuch as He, with all His ex-
treme goodness, endured evil in Matter be-


" Precario : See above, note 2, p. 482.

"Z?^ is often in Tertullian the sign of an instrumental noun,

13 Optima.

'4 Bona fide.

»5 Audiat.

'6 De mali ratione.

'7 Hac sua injectione. See our Anti-Marcion, iv. i.,for this
word, p. 345.

•8 Assentator. Fr. Junius suggests " adsectator " of the stronger
meaning " promoter ; ' nor does Oehler object.


CHAP. XII.]


AGAINST HERMOGENES.


483


fore He created the world, although, as being
good, and the enemy of evil, He ought to
have corrected it. For He either was able
to correct it, but was unwilling; or else was
willing, but being a weak God, was not able.
If He was able and yet unwilling. He was
Himself evil, as having favoured evil; and
thus He now opens Himself to the charge of
evil, because even if He did not create it,
yet still, since it would not be existing if He
had been against its existence. He must Him-
self have then caused it to exist, when He
refused to will its non-existence. And what
is more shameful than this ? When He willed
that to be which He was Himself unwilling to
create. He acted in fact against His very self,'
inasmuch as He was both willing that that
should exist which He was unwilling to make,
and unwilling to make that which He was will-
ing should exist. As if what He willed was
^ood, and at the same time what he refused
to be the Maker of was evil. What He judged
to be evil by not creating it, He also
proclaimed to be good by permitting it to
exist. By bearing with evil as a good in-
stead of rather extirpating it. He proved
Himself to be the promoter thereof; crimi-
nally,^ if through His own will — disgracefully,
if through necessity. God must either be
the servant of evil or the friend thereof, since
He held converse with evil in Matter — nay
more, effected His works out of the evil
thereof.

•CHAP. XI. — HERMOGENES MAKES GREAT EF-
FORTS TO REMOVE EVIL FROM GOD TO MAT-
TER. HOW HE FAILS TO DO THIS CONSIST-
ENTLY WITH HIS OWN ARGUMENT.

But, after all,^ by what proofs does Her-
mogenes persuade us that Matter is evil ?
For it will be impossible for him not to call
that evil to which he imputes evil, Now we
lay down this principle,^ that what is eternal
cannot possibly admit of diminution and sub-
jection, so as to be considered inferior to an-
other co-eternal Being. So that we now affirm
that evil is not even compatible with it,^
since it is incapable of subjection, from the
fact that it cannot in any wise be subject to
any, because it is eternal. But inasmuch as,
on other grounds,^ it is evident what is eter-
nal as God is the highest good, whereby also
He alone is good — as being eternal, and there-
fore good — as being God, how can evil be in-
herent in Matter, which (since it is eternal)


1 Adversum semetipsum.

2 Male : in reference to His alleged complicity with evil.

3 Et tamen.

4 Definimus.

5 Competere illi.
* Alias.


must needs be believed to be the highest
good ? ILlse if that which is eternal prove to
be also capable of evil, this (evil) will be able
to be also believed of God to His prejudice; '
so that it is without adequate reason that he
has been so anxious^ to remove evil from
God; since evil must be compatible with
an eternal Being, even by being made com-
patible with Matter, as Her?nogefies 7nakes
it. But, as the argument now stands,' since
what is eternal can be deemed evil, the
evil must prove to be invincible and insuper-
able, as being eternal; and in that case" it
will be in vain that we labour " to put away
evil from the midst of us; " " in that case,
moreover, God vainly gives us such a com-
mand and precept; nay more, in vain has
God appointed any judgment at all, when He
means, indeed," to inflict punishment with
injustice. But if, on the other hand, there
is to be an end of evil, when the chief thereof,
the devil, shall "go away into the fire which
God hath prepared for him and his angels " '^
— having been first " cast into the bottomless
pit;"*'* when likewise "the manifestation of
the children of God " 's shall have " delivered
the creature"'^ from evil, which had been
" made subject to vanity; " '^ when the cattle
restored in the innocence and integrity of
their nature'^ shall be at peace'' with the
beasts of the field, when also little children
shall play with serpents;^ when the Father
shall have put beneath the feet of His Son
His enemies,^' as being the workers of evil,
— if in this way an e7id is compatible with
evil, it must follow of necessity that a begi?i-
ning is also compatible with it; and Matter
will turn out to have a beginning, by virtue
of its having also an end. For whatever
things are set to the account of evil," have
a compatibility with the condition of evil.

CHAP. XII. THE MODE OF CONTROVERSY

CHANGED. THE PREMISSES OF HERMOGENES
ACCEPTED, IN ORDER TO SHOW INTO WHAT
CONFUSION THEY LEAD HIM.

Come now, let us suppose Matter to be evil,
nay, very evil, by nature of course, just as


7 Et in Deura credi.

8 Gestivit.

9 lam vero.
"" Tum.


11 I Cor. V. i^.

12 Utique : with a touch of irony, in the argumentum ad kotni-


nevt.

13 Matt. XXV. 41.

14 Rev. XX. 3.

15 Rom. viii. 19.
'6 Rom. viii. 21.

17 Rom. viii. 20.

18 Conditionis : "creation

19 Condixerint.
2oIsa. xi. 6.

21 Ps. ex. I.

22 Male deputantur.


484


AGAINST HERMOGENES.


[chap. XIV.


we believe God to be good, even very good,
in like manner by nature. Now nature must
be regarded as sure and fixed, just as persist-
ently fixed in evil in the case of Matter, as
immoveable and unchangeable in good in the
case of God. Because, as is evident,' if nat-
ure admits of change from evil to good in
Matter, it can be changed from good to evil
in God. Here some man will say, Then will
" children not be raised up to Abraham from
the stones ? " = Will " generations of vipers
not bring forth the fruit of repentance ?" ^
And *' children of wrath " fail to become sons
of peace, if nature be unchangeable ? Your
reference to such examples as these, my
friend,* is a thoughtless s one. For things
which owe their existence to birth — such as
stones and vipers and human beings — are not
apposite to the case of Matter, which is un-
born; since their nature, by possessing a be-
ginning, may have also a termination. But
bear in mind*^ that Matter has once for all
been determined to be eternal, as being un-
made, unborn, and therefore supposably of
an unchangeable and incorruptible nature;
and this from the very opinion of Hermogenes
himself, which he alleges against us when he
denies that God was able to make (anything)
of Himself, on the ground that what is eter-
nal is. incapable of change, because it would
lose — so the opinion runs^ — what it once
was, in becoming by the change that which it
was not, if it were not eternal. But as for
the Lord, who is also eternal, (he maintained)
that He could not be anything else than what
He always is. Well, then, I will adopt this
definite opinion of his, and by means thereof
refute him. I blame Matter with a like cen-
sure, because out of it, evil though it be —
nay, very evil — good things have been created,
ay, "very good" ones: "And God saw that
they were good, and God blessed them " ^ —
because, of course, of their very great good-
ness; certainly not because they were evil,
or very evil. Change is therefore admissible
in Matter; and this being the case, it has lost
its condition of eternity; in short,' its beauty
is decayed in death. '° Eternity, however,
cannot be lost, because it cannot be eternity,
except by reason of its immunity from loss.
For the same reason also it is incapable of
change, inasmuch as, since it is eternity, it
can by no means be changed.

I Scilicet.
' Nfat. in. 9.

3 Verses 7, 8.

4 O homo.

5 Temere.

6 Tene.

7 Scilicet.
^Gen. i. 21, 22.
9Denique.

»° That IS, of course, by its own natural law.


CHAP. XIII. ANOTHER GROUND OF HERMOG-
ENES THAT MATTER HAS SOME GOOD IN IT.
ITS ABSURDITY.

Here the question will arise How creatures
were made good out of it," which were formed
without any change at all ? " How occurs the
seed of what is good, ay, very good, in that
which is evil, nay, very evil? Surely a good
tree does not produce evil fruit, '^ since there
is no God who is not good; nor does an evil
tree yield good fruit, since there is not Matter
except what is very evil. Or if we were to
grant him that there is some germ of good in
it, then there will be no longer a uniform nat-
ure (pervading it), that is to say, one which
is evil throughout; but instead thereof (we
now encounter) a double nature, partly good
and partly evil; and again the question will
arise, whether, in a subject which is good and
evil, there could possibly have been found a
harmony for light and darkness, for sweet and
bitter? So again, if qualities so utterly di-
verse as good and evil have been able to unite
together,''^ and have imparted to Matter a
double nature, productive of both kinds of
fruit, then no longer will absolutely 's good
things be imputable to God, just as evil things
are not ascribed to Him, but both qualities
will appertain to Matter, since they are derived
from the property of Matter. At this rate,
we shall owe to God neither gratitude for good
things, nor grudge'^ for evil ones, because
He has produced no work of His own proper
character. '7 From which circumstance will
arise the clear proof that He has been subser-
vient to Matter.

CHAP. XIV. TERTULLIAN PUSHES HIS OPPONENT

INTO A DILEMMA.

Now, if it be also argued, that although
Matter may have afforded Him the oppor-
tunity, it was still His own will which led Him
to the creation of good creatures, as having
detected '^ what was good in matter — although
this, too, be a discreditable supposition '«• —
yet, at any rate, when He produces evil like-
wise out of the same (Matter), He is a servant
to Matter, since, of course, ^^ it is not of His
own accord that He produces this too, having
nothing else that He can do than to -effect
creation out of an evil stock" — unwillingly, no


" Matter.

" i. e. in their nature, Matter being evil, and they good, on the
hypothesis.
'3 Matt. vii. ig.
'4 Concurrisse.
»S Ipsa.
*6 Invidiam.
'7 Ingenio.
'8 Nactus.
'9 Turpe.
ao Utique.
' " Ex malo.


CHAP. XV.]


AGAINST HERMOGENES.


48;


doubt, as being good; of necessity, too, as
being unwilling; and as an act of servitude,
because from necessity. Which, then, is the
worthier thought, that He created evil things
of necessity, or of His own accord ? Because
it was indeed of necessity that He created
them, if out of Matter; of His own accord, if
out of nothing. For you are now labouring
in vain when you try to avoid making God the
Author of evil things; because, since He made
all things of Matter, they will have to be as-
cribed to Himself, who made them, just be-
cause ^ He made them. Plainly the interest
of the question, whence He made all things,
identifies itself with (the question), whether
He made all things out of nothing; and it
matters not whence He made all things, so
that He made all things thence, whence most
glory accrued to Him.'' Now, more glory
accrued to Him from a creation of His own
will than from one of necessity ; in other words,
from a creation out of nothing, than from one
out of Matter. It is more worthy to believe
that God is free, even as the Author of evil,
than that He is a slave. Power, whatever it
be, is more suited to Him than infirmity. ^
If we thus even admit that matter had nothing
good in it, but that the Lord produced what-
ever good He did produce of His own power,
then some other questions will with equal rea-
son arise. First, since there was no good at
all in Matter, // is clear that good was not
made of Matter, on the express ground in-
deed that Matter did not possess it. Next,
if good was not made of Matter, it must then
have been made of God; if not of God, then
it must have been made of nothing. — For this
is the alternative, on Hermogenes' own show-
ing. ^

CHAP. XV. THE TRUTH, THAT GOD MADE ALL

THINGS FROM NOTHING, RESCUED FROM THE
opponent's FLOUNDERINGS.

Now, if good was neither produced out of
matter, since it was not in it, evil as it was,
nor out of God, since, according to the posi-
tion of Hermogenes, nothing could have been
produced out of god, it will be found that
good was created out of nothing, inasmuch as
it was formed of none — neither of Matter nor
of God. And if good was formed out of noth-
ing, why not evil too ? Nay, if anything was
formed out of nothing, why not all things ?
Unless indeed it be that the divine might was
insufficient for the production of all things,
though it produced a something out of noth-


1 Proinde quatenus,

2 We subjpin the original of this sentence : " Plane sic interest
unde fecerit ac si de nihilo fecisset, nee interest undo fecerit, ut
inde fecerit unde eum magis decuit.

sPusillitas.

4 Secundum Hermogenis dispositionem.


ing. Or else if good proceeded from evil
matter, since it issued neither from nothing
nor from God, it will follow that it must have
proceeded from the conversion of Matter con-
trary to that unchangeable attribute which has
been claimed for //, as an eternal being.s
Thus, in regard to the source whence good
derived its existence, Hermogenes will now
have to deny the possibility of such. But still
it is necessary that (good) should proceed
from some one of those sources from which
he has denied the very possibility of its hav-
ing been derived. Now if evil be denied to
be of nothing for the purpose of denying it
to be the work of God, from whose will there
would be too much appearance of its being
derived, and be alleged to proceed from Mat-
ter, that it may be the property of that very
thing of whose substance it is assumed to be
made, even here also, as I have said, God will
have to be regarded as the Author of evil;
because, whereas it had been His duty ^ to
produce all good things out of Matter, or
rather good things simply, by His identical
attribute of power and will. He did yet not only
not produce all good things, but even (some)
evil things — of course, either willing that the
evil should exist if He was able to cause their
non-existence, or not being strong enough to
effect that all things should be good, if being
desirous of that result, He failed in the ac-
complishment thereof; since there can be no
difference whether it were by weakness or by
will, that the Lord proved to be the Author
of evil. Else what was the reason that, after
creating good things, as if Himself good, He
should have also produced evil things, as if
He failed in His goodness, since He did not
confine Himself to the production of things
which were simply consistent with Himself?
What necessity was there, after the produc-
tion of His proper work, for His troubling
Himself about Matter also by producing evil
likewise, in order to secure His being alone
acknowledged as good from His good, 'and at
the same time ^ to prevent Matter being re-
garded as evil from (created) evil ? Good
would have flourished much better if evil had
not blown upon it. For Hermogenes himself
explodes the arguments of sundry persons
who contend that evil things were necessary
to impart lustre to the good, which must be
understood from their contrasts. This, there-
fore, was not the ground for the production


5 Contra denegatam seterni conversationem. Literally, " Con-
trary to that convertibility of an eternal nature which has been
denied (by Hermogenes) to be possible." It will be obvious why
we have, in connection with the preceding clause preferred the
equivalent rendering of our text. For the denial of Hermogenes,
which Tertullian refers to, see above, chap. xii. p. 484.

6 Debuisset protulisse.

7 This clumsy expedient to save the character of both God and
Matter was one of the weaknesses of Hermogenes' system.


486


AGAINST HERMOGENES.


[CHAI'. XVII.


I


of evil; but if some other reason must be
sought for the introduction thereof, why could
it not have been introduced even from noth-
ing,' since the very same reason would ex-
culpate the Lord from the reproach of being
thought the author of evil, which now excuses
the existence of evil things, when He produces
them out of Matter? And if there is this ex-
cuse, then the question is completely^ shut
up in a corner, where they are unwilling to
find it, who, without examining into the rea-
son itself of evil, or distinguishing how they
should either attribute it to God or separate
it from God, do in fact expose God to many
most unworthy calumnies. ^

CHAP. XVI. A SERIES OF DILEMMAS. THEY

SHOW THAT HERMOGENES CANNOT ESCAPE
FROM THE ORTHODOX CONCLUSION.

On the very threshold,* then, of this doc-
trine,s which I shall probably have to treat of
elsewhere, I distinctly lay it down as my posi-
tion, that both good and evil must be ascribed
either to God, who made them out of Matter;
or to Matter itself, out of which He made
them; or both one and the other to both of
them together,^ because they are bound to-
gether— both He who created, and that out
of which He created; or (lastly) one to One,
and the other to the Other,^ because after
Matter and God there is not a third. Now if
both should prove to belong to God, God evi-
dently will be the author of evil; but God, as
being good, cannot be the author of evil.
Again, if both are ascribed to Matter, Matter
will evidently be the very mother of good,^
but inasmuch as Matter is wholly evil, it can-
not be the mother of good. But if both one
and the other should be thought to belong
to Both together, then in this case also Matter
will be comparable with God; and both will
be equal, being on equal terms allied to evil
as well as to good. Matter, however, ought
not to be compared with God, in order that it
may not make two gods. If, (lastly,) one be
ascribed to One, and the other to the Other —
that is to say, let the good be God's, and the
evil belong to Matter — then, on the one hand,
evil must not be ascribed to God, nor, on the
other hand, good to Matter. And God, more-
over, by making both good things and evil
things out of Matter, creates thcjn along with


* Cur non et ex nihilo potuerit induci ?
» Ubique et undique.

3 Destructionibus. " Ruin of character" is the true idea of this
strong term.

4 Praestructione. The notion is of the foundation of an edi-
fice: here = •'preliminary remarks" (see our Anti-Marcion, v.
5, p. 43?). ..

5 Articuh.

6 Utrumque utrique.

7 Alterum alteri.
s Boni matrix.


it. This being the case, I cannot tell how
Hermogenes' is to escape from my conclu-
sion; for he supposes that God cannot be the
author of evil, in what way soever He created
evil out of Matter, whether it was of His own
will, or of necessity, or from the reason (of
the case). If, however, He is the author of
evil, who was the actual Creator, Matter being
simply associated 7vith Him by reason of its
furnishing Him with substance,'" you now do
away with the cause " of your introducing
Matter. For it is not the less triie, that it is
by means of Matter that God shows Himself
the author of evil, although Matter has been
assumed by you expressly to prevent God's
seeming to be the author of evil. Matter be-
ing therefore excluded, since the cause of it
is excluded, it remains that God, without
doubt, must have made all things out of noth-
ing. Whether evil things were amongst them
we shall see, when it shall be made clear what
are evil things, and whether those things are
evil which you at present deem to be so. For
it is more worthy of God that He produced
even these of His own will, by producing them
out of nothing, than from the predetermination
of another,'^ (which must have been the case)
if He had produced them out of Matter. It
is liberty, not necessity, which suits the char-
acter of God. I would much rather that He
should have even willed to create evil of Him-
self, than that He should have lacked ability
to hinder its creation.

CHAP. XVII. — THE TRUTH OF GOD's WORK IN
CREATION. YOU CANNOT DEPART IN THE
LEAST FROM IT, WITHOUT LANDING YOURSELF
IN AN ABSURDITY.

This rule is required by the nature of the
One-only God,'^ who is One-only in no other
way than as the sole God; and in no other
way sole, than as having nothing else (co-ex-
istent) with Him. So also He will be first,
because all things are after Him; and all things
are after Him, because all things are by Him;
and all things are by Him, because they are
of nothing: so that reason coincides with the
Scripture, which says: " Who hath known the
mind of the Lord ? or who hath been His
counsellor ? or with whom took He counsel ?
or who hath shown to Him the way of wisdom
and knowledge ? Who hath first given to


9The usual reading is " Hermogenes." Rigaltius, however,
reads " Hermogenis," of which Oehler approves; so as to make
TertuUian say, " I cannot tell how I can avoid the opinion of Her-
mogenes, who," etc. etc.

'" Per substantia: suggestum.

" Kxcusjis jam causam. Hermogenes held that Matter was
eternal, to exclude Cod from the authorship of evil. This causa
of Matter he was now illogically evading. Excusare = ex, causa,
" to cancel the cause."

'2 De praejudicio alieno.

'3 Unici Dei.


CHAP. XVIII.]


AGAINST HERMOGENES.


487


Him, and it sliall be recompensed to him
again ?" ^ Surely none! Because there was
present with Him no power, no material, no
nature which belonged to any other than Him-
self. But if it was with some (portion of
Matter) ^ that He effected His creation, He
must have received from that (Matter) itself
both the design and the treatment of its order,
as being " the way of wisdom and knowledge, ' '
For He had to operate conformably with the
quality of the thing, and according to the nat-
ure of Matter, not according to His own will;
in consequence of which He must have made^
even evil things suitably to the nature not of
Himself, but of Matter.

CHAP. XVIII. — AN EULOGY ON THE WISDOM AND
WORD OF GOD, BY WHICH GOD MADE ALL
THINGS OF NOTHING.

If any material was necessary to God in
the creation of the world, as Hermogenes
supposed, God had a far nobler and more
suitable one in His own wisdom * — one which
was not to be gauged by the writings of^
philosophers, but to be learnt from the words
of 5 prophets. This alone, indeed, knew the
mind of the Lord. For " who knoweth the
things of God, and the things in God, but the
Spirit, which is in Him ? " ^ Now His wis-
dom is that Spirit. This was His counsellor,
the very way of His wisdom and knowledge.''
Of this He made all things, making them
through It, and making them with It. " When
He prepared the heavens," so says (the Scrip-
ture^), "I was present with Him; and when
He strengthened above the winds the lofty
clouds, and when He secured the fountains ^
which are under the heaven, I was present,
compacting these things '° along with Him. I
was He" in whom He took delight; more-
over, I daily rejoiced in His presence: for
He rejoiced when He had finished the world,
and amongst the sons of men did He show
forth His pleasure."'^ Now, who would not
rather approve of '^ this as the fountain and
origin of all things — of this as, in very deed,
the Matter of all Matter, not liable to any
end,''* not diverse in condition, not restless in


1 Rom. xi. 34, 35 ; comp. Isa. xl. 14.

2 De aliquo.

3 Adeo ut fecerit.

4 Sophiam suam scilicet.
SApud.

^ I Cor. li. II.

7 Isa. xl. 14.

8 Or the " inquit " may indicate the very words of " Wisdom."

9 Pontes. Although Oehler prefers Junius ' reading " montes,"
he yet retains " fontes," because Tertullian (in ch. xxxii. below)
has the unmistakable reading " fontes " in a like connection.

10 Compingens.

i^ Ad quem : the expression is masculine.

i^Prov. viii. 27-31.

13 Commendet.

14 " Non fini subditj m " is Oehler's better reading than the old 1
" sibi subditam."


motion, not ungraceful in form, but natural,
and proper, and duly proportioned, and beau-
tiful, such truly as even God might well have
required, who requires His own and not an-
other's? Indeed, as soon as He perceived It
to be necessary for His creation of the world,
He immediately creates It, and generates It in
Himself. "The Lord," says the Scripture,
" possessed 's me, the beginning of His ways
for the creation of His works. Before the
worlds He founded me; before He made the
earth, before the mountains were settled in
their places; moreover, before the hills He
generated me, and prior to the depths was I
begotten."'^ Let Hermogenes then confess
that the very Wisdom of God is declared to be
born and created, for the especial reason that
we should not suppose that there is any other
being than God alone who is unbegotten and
uncreated. For if that, which from its being
inherent in the Lord '^ was of Him and in
Him, was yet not without a beginning, — I
mean '^ His wisdom, which was then born and
created, when in the thought of God It began
to assume motion '^ for the arrangement of
His creative works, — how much more impossi-
ble^ is it that anything should have been
without a beginning which was extrinsic to the
Lord ! ^' But if this same Wisdom is the
Word of God, in the capacity ^= of Wisdom,
and (as being He) without whom nothing was
made, just as also (nothing) was set in order
without Wisdom, how can it be that anything,
except the Father, should be older, and on
this account indeed nobler, than the Son of
God, the only-begotten and first-begotten
Word ? Not to say that ^ what is unbegotten
is stronger than that which is born, and what
is not made more powerful than that which is
made. Because that which did not require a
Maker to give it existence, will be much more
elevated in rank than that which had an author
to bring it into being. On this principle,
then,='4 if evil is indeed unbegotten, whilst the
Son of God is begotten ("for," says God,
" my heart hath emitted my most excellent
Word " "5), I am not quite sure that evil may
not be introduced by good, the stronger by
the weak, in the same way as the unbegotten
is by the begotten. Therefore on this ground
Hermogenes puts Matter even before God,
by putting it before the Son. Because the


'3 Condidit : created.

'6 See Prov. viii.

'7 Intra Dominuin.

18 Scilicet.

'9 Coepti agitari.

20 Multo magis non capit.

2' Extra Dominum.

" Sensu.

23Nedum.

24 Proinde.

25 On this version of Ps. xl\


see our Anti-HIarct'on (p. 299, note 5)


, and its application by Tertullian,


488


AGAINST HERMOGENES.


[chap. XX.


Son is the Word, and "the Word is God,"'
and " I and my Father are one." ' But after
all, perhaps,^ the Son will patiently enough
submit to having that preferred before Him,
which (by Hermogenes), is made equal to the
Father !

CHAP. XIX. AN APPEAL TO THE HISTORY OF

CREATION. TRUE MEANING OF THE TERM
BEGINNING, WHICH THE HERETIC CURIOUSLY
WRESTS TO AN ABSURD SENSE.

But I shall appeal to the original docu-
ment* of Moses, by help of which they on
the other side vainly endeavour to prop up
their conjectures, with the view, of course,
of appearing to have the support of that
authority which is indispensable in such an
inquiry. They have found their opportunity,
as is usual with heretics, in wresting the plain
meaning of certain words. For instance the
very beginning,^ when God made the heaven
and the earth, they will construe as if it meant
something substantial and embodied,^ to be
regarded as Matter. We, however, insist on
the proper signification of every word, a?id
say that principium means beginning, — being
a term which is suitable to represent things
which begin to exist. For nothing which has
come into being is without a beginning, nor can
this its commencement be at any other mo-
ment than when it begins to have existence.
Thus principium or beginning, is simply a
term of inception, not the name of a sub-
stance. Now, inasmuch as the heaven and
the earth are the principal works of God, and
since, by His making them first. He consti-
tuted them in an especial manner the begin-
ning of His creation, before all things else,
with good reason does the Scripture preface
(its record of creation) with the words,'* In the
beginning God made the heaven and the
earth;" 7 just as it would have said, "At
last God made the heaven and the earth," if
God had created these after all the rest. Now,
if the beginning is a substance, the end
must also be material. No doubt, a substan-
tial things may be the beginning of some
other thing which maybe formed out of it;
thus the clay is the beginning of the vessel,
and the seed is the beginning of the plant.
But when we employ the word beginning in
this sense of origin, aixl not in that of order,
we do not omit to mention also the name of


» John i. I.

2 John X. 30.

3 Nisi quod.

4 Originale instnimentum : which may mean " the document
•which treats of the origin of all things."

5 Principium.

6 Corpulentum.

7 Gen. i. i.

8 Substantivum aliquid.


that particular thing which we regard as the
origin of the other. On the other hand,' if
we were to make such a statement as this,
for example, " In the beginning the potter
made a basin or a water-jug," the word be-
ginning will not here indicate a material sub-
stance (for I have not mentioned the clay,
which is the beginning in this sense, but only
the order of the work, meaning that the potter
made the basin and the jug first, before any-
thing else — intending afterwards to make the
rest. It is, then, to the order of the works
that the word beginning has reference, not to
the origin of their substances. I might also
explain this word begi?ming in another way,
which would not, however, be inapposite.'"
The Greek term for beginning, which is apxy,
admits the sense not only of priority of order,
but of power as well; whence princes and mag-
istrates are called hpxovreq. Therefore ir this
sense too, beginmng may he taken for princely
authority and power. It was, indeed, in His
transcendent authority and power, that God
made the heaven and the earth.

CHAP. XX. MEANING OF THE PHRASE — IN THE

BEGINNING. TERTULLIAN CONNECTS IT WITH
THE WISDOM OF GOD, AND ELICITS FROM IT
THE TRUTH THAT THE CREATION WAS NOT
OUT OF PRE-EXISTENT MATTER.

But in proof that the Greek word means
nothing else than beginning, and that begin-
ning admits of no other sense than the initial
one, we have that (Being) " even acknowledg-
ing such a beginning, who says: "The Lord
possessed " me, the beginning of His ways
for the creation of His works." '3 For since
all things were made by the Wisdom of God,
it follows that, when God made both the heaven
and the earth in principio — that is to say, in
the beginning-^He made them in His Wis-
dom. If, indeed, beginning had a material
signification, the Scripture would not have in-
formed us that God made so and so in prin-
cipio, at the beginning, but rather ex principio,
of the beginning; for He would not have
created in, but of, matter. When Wisdom,
however, was referred to, it was quite right
to say, in the beginning. For it was ni Wis-
dom that He made all things at first, because
by meditating and arranging His plans there-
in,'-* He had in fact already done (the work
of creation); and if He had even intended to
create out of matter. He would yet have ef-
fected His creation when He previously medi-


9 De cetero.
"' Non ab re tamen.
" 111am . . . quae.
" Condidit : " created.
'3 Prov. viii. 22.
'4 In qua : in Wisdom.


CHAP. XXII.]


AGAINST HERMOGENES.


489


tated on it and arranged it in His Wisdom,
since It' was in fact the beginning of His
ways: this meditation and arrangement being
the primal operation of Wisdom, opening as
it does the way to the worlcs by the act of
meditation and thought. = This authority of
Scripture I claim for myself even from this
circumstance, that whilst it shows me the God
who created, and the works He created, it
does not in like manner reveal to me the
source from which He created. For since
in every operation there are three principal
things, He who makes, and that which is
made, and that of which it is made, there must
be three names mentioned in a correct narra-
tive of the operation — the person of the maker,
the sort of thing which is made,^ a?id the ma-
terial of which it is formed. If the material
is not mentioned, while the work and the
maker of the work are both mentioned, it is
manifest that He made the work out of noth-
ing. For if He had had anything to operate
upon, it would have been mentioned as well
as (the other two particulars).^ In conclusion,
I will apply the Gospel as a supplementary
testimony to the Old Testament. Now in
this there is all the greater reason why there
should be shown the material (if there were
any) out of which God made all things, inas-
much as it is therein plainly revealed by whom
He made all things. " In the beginning was
the Word " 5 — that is, the same beginning,
of course, in which God made the heaven and
the earth,^ — "and the Word was with God,
and the Word was God. All things were
made by Him, and without Him nothing was
made." 7 Now, since we have here clearly
told us who the Maker was, that is, God, and
what He made, even all things, and through
whom He made them, even His Word, would
not the order of the narrative have required
that the" source out of which all things were
made by God through the Word should like-
wise be declared, if they had been in fact made
out of anything? What, therefore, did not
exist, the Scripture was .unable to mention;
and by not mentioning it, it has given us a
clear proof that there was no such thing: for
if there had been, the Scripture would have
mentioned it.

CHAP. XXI. A RETORT OF HERESY ANSWERED.

THAT SCRIPTURE SHOULD IN SO MANY WORDS
TELL US THAT THE WORLD WAS MADE OF
NOTHING IS SUPERFLUOUS.

But, you will say to me, if you determine


I Wisdom.
- De cogitatu.

3 Species facti.

4 Proinde.

5 John i. I.

6 Gen. i. 1.


that all things were made of nothing, on the
ground that it is not told us that anything
was made out of pre-existent Matter, take care
that it be not contended on the opposite side,
that on the same ground all things were made
out of Matter, because it is not likewise ex-
pressly said that anything was made out of
nothing. Some arguments may, of course,^
be thus retorted easily enough; but it does
not follow that they are on that account fairly
admissible, where there is a diversity in the
cause. For I maintain that, even if the Scrip-
ture has not expressly declared that all things
were made out of nothing — just as it abstains
(from saying that they were formed) out of
Matter — there was no such pressing need for
expressly indicating the creation of all things
out of nothing, as there was of their creation
out of Matter, if that had been their origin.
Because, in the case of what is made out of
nothing, the very fact of its not being indicated
that it was made of any particular thing shows
that it was made of nothing; and there is no
danger of its being supposed that it was made
of anything, when there is no indication at all
of what it was made of. In the case, however,
of that which is made out of something, unless
the very fact be plainly declared, that it was
made out of something, there will be danger,
until 5 it is shown of what it was made, first
of its appearing to be made of nothing, because
it is not said of what it was made; and then,
should it be of such a nature '° as to have the
appearance of having certainly been made of
something, there will be a similar risk of its
seeming to have been made of a far different
material from the proper one, so long as there
is an absence of statement of what it was made
of. Then, if God had been unable to make
all things of nothing, the Scripture could not
possibly have added that He had made all
things of nothing: (there could have been no
room for such a statement,) but it must by all
means have informed us that He had made
all things out of Matter, since Matter must
have been the source; because the one case
was quite to be understood," if it were not
actually stated, whereas the other case would
be left in doubt unless it were stated.

CHAP. XXII. THIS CONCLUSION CONFIRMED BY

THE USAGE OF HOLY SCRIPTURE IN ITS HIS-
TORY OF THE CREATION. HERMOGENES IN
DANGER OF THE WOE PRONOUNCED AGAINST
ADDING TO SCRIPTURE.

And to such a degree has the Holy Ghost


7 John 1. 1-3.

8 Plane.

9 Dum ostenditur : which Oehler and Rigalt. construe as
"donee ostendatur." One reading has "dum mow ostenditur,"
" so long as it is not shown."

'^ Ea conditione.

I' In totum habebat intelligi.


490


AGAINST HERMOGENES.


[chap, xxiv^


made this the rule of His Scripture, that
whenever anything is made out of anything,
He mentions both the thing that is made and
thethingof which it is made. " Let the earth,"
says He, "bring forth grass, the herb yield-
ing seed, and the fruit-tree yielding fruit after
its kind, whose seed is in itself, after its kind.
And it was so. And the earth brought forth
grass, and herb yielding seed after its kind,
and the tree yielding fruit, whose seed was in
itself, after its kind."' And again: "And
God said. Let the waters bring forth abun-
dantly the moving creatures that have life,
and fowl that may fly above the earth through
the firmament of heaven. And it was so.
And God created great whales, and every liv-
ing creature that moveth, which the waters
brought forth abundantly, after their kind." =
Again afterwards: "And God said, Let the
earth bring forth the living creature after his
kind, cattle, and creeping thing, and beasts
of the earth after their kind." 3 If therefore
God, when producing other things out of
things which had been already made, indicates
them by the prophet, and tells us what He
has produced from such and such a source*
(although we might ourselves suppose them
to be derived from some source or other,
short of nothing; 5 since there had already
been created certain things, from which they
might easily seem to have been made); if the
Holy Ghost took upon Himself so great a con-
cern for our instruction, that we might know
from what everything was produced,*^ would
He not in like manner have kept us well in-
formed about both the heaven and the earth,
by indicating to us what it was that He made
them of, if their original consisted of any
material substance, so that the more He
seemed to have made them of nothing, the
less in fact was there as yet made, from which
He could appear to have made them ? There-
fore, just as He shows us the original out of
which He drew such things as were derived
from a given source, so also with regard to
those things of which He does not point out
whence He produced them, He confirms (by
that silence our assertion) that they were pro-
duced out of nothing. " In the beginning,"
then, " God made the heaven and the
earth." 7 I revere^ the fulness of His Scrip-
ture, in which He manifests to me both the
Creator and the creation. In the gospel.


'Gen. i. ii, 12.
= Gen. i. 20, 21.

3 Ver. 24.

4 Quid unde protulerit : properly a double question = " what
was produced, and whence ? '

5 Unde unde . . . dumne.

6 Quid unde processerit : properly a double question = " what
was produced, and whence ? '

7 Gen. i. i.

SAdoro: reverently admire.


moreover, I discover a Minister and Witness
of the Creator, even His Word. ^ But whether
all things were made out of any underlying
Matter, I have as yet failed anywhere to
find. Where such a statement is written, Her-
mogenes' shop" must tell us. If it is no-
where written, then let it fear the woe which
impends on all who add to or take away from
the written word.^^

CHAP. XXIII. HERMOGENES PURSUED TO AN-
OTHER PASSAGE OF SCRIPTURE. THE ABSURD-
ITY OF HIS INTERPRETATION EXPOSED.

But he draws an argument from the follow-
ing words, where it is written: "And the earth
was without form, and void."" For he re-
solves '3 the word earth into Matter, because
that which is made out of it is the earth.
And to the word was he gives th'e same di-
rection, as if it pointed to what had always
existed unbegotten and unmade. It was
without form ^ moreover, and void, because
he will have Matter to have existed shapeless
and confused, and without the finish of a
maker's hand.'* Now these opinions of his I
will refute singly; but first I wish to say to
him, by way of general answer: We are of
opinion that Matter is pointed at in these
terms. But yet does the Scripture intimate
that, because Matter was in existence before
all, anything of like condition 's was even
formed out of it ? Nothing of the kind. Mat-
ter might have had existence, if it so pleased
— or rather if Hermogenes so pleased. It
might, I say, have existed, and yet God might
not have made anything out of it, either as
it was unsuitable to Him to have required the
aid of anything, or at least because He is not
shown to have made anything out of Matter.
Its existence must therefore be without a cause,
you will say. Oh, no ! certainly '^ not with-
out cause. For even if the world were not
made out of it, yet a heresy has been hatched
therefrom; and a specially impudent one too,
because it is not Matter which has produced
the heresy, but the- heresy has rather made
Matter itself.

CHAP. XXIV. — EARTH DOES NOT MEAN MATTER
AS HERMOGENES WOULD HAVE IT.

I now return to the several points '^ by
means of which he thought that Matter was
signified. And first I will inquire about the


9 John i. 3.
10 Officina.
" Rev. xxii. 18, 19.
"Gen. i. 2.
'SRedigitin.

'4 Inconditam : we have combined the two senses of the word.
'5 Tale aliquid.
'6 Plane: ironical.
'7 Articulos.


CHAP. XXVI


■]


AGAINST HERMOGENES.


491


terms. For we read only of one of them,
Earth; the other, namely Matter^ we do not
meet with. I ask, then, since Matter is not
mentioned in Scripture, how the term earth
can be applied to it, which marks a substance
of another kind ? There is all the greater
need why mention should also have been
made of Matter, if this has acquired the
further sense of Earth, in order that I may
be sure that Earth is one and the same name
as Matter, and so not claim the designation
for merely one substance, as the proper name
thereof, and by which it is better known; or
else be unable (if I should feel the inclination)
to apply it to some particular species of Mat-
er, instead, indeed,' of making it the common
term^ of all Matter. For when a proper
name does not exist for that thing to which
a common term is ascribed, the less apparent ^
is the object to which it may be ascribed, the
more capable will it be of being applied to
any other object whatever. Therefore, even
supposing that Hermogenes could show us
the 7iame'' Matter, he is bound to prove to us
further, that the same object has the sur-
?ia?ne^ Earth, in order that he may claim for
it both designations alike.

CHAP. XXV. THE ASSUMPTION THAT THERE

ARE TWO EARTHS MENTIONED IN THE HIS-
TORY OF THE CREATION, REFUTED.

He accordingly maintains that there are two
earths set before us in the passage in ques-
tion: one, which God made in the begin-
ning; the other being the Matter of which
God made the world, and concerning which
it is said, "And the earth was without form,
and void."^ Of course, if I were to ask, to
which of the two earths the name earth is
best suited, 7 I shall be told that the earth
which was made derived the appellation from
that of which it was made, on the ground that
it is more likely that the offspring should get
its name from the original, than the original
from the offspring. This being the case,
another question presents itself to us, whether
it is right and proper that this earth which
God made should have derived its name from
that out of which He made it ? For I find
from Hermogenes and the rest of the Ma-
terialist heretics,^ that while the one earth


1 Nee utique.

2 Communicare.

3 We have construed Oehler's reading: " Quanto non compa-
ret" (i.e., by a frequent ellipse of Tertullian, " quanto viagis non
comparet "). Fr. Junius, however, suspects that instead of
" quanto " we should read " quando :" this would produce the
sense, " since it is not apparent to what object it may be ascribed,"
etc.

4 Nominatam.

5 Cognominatam.

6 Gen. i. 2.

7 Quae cui nomen terrse accommodare debeat. This is literally
a double question, asking about the fitness of the name, and lo
which earth it is best adapted.


was indeed "without form, and void," this
one of ours obtained from God in an equal
degree 9 both form, and beauty, and sym-
metry; and therefore that the earth which
was created was a different thing from that
out of which it was created. Now, hav-
ing become a different thing, it could not
possibly have shared with the other in its
name, after it had declined from its con-
dition. If earth was the proper name of
the (original) Matter, this world of ours,
which is not Matter, because it has become
another thing, is unfit to bear the name of
earth, seeing that that name belongs to some-
thing else, and is a stranger to its nature..
But (you will tell me) Matter which has under-
gone creation, that is, our earth, had with its.
original a community of name no less than
of kind. By no means. For although the
pitcher is formed out of the clay, I shall nO'
longer call it clay, but a pitcher; so likewise,
although electriun '° is compounded of gold
and silver, I shall yet not call it either gold
or silver, but electrum. When there is a de-
parture from the nature of any thing, there is
likewise a relinquishment of its name — with
a propriety which is alike demanded by the
designation and the condition. How great a
change indeed from the condition of that
earth, which is Matter, has come over this
earth of ours, is plain even from the fact that
the latter has received this testimony to its
goodness in Genesis, "And God saw that if
was good; " " while the former, according to
Hermogenes, is regarded as the origin and
cause of all evils. Lastly, if the one is Earth
because the other is, why also is the one not
Matter as the other is? Indeed, by this rule
both the heaven and all creatures ought to
have had the names of Earth and Matter^
since they all consist of Matter. I have said
enough touching the designation Earth, by
which he will have it that Matter is under-
stood. This, as everybody knows, is the
name of one of the elements; for so we are
taught by nature first, and afterwards by Scrip-
ture, except it be that credence must be given
to that Silenus who talked so confidently in
the presence of king Midas of another world,
according to the account of Theopompus.
But the same author informs us that there
are also several gods.

CHAP. XXVI. — THE METHOD OBSERVED IN THE
HISTORY OF THE CREATION, IN REPLY TO THE
PERVERSE INTERPRETATION OF HERMOGENES.

We, however, have but one God, and but


8 He means those who have gone wrong on the eternity of

matter.

9 Promde.

1° A mixed metal, of the colour of amber.
" Gen. i. 31.


492


AGAINST HERMOGENES.


[chap. XXVIII.


one earth too, which in the beginning God
made.* The Scripture, which at its very out-
set proposes to run through the order thereof,
tells us as its first information that it was
created; it next proceeds to set forth what sort
of earth it was.' In like manner with respect
to the heaven, it informs us first of its crea-
tion— *' In the beginning God made the
heaven: "3 it then goes on to introduce its
arrangement; how that God both separated
*'the water which was below the firmament
from that which was above the firmament,"*
and called the firmament heaven, s — the very
thing He had created in the beginning.
Similarly it (afterwards) treats of man: "And
God created man, in the image of God made
He him."* It next reveals how He made
him: "And (the Lord) God formed man of
the dust of the ground, and breathed into his
nostrils the breath of life; and man became
a living soul."' Now this is undoubtedly^
the correct and fitting mode for the narrative.
First comes a prefatory statement, then fol-
low the details in full;^ first the subject is
named, then it is described.'" How absurd
is the other view of the account," when even
before he " had premised any mention of his
subject, i.e. Matter, without even giving us
its name, he all on a sudden promulged its
form and condition, describing to us its qual-
ity before mentioning its existence, — pointing
out the figure of the thing formed, but con-
cealing its name ! But how much more credi-
ble is our opinion, which holds that Scripture
has only subjoined the arrangement of the
sul)ject after it has first duly described its
formation and mentioned its name ! Indeed,
how full and complete '^ is the meaning of
these words: " In the beginning God created
the heaven and the earth; but ''♦the earth
was without form, and void," 's — the very
same earth, no doubt, which God made, and
of which the Scripture had been speaking at
that very moment.'* For that very ^^but'*^^
is inserted into the narrative like a clasp,'^
(in its function) of a conjunctive particle, to

1 Gen. i. i.

2 Qualitatem ejus : unless this means " horv He made it," like
the " qualiter fecerit " below.

3 Gen. i. i.

4 Gen. i. 7.

5 Ver. 8.

6 Gen, i. 27.

7 Gen. ii. 7.

8 Utique.

9 Prosequi.

10 Primo prsefari, postea prosequi ; nominare, deinde describere.
This properly is an a/istraci statement, given with TertuUian's
usual terseness : " First you should (' decet ') give your preface,
then follow up with details : first name your subject, then describe
it."

" Alioquin.

«2 Hermogenes, whose view of the narrative is criticised.

13 Integer.

14 .\utem.

*S Gen. i. i, 2.

16 Cum maxime edixerat.

17 The "autem" of the note just before this. Fibula. '


connect t/ie tivo sefitences indissolubly together:
''But the earth." This word carries back
the mind to that earth of which mention had
just been made, and binds the sense there-
unto.'' Take away this "but," and the tie
is loosened; so much so that the passage,
" But the earth was without form, and void,"
may then seem to have been meant for any
other earth.

CHAP. XXVII. — SOME HAIR-SPLITTING USE OF
WORDS IN WHICH HIS OPPONENT HAD IN-
DULGED.

But you next praise your eyebrows, and
toss back your head, and beckon with your
finger, in characteristic disdain, =° and say:
There is the 7vas^ looking as if it pointed to
an eternal existence, — making its subject,
of course, unbegotten and unmade, and on
that account worthy of being supposed to be
Matter. Well now, for my own part, I shall
resort to no affected protestation, =' but simply
reply that " was " may be predicated of every-
thing— even of a thing which has been created,
which was born, which once was not, and
which is not your Matter. For of everything
which has being, from whatever source it
has it, whether it has it by a beginning or
without a beginning, the word ''was'' will be
predicated from the very fact that it exists.
To whatever thing the first tense =" of the verb
is applicable for deJi?iition, to the same will
be suitable the later form "^ of the verb, when
it has to descend to relation. " Est " (it is)
forms the essential parf* of a definition,
" erat " (it was) of a relation. Such are the
trifles and subtleties of heretics, who wrest
and bring into question the simple meaning
of the commonest words. A grand question
it is, to be sure,'^ whether "the earth luas,"
which was made ! The real point of discus-
sion is, whether "being without form, and
void," is a state which is more suitable to that
which was created, or to that of which it was
created, so that the predicate {ivas) may ap-
pertain to the same thing to which the subject
[that which 7vas) also belongs. =*

CHAP. XXVIII. A CURIOUS INCONSISTENCY IN

HERMOGENES EXPOSED. CERTAIN EXPRES-
SIONS IN THE HISTORY OF CREATION VINDI-
CATED IN THE TRUE SENSE.

But we shall show not only that this condi-
tion '^ agreed with this earth of ours, but that


'9 AUigat sensum.

=0 Implied in the emphatic tu.

2' Sine u lo lenocinio pronunciationis.

22 Prima positio : the first inflection perhaps, i. e. t/ie present
tense.

23 Declinatio : the past tense.

24 Caput.

25 Scilicet.

26 This seems to be the meaning of the obscure passage, " Ut
ejusdem sit Erat cujus et quod erat.

27 Habitum.


CHAP. XXIX.]


AGAINST HERMOGENES.


495


it did not agree with that other (insisted on
by Hermogenes). For, inasmuch as pure
Matter was thus subsistent with God,' with-
out the interposition indeed of any element
at all (because as yet there existed nothing but
itself and God), it could not of course have
been invisible. Because, although Hermog-
enes contends that darkness was inherent in
the substance of Matter, a position which we
shall have to meet in .its proper place, ^ yet
darkness is visible even to a human being
(for the very fact that there is the darkness is
an evident one), much more is it so to God.
If indeed it ^ had been invisible, its quality
would not have been by any means discovera-
ble. How, then, did Hermogenes find out-*
that that substance was "without form," and
confused and disordered, which, as being in-
visible, was not palpable to his senses ? If
this mystery was revealed to him by God, he
ought to give us his proof. I want to know
also, whether (the substance in question)
could have been described as "void." That
certainly is "void" which is imperfect.
Equally certain is it, that nothing can be im-
perfect but that which is made; it is imperfect
when it is not fully made.s Certainly, you
admit. Matter, therefore, which was not
made at all, could not have been imperfect;
and what was not imperfect was not "void."
Having no beginning, because it was not made,
it was also unsusceptible of any void-condi-
tion.^ For this void-condition is an accident
of beginning. The earth, on the contrary,
which was made, was deservedly called
"void." For as soon as it was made, it had
the condition of being imperfect, previous to
its completion.

CHAP. XXIX. THE GRADUAL DEVELOPMENT OF

COSMIC AL ORDER OUT OF CHAOS IN THE
CREATION, BEAUTIFULLY STATED.

God, indeed, consummated all His works
in a due order; at first He paled them out,^
as it were, in their unformed elements, and
then He arranged them^ in their finished
beauty. For He did not all at once inundate
light with the splendour of the sun, nor all
at once temper darkness with the moon's as-
suaging ray. 9 The heaven He did not all at
once bedeck '° with constellations and stars,
nor did He at once fill the seas with their teem-


iDeo subjacebat.

2 See below, ch. xxx. p. 494.

3 Matter.

4" Compertus est " is here a deponent verb.

5 Minus factum.

6 Rudimento. Tertullian uses the word " rudis" (unformed)
for the scriptural term (" void ") ; of this word " rudimentum " is
the abstract.

7 Depalans.

SDedicans : " disposed" them.
9 Solatio lunae : a beautiful expression !
1° Significavit.


ing monsters." The earth itself He did not
endow with its varied fruitfulness all at once;
but at first He bestowed upon it being, and
then He filled it, that it might not be made
in vain." For thus says Isaiah: " He created
it not in vain; He for^ned it to be inhabit-
ed. "'3 Therefore after it was made, and
while awaiting its perfect state,'* it was "with-
out form, and void:" "void" indeed, from
the very fact that it was without form (as be-
ing not yet perfect to the sight, and at the
same time unfurnished as yet with its other
qualities); '5 and "without form," because it
was still covered with waters, as if with the
rampart of its fecundating moisture,'^ by
which is produced our flesh, in a form allied
with its own. For to this purport does David
say: '7 " The earth is the Lord's, and the ful-
ness thereof; the world, and all that dwell
therein: He hath founded it upon the seas,
and on the streams hath He established it." '^
It was when the waters were withdrawn into
their hollow abysses that the dry land became
conspicuous, ^5> which was hitherto covered
with its watery envelope. Then it forthwith
becomes " visible," ^ God saying, " Let the
water be gathered together into one mass,"
and let the dry land appear."" '"''Appear^'"
says He, not ''''be made.'' It had been already
made, only in its invisible condition it was
then waiting ^3 to appear. "Dry," because
ii was about to become such by its severance
from the moisture, but yet "land." "And
God called the dry land Earth,'' "^ not Matter.
And so, when it afterwards attains its perfec-
tion, it ceases to be accounted void, when God
declares, " Let the earth bring forth grass,
the herb yielding seed after its kind, and ac-
cording to its likeness, and the fruit-tree yield-
ing fruit, whose seed is in itself, after its
kind." =5 Again: " Let the earth bring forth
the living creature after his kind, cattle, and
creeping things, and beasts of the earth, after
their kind."^ Thus the divine Scripture
accomplished its full order. For to that,
which it had at first described as "without
form (invisible) and void," it gave both visi-
bility and completion. Now no other Matter
was "without form (invisible) and void."


" Belluis.

" In vacuum : void.

13 Isa. xlv. i8.

14 Futura etiam perfecta.

'S De reliquo nondum instructa.
i6 Genitalis humoris.
'7 Canit : " sing," as the Psalmist.
i8 Ps. xxiv. I.
'9 Emicantior.

20 "Visibilis" is here the opposite of the term " invisibilis," which
Tertullian uses for the Scripture phrase " without form."
2' In congregatione una.

22 Gen. i. 9.

23 Sustinebat : i. e. expectabat (Oehler).

24 Gen. i. 10.

25 Ver. II.

26 Ver. 24.


494


AGAINST HERMOGENES.


[chap. XXXI.


Henceforth, then, Matter will have to be vis-
ible and complete. So that I must' see Mat-
ter, since it has become visible. I must
likewise recognize it as a completed thing, so
as to be able to gather from it the herb bear-
ing seed, and the tree yielding fruit, and
that living creatures, made out of it, may
minister to my need. Matter, however, is
nowhere,' but the Earth is here, confessed
to my view. I see it, I enjoy it, ever since
it ceased to be " without form (invisible), and
void." Concerning it most certainly did
Isaiah speak when he said, "Thus saith the
Lord that created the heavens. He was the
God that formed the earth, and made it."^
The same earth for certain did He form,
which He also made. Now how did He
form* it? Of course by saying, "Let the
dry land appear." s Why does He command
it to appear, if it were not previously invisible ?
Jlis purpose was also, that He might thus
prevent His having made it in vain, by ren-
dering it visible, and so fit for use. And
thus, throughout, proofs arise to us that this
earth which we inhabit is the very same which
was both created and formed ^ by God, and
that none other was " without form, and
void," than that which had been created and
formed. It therefore follows that the sen-
tence, " Now the earth was without form, and
void," applies to that same earth which God
mentioned separately along with the heaven. ^

CHAP. XXX. ANOTHER PASSAGE IN THE SACRED

HISTORY OF THE CREATION, RELEASED FROM
THE MISHANDLING OF HERMOGENES.

The following words will in like manner ap-
parently corroborate the conjecture of Her-
mogenes, "And darkness was upon the face
of the deep, and the Spirit of God moved
upon the face of the water; " ^ as if these
blended ' substances, presented us with argu-
ments for his massive pile of Matter.^" Now,
so discriminating an enumeration of certain and
distinct elements (as we have in this passage),
which severally designates " darkness," "the
deep" "the Spirit of God," "the waters,"
forbids the inference that anything confused or
(from such confusion) uncertain is meant. Stili
more, when He ascribed to them their own
places," " darkness 07i the face ^the deep,"
" the Spirit upo7i the face of the waters," He


J Volo.

2 He means, of course, the theoretic '* Matter " of Hermogenes.

3 Isa. xlv. i8.

4 Demonstravit : "make it visible." Tertullian here all along
makes y5»r>« and visibility synonymous,

5 Gen. i. 9.

6 Ostensara : " manifested " (see note 10, p. 96).

7 Cum ca:lo separavit : Gen. i. 1.

8 Gen. i. 2.

9 Confosae.

10 Massalis illius molls.
" Situs.


repudiated all confusion in the substances;
and by demonstrating their separate position,"
He demonstrated also their distinction. Most
absurd, indeed, would it be that Matter,
which is introduced to our view as "without
form," should have its " formless " condition
maintained by so many words indicative of
form, '3 without any intimation of what that
confused body'-* is, which must of course be
supposed to be unique, '^ since it is without
form.'* For that which is without form is
uniform; but even'^ that which is without
form, when it is blended together '^ from va-
rious component parts, ''must necessarily
have one outward appearance ;=° and it has
not any appearance, until it has the one ap-
pearance (which comes) from many parts
combined.'^'- Now Matter either had those spe-
cific parts ^ within itself, from the words indic-
ative of which it had to be understood — I
mean "darkness," and "the deep," and
"the Spirit," and "the waters" — or it had
them not. If it had them, how is it intro-
duced as being " without form ? " =3 if it had
them not, how does it become known ?="•*

CHAP. XXXI. A FURTHER VINDICATION OF THE

SCRIPTURE NARRATIVE OF THE CREATION,
AGAINST A FUTILE VIEW OF HERMOGENES.

But this circumstance, too, will be caught
at, that Scripture meant to indicate of the
heaven only, and this earth of yours, =5 that
God made it in the beginning, while nothing
of the kind is said of the above-mentioned
specific parts ;=* and therefore that these,
which are not described as having been made,
appertain to unformed Matter. To this
point ="7 also we must give an answer. Holy
Scripture would be sufficiently explicit, if it
had declared that the heaven and the earth,
as the very highest works of creation, were
made by God, possessing of course their own
special appurtenances, ^"^ which might be un-
derstood to be implied in these highest works
themselves. Now the appurtenances of the
heaven and the earth, made then in the be-
ginning, were the darkness and the deep, and
the spirit, and the waters. For the depth
and the darkness underlay the earth. Since


"^ Dispositionem.

'3 Tot formarum vocabulis.

'4 Corpus confusionis.

»S Unicum.

'^Informe.

'7 Autem.

>8 Confusum.

'9 Ex varietate.

=» Unam speciem.

»' Unam ex multis speciem.

»= Istas species.

=3 Non habens formas.

=^4 ARnoscitur.

=5 Ista : the earth, which has been the subject of contention.

=6 Speciebus.

27 Scrupulo : doubt or diflRculty.

=8 Suggestus : " Hoc est, apparatus, ornatus " fOehler).


■CHAP. XXXII.]


AGAINST HERMOGENES.


495


the deep was under the earth, and the dark-
ness was over the deep, undoubtedly both
the darkness and the deep were under the
€arth. Below the heaven, too, lay the spirit '
and the waters. For since the waters were
over the earth, which they covered, whilst
the spirit was over the waters, both the
spirit and the waters were alike over the
earth. Now that which is over the earth, is
of course under the heaven. And even as the
earth brooded over the deep and the dark-
ness, so also did the heaven brood over the
spirit and the waters, and embrace them.
Nor, indeed, is there any novelty in men-
tioning only that which contains, as pertain-
ing to the whole, ^ and understanding that
which is contained as included in it, in its
character of a portion. ^ Suppose now I
should say the city built a theatre and a cir-
cus, but the stage * was of such and such a
kind, and the statues were on the canal, and
the obelisk was reared above them all, would
it follow that, because I did not distinctly
state that these specific things s were made
by the city, they were therefore not made by
it along with the circus and the theatre ? Did
I not, indeed, refrain from specially men-
tioning the formation of these particular
things because they were implied in the things
which I had already said were made, and
might be understood to be inherent in the
things in which they were contained ? But
this example may be an idle one as being
derived from a human circumstance; I will
take another, which has the authority of
Scripture itself. It says that "God made
man of the dust of the ground and breathed
into his nostrils the breath of life, and
man became a living soul." ^ Now, although
it here mentions the nostrils,'' it does not say
that they were made by God; so again it
speaks of skin^ and bones, and flesh and
eyes, and sweat and blood, in subsequent
passages,^ and yet it never intimated that
they had been created by God. What will
Hermogenes have to answer ? That the hu-
man limbs must belong to Matter, because
they are not specially mentioned as objects of
creation ? Or are they included in the forma-
tion of man ? In like manner, the deep and
the darkness, and the spirit and the waters,
were as members of the heaven and the earth.
For in the bodies the limbs were made, in the

1 It will be observed that Tertullian applies the spiritus to the
■7vtnd as a creature.

2 Qua summale.

3 Qua portionale.

4 Scena.

5 Has species.

6 Gen. ii. 7.

7 Both in the quotation and here, Tertullian read " faciem"
"W'here we read " nostrils."

^Cutem : another reading has " costam," rib.
9 See Gen. ii. 21, 23, iii. 5, 19, iv. 10,


bodies the limbs too were mentioned. No
element but what is a member of that element
in which it is contained. But all elements
are contained in the heaven and the earth.

CHAP. XXXII. — THE ACCOUNT OF THE CREATION
IN GENESIS A GENERAL ONE. CORROBO-
RATED, HOWEVER, HY MANY OTHER PASSAGES
OF THE OLD TESTAMENT, WHICH GIVE AC-
COUNT OF SPECIFIC CREATIONS. FURTHER
CAVILLINGS CONFUTED.

This is the answer I should give in defence
of the Scripture before us, for seeming here
to set forth '° the formation of the heaven and
the earth, as if (they were) the sole bodies
?nade. It could not but know that there were
those who would at once in the bodies under-
stand their several members also, and there-
fore it employed this concise mode of speech.
But, at the same time, it foresaw that there
would be stupid and crafty men, who, after
paltering with the virtual meaning," would
require for the several members a word de-
scriptive of their formation too. It is there-
fore because of such persons, \h2X Scripture in
other passages teaches us of the creation of
the individual parts. You have Wisdom say-
ing, " But before the depths was I brought
forth," " in order that you may believe that
the depths were also "brought forth" — that
is, created — just as we create sons also,
though we " bring them forth." It matters
not whether the depth was made or born, so
that a beginning be accorded to it, which hoiu-
cver would not be, if it were subjoined '^ to
matter. Of darkness, indeed, the Lord Him-
self by Isaiah says, " I formed the light, and I
created darkness."^'* Of the wind '^ also
Amos says, " He that strengtheneth the thun-
der,'^ and createth the wind, and declareth
His Christ'^ unto men;""' thus showing that
that wind was created which was reckoned
with the formation of the earth, which was
wafted over the waters, balancing and refresh-
ing and animating all things: not (as some sup-
pose) meaning God Himself by the spirit ^'^ on
the ground that " God is a Spirit," '' because
the waters would not be able to bear up their
Lord; but He speaks of that spirit of which
the winds consist, as He says by Isaiah,
" Because my spirit went forth from me, and
I made every blast."'" In like manner the


10 Quatenus hie commendare videtur.
" Dissimulato tacito intellectu.
12 Prov. viii. 24.
'3 Subjecta.

14 Isa. xlv. 7.

15 De spiritu. This shows that Tertullian took the spirit of
Gen. i. 2 in the inferior sense.

16 So also the Septuajjint.

17 Amos iv. 13.

18 The "wind."

19 John iv. 24.

zoFlatum : " breath ;" so T,XX. of Isa. Ivii. 16.


496


AGAINST HERMOGENES.


[chap. XXXIV.


same Wisdom says of the waters, " Also when
He made the fountains strong, things which '
are under the sky, I was fashioning' them
along with Him."^ Now, when we prove
that these particular things were created by
God, although they are only mentioned in
Genesis, without any intimation of their hav-
ing been made, we shall perhaps receive from
the other side the reply, that these were made,
it is true,* but out of Matter, since the very
statement of Moses, " And darkness was on
the face of the deep, and the spirit of God
moved on the face of the waters," s refers to
Matter, as indeed do all those other Scrip-
tures here and there, ^ which demonstrate
that the separate parts were made out of
Matter. It must follow, then,7 that as earth
consisted of earth, so also depth consisted of
depth, and darkness of darkness, and the
wind and waters of wind and waters. And, as
we said above,^ Matter could not have been
without form, since it had specific parts,
which were formed out of it — although as
separate things' — unless, indeed, they were
not separate, but were the very same with
those out of which they came. For it is
really impossible that those specific things,
which are set forth under the same names,
should have been diverse; because in that
case '° the operation of God might seem to be
useless," if it made things which existed
already; since that alone would be a crea-
tion," when things came into being, which
had not been (previously) made. Therefore,
to conclude, either Moses then pointed to
Matter when he wrote the words: " And dark-
ness was on the face of the deep, and the
spirit of God moved on the face of the
waters;" or else, inasmuch as these specific
parts of creation are afterwards shown in
other passages to have been made by God,
they ought to have been with equal explicit-
ness '3 shown to have been made out of the
Matter which, according to you, Moses had
previously mentioned;'* or else, finally , if
Moses pointed to those specific parts, and not
to Matter, I want to know where Matter has
been pointed out at all.


* Fontcs, quae,
a Modulans.
SProv. viii. 28.

4 Plane.

5 Gen. i. 2.

* In disperse.

7 Ergo : I'ertullian's answer.
^Ch. XXX., towards the end.
9 Ut et alia:.
«o Jam.
" Otiosa.

»3 Generatio : creation in the highest sense of matter issuing from
the maker. Another readinic has " generosiora essent," for our
" generatio sola esset," meaning that " those things would be no-
bler which had not been made." which is obviously quite opposed
to TertuUian's argument.
^^ /Kque.
MPraemiserat.


CHAP. XXXIII. STATEMENT OF THE TRUE DOC-
TRINE CONCERNING MATTER. ITS RELATION
TO god's CREATION OF THE WORLD.

But although Hermogenes finds it amongst
his own colourable pretences 's (for it was not
in his power to discover it in the Scriptures of
God), it is enough for us, both that it is cer-
tain that all things were made by God, and
that there is no certainty whatever that they
were made out of Matter. And even if Mat-
ter had previously existed, we must have
believed that it had been really made by God,
since we maintained (no less) when we held
the rule of faith to be,'^ that nothing except
God was uncreated. '7 Up to this point there
is room for controversy, until Matter is
brought to the test of the Scriptures, and fails
to make good its case.'** The conclusion of
the whole is this: I find that there was nothing
made, except out of nothing; because that
which I find was made, I know did not once
exist. Whatever '5 was made out of some-
thing, has its origin in something made: for
instance, out of the ground was made the
grass, and the fruit, and the cattle, and the
form of man himself; so from the waters were
produced the animals which swim and fly.
The original fabrics =° out of which such
creatures were produced I may call their
materials, '^'^ but then even these were created
by God.

CHAP. XXXIV. A PRESUMPTION THAT ALL

THINGS WERE CREATED BY GOD OUT OF NOTH-
ING AFFORDED BY THE ULTIMATE REDUCTION
OF ALL THINGS TO NOTHING. SCRIPTURES
PROVING THIS REDUCTION VINDICATED FROM
hermogenes' CHARGE OF BEING MERELY
FIGURATIVE.

Besides,^" the belief that everything was
made from nothing will be impressed upon us
by that ultimate dispensation of God which
will bring back all things to nothing. For
"the very heaven shall be rolled together as
a scroll;" ="3 nay, it shall come to nothing
along with the earth itself, with which it was
made in the beginning. " Heaven and earth
shall pass away,"** says He. "The first
heaven and the first earth passed away,"='5
"and there was found no place for them," **
because, of course, that which comes to an


•SColores. See our '• Anti-Marcion," p. 217, j5^'f//«., where the
word pretension should stand instead ol precedent.

'6 Pra:scribentes.

'7 Innatum : see above, note 12.

'8 Donee ad .Scripturas provocata deficiat exhibitio materiae.

'9 Etiamsi quid.

'oOrigines.

21 Matcrias. There is point in this use of the plural of the con-
troverted term materia.

a'Ceterum.

23 Isa. xxxiv. 4 ; Matt, xxiv, 29 ; 2 Pet. iii. 10 ; Rev. vi. 14.

=4 Matt. xxiv. 35,

25 Rev. xxi. I.

26 Rev. XX. II.


CHAP. XXXVI.]


AGAINST HERMOGENES.


497


end loses locality. In like manner David
says, "The heavens, the wofks of Thine
hands, shall themselves perish. For even as
a vesture shall He change them, and they
shall be changed." ' Now to be changed is
to fall from that primitive state which they
lose whilst undergoing the change. "And
the stars too shall fall from heaven, even as a
fig-tree casteth her green figs ' when she is
shaken of a mighty wind."^ *' The moun-
tains shall melt like wax at the presence of
the Lord;"* that is, " when He riseth to
shake terribly the earth." s " But I will dry
up the pools;" ^ and "they shall seek water,
and they shall find none."^ Even "the sea
shall be no more."^ Now if any person
should go so far as to suppose that all these
passages ought to be spiritually interpreted, he
will yet be unable to deprive them of the true
accomplishment of those issues which must
come to pass just as they have been written.
For all figures. of speech necessarily arise out
of real things, not out of chimerical ones;
because nothing is capable of imparting any-
thing of its own for a similitude, except it
actually be that very thing which it imparts in
the similitude. I return therefore to the
principle ^ which defines that all things which
have come from nothing shall return at last to
nothing. For God would not have made any
perishable thing out of what was eternal, that
is to say, out of Matter; neither out of greater
things would He have created inferior ones,
to whose character it would be more agreeable
to produce greater things out of inferior ones,
— in other words, what is eternal out of what
is perishable. This is the promise He makes
even to our flesh, and it has been His will to
deposit within us this pledge of His own vir-
tue and power, in order that we may believe
that He has actually '° awakened the uni-
verse out of nothing, as if it had been steeped
in death," in the sense, of course, of its pre-
vious non-existence for the purpose of its
coming into existence.'^

CHAP. XXXV. — CONTRADICTORY PROPOSITIONS
ADVANCED BY HERMOGENES RESPECTING MAT-
TER AND ITS QUALITIES.

As regards all other points touching Matter,

1 Ps. cii. 25, 26. o • 1 J

2 Acerba sua " grosses suos " (Rigalt.). So our marginal read-
ing.

3 Rev. vi. 13.

4 Ps. xcvii. 5.

5 Isa. ii. 19.

6 Tsa. xlii. 15.

7 Isa. xli. 17.

8 Etiam mare hactenus, Rev. xxi. i.

9 Causam.
10 Etiam.

" Emortuam. „ r ^.

12 In hoc, lit esset. Contrasted with the " non erat of the pre-
vious sentence, this must be the meaning, as if it were " ut
fieret."

32


although there is no necessity why we should
treat of them (for our first point was the
manifest proof of its existence), we must for
all that pursue our discussion just as if it
did exist, in order that its non-existence may
be the more apparent, when these other points
concerning it prove inconsistent with each
other, and in order at the same time that
Hermogenes may acknowledge his own contra-
dictory positions. Matter, says he, at first
sight seems to us to be incorporeal; but when
examined by f/ie light of right reason, it is
found to be neither corporeal nor incorporeal.
What is this right reason of yours, '^ which
declares nothing right, that is, nothing certain ?
For, if I mistake not, everything must of
necessity be either corporeal or incorporeal
(although I may for the moment ^^ allow that
there is a certain incorporeality in even sub-
stantial things, '5 although their very sub-
stance is the body of particular things); at all
events, after the corporeal and the incorporeal
there is no third state. But if it be contended '^
that there is a third state discovered by this
right reason of Hermogenes, which makes
Matter neither corporeal nor incorporeal, (I
ask,) Where is it? what sort of thing is it?
what is it called ? what is its description ?
what is it understood to be ? This only has
his reason declared, that Matter is neither
corporeal nor incorporeal.

CHAP. XXXVI. OTHER ABSURD THEORIES RE-
SPECTING MATTER AND ITS INCIDENTS EX-
POSED IN AN IRONICAL STRAIN. MOTION IN
MATTER. hermogenes' CONCEITS RESPECT-
ING IT.

But see what a contradiction he next ad-
vances '7 (or perhaps some other reason '^
occurs to him), when he declares that Matter
is partly corporeal and partly incorporeal.
Then must Matter be considered (to embrace)
both conditions, in order that it may not have
either? For it will be corporeal, and incor-
poreal in spite of'^ the declaration of that
antithesis,^ which is plainly above giving any


»3 Ista.

14 Interim.

15 De substantiis duntaxat.

16 Age nunc sit : " But grant that there is this third stale."

17 Subicit.

18 Other than " the right reason " above named.

19 Adversus.

20 The original, "Adversus renuntiationem reciprocationis illius,"
is an obscure expression. Oehler, who gives this reading in his
edition, after the editio princeps, renders the term " reciproca-
tionis" by the phrase " negative conversion" of the proposition
that Matter is corporeal and incorporeal (q. d. " Matter is neither
corporeal nor incorporear'). Instead, however, of the reading
" reciprocationis," Oehler would gladly read " rectae rationis,'
after most of the editions. He thinks that this allusion to " the
right reason," of which Hermogenes boasted, and of which the ab-
surd conclusion is exposed in the context, very well suits the sar-
castic style of Tertullian. If this, the general reading, be adopted,
we must render the whole clause thus : " For it will be corporeal
and incorporeal, in spite of the declaration of that right reason
(of Hermogenes), which is plainly enough above giving any reason,"
etc. etc.


498


AGAINST HERMOGENES.


[chap. XXXVII.


reason for its opinion, just as that "other
reason" also was. Now. by the corporeal
part of Matter, he means that of which
bodies are created; but by the incorporeal
part of Matter^ he means its uncreated '
motion. If, says he. Matter were simply a
body, there would appear to be in it nothing
incorporeal, that is, (no) motion; if, on the
other hand, it had been wholly incorporeal,
no body could be formed out of it. What a
peculiarly right = reason have we here ! Only
if you make your sketches as right as you
make your reason, Hermogenes, no painter
would be more stupid ^ than yourself. For
who is going to allow you to reckon motion as
a moiety of Matter, seeing that it is not a
substantial thing, because it is not corporeal,
but an accident (if indeed it be even that) of
a substance and a body? Just as action ■* is,
and impulsion, just as a slip is, or a fall, so is
motion. When anything moves even of itself,
its motion is the result of impulse; s but cer-
tainly it is no part of its substance in your
sense, ^ when you make motion the incorpo-
real part of matter. All things, indeed, ^ have
motion — either of themselves as animals, or
of others as inanimate things; but yet we
should not say that either a man or a stone
was both corporeal and incorporeal because
they had both a body and motion : we should
say rather that all things have one form of
simple^ corporeality, which is the essential
quality 9 of substance. If any incorporeal
incidents accrue to them, as actions, or pas-
sions, or functions,'" or desires, we do not
reckon these parts as of the things. How then
does he contrive to assign an iritcgral portion
of Matter to motion, which does not pertain to
substance, but to a certain condition " of sub-
stance ? Is not this incontrovertible ? " Sup-
pose you had taken it into your head '^ to
represent matter as immoveable, would then
the immobility seem to you to be a moiety of
its form? Certainly not. Neither, in like
manner, could motion. But I shall be at lib-
erty to speak of motion elsewhere.'*

CHAP. XXXVII. — IRONICAL DILEMMAS RESPECT-
ING MATTER, AND SUNDRY MORAL QUALITIES
FANCIFULLY ATTRIBUTED TO IT.

1 see now that you are coming back again to

» Inconditum. See above ch. xviii., in the middle. Notwith-
standing the absurdity of Hermogenes" idea, it is impossible to
translate this word irregular, as it has been proposed to do by
Genoude.

2 Rectior.

3 Bardior.

4 Actus : being driven.

5 Actus ejus est motus.

6 Sicut tu.

7 Denique.

8 Solius.

9 Res. *
1° Officia.


that reason, ^hich has been in the habit of
declaring to you nothing in the way of cer-
tainty. For just as you introduce to our
notice Matter as being neither corporeal nor
incorporeal, so you allege of it that it is
neither good nor evil; and you say, whilst
arguing further on it in the same strain: " If
it were good, seeing that it had ever been so,
it would not require the arrangement of itself
by God;'5 if it were naturally evil, it would
not have admitted of a change '^ for the bet-
ter, nor would God have ever applied to such
a nature any attempt at arrangement of it, for
His labour would have been in vain." Such
are your words, which it would have been
well if you had remembered in other passages
also, so as to have avoided any contradiction
of them. As, however, we have already
treated to some extent of this ambiguity of
good and evil touching Matter, I will now re-
ply to the only proposition and argument of
yours which we have before l>s. I shall not
stop to repeat my opinion, that it was your
bounden duty to have said for certain that
Matter was either good or bad, or in some
third condition; but (I must observe) that-you
have not here even kept to the statement which
you chose to make before. Indeed, you re-
tract what you declared — that Matter is neither
good nor evil; because you imply that it is
evil when you say, "If it were good, it would
not require to be set in order by God;" so
again, when you add, "If it were naturally
evil, it would not admit of any change for the
better," you seem to intimate '^ that it is good.
And so you attribute to it a close relation '^ to
good and evil, although you declared it neither
good nor evil. With a view, however, to re-
fute the argument whereby you thought you
were going to clinch your proposition, I here
contend: If Matter had always been good,
why should it not have still wanted a change
for the better ? Does that which is good
never desire, never wish, never feel able to
advance, so as to change its good for a better ?
And in like manner, if Matter had been by
nature evil, why might it not have been
changed by God as the more powerful Being,
as able to convert the nature of stones into
children of Abraham ? '» Surely by such means
you not only compare the Lord with Matter,
but you even put Him below'" it, since you
affirm that" the nature of Matter could not


" Habitum.

" Quid enim ?

'3 Si placuisset tibi.

'4 See below, ch. xli., p. 500.

>5 Compositionem Dei.

'6 Non accepisset translationem.

'7 Subostendis.

'8 Affinem.

»9 Matt. iii. 9.

*> Subicis.

»' This is the force of the subjunctive verb.


I


.•xL.]


AGAINST HERMOGENES.


499


possibly be brought under control by Him,
and trained to something better. But al-
though you are here .disinclined to allow that
Matter is by nature evil, yet in another pas-
sage you will deny having made such an
admission.^

CHAP. XXXVIII. — OTHER SPECULATIONS OF HER-
MOGENES, ABOUT MATTER AND SOME OF ITS
ADJUNCTS, SHOWN TO BE ABSURD. FOR IN-
STANCE, ITS ALLEGED INFINITY.

My observations touching the site" of Mat-
ter, as also concerning its inode,^ have one
and the same object in view — to meet and re-
fute your perverse positions. You put Matter
below God, and thus, of course, you assign a
place to it below God. Therefore Matter is
local.'* Now, if it is local, it is within locality;
if within locality, it is bounded s by the place
within which it is; if it is bounded, it has an
outline,^ which (painter as you are in your
special vocation) you know is the boundary to
every object susceptible of outline. Matter,
therefore, cannot be infinite, which, since it
is in space, is bounded by space; and being
thus determinable by space, it is susceptible
of an outline. You, however, make it infinite,
when you say: " It is on this account infinite,
because it is always existent." And if any of
your disciples should choose to meet us by
declaring your meaning to be that Matter is
infinite in time, not in its corporeal mass,''
still what follows will show that (you mean)
corporeal infinity to be an attribute of Matter^
that it is in respect of bulk immense and un-
circumscribed. " Wherefore," say you, " it
is not fabricated as a whole, but /« its parts." ^
In bulk, therefore, is it infinite, not in time.
And you contradict yourself ^ when you make
Matter infinite in bulk, and at the same time
ascribe place to it, including it within space
and local outline. But yet at the same time
I cannot tell why God should not have entirely
formed it,'° unless it be because He was either
impotent or envious. I want therefore to know
the moiety of that which was not wholly
formed (by God), in order that I may under-
stand what kind of thing the entirety was. It
was only right that God should have made it


1 Te confessum.

2 De situ.

3 Oehler here restores the reading " quod et de inodo^'' instead
of " de niotu^'' for which Pamelius contends. Oehler has the
Mss. on his side, and Fr. Junius, who interprets " viodo" here to
mean " mass or quantity." Pamelius wishes to suit the passajre
to the preceding context (see ch. xxxvi.) ; Junius thinks it is
meant rather to refer to what follows, by which it is confirmed.

4 In loco.

5 Determinatur.

6 Lineam extremam.

7 Modo corporis : or " bulk."

8 Nee tota fabricatur, sed partes ejus. This perhaps means :
•" It is not its entirety, but its parts, which are used in creation."

9 Obduceris : here a verb of the middle voice.

JO In reference to the opinion above mentioned, " Matter is not
fabricated as a whole, but in parts."


known as a model of antiquity," to set off the
glory of His work.

CHAP. XXXIX. — THESE LATTER SPECULATIONS
SHOWN TO BE CONTRADICTORY TO THE FIRST
PRINCIPLES RESPECTING MATTER, FORMERLY
LAID DOWN BY HERMOGENES.

Well, now, since it seems to you to be the
correcter thing," let Matter be circumscribed ''
by means of changes and displacements; let
it also be capable of comprehension, since (as
you say) it is used as material by God,'* on
the ground of its being convertible, mutable,
and separable. For its changes, you say,
show it to be inseparable. And here you have
swerved from your own lines '^ which you pre-
scribed respecting the personof God when you
laid down the rule that God made it not out
of His own self, because it was not possible for
Him to become divided '^ seeing that He is
eternal and abiding for ever, and therefore un-
changeable and indivisible. Since Matter too is
estimated by the same eternity, having neither
beginning nor end, it will be unsusceptible of di-
vision, of change, for the same reason that God
also is. Since it is associated with Him in the
joint possession of eternity, it must needs share
with Him also the powers, the laws, and the
conditions of eternity. In like manner, when
you say, "All things simultaneously through-
out the universe '^ possess portions of it,'^
that so the whole may be ascertained from ''
its parts," you of course mean to indicate
those parts which were produced out of it,
and which are now visible to us. How then
is this possession (of Matter) by all things
throughout the universe effected — that is, of
course, from the very beginning^ — when the
things which are now visible to us are differ-
ent in their condition ^' from what they were
in the beginning ?

CHAP. XL. SHAPELESS MATTER AN INCONGRUOUS

ORIGIN FOR god's BEAUTIFUL COSMOS. HER-
MOGENES DOES NOT MEND HIS ARGUMENT BY
SUPPOSING THAT ONLY A PORTION OF MATTER
WAS USED IN THE CREATION.

You say that Matter was reformed for the
better" — from a worse condition, of course;
and thus you would make the better a copy of


"Ut exemplarium antiquitatis.
'- Rectius.
n Definitiva.

'4 Ut quae fabricatur, inquis, a Deo.

J5 Lineis. Tertullian often refers to Hermogenes' profession of
painting.

i6 In partes venire.
'7 Omnia ex omnibus.
i8 i. e. of Matter.
'9 Dinoscatur ex.

20 Utique ex pristinis.

21 A liter habeant.

22 In melius reformatam.


500


AGAINST HERMOGENES.


[cHaP. XLII.


the worse. Everything was in confusion,
but now it is reduced to order; and would you
also say, that out of order, disorder is pro-
duced ? No one thing is the exact mirror^ of
another thing; that is to say, it is not its
co-equal. Nobody ever found himself in a
barber's looking-glass look like an ass*
instead of a man; unless it be he who supposes
that unformed and shapeless Matter answers
to Matter which is now arranged and beautified
in the fabric of the world. What is there now
that is without form in the world, what was
there once that was formed ^ in Matter, that
the world is the mirror of Matter ? Since the
world is known among the Greeks by a term
denoting ornament,* how can it present the
image of unadorned s Matter, in such a way
that you can say the whole is known by its
parts? To that whole will certainly belong
even the portion which has not yet become
formed; and you have already declared that
the whole of Matter was not used as material
in the creatiofi.^ It follows, then, that this
rude, and confused, and unarranged portiop
cannot be recognized in the polished, and dis-
tinct and well-arranged parts of creation,
which indeed can hardly with propriety be
called parts of Matter, since they have quit-
ted ' its condition, by being separated from
it in the transformation the;^ have undergone.

CHAP. XLI. — SUNDRY QUOTATIONS FROM HER-
MOGENES. HOW UNCERTAIN AND VAGUE ARE
HIS SPECULATIONS RESPECTING MOTION IN
MATTER, AND THE MATERIAL QUALITIES OF
GOOD AND EVIL.

I come back to the point of motion,^ that I
may show how slippery you are at every step.
Motion in Matter was disordered, and con-
fused, and turbulent. This is why you apply
to it the comparison of a boiler of hot water
surging over. Now how is it, that in another
passage another sort of motion is affirmed by
you ? For when you want to represent Matter
as neither good nor evil, you say: " Matter,
which is the substratum (of creation) » pos-
sessing as it does motion in an equable
impulse,'" tends in no very great degree
either to good or to evil." Now if it had this
equable impulse, it could not be turbulent,
nor be like the boiling water of the caldron;
it would rather be even and regular, oscillating


» Speculum.

» Nl ulus.

aSpeciatuin : eifioTrociitfei', "arranged in specific forms.'

4 K6<rfio«.

5 Inornata: : iin/urnt'shed with forms of beauty.

6 Non totam cam fabricatam.

7 Recesserunt a forma ejus.

8 From which he has digressed since ch. xxxvi., p. 497.
9Subjacens materia.

10 ^qualis momenti motum.


indeed of its own accord between good and
evil, but yet not prone or tending to either
side. It would swing, as the phrase is, in a
just and exact balance. Now this is not un-
rest; this is not turbulence or inconstancy; "
but rather the regularity, and evenness, and
exactitude of a motion, inclining to neither
side. If it oscillated this way and that way,
and inclined rather to one particular side, it
would plainly in that case merit the reproach
of unevenness, and inequality, and turbulence.
Moreover, although the motion of Matter
was not jprone either to good or to evil, it
would stifl, of course, oscillate between good
and evill so that from this circumstance too it
is obviilis that Matter is contained within
certain [limits," because its motion, while
prone to neither good nor evil, since it had
no natural bent either way, oscillated from
either between both, and therefore was con-
tained within the limits of the two. But you,
in fact, place both good and evil in a local
habitation, '3 when you assert that motion in
Matter inclined to neither of them. For
Matter' which was local,'* when inclining
neither hither nor thither, inclined not to the
places in which good and evil were. But
when you assign locality to good and evil,
you make them corporeal by making them
local, since those things which have local
space must needs first have bodily substance.
In fact, '5 incorporeal things could not have any
locality of their own except in a body, when
they have access to a body.'^ But when Mat-
ter inclined not to good and evil, it was as
corporeal or local essences that it did not
incline to them. You err, therefore, when
you will have it that good and evil are
substances. For you make substances of the
things to which you assign locality ;'7 but you
assign locality when you keep motion in Mat-
ter poised equally distant from both sides. '^

CHAP. XLII. — FURTHER EXPOSURE OF INCON-
SISTENCIES IN THE OPINIONS OF HERMOGENES
RESPECTING THE DIVINE QUALITIES OF MAT-
TER.

You have thrown out all your views loosely
and at random,'' in order that it might not be
apparent, by too close a proximity, how con-
trary they are to one another. I, however,
mean to gather them together and compare
them. You allege that motion in Matter is


\


" Passivitas.
'2 Determinabilem.
'3 In loco facis : " you localise."
'4 In loco.
'5 Denique.

'6 Cum corpori accedunt : or, " when they are added to a body."
'7 Loca: " places ; " one to each.

'8 Cum ab utraque regione suspendis ; equally far from good and
evil.

>9 Dispersisti omnia.


CHAP. XLIV.]


AGAINST HERMOGENES.


501


without regularity," and you go on to say
tliat Matter aims at a shapeless condition, and
then, in another passage, that it desires to be
set in order by God. Does that, then, which
affects to be without form, want to be put into
shape ? Or does that which wants to be put
into shape, affect to be without form ? You
are unwillling that God should seem to be
equal to Matter; and then again you say that
it has a common condition * with God. " For
it is impossible," you say, " if it has nothing
in common with God, that it can be set in
order by Him." But if it had anything in
common with God, it did not want to be set
in order, 3 being, forsooth, a part of the Deity
through a community of condition; or else
even God was susceptible of being set in
order 3 by Matter, by His having Himself
something in common with it. And now you
herein subject God to necessity, since there
was in Matter something on account of which
He gave it form. You make it, however, a
common attribute of both of them, that they
set themselves in motion by themselves, and
that they are ever in motion. What less do
you ascribe to Matter than to God ? There
will be found all through a fellowship of div-
inity in this freedom and perpetuity of motion.
Only in God motion is regular,-* in Matter
irregular. s In both, however, there is equally
the attribute of Deity — both alike having
free and eternal motion. At the same time,
you assign more to Matter, to which belonged
the privilege of thus moving itself in a way
not allowed to God.

CHAP. XLIII. OTHER DISCREPANCIES EXPOSED

AND REFUTED RESPECTING THE EVIL IN MAT-
TER BEING CHANGED TO GOOD.

On the subject of motion I would make
this further remark. Following the simile of
the boiling caldron, you say that motion in
Matter, before it was regulated, was con-
fused,^ restless, incomprehensible by reason
of excess in the commotion. ^ Then again
you go on to say, "But it waited for the
regulation^ of God, and kept its irregular
motion incomprehensible, owing to the tardi-
ness of its irregular motion." Just before
you ascribe commotion, lere tardiness, to
motion. Now observe how many slips you
make respecting the nature of Matter. In a
former passage' you say, "If Matter were


I Inconditum.

2" Communionem."

3 Ornari : " to be adorned."

4 Composite.

5 Incondite.
^ Concretus.
7 Certaminis.

8 Compositionem : "arrangement.
9 See above, ch. xxxvii. p. 498.


naturally evil, it would not have admitted of
a change for the better; nor would God have
ever applied to it any attempt at arrangement,
for His labour would have been in vain."
You therefore concluded your two opinions,
that Matter was not by nature evil, and that
its nature was incapable of being changed by
God; and then, forgetting them, you after-
wards drew this inference: " But when it re-
ceived adjustment from God, and was reduced
to order,'" it relinquished its nature." Now,
inasmuch as it was transformed to good, it was
of course transformed from evil; and if by
God's setting it in order it relinquished " the
nature of evil, it follows that its nature came
to an end; "now its nature was evil before
the adjustment, but after the transformation
it might have relinquished that nature.

CHAP. XLIV. CURIOUS VIEWS RESPECTING

god's method of working WITH MATTER
EXPOSED. DISCREPANCIES IN THE HERETIC'S
opinion ABOUT GOD's LOCAL RELATION TO
MATTER. ■

But it remains that I should show also how
you make God work. You are plainly enough
at variance with the philosophers; but neither
are you in accord with the prophets. The
Stoics maintain that God pervaded Matter,
just as honey the honeycomb. You, how-
ever, affirm that it is not by pervading Matter
that God makes the world, but simply by ap-
pearing, and approaching it, just as beauty
affects '3 a thing by simply appearing, and a
loadstone by approaching it. Now what simi-
larity is there in God forming the world, and
beauty wounding a soul, or a magnet attract-
ing iron ? For even if God appeared to Mat-
ter, He yet did not wound it, as beauty does
the soul; if, again. He approached it, He yet
did not cohere to it, as the magnet does to
the iron. Suppose, however, that your ex-
amples are suitable ones. Then, of course,'*
it was by appearing and approaching to Mat-
ter that God made the world, and He made it
when He appeared and when He approached
to it. Therefore, since He had not made it
before then,'s He had neither appeared nor
approached to it. Now, by whom can it be be-
lieved that God had not appeared to Matter —
of the same nature as it even was owing to
its eternity ? Or that He had been at a dis-
tance from it — even He whom we believe to
be existent everywhere, and everywhere ap-
parent; whose praises all things chant, even
inanimate things and things incorporeal, ac-


'o Ornata.
" Cessavit a.

12 Cessavit.

13 Facit quid decor.
M Certe.

x5 Retro.


AGAINST HERMOGENES.


[chap, xlv


cording to (the prophet) Daniel ? ' How im-
mense the place, where God kept Himself so
far aloof from Matter as to have neither ap-
peared nor approached to it before the crea-
tion of the world ! I suppose He journeyed
to it from a long distance, as soon as He
wished to appear and approach to it.

CHAP. XLV. — CONCLUSION. CONTRAST BE-
TWEEN THE STATEMENTS OF HERMOGENES
AND THE TESTIMONY OF HOLY SCRIPTURE RE-
SPECTING THE CREATION. CREATION OUT
OF NOTHING, NOT OUT OF MATTER.

But it is not thus that the prophets and the
apostles have told us that the world was made
by God merely appearing and approaching
Matter. They did not even mention any
Matter, but (said) that Wisdom was first set
up, the beginning of His ways, for His works. "^
Then that the Word was produced, " through
whom all things were made, and without
whom nothing was made."^ Indeed, "by
the Word of the Lord were the heavens made,
and all their hosts by the breath of His
mouth." ^ He is the Lord's right hand,^
indeed His two hands, by which He worked
and constructed the imiverse. "For," says
He, "the heavens are the works of Thine
hands," ^ wherewith " He hath meted out the
heaven, and the earth with a span."^ Do
not be willing so to cover God with flattery,
as to contend that He produced by His mere
appearance and simple approach so many vast
substances, instead of rather forming them
by His own energies. For this is proved by
Jeremiah when he says, "God hath made the
earth by His power, He hath established the
world by His wisdom, and hath stretched out
the heaven by His understanding."^ These
are the energies by the stress of which He
made this universe.' His glory is greater if
He laboured. At length on the seventh day
He rested from His works. Both one and
the other were after His manner. If, on the
contrary," He made this world simply by ap-


' Dan. iji. 21.— «|l CV«.l-cv.te^

» Prov. yiij. 33, 23.

3 John i. 1.

4Spiritu Ipsius: "by His Spirit."

5 Isa. xlviii. 13.

*Ps. cJi. 25.

7 Isa. xl. 12 and xlviii. 13.

3 Ter. li. 15.

9 Ps. Ixiv. 7.


See Ps. xxxiii. 6.


pearing and approaching it, did He, on the
completion of His work, cease to appear and
approach it any more. Nay rather," God
began to appear more conspicuously and to
be everywhere accessible " from the time
when the world was made. You see, there-
fore, how all things consist by the operation
of that God who "made the earth by His
power, who established the world by His wis-
dom, and stretched out the heaven by His
understanding;" not appearing merely, nor
approaching, but applying the almighty efforts
of His mind. His wisdom, His power, His
understanding, His word, His Spirit, His
might. Now these things were not necessary
to Him, if He had been perfect by simply ap-
pearing and approaching. They are, how-
ever. His "invisible things," which, accord-
ing to the apostle, " are from the creation of
the world clearly seen by the things that are
made; '3 they are no parts oi a nondescript'*
Matter, but they are the sensible 's evidences
of Himself. " For who hath known the mind
of the Lord,"'^ of which (the apostle) ex-
claims: "O the depth of the riches both of
His wisdom and knowledge ! how unsearcha-
ble are His judgments, and His ways past
finding out ! " '^ Now what clearer truth do
these words indicate; than that all things were
made out of nothing ? They are incapable of
being found out or investigated, except by
God alone. Otherwise, if they were traceable
or discoverable in Matter, they would be
capable of investigation. Therefore, in as
far as it has become evident that Matter had
no prior existence (even from this circum-
stance, that it is impossible '^ for it to have
had such an existence as is assigned to it), in
so far is it proved that all things were made
by God out of nothing. It must be admitted,
however, '5 that Hermogenes, by describing
for Matter a condition like his own — irregular,
confused, turbulent, of a doubtful and pre-
cipate and fervid impulse — has displayed a
specimen of his own art, and painted his own
portrait.


" Atquin

»2 Ubtque conveniri.

»3 Rom. i. 20.

'4 Nescio quae.

'5 Sensualia.

'6 Rom. xi. 34.

»7 Ver. 33.

'8 Nee competat.

'9 Nisi quod.


IV.


AGAINST THE VALENTINIANS.

IN WHICH THE AUTHOR GIVES A CONCISE ACCOUNT OF, TOGETHER
WITH SUNDRY CAUSTIC ANIMADVERSIONS ON, THE VERY FANTASTIC
THEOLOGY OF THE SECT. THIS TREATISE IS PROFESSEDLY TAKEN
FROM THE WRITINGS OF JUSTIN, MILTIADES, IREN^US, AND PRO-
CULUS.

[TRANSLATED BY DR. ROBERTS.]


CHAP. I. INTRODUCTORY. TERTULLIAN COM-
PARES THE HERESY TO THE OLD ELEUSINIAN
MYSTERIES. BOTH SYSTEMS ALIKE IN PRE-
FERRING CONCEALMENT OF ERROR AND
SIN TO PROCLAMATION OF TRUTH AND VIR-
TUE.

The Valentinians, who are no doubt a very-
large body of heretics — comprising as they do
so many apostates from the truth, who have
a propensity for fables, and no disciphne to
deter them (therefrom) care for nothing so
much as to obscure ' what they preach, if in-
deed they (can be said to) preach who ob-
scure their doctrine. The officiousness with
which they guard their doctrine is an officious-
ness which betrays their guilt. ^ Their dis-
grace is proclaimed in the very earnestness
with which they maintain their religious sys-
tem. Now, in the case of those Eleusinian
mysteries, which are the very heresy of Athe-
nian superstition, it is their secrecy that is
their disgrace. Accordingly, they previously
beset all access to their body with tormenting
conditions; 3 ^«^ they require a long initia-
tion before they enrol (their members), -^ even
instruction during five years for their perfect
disciples, 5 in order that they may mould ^
their opinions by this suspension of full knowl-
edge, and apparently raise the dignity of
their mysteries in proportion to the craving


1 Occultant. [This tract may be assigned to any date not ear-
lier than A. D. 207. Of this Valentinus, see cap. iv. in/ra, and cie
Prcescript. capp. 29, 30, supra.'\

2 We are far from certain whether we have caught the sense of
the original, which we add, that the reader may judge for himself,
and at the same time observe the terseness of our author : " Cus-
todicc officium conscientiae officium est, confusio prasdicatur, dum
religio asseveratur."

3 Et aditum prius cruciant.

4 Antequam consignant.
SEpoptas: see Suidas, s.v. 'ETron-Tat.
6 j^dificent.


for them which they have previously created.
Then follows the duty of silence. Carefully
is that guarded, which is so long in finding.
All the divinity, however, lies in their secret
recesses: 7 there are revealed at last all the
aspirations of the fully initiated,^ the entire
mystery of the sealed tongue, the symbol of
virility. But this allegorical representation, ^
under the pretext of nature's reverend name,
obscures a real sacrilege by help of an arbi-
trary symbol,'" and by empty images obvi-
ates " the reproach of falsehood ! " In like
manner, the heretics who are now the object
of our remarks, '3 the Valentinians, have
formed Eleusinian dissipations '■* of their own,
consecrated by a profound silence, having
nothing of the heavenly in them but their
mystery. 's By the help of the sacred names
and titles and arguments of true religion, they
have fabricated the vainest and foulest fig-
ment for men's pliant liking,'^ out of the af-
fluent suggestions of Holy Scripture, since
from its many springs many errors may well
emanate. If you propose to them inquiries
sincere and honest, they answer you with
stern '^ look and contracted brow, and say,
" The subject is profound." If you try them
with subtle questions, with the ambiguities of
their double tongue, they affirm a community
of faith (with yourself). If you intimate to


7 Adytis.

8 Epoptarum.

9 Dispositio.

»° Patrocinio coactae figurae. -

" Excusat.

12 " Quid enim aliud est simulachrum nisi falsum ? " (Rigalt.)

»3 Quos nunc destinamus.

14 Lenocinia.

15 Taciturnitate.

'6 I'acili caritati. Oehler, after Fr. Junius, gives, however, this
phrase a subjective turn thus : " by affecting a charity which is
easy to them, costing nothing."

17 Concreto.


504


AGAINST THE VALENTINIANS.


[chap. III.


them that you understand their opiniotis^ they
insist on knowing nothing themselves. If
you come to a close engagement with them,
they destroy your own fond hope of a victory
over them by a self-immolation.' Not even
to their own disciples do they commit a secret
before they have made sure of them. They
have the knack of persuading men before in-
structing them; although truth persuades by
teaching, but does not teach by first persuad-
ing.

CHAP. II. THESE HERETICS BRAND THE CHRIS-
TIANS AS SIMPLE PERSONS. THE CHARGE AC-
CEPTED, AND SIMPLICITY EULOGIZED OUT OF
THE SCRIPTURES.

For this reason we are branded =" by them
as simple, and as being merely so, without
being wise also; as if indeed wisdom were
compelled to be wanting in simplicity, where-
as the Lord unites them both: "Be ye there-
fore wise as serpents, and simple as doves." ^
Now if we, on our parts, be accounted foolish
because we are simple, does it then follow that
they are not simple because they are wise?
Most perverse, however, are they who are not
simple, even as they are most foolish who are
not wise. And yet, (if I must choose) I
should prefer taking '* the latter condition for
the lesser fault; since it is perhaps better to
have a wisdom which falls short in quantity,
than that which is bad in quality s — better to
be in error than to mislead. Besides, the
face of the Lord* is patiently waited for by
those who " seek Him in simplicity of heart,"
as says the very Wisdom — not of Valentinus,
but — of Solomon. 7 Then, again, infants
have borne ^ by their blood a testimony to
Christ. (Would you say) that it was children
who shouted " Crucify Him"?' They were
neither children nor infants; in otfTer words,
they were not simple. The apostle, too, bids
us to "become children again" towards
God,'" " to be as children in malice " by our
simplicity, yet as being also "wise in our
practical faculties."" At the same time,
with respect to the order of development in
Wisdom, I have admitted " that it f^ows from
simplicity. In brief, "the dove" has usually


» Sua csede.

2 Notamur.

3 Matt. X. i6.

4 In the original the phrase is -^mX. passively : " maliin earn par-
tem meliori sumi vitio.'

5 How terse is the original ! minus sapere quam pejus.

6 Fades Dei.
7Wisd. of Sol. i. I.
8Litavenint: "consecrated."

9Tertullian's words are rather suggestive of sense than of syn-
tax : " Pueros vocem qui crucem clamant ? "

'° Secundum Deum : " according to God's will."
»' I Cor. xiv. 2o, where Tertullian renders the raU ({tptai (A. V.
" understanding ") by " sensibus."
" Dedi.


served to figure Christ; "the serpent," to
tempt Him. The one even from the first has
been the harbinger of divine peace; the other
from the beginning has been the despoiler of
the divine image. Accordingly, simplicity
alone '^ will be more easily able to know and
to declare God, whereas wisdom alone will
rather do Him violence,'-* and betray Him.

CHAP. III. — THE FOLLY OF THIS HERESY. IT
DISSECTS AND MUTILATES THE DEITY. CON-
TRASTED WITH THE SIMPLE WISDOM OF TRUE
RELIGION. TO EXPOSE THE ABSURDITIES OF
THE VALENTINIAN SYSTEM IS TO DESTROY IT.

Let, then, the serpent hide himself as much
as he is able, and let him wrest 's all his wis-
dom in the labyrinths of his obscurities; let
him dwell deep down in the ground; let him
worm himself into secret holes; let him unroll
his length through his sinuous joints;'* let
him tortuously crawl, though not all at once,''
beast as he is that skulks the light. Of our
dove, however, how simple is the very home !
— always in high and open places, and facing
the light! As the symbol of the Holy Spirit,
it loves the (radiant) East, that figure of
Christ.'^ Nothing causes truth a blush, ex-
cept only being hidden, because no man will
be ashamed to give ear thereto. No man
will be ashamed to recognise Him as God
whom nature has already commended to him,
whom he already perceives in all His works, '^
— Him indeed who is simply, for this reason,
imperfectly known; because man has not
thought of Him as only one, because he has
named Him in a plurality (of gods), and
adored Him in other /^r;//^. Yet,=~ to induce
oneself to turn from this multitude of deities
to another crowd, =" to remove from a familiar
authority to an unknown one, to wrench one-
self from what is manifest to what is hidden,
is to offend faith on the very threshold. Now,
even suppose that you are initiated into the
entire fable, will it not occur to you that you
have heard something very like it from your
fond nurse "" when you were a baby, amongst


13 i.e., without wisdom.

14 Concutere.
'5 Torqueat,

16 Per anfractus.

>7 Nee semel totus,

'8 By this remark it would seem that Tertullian read sundry pas-
sages in his I^tjn Bible similarly to the subsequent Vulgate ver-
sion. For instance, in Zech. vi. 12, the prophet's words
\yi12 T\^'% kJ^^N'rii" (" Behold the Man, whose name is the
Branch "), are rendered in the Vulgate, " Ecce Vir Oricns


nomen ejus.


ilarlv in Zech. iii. 8, " Servum meum adduaim


Okikntem." (Compare Luke 1. ^78, where the 'Ai-aToAij «f vi/^ovs
(" the day-spring from on high ") is in the same version " Oriens
ex alto.")

'9 Or, perhaps, " whom it (nature) feels in all its works."

2oAlioquin.

=1 AUoquin a turba eorum et aliam frequentiam suadere : which
perhaps is best rendered, " But from one rabble of gods to frame
and teach men to believe in another set," etc.

'^ A nutricuia.


AGAINST THE VALENTINIANS.


505


the lullabies she sang to you ' about the
towers of Lamia, and the horns of the sun ?'
Let, however, any man approach the sul)ject
from a knowledge of the faith which he has
otherwise learned, as soon as he finds so many
names of ^ons, so many marriages; so many
offsprings, so many exits, so many issues, fe-
licities ^«^/infelicitiesof a dispersed and muti-
lated Deity, will that man hesitate at once to
pronounce that these are " the fables and end-
less genealogies " which the inspired apostle ^
by anticipation condemned, whilst these seeds
of heresy were even then shooting forth?
Deservedly, therefore, must they be regarded
as wanting in simplicity, and as merely pru-
dent, who produce such fables not without
difficulty, and defend them only indirectly,
who at the same time do not thoroughly
instruct those whom they teach. This, of
course, shows their astuteness, if their lessons
are disgraceful; their unkindness, if they are
honourable. As for us, however, who are the
simple folk, we know all about it. In short,
this is the very first weapon with which we are
armed for our encounter; it unmasks'* and
brings to view^ the whole of their depraved
system.^ And in this we have the first au-
gury of our victory; because even merely to
point out that which is concealed with so great
an outlay of artifice, ^ is to destroy it.

CHAP. IV. THE HERESY TRACEABLE TO VALEN-

TINUS, AN ABLE BUT RESTLESS MAN. MANY
SCHISMATICAL LEADERS OF THE SCHOOL MEN-
TIONED. ONLY ONE OF THEM SHOWS RESPECT
TO THE MAN WHOSE NAME DESIGNATES THE
ENTIRE SCHOOL.

We know, I say, most fully their actual
origin, and we are quite aware why we call
them Valentinians, although they affect to
disavow their name. They have departed, it
is true,^ from their founder, yet is their origin
by no means destroyed; and even if it chance
to be changed, the very change bears testi-
mony to the fact. Valentinus had expected to
» become a bishop, because he was an able man
both in genius and eloquence. Being indignant,
however, that another obtained the dignity by
reason of a claim which confessorship^ had
given him, he broke with the church of the
true faith. Just like those (restless) spirits
which, when roused by ambition, are usually
inflamed with the desire of revenge, he applied


1 Inter somni difficultates.

2 These were child's stories at Carthage ia Tertullian's days.

3 Apostoli spiritus : see i Tim. i. 4.
4Detectorem.

S Designatorem.
^Totiusconscientiae illoru»n.

7 Tanto impendio.

8 Enim.

9 Martyrii.


himself with all his might"* to exterminate the
truth; and finding the clue" of a certain old
opinion, he marked out a path for himself
with the subtlety of a serpent. Ptolemaeus
afterwards entered on the same path, by dis-
tinguishing the names and the numbers of the
yEnons into personal substances, which, how-
ever, he kept apart from God. Valentinus
had included these in the very essence of the
Deity, as senses and affections of motion.
Sundry bypaths were then struck off there-
from, by Heraclean and Secundus and the
magician Marcus. Theotimus worked hard
about " the images of the law." Valentinus,
however, was as yet nowhere, and still the
Valentinians derive their name from Valenti-
nus. Axionicus at Antioch is the only man
who at the present time does honour" to the
memory of Valentinus, by keeping his rules ''
to the full. But this heresy is permitted to
fashion itself into as many various shapes
as a courtezan, who usually changes and ad-
justs her dress every day. And why not?
When they review that spiritual seed of theirs
in every man after this fashion, whenever they
have hit upon any novelty, they forthwith call
their presumption a revelation, their own per-
verse ingenuity a spiritual gift; but (they
deny all) unity, adfnitUng only diversity.'^
And thus we clearly see that, setting aside
their customary dissimulation, most of them
are in a divided state, being ready to say (and
that sincerely) of certain points of their belief,
"This is not so;" and, "I take this in a
different sense; " and, " I do not admit tiiat."
By this variety, indeed, innovation is stamped
on the very face of their rules; besides which,
it wears all the colourable features of ignorant
conceits. '5

CHAP. V. MANY EMINENT CHRISTIAN WRITERS

HAVE CAREFULLY AND FULLY REFUTED THE
HERESY. THESE THE AUTHOR MAKES HIS
OWN GUIDES.

My own path, however, lies along the orig-
inal tenets "^ of their chief teachers, not with
the self-appointed leaders of their promiscu-
ous '7 followers. Nor shall we hear it said of
us from any quarter, that we have of our own
mind fashioned our own materials, since these
have been already produced, both in respect
of the opinions and their refutations, in care-
fully written volumes, by so many eminently


10 Conversus.
" Semitam.

12 Consolatur.

13 Regiilaruin : the particulars of his system. [Here comes in
the word, borrowed from heresy, which shaped Monasticism in
after times and created the regular orders.]

14 Nee unitatem, sed diversitatem : sctl. appellant.

15 Colores ignorantiarum.
"^ Archetypis.

*7 Passivorum.


^o6


AGAINST THE VALENTINIANS.


[chap. vir.


holy and excellent men, not only those who
have lived before us, but those also who were
contemporary with the heresiarchs themselves:
for instance Justin, philosopher and martyr; '
Miltiades, the sophist' of the churches;
Irenaeus, that very exact inquirer into all
doctrines; 3 our own Proculus, the model* of
chaste old age and Christian eloquence. All
these it would be my desire closely to follow
in every work of faith, even as in this particu-
lar one. Now if there are no heresies at all,
but what those who refute them are supposed
to have fabricated, then the apostle who pre-
dicted them 5 must have been guilty of false-
hood. If, however, there are heresies, they
can be no other than those which are the sub-
ject of discussion. No writer can be supposed
to have so much time on his hands ^ as to
fabricate materials which are already in his
possession.

CHAP. VI. ALTHOUGH WRITING IN LATIN HE

PROPOSES TO RETAIN THE GREEK NAMES OB'
THE VALENTINIAN EMANATIONS OF DEITY.
NOT TO DISCUSS THE HERESY BUT ONLY TO
EXPOSE IT. THIS WITH THE RAILLERY WHICH
ITS ABSURDITY MERITS.

In order then, that no one may be blinded
by so many outlandish 7 names, collected to-
gether, and adjusted at pleasure,^ and of
doubtful import, I mean in this little work,
wherein we merely undertake to propound
this (heretical) mystery, to explain in what
manner we are to use them. Now the render-
ing of some of these names from the Greek
to as to produce an equally obvious sense of
the word, is by no means an easy process:
in the case of some others, the genders
are not suitable; while others, again, are
more familiarly known in their Greek form.
For the most part, therefore, we shall use
the Greek names; their meanings will be
seen on the margins of the pages. Nor
will the Greek be unaccompanied with the
Latin equivalents; only these will be marked
in lines above, for the purpose of explain-
ing' the personal names, rendered neces-
sary by the ambiguities of such of them as
admit some different meaning. But although
I must postpone all discussion, and be content
at present with the mere exposition (of the
heresy), still, wherever any scandalous feature


' rSee Vol. I. pp. 171, 182, this series].

= In a good sense, trom the elegance of his style.

3 [See Vol. I. p. 326, of this senes. Tertullian appropriates
the work of Irenaius, (H. \.) against the Gnostics without further
ceremony : translation e.\cepted.]

* Dignitas. [Of this Proculus see Kaye, p. 55.]

5 I Cor. xi. 19.

^Otiosiis.

7 Tarn peregrinis.

8 Compact is.

9 Ut signum hoc sit.


shall seem to require a castigation, it must be
attacked '° by all means, if only with a passing
thrust." Let the reader regard it as the skir-
mish before the battle. It will be my drift to
show how to wound " rather than to inflict
deep gashes. If in any instance mirth be ex-
cited, this will be quite as much as the subject
deserves. There are many things which de-
serve refutation in such a way as to have no
gravity expended on them. Vain and silly
topics are met with especial fitness by laugh-
ter. Even the truth may indulge in ridicule,
because it is jubilant; it may play with its
enemies, because it is fearless. '^ Only we
must take care that its laughter be not un-
seemly, and so itself be laughed at; but
wherever its mirth is decent, there it is a duty
to indulge it. And so at last I enter on my
task.

CHAP. VII. — THE FIRST EIGHT EMANATIONS, OR
iEONS, CALLED THE OGDOAD, ARE THE FOUN-
TAIN OF ALL THE OTHERS. THEIR NAMES
AND DESCENT RECORDED.

Beginning with Ennius,'-* the Roman poet,
he simply spoke of "the spacious saloons '^
of heaven," — either on account of their ele-
vated site, or because in Homer he had read
about Jupiter banqueting therein. As for
our heretics, however, it is marvellous what
storeys upon storeys'^ and what heights upon
heights, they have hung up, raised and spread
out as a dwelling for each several god of
theirs. Even our Creator has had arranged for
Him the saloons of Ennius in the fashion of
private rooms, '^ with chamber piled upon
chamber, and assigned to each god by just as
many staircases as there were heresies. The
universe, in fact, has been turned into " rooms
to let." '^ Such storeys of the heavens you
would imagine to be detached tenements in
some happy isle of the blessed,'' I know not
where. There the god even of the Valentinians
has his dwelling in the attics. They call him in-
deed,as to his essence, k\CiVTkltioq{I'crfectAion)^
but in respect of* his personality, iifjoapxy {Be-
fore the Beginning), 'H ' ki^xv (77/^ Beginning),
and sometimes Bythos (Depth), ^^^ a name


>o Or stormed perhaps; ex^ugnatio is the word.

" Delibatione transfunctoria.

" Ostendam vulnera.

'3Secura.

'4 Primus omnium.

«5 Coenacula : dining halls.

'^Supernitates supernitatum.

i7>Edicularum.

i8 Meritorium.

'9 This is perhaps a fair rendering of " Insulam Feliculam
credas tanta tabulata ccelorum, nescio ubi." "Insula" is some-
times " a detached house." It is difficult to say what " Felicula"
is; it seems to be a diminutive of Feli.x. It occurs in Arrian's
Epictetica as the name of a slave.

2o We fgllow Tertullian's mode of designation all through. He,
for the most part, gives the Greek names in Roman leMers, but
not quite always.


CHAP. VIII.]


AGAINST THE VALENTINIANS.


507


which is most unfit for one who dwells in the
j heights above ! They describe him as un-
begotten, immense, infinite, invisible,' and
eternal; as if, when they described him to be
such as we know that he ought to be, they
straightway prove him to be a being who may
be said to have had such an existence even
before all things else. I indeed insist upon'
it that he is such a being; and there is nothing
which I detect in beings of this sort more ob-
vious, than that they who are said to have
been before all things — things, too, not their
own — are found to be behind all things. Let
it, however, be granted that this Bythos of
theirs existed in the infinite ages of the past
in the greatest and profoundest repose, in the
extreme rest of a placid and, if I may use the
expression, stupid divinity, such as Epicurus
has enjoined upon us. And yet, although
they would have him be alone, they assign to
him a second person in himself and with him-
self, Ennoea [Thought), which they also call
both Charis {Grace) and' Sige {Silence). Other
things, as it happened, conduced in this most
agreeable repose to remind him of the need
of by and by producing out of himself the
beginning of all things. This he deposits in
lieu of seed in the genital region, as it were,
of the womb of his Sige. Instantaneous con-
ception is the result: Sige becomes pregnant,
and is delivered, of course in silence; and
her offspring is Nus (Mind), very like his
father and his equal in every respect. In
short, he alone is capable of comprehending
the measureless and incomprensible greatness
of his father. Accordingly he is even called
the Father himself, and the Beginning of all
things, and, with great propriety, Monogenes
(The Only-begoffen). And yet not with abso-
lute propriety, since he is not born alone.
For along with him a female also proceeded,
whose name was Veritas^ {Truth). But how
much more suitably might Monogenes be
called Protogenes {First begotten), since he was
begotten first ! Thus Bythos and Sige, Nus
and Veritas, are alleged to be the first four-
fold team ^ of the Valentinian set (of gods) •♦
the parent stock and origin of them all. For
immediately whens Nus received the func-
tion of a procreation of his own, he too pro-
duces out of himself Sermo {the Word) and
Vita {the Life). If this latter existed not
previously, of course she existed not in By-
thos. And a pretty absurdity would it be, if
Life existed not in God ! However, this off-


1 Expostulo: " I postulate as a first principle. "

2 Tertullian is responsible for this Latin word amongst the
Greek names. The strange mi.xture occurs often.

3 Quadriga.

4 Faction is.

5 Ibidem si:nul.


spring also produces fruit, having for its mis-
sion the initiation of the universe and the
formation of the entire Pleroma: it procreates
Homo {Man) and Ecclesia {the Church).
Thus you have an Ogdoad, a double Tetra,
out of the conjunctions of males and females
— the cells ^ (so to speak) of the primordial
^]ons, the fraternal nuptials of the Valentin-
ian gods, the simple originals ^ of heretical
sanctity and majesty, a rabble^ — shall I say
of criminals' or of deities ?'° — at any rate,
the fountain of all ulterior fecundity.

CHAP. VIII. THE NAMES AND DESCENT OF OTHER

^ONS; FIRST HALF A SCORE, THEN TWO MORE,
AND ULTIMATELY A DOZEN BESIDES. THEsk
THIRTY CONSTITUTE THE PLEROMA. BUT
WHY BE so CAPRICIOUS AS TO STOP AT THIRTY ?

For, behold, when the second Tetrad — Ser-
mo and Vita, Homo and Ecclesia" — had
borne fruit to the Father's glory, having an
intense desire of themselves to present to the
Father something similar of their own, they
bring other issue into being '= — conjugal of
course, as the others were '^ — by the union of
the twofold nature. On the one hand, Sermo
and Vita pour out at a birth a half-score of
^ons; on the other hand. Homo and Eccle-
sia produce a couple more, so furnishing an
equipoise to their parents, since this pair with
the other ten make up just as many, as they
did themselves procreate. I now give the
names of the half-score whom I have men-
tioned: Bythios {Profound) and Mixis [Mix-
ture), Ageratos {Never old) and Henosis
{Ufiion), Autophyes {Essential nature) and
Hedone {Pleasure), Acinetos {Ivunoi'eablc)
and Syncrasis {Commixture,) Monogenes
{Only-begotten) and Macaria {Happiness). On
the other hand, these will make up the num-
ber twelve (to which I have also referred):
Paracletus {Comforter) and Pistis {Faith),
Patricas (/Vz/^rw^/ ) and Elpis {Hope), Metricos
{Maternal) and Agape {Love), Ainos {Praise) '*
and Synesis {Intelligence), Ecclesiasticus {Son
of Ecclesia) and Macariotes {Blessedness),
Theletus 's {Perfect) and Sophia ( JJ'isdom). I
cannot hfelp"^ here quoting from a like exam-
ple what may serve to show the import of


6 Cellas.

7 Census.
** Turbam.
9Criminum.

10 Nuininum.

"We everywhere give Tertullians own names, whether of
Greek form or Latin. On their first occurrence we also give
their English sense.

12 Ebulliunt.

13 Proinde conjugales.

M Of this name there are two forms — Aifos (Praise) and
'Aeii/oO? (Eternal Mind).

•5 Or TeAeT<5s (Teletus). Another form of this ^'Eon's name is
*iA7)t6? (Philetus — Belo7>ed). Oehler always reads Theletus.

'6 Cogor.


5o8


AGAINST THE VALENTINIANS.


[chap. X.


these names. In the schools of Carthage
there was once a certain Latin rhetorician, an
excessively cool fellow,' whose name was
Phosphorus. He was personating a man of
valour, and wound up^ with saying, *'I come
to you, excellent citizens, from battle, with
victory for myself, with happiness for you,
full of honour, covered with glory, the favou-
rite of fortune, the greatest of men, decked
with triumph." And forthwith his scholars
begin to shout for the school of Phosphorus,
(pei) 3 (a/i /) Are you a believer in -» Fortunata,
and Hedone, and Acinetus, and Theletus ?
Then shout out your <i>ev for the school of
Ptolemy. 5 This must be that mystery of the
Pleroma, the fulness of the thirty-fold divini-
ty. Let us see what special attributes^ be-
long to these numbers — four, and eight, and
twelve. Meanwhile with the number thirty
all fecundity ceases. The generating force
and power and desire of the ^ons is spent. ^
As if there were not still left some strong ren-
net for curdling numbers.^ As if no other
names were to be got out of the page's hall l^
For why are there not sets of fifty and of a
hundred procreated? Why, too, are there
no comrades and boon companions '° named
yor them ?

CHAP. IX. OTHER CAPRICIOUS FEATURES IN

THE SYSTEM. THE ^ONS UNEQUAL IN ATTRI-
BUTES*. THE SUPERIORITY OF NUS; THE VA-
GARIES OF SOPHIA RESTRAINED BY HOROS.
GRAND TITLES BORNE BY THIS LAST POWER.

But, further, there is an "acceptance" of
persons," inasmuch as Nus alone among them
all enjoys the knowledge of the immeasurable
Father, joyous and exulting, while they of
course pine in sorrow. To be sure, Nus, so
far as in him lay, both wished and tried to
impart to the others also all that he had learnt
about the greatness and incomprehensibility
•of the Father; but his mother, Sige, inter-
posed— she who (you must know) imposes
silence even on her own beloved heretics; " al-
though they affirm that this is done at the will
of the Father, who will have all to be inflamed


I Frijfidissimus.

' Cum virum fortem pcroraret . . . inquit.

3Tcrtullian's joke lies in the equivocal sense of this cry, which
may mean either admiration and joy, or grief and rage,

4 Audisti : interroRatively.

5 See above, chap. iv. p. 505.

6 Privilegia.

7 Castrata.

8 Tanta numerorum coa^ula.

9 The padagogiuin was either the place where boys were
trained as pajjes (often for lewd purposes), or else the boy himself
of such a character.

>oOehler reads, " hetaeri (eraipoi) et syntrophi." Another
reading, supported by Rigaltius, is " sterceiae, instead of the
former word, which gives a very contemptuous sense, suitable to
Tertullian's irony,

" Exceptio.

"Tertullian has. above, remarked on the silent and secret prac-
tices of the Valentinians : see chap. i. p. 503.


with a longing after himself. Thus, while
they are tormenting themselves with these in-
ternal desires, while they are burning with the
secret longing to know the Father, the crime
is almost accomplished. For of the twelve
^4'^ons which Homo and Ecclesia had pro-
duced, the youngest by birth (never mind the
solecism, since Sophia (Wisdom) is her name),
unable to restrain herself, breaks away with-
out the society of her husband Theletus, in
quest of the Father and contracts that kind
of sin which had indeed arisen amongst the
others who were conversant with Nus but had
flowed on to this Alon,^^ that is, to Sophia;
as is usual with maladies which, after arising
in one part of the body, spread abroad their
infection to some other limb. The fact is,"*
under a pretence of love to the Father, she
was overcome with a desire to rival Nus, who
alone rejoiced in the knowledge of the
Father. 's But when Sophia, straining after
impossible aims, was disappointed of her
hope, she is both overcome with difficulty,
and racked with affection. Thus she was all
but swallowed up by reason of the charm and
toil (of her research),'^ and dissolved into the
remnant of ///j- substance ; '^ nor would there
have been any other alternative for her than
perdition, if she had not by good luck fallen
in with Horos [Limit). He too had considera-
ble power. He is the foundation of the
great '^ universe, and, externally, the guar-
dian thereof. To him they give the additional
names of Crux {Cross), and Lytrotes (J^c-
deemef'y) and Carpistes {Emancipator)."^ When
Sophia was thus rescued from danger, and
tardily persuaded, she relinquished further
research after the Father, found repose, and
laid aside all her excitement,"* or Enthymesis
{Desire,) along with the passion which had
come over her.

CHAP, X. ANOTHER ACCOUNT OF THE STRANGE

ABERRATIONS OF SOPHIA, AND THE RESTRAIN-
ING SERVICES OF HOROS. SOPHIA WAS NOT
HERSELF, AFTER ALL, EJECTED FROM THE
PLEROMA, BUT ONLY HER ENTHYMESIS.

But some dreamers have given another ac-
count of the aberration'' and recovery of


'3 In hunc derivarct.

uSed enim.

'5 De Patre.

'6 Prsc vi dulcedinis et laboris.

17 It is not easy to say what is the meaning of the words, " Et
in reliquam substantiam dissolvi." Rigaltius renders them: "So
that whatever substance was left to her was being dissolved."
This seems to be forcing the sentence unnaturally. Irentcus (ac-
cording to the Latin translator) says : " Resolutum in universam
substantiam," " Resolved into his (the leather's) general sub-
stance," i. 2, 2, [Vol. I. p. 317.]

isillius.

19 So Grabe ; but Reaper^ according to Neander.

=0 Animationem.

=« Exilum.


CHAP. XI.]


AGAINST THE VALENTINIANS.


509


Sophia. After her vain endeavours, and the
disappointment of her hope, she was, I sup-
pose, disfigured with paleness" and emacia-
tion, and that neglect of her beauty which
was natural to one who ' was deploring the
denial of the Father, — an affliction which was
no less painful than his loss. Then, in the
midst of all this sorrow, she by herself alone,
without any conjugal help,. conceived and bare
a female offspring. Does this excite your
surprise ? Well, even the hen has the power
of being able to bring forth by her own en-
ergy.' They say, too, that among vultures
there are only females, which become parents
alone. At any rate, she was another without
aid from a male, and she began at last to be
afraid that her end was even at hand. She was
all in doubt about the treatment ^ of her case,
and took pains at self-concealment. Reme-
dies could nowh^vQ be found. For where, then,
should we have tragedies and comedies, from
which to borrow the process of exposing what
has been born without connubial modesty ?
While the thing is in this evil plight, she raises
her eyes, and turns them to the Father.
Having, however, striven in vain, as her
strength was failing her, , she falls to praying.
Her entire kindred also supplicates in her be-
half, and especially Nus. Why not? What
was the cause of so vast an evil ? Yet not
a single casualty ^ befell Sophia without its
effect. All her sorrows operate. Inasmuch
as all that conflict of hers contributes to the
origin of Matter. Her ignorance, her fear,
her distress, become substances. Hereupon
the Father by and by, being moved, produces
in his own image, with a view to these circum-
stances^ the Horos whom we have mentioned
above; (and this he does) by means of Mono-
genes Nus, a male-female (^on), because
there is this variation of statement about the
Father's^ sex. They also go on to tell us
that Horos is likewise called Metagogius, that
is, "a conductor about," as well as Horo-
thetes {Setter of Limits). By his assistance
they declare that Sophia was checked in her
illicit courses, and purified from all evils, and
henceforth strengthened (in virtue), and re-
stored to the conjugal state: (they add) that
she indeed remained within the bounds ^ of
the Pleroma, but that her Enthymesis, with
the accruing^ Passion, was banished by,
Horos, and crucified and cast out from the
Pleroma, — even as they say. Malum foras!


I Uti quae.

^Comp. Aristotle, Hist. Anint. vi. 2; Pliny, H, N. x. 58, 60.

3 Ratione.

4 Exitus.

5 In haec : in relation to the case of Sophia.

6 Above, in chap. viii. we were told that Nus, who was so much
like the Father, was himself called " Father."

7 In censu.

. SAppendicem.


(Evil, avaunt!) Still, that was a spiritual es-
sence, as being the natural impulse of an vEon,
although without form or shape, inasmuch as
it had apprehended nothing, and therefore was
pronounced to be an infirm and feminine
fruit. 5*

CHAP. XI. — THE PROFANE ACCOUNT GIVEN OF
THE ORIGIN OF CHRIST AND THE HOLY GHOST
STERNLY REBUKED. AN ABSURDITY RESPECT-
ING THE ATTAINMENT OF THE KNOWLEDGE
OF GOD ABLY EXPOSED.

Accordingly, after the banishment of the
Enthymesis, and the return of her mother
Sophia to her husband, the (illustrious) Mono-
genes, the Nus, '"released indeed from all care
and concern of the Father, in order that he
might consolidate all things, and defend and
at last fix the Pleroma, and so prevent any
concussion of the kind again, once more "
emits a new couple'^ (blasphemously named).
I should suppose the coupling of two males
to be a very shameful thing, or else the one '^
must be a female, and so the male is dis-
credited '■* by the female. One divinity is as-
signed in the case of all these, to procure a
complete adjustment among the ^ons. Even
from this fellowship in a common duty two
schools actually arise, two chairs, 's and, to
some extent,'^ the inauguration of a division
in the doctrine of Valentinus. It was the
function of Christ to instruct the ^ons in the
nature of their conjugal relations ''^ (you see
what the whole thing was, of course !), and
how to form some guess about the unbegot-
ten,'^ and to give them the capacity of genera-
ting within themselves the knowledge of the
Father; it being impossible to catch the idea
of him, or comprehend him, or, in short, even
to enjoy any perception of him, either by the
eye or the ear, except through Monogenes
(the Only-begotten). Well, I will even grant
them what they allege about knowing the
Father, so that they do not refuse us (the at-
tainment of) the same. I would rather point
out what is perverse in their doctrine, how
they were taught that the incomprehensible
part of the Father was the cause of their own
perpetuity, '9 whilst that which might be com-


9 Literally, " infirm fruit and a female," i.e. " had not shared
in any male influence, but was a purely female production." See
OUT Irencetts, i. 4. [Vol. I. p. 321.]

10 lUe nus.

11 Iterum : above.

i2Copulationem: The profane reference is to Christ and the
Spirit.

13 [A shocking reference to the Spirit which I modify to one of
the Divine Persons.]

14 Vulneratur.

15 Cathedrae.
i^Quaedam.
i7Conjuj;iorum.

18 Innati conjectationem.

19 Perpetuitatis : i.e. " what was unchangeable in their condition
and nature."


lO


AGAINST THE VALENTINIANS.


[chap. XIII.


prehended of him was the reason ' of their
generation and formation. Now by these
several positions^ the tenet, I suppose, is in-
sinuated, that it is expedient for God not to
be apprehended, on the very ground that the
incomprehensibility of His character is the
cause of perpetuity; whereas what in Him is
comprehensible is productive, not of perpetu-
ity, but rather of conditions which lack per-
petuity— namely, nativity and formation.
The Son, indeed, they made capable of com-
prehending the Father. The manner in which
He is comprehended, the recently produced
Christ fully taught them. To the Holy
Spirit, however, belonged the special gifts,
whereby they, having been all set on a com-
plete par in respect of their earnestness to
learn, should be enabled to offer up their
thanksgiving, and be introduced to a true
tranquillity.

CHAP. XII. THE STRANGE JUMBLE OF THE

PLEROMA. THE FRANTIC DELIGHT OF THE
MEMBERS THEREOF. THEIR JOINT CONTRIBU-
TION OF PARTS SET FORTH WITH HUMOROUS
IRONY.

Thus they are all on the self-same footing
in respect of form and knowledge, all of them
having become what each of them severally
is; none being a different being, because they
are all what the others are.^ They are all
turned into* Nuses, into Homos, into The-
letuses;s and so in the case of the females,
into Siges, into Zoes, into Ecclesias, into
Forunatas, so that Ovid would have blotted
out his own Metamorphoses if he had only
known our larger one in the present day.
Straightway they were reformed and thor-
oughly established, and being composed to
rest from the truth, they celebrate the Father
in a chorus ' of praise in the exuberance of
their joy. The Father himself also revelled ^
in the glad feeling; of course, because his
children and grandchildren sang so well. And
why should he not revel in absolute delight ?
Was not the Pleroma freed (from all danger) ?
AVhat ship's captain^ fails to rejoice even
with indecent frolic? Every day we observe
the uproarious ebullitions of sailors' joys.^
Therefore, as sailors always exult over the
reckoning they pay in common, so do these
^-Eons enjoy a similar pleasure, one as they


* Rationetn j perhaps *' the means."

* Hac dispositione.

3 Nemo aliud quia alteri omnes.

4 Refundiintur.

5 The reader will, of course, see that we jfive a familiar English
plural to these names, as better expressing Tertullian's irony.

6 Concinunt.

7 Diffundebatur.

** Nauclerus: " pilot,"

9 Tertullian lived m a seaport at Carthage.


now all are in form, and, as I may add,'° in
feeling too. With the concurrence of even
their new brethren and masters," they con-
tribute into one common stock the best and
most beautiful thing with which they are sev-
erally adorned. Vainly, as I suppose. For
if they were all one by reason by the above-
mentioned thorough equalization, there was
no room for the process of a common reckon-
ing,'-' which for the most part consists of a
pleasing variety. They all contributed the
one good thing, which they all were. There
would be, in all probability, a formal pro-
cedure '3 in the mode or in the form of the
very equalization in question. Accordingly,
out of the donation which they contributed'*
to the honour and glory of the Father, they
jointly fashion 's the most beautiful constella-
tion of the Pleroma, and its perfect fruit,
Jesus. Him they also surname'* Soter
(Saviou?-) and Christ, and Sermo (J Ford)
after his ancestors; '^ and lastly Omnia (A//
Thmgs), as formed from a universally culled
nosegay,'^ //he the jay of ^^sop, the Pandora
of Hesiod, the bowl '^ of Accius, the honey-
cake of Nestor, the miscellany of Ptolemy.
How much nearer the mark, if these idle
title-mongers had called him Pancarpian,
after certain Athenian customs. =° By way of
adding external honour also to their wonder-
ful puppet, they produce for him a body-guard
of angels of like nature. If this be their mu-
tual condition, it may be all right; if, how-
ever, they are consubstantial with Soter (for
I have discovered how doubtfully the case is
stated), where will be his eminence when sur-
rounded by attendants who are co-equal with
himself ?

CHAP. XIII. — FIRST PART OF THE SUBJECT,
TOUCHING THE CONSTITUTION OF THE PLER-
OMA, BRIEFLY RECAPITULATED. TRANSITION
TO THE OTHER PART, WHICH IS LIKE A PLAY
OUTSIDE THE CURTAIN.

In this series, then, is contained the first
emanation of /Eons, who are alike born, and
are married, and produce offspring: there are
the most dangerous fortunes of Sophia in her
ardent longing for the Father, the most sea-
sonable help of Horos, the expiation of her


JoNedum.

«« Christ and the Holy Spirit, [i.e. blasphemously.]

"Symbolse ratio.

»3 Ratio.

'4 Ex acre collaticio. In reference to the common symboia,
Tertullian adds the proverbial formula, "quodaiunt" (as they say).

•5 Compinjiunt.

'6 Cognominant.

'7 De patritis. Irenaeus' wordhere is narpoivvixLKui^ ('■'• patrony~
mice ").

i8 Ex omnium defloratione.

»9 Patina.'

■■«> Alluding to the olive-branch, ornamented with all sorts of
fruits (compare our " Christmas tree "), which was carried about
by boys in Athens on a certain festival (White and Riddle).


^


CHAP. XV.]


AGAINST THE VALENTINIANS.


511


Enthymesis and accruing Passion, the in-
struction of Ciirist and the Holy Spirit, their
tutelar reform of the ^ons, the piebald or-
namentation of Soter, the consubstantial
retinue ' of the angels. All that remains,
according to you, is the fall of the curtain
and the clapping of hands.' What remains,
in my opinion, however, is, that you should
hear and take heed. At all events, these
things are said to have been played out within
the company of the Pleroma, the first scene
of the tragedy. The rest of the play, how-
ever, is beyond the curtain — I mean outside
of the Pleroma. And yet if it be such within
the bosom of the Father, within the embrace
of the guardian Horos, what must it be out-
side, in free space,^ where God did not exist ?

CHAP. XIV. — THE ADVENTURES OF ACHAMOTH
OUTSIDE THE PLEROMA. THE MISSION OF
CHRIST IN PURSUIT OF HER. HER LONGING
FOR CHRIST. HOROS' HOSTILITY TO HER.
HER CONTINUED SUFFERING.

For Enthymesis, or rather Achamoth — be-
cause by this inexplicable^ name alone must
she be henceforth designated — when in com-
pany with the vicious Passion, her inseparable
companion, she was expelled to places devoid
of that light 'which is the substance of the
Pleroma, even to the void and empty region
of Epicurus, she becomes wretched also be-
cause of the place of her banishment. She
is indeed without either form or feature, even
an untimely and abortive production. Whilst
she is in this plight,^ Christ descends from ^
the heights, conducted by Horos, in order to
impart form to the abortion, out of his own
energies, the form of substance only, but not
of knowledge also. ■ Still she is left with some
property. She has restored to her the odour
of immortality, in order that she might, under
its influence, be overcome with the desire of
better things than belonged to her present
plight.'' Having accomplished His merciful
mission, not without the assistance of the
Holy Spirit, Christ returns to the Pleroma.
It is usual out of an abundance of things^
for names to be also forthcoming. Enthyme-


I Comparaticium antistatum. The latter word Oehler ex-
plains, "ante ipsum stantes; " the former, •' quia genus eorum
comparari poterat substantise Soteris " (so Rigaltus).

- The reader will see how obviously this is meant in TertulHan's
"Quod superest, inquis, vos valete et plaudite." This is the
well-known allusion to the end of the play in the old Roman
theatre. See Quintilian, vi. i, 52; comp. Horace, A. P. i^s-
TertulHan's own parody to this formula, immediately after, is :
" Immo quod superest, inquam, vos audite et proficite.

3 In libero : which may be, however, "beyond the control of
Horos. '

4lninterpretabili.

5 TertulHan's " Dum ita rerum habet " is a copy of the Greek
ouTu> TMV ■npa.yfj.o.Tuiv e;)(ovcrr, ,

6 Deflectitur a.

7 Casus sui.

8 Rerum ex Hberalitatibus.

9 De actia fuit. [See Vol. I. pp. 320, 321.]


sis came from action ;' whence Achamoth
came is still a question; Sophia emanates from
the Father, the Holy Spirit from an angel.
She entertains a regret for Christ immediately
after she had discovered her desertion by
him. Therefore she hurried forth herself, in
quest of the light of Him Whom she did not
at all discover, as He operated in an invisible
manner; for how else would she make search
for His light, wliich was as unknown to her as
He was Himself? Try, however, she did,
and perhaps would have found Him, had not
the self-same Horos, who had met her mother
so opportunely, fallen in with the daughter
quite as unseasonably, so as to exclaim at her
lAO ! justas w^e hear the cry " PorroQuirites "
("Out of the way, Romans!"), or else
" Fidem Caesaris ! " ("By the faith of Cae-
sar ! "), whence (as they will have it) the
name lAO comes to be found is the Scrip-
tures.'° Being thus hindered from proceed-
ing further, and being unable to surmount "
the Cross, that is to say, Horos, because she
had not yet practised herself in the part of
Catullus' Laureolus," and given over, as it
were, to that passion of hers in a manifold
and complicated mesh, she began to be af-
flicted with every impulse thereof, with sor-
row,— because she had not accomplished her
enterprise, with fear, — lest she should lose her
life, even as she had lost the light, with con-
sternation, and then with ignorance. But not
as her mother (did she suffer this), for she
was an Mow. Hers, however, was a worse
suffering, considering her condition; for an-
other tide of emotion still overwhelmed her,
even of conversion to the Christ, by Whom
she had been restored to life, and had been
directed '^ to this very conversion.

chap. xv. — strange account of the origin
of matter, from the various affections
of achamoth. the waters from her
tears; light from her smile.

Well, now, the Pythagoreans may learn,
the Stoics may know, Plato himself (may dis-
cover), whence Matter, which they will have
to be unborn, derived both its origin and sub-
stance for all this pile of the world — (a mys-
tery) which not even the renowned '* Mercu-
rius Trismegistus, master (as he was) of all


'o It is not necessary', with Rigaltius, to make a difficulty about
this, when we remember that Tertullian only refers to a silly con-
ceit of the Valentinians touching the origin of the sacred name.

" Or does " nee habens super^'olare crucem " mean " being un-
able to elude the cross?" As if Tertullian meant, in his raillery,
to say, that Achamoth had not the skill of the player who played
the part of Laureolus. Although so often suspended on the gib-
bet, he had of course as often escaped the real penalty.

'2 A notorious robber, the hero of a play by Lutatius Catullus,
who is said to have been crucified.

'3 I'emperata.

Ml He.


512


AGAINST THE VALENTINIANS.


[chap. xvti.


physical philosophy, thought out.' You have
•just heard of ''Conversion," one element in
the " Passion " (we have so often mentioned).
Out of this the whole life of the world,'' and
even that of the Demiurge himself, our God,
is said to have had its being. Again, you
have heard of " sorrow " and " fear." From
these all other created things ^ took their be-
ginning. For from her* tears flowed the en-
tire mass of waters. From this circumstance
one may form an idea of the calamity ^ which
she encountered, so vast were the kinds of
the tears wherewith she overflowed. She had
salt tear-drops, she had bitter, and sweet, and
warm, and cold, and bituminous, and ferrugi-
nous, and sulphurous, and even^ poisonous,
so that the Nonacris exuded therefrom which
killed Alexander; and the river of the Lyn-
cestae' flow^ed from the same source, which
produces drunkenness; and the Salmacis^
was derived from the same source, which ren-
ders men effeminate. The rains of heaven
Achamoth whimpered forth, ^ and we on our
part are anxiously employed in saving up in
our cisterns the very wails and tears of an-
other. In like manner, from the " consterna-
tion " and "alarm" (of which we have also
heard), bodily elements were derived. And
yet amidst so many circumstances of solitude,
in this vast prospect of destitution, she oc-
casionally smiled at the recollection of the
sight of Christ, and from this smile of joy
light flashed forth. How great was this be-
neficence of Providence, which induced her
to smile,- and all that we might not linger
for ever in the dark ! Nor need you feel as-
tonished how'° from her joy so splendid an
element" could have beamed upon the world,
when from her safiness even so necessary a
provision " flowed forth for man. O illumina-
ting smile ! O irrigating tear ! And yet it
might now have acted as some alleviation
amidst the horror^of her situation; for she
might have shaken off all the obscurity thereof
as often as she had a mind to smile, even
no^ to be obliged to turn suppliant to those
who had deserted her.'^

CHAP. XVI. — ACHAMOTH PURIFIED FROM ALL
IMPURITIES OF HER PASSION BY THE PARA-
CLETE, ACTING THROUGH SOTER, WHO OUT OF
THE ABOVE-MENTIONED IMPURITIES ARRANGES
MATTER, SEPARATING ITS EVIL FROM THE
BETTER QUALITIES.

She, too, resorts to prayers, after the man-


» Recogitavit.

2 " Omnis anima hujus mundi" may, however, mean " every
ing soul." So Bp. Kaye, On Tertuiltan, p. 487.

3 Cetera.

4 Achamoth's.

5 Exitum.
* Utiqiie.


liv-


ner of her mother. But Christ, Who now felt
a dislike to quit the Pleroma, appoints the
Paraclete as his deputy. To her, therefore,
he despatches Soter,'* (who must be the same
as Jesus, to whom the Father imparted the
supreme power over the whole body of, the
y^Eons, by subjecting them all to him, so that
"by him," as the apostle says, "all things
were created " 's), with a retinue and cortege
of contemporary angels, and (as one may sup-
pose) with the dozen fasces. Hereupon Acha-
moth, being quite struck with the pomp of his
approach, immediately covered herself with
a veil, moved at first with a dutiful feeling of
veneration and modesty; but afterwards she
surveys him calmly, and his prolific equipage.'*
With such energies as she had derived from
the contemplation, she meets him with the
salutation, Khpie, ;^aip£ (" Hail, Lord ") ! Upon
this, I suppose, he receives her, confirms
and conforms her in knowledge, as well as
cleanses '^ her from all the outrages of Pas-
sion, without, however, utterly severing them,
with an indiscriminateness like that which had
happened in the casualties which befell her
mother. For such vices as had become in-
veterate and confirmed by practice he throws
together; and when he had consolidated them
in one mass, he fixes them in a separate body,
so as to compose the corporeal condition of
Matter, extracting out of her inherent, incor-
poreal passion such an aptitude of nature '^
as might qualify it to attain to a reciprocity
of bodily substances, '^ which should emulate
one another, so that a twofold condition of
the substances might be arranged; one full of
evil through its faults, f/ic otJier susceptible of
passion from conversion. This will prove to
be Matter, which has set us in battle array
against Hermogenes, and all others who pre-
sume to teach that God made all things out
of Matter, not out of nothing.

CHAP. XVII. ACHAMOTH IN LOVE WITH THE

ANGELS. A PROTEST AGAINST THE LASCIVIOUS
FEATURES OF VALENTINIANISM. ACHAMOTH
BECOMES THE MOTHER OF THREE NATURES.

Then Achamoth, delivered at length from
all her evils, wonderful to tell "^ goes on and


7 These two rivers, with their peculiar qualitieSj are mentioned
by Plin)r, H.N. ii. 103; [and the latter by Milton agamst Salmasius.]

8 Ovid. Metam. iv. 286.

9 Pipiavit.
•oQui.

" As listht.

'2 Instrumentum : water is meant.
«3 Christ and the Holy Spirit. Oehler.
«4 Saviour: another title of their Paraclete.
'5 Col i. 16.

'6 Fructiferumque suggestum.
17 Expumicat.

*8 Habilitatem atque naturam. We have treated this as a hendia-
dys.

'9 ^quiparantias corpulentiarum. ,

» Ecce.


CHAP. XX.]


AGAINST THE VALENTINIANS.


513


bears fruit with greater results. For warmed
with the joy of so great an escape from her
unhappy condition, and at the same time
heated with the actual contemplation of the
angelic luminaries (one is ashamed) to use sueh
latiguage^ but there is no other way of express-
ing one's meaning), she during the emotion
somehow became personally inflamed with
desire " towards them, and at once grew preg-
nant with a spiritual conception, at the very
image of which the violence of her joyous trans-
port,and the delight of her prurient excitement,
had imbibed and impressed upon her. She
at length gave birth to an offspring, and then
there arose a leash of natures, =" from a triad
of causes, — one material, arising from her
passion; another animal, arising from her
conversion; the third spiritual, which had its
origin in her imagination.

CHAP. XVIII. — BLASPHEMOUS OPINION CONCERN-
ING THE ORIGIN OF THE DEMIURGE, SUPPOSED
TO BE THE CREATOR OF THE UNIVERSE.

Having become a better proficient ^ in
practical conduct by the authority which, we
may well suppose,'^ accrued to her from her
three children, she determined to impart form
to each of the natures. The spiritual one,
however, she was unable to touch, inasmuch
as she was herself spiritual. For a participa-
tion in the same nature has, to a very great
extent,s disqualified like and consubstantial
beings from having superior power over one
another. Therefore^ she applies herself
solely to the animal nature, adducing the in-
structions of Soter? (for her guidance). And
first of all (she does) what cannot be described
and read, and heard of, without an intense
horror at the blasphemy thereof: she pro-
duces this God of ours, the God of all except
of the heretics, the Father and Creator^ and
King of all things, which are inferior to him.
For from him do they proceed. If, however,
they proceed from him, and not rather from
Achamoth, or if only secretly from her, with-
out his perceiving her, he was impelled to all
that he did, even like a puppet ^ which is
moved from the outside. In fact, it was ow-
ing to this very ambiguity about the personal
agency in the works which were done, that
they coined for him the mixed name of
{Motherly Father), ^° whilst his other appella-


1 Subavit et ipsa.

2 Trinitas generum.

3 Exercitior.

4 Scilicet.

5 Fere.

^ Eo animo.

7 See above, chap. xvi. p. 512

8 Demiurgum.
9Et velut sigillario.


Oeh-


. „. ^ ^ Sigillarium est vevpoairaarov

10 The Father acting through and proceeding from his Mother

33


tions were distinctly assigned according to
the conditions and positions of his works: so
that they call him Father in relation to the
animal substances to which they give the place
of honour" on his right hand; whereas, in
respect of the material substances which they
banish " to his left hand, they name him Dem-
iiirgus; whilst his title King designates his
authority over both classes, 7iay over the uni-
verse.'^

CHAP. XIX. — PALPABLE ABSURDITIES AND CON-
TRADICTIONS IN THE SYSTEM RESPECTING-
ACHAMOTH AND THE DEMIURGE.

And yet there is not any agreement between
the propriety of the names and that of the
works, from which all the names are suggested;
since all of them ought to have borne the
name of her by whom the things were done,
unless after all '^ it turn out that they were
not made by her. For, although they say
that Achamoth devised these forms in honour
of the ^ons, they yet 's transfer this work to
Soter as its author, when they say that he '^
operated through her, so far as to give her the
very image of the invisible and unknown
Father — that is, the image which was un-
known and invisible to the Demiurge; whilst
he '7 formed this same Demiurge in imitation '^
of Nus the son of Propator ;^^ and whilst the
archangels, who were the work of the Demi-
urge, resembled the other ^ons. Now, when
I hear of such images of the three, I ask, do
you not wish me to laugh at these pictures of
their most extravagant painter? At the fe-
male Achamoth, a picture of the Father ? At
the Demiurge, ignorant of his mother, much
more so of his father ? At the picture of Nus,
ignorant of his father too, and the ministering
angels, facsimiles of their lords? This is
painting a mule from an ass, and sketcthing
Ptolemy from Valentinus.

CHAP. XX — THE DEMIURGE WORKS AWAY AT
CREATION, AS THE DRUDGE OF HIS MOTHER
ACHAMOTH, IN IGNORANCE ALL THE WHILE
OF THE NATURE OF HIS OCCUPATION,

The Demiurge therefore, placed as he was
without the limits of the Pleroma in the igno-
minious solitude of his eternal exile, founded
a new empire — this world (of ours) — by clear-


" Commandant.

12 Delegant.

«3 Communiter in universitatem.

14 Jam.

15 Rursus.

16 This is the force of the " qui" with the subjunctive verb.

17 Soter.

18 Effingeret.

19 There seems to be a relative gradation meant among these
extra-Pleroma beings, as there was among the ^tons of the
Pleroma ; and, further, a relation between the two sets of beings
— Achamoth bearing a relation to Propator, the Demiurge to
Nus, etc.


514


AGAINST THE VALENTINIANS.


[chap. XXIII.


ing away the confusion and distinguishing the
difference between the two substances which
severally constituted it/ the animal and the
material. Out of incorporeal (elements) he
constructs bodies, heavy, light, erect "^ and
stooping, celestial and terrene. He then
completes the sevenfold stages of heaven it-
self, with his own throne above all. Whence
he had the additional name of Sabbatum from
the hebdomadal nature of his abode; his
mother Achamoth, too, had the title Ogdoa-
da, after the precedent of the primeval Og-
doad.3 These heavens, however, they con-
sider to be intelligent,'* and sometimes they
make angels of them, as indeed they do of
the Demiurge himself; as also (they call)
Paradise the fourth archangel, because they
fix it above the third heaven, of the power
of which Adam partook, when he sojourned
there amidst its fleecy clouds s and shrubs.^
Ptolemy remembered perfectly well the prattle
of his boyhood, 7 that apples grew in the sea,
and fishes on the tree; after the same fashion,
he assumed that nut-trees flourished in the
skies. The Demiurge does his work in igno-
rance, and therefore perhaps he is unaware
that trees ought to be planted only on the
ground. His mother, of course, knew all
about it: how is it, then, that she did not
suggest the fact, since she was actually exe-
cuting her own operation ? But whilst build-
ing up so vast an edifice for her son by means
of those works, which proclaim him at once
to be father, god and, king before the con-
ceits of the Valentinians, why she refused to
let them be known to even him,^ is a ques-
tion which I shall ask afterwards.

CHAP. XXI. — THE VANITY AS WELL AS IGNO-
RANCE OF THE DEMIURGE. ABSURD RESULTS
FROM SO IMPERFECT A CONDITION.

Meanwhile you must believe «> that Sophia
has the surnames of earth and of Mother —
*' Mother-Earth," of course — and (what may
excite your laughter still more heartily) even
Holy Spirit. In this way they have conferred
all honour on that female, I suppose even a
beard, not to say other things. Besides,'"
the Demiurge had so little mastery over
things," on the score," you must know,'- of

1 Duplicis substantise illius disclusx.

2 Sublimantia.

3 0gdoadis primogenitalis : what Irenaeus calls "the first-
begotten and primary Ogdoad of the Pleroma" (See our Irenteus,
Vol. I. ; also above, chap. vii. p. 506.)

4 Nocros.

5 Nubeculas.
*Arbusculas.
yPueriiium dicibulorum.

8 Sibi here must refer to the secondary agent of the sentence.

9 Tenendum.
>o AUoquin.

»» Adeo rerum non erat compos.
" Censu.
»3 Scilicet.


his inability to approach spiritual essences,
(constituted as he was) of animal elements,
that, imagining himself to be the only being,
he uttered this soliloquy: *' I am God, and
beside me there is none else." "* But for all
that, he at least was aware that he had not
himself existed before. He understood,
therefore, that he had been created, and that
there must be a creator of a creature of some
sort or other. How happens it, then, that
he seemed to himself to be the only be-
ing, notwithstanding his uncertainty, and al-
though he had, at any rate, some suspicion
of the existence of some creator ?

CHAP. XXII. ORIGIN OF THE DEVIL, IN THE

CRIMINAL EXCESS OF THE SORROW OF ACHA-
MOTH. THE DEVIL, CALLED ALSO MUNDITEN-
ENS, ACTUALLY WISER THAN THE DEMIURGE,
ALTHOUGH HIS WORK.

The odium felt amongst them 's against the
devil is the more excusable,'^ even because the
peculiarly sordid character of his origin justi-
fies it.'7 For he is supposed by them to have
had his origin in that criminal excess '^ of her ''
sorrow, from which they also derive the birth of
the angels, and demons, and all the wicked
spirits. Yet they affirm that the devil is the
work of the Demiurge, and they call him
Munditenens=° {Ruler of the World), and
maintain that, as he is of a spiritual nature,
he has a better knowledge of the things above
than the Demiurge, an animal being. He
deserves from them the pre-eminence which
all heresies provide him with.

CHAP. XXIII. THE RELATIVE POSITIONS OF THE

PLEROMA. THE REGION OF ACHAMOTH, AND
THE CREATION OF THE DEMIURGE. THE AD-
DITION OF FIRE TO THE VARIOUS ELEMENTS
AND BODIES OF NATURE.

Their most eminent powers, moreover,
they confine within the following limits, as
in a citadel. In the most elevated of all sum-
mits presides the tricenary Pleroma, =' Horos
marking off its boundary line. Beneath it,
Achamoth occupies the intermediate space
for her abode," treading down her son. For
under her comes the Demiurge in his own
Hebdomad, or rather the Devil, sojournifig in
this world in common with ourselves, formed,
as has been said above, of the same elements


'4 Isa. xlv. 5, xlvi. 9.

IS Infamia apud illos

'6 Tolerabilior.

»7 Capit : " capax est," nimirum " infamise" (Fr. Junius).

18 Ex nequitia.

19 Achamoth's.

20 Irena;us' word is Ko<rft.oKaarit>p ; see also Eph. vi. 12.

2' Above, in chap, viii., he has mentioned the Pleroma as "the
fulness of the thirtyfold divinity."'
23 Metatur.


CHAP. XXVI.]


AGAINST THE VALENTINIANS.


515


and the same body, out of the most profitable
calamities of Sophia; inasmuch as, (if it had
not been for these,) our spirit would have had
no space for inhaling and ejecting' air — that
delicate vest of all corporeal creatures, that
revealer of all colours, that instrument of the
seasons — if the sadness of Sophia had not fil-
tered it, just as her fear did the animal ex-
istence, and her conversion the Demiurge
himself. Into all these elements and bodies
fire was fanned. Now, since they have not
as yet explained to us the original sensation
of this * in Sophia, I will on my own responsi-
bility ^ conjecture that its spark was struck
out of the delicate emotions'^ of her (feverish
grief). For you may be quite sure that,
amidst all her vexations, she must have had
a good deal of fever. s

CHAP. XXIV. THE FORMATION OF MAN BY THE

DEMIURGE. HUMAN FLESH NOT MADE OF
THE GROUND, BUT OF A NONDESCRIPT PHILO-
SOPHIC SUBSTANCE.

Such being their conceits respecting God,
or, if you like,^ the gods, of what sort are
their figments concerning man ? For, after
he had made the world, the Demiurge turns
his hands to man, and chooses for him as his
substance not any portion of " the dry land,"
as they say, of which alone we have any
knowledge (although it was, at that time, not
yet dried by the waters becoming separated
from the earthy residuum, and only after-
wards became dry), but of the invisible sub-
stance of that matter, which philosophy in-
deed dreams of, from its fluid and fusible
composition, the origin of which I am unable
to imagine, because it exists nowhere. Now,
since fluidity and fusibility are qualities of
liquid matter, and since everything liquid
flowed from Sophia's tears, we must, as a nec-
essary conclusion, believe that muddy earth
is constituted of Sophia's eye-rheums and
viscid discharges, 7 which are just as much
the dregs of tears as mud is the sediment of
waters. Thus does the Demiurge mould
man as a potter does his clay, and animates
him with his own breath. Made after his
image and likeness, he will therefore be both
material and animal. A fourfold being ! For
in respect of his "image," he must be deemed
clayey,^ that is to say, material, although the
Demiurge is not composed of matter; but as
to his "likeness," he is animal, for such.


1 Reciprocandi.

2 Fire.

3 Ego.

4 Motiunculis.

5 Febricitasse.

6 Vel.

7 Ex pituitis et gramis
* Choicus.


too, is the Demiurge. You have two (of his
constituent elements). Moreover, a coating
of flesh was, as they allege, afterwards placed
over the clayey substratum, and it is this tunic
of skin which is susceptible of sensation.

CHAP. XXV. AN EXTRAVAGANT WAY OF AC-
COUNTING FOR THE COMMUNICATION OF THE
SPIRITUAL NATURE TO MAN. IT WAS FUR-
TIVELY MANAGED BY ACHAMQTH, THROUGH
THE UNCONSCIOUS AGENCY OF HER SON.

In Achamoth, moreover, there was inherent
a certain property of a spiritual germ, of her
motherSophia's substance; and Achamoth her-
self had carefully severed off (the same q^uali-
ty), and implanted it in hei son the Demi-
urge, although he was actually unconscious
of it. It is for you to imagine ' the industry
of this clandestine arrangement. For to this
end had she deposited and concealed (this
germ), that, whenever the Demiurge came to
impart life to Adam by his inbreathing, he
might at the same time draw off from the vital
principle '° the spiritual seed, and, as by a
pipe, inject it into the clayey nature; in order
that,, being then fecundated in the material
body as in a womb, and having fully grown
there, it might be found fit for one day re-
ceiving the perfect Word." When, therefore,
the Demiurge commits to Adam the transmis-
sion of his own vital principle," the spiritual
man lay hid, although inserted by his breath,
and at the same time introduced into the body,
because the Demiurge knew no more about
his mother's seed than about herself. To
this seed they give the name of Ecclesia {the
Church^, the mirror of the church above, and
the perfection '3 of man; tracing this perfec-
tio7i from Achamoth, just as they do the ani-
mal nature from the Demiurge, the clayey
material of the body (they derive) from the
primordial substance,'* the flesh from Matter.
So that you have a new Geryon here, only a
fourfold (rather than a threefold) monster.

CHAP. XXVI. — THE THREE SEVERAL NATURES —
THE MATERIAL, THE ANIMAL, AND THE SPIRIT-
UAL, AND THEIR SEVERAL DESTINATIONS.
THE STRANGE VALENTINIAN OPINION ABOUT
THE STRUCTURE OF SOTER's NATURE.

In like manner they assign to each of them
a separate end.'s To the material, that is to
say the carnal (nature), which they also call
"the left-handed," they assign undoubted


9 Accipe

10 Anima denvaret.
" Sermoni perfecto.

12 Traducem anima: suae

13 Censum.

M Or, the substance of 'Apxi).
'5 Exitum.


AGAINST THE VALENTINIANS.


[chap. XXVIII.


destruction; to the animal (nature), which
they also call "the right-handed," a doubtful
issue, inasmuch as it oscillates between the
material and the spiritual, and is sure to fall at
last on the side to which it has mainly gravi-
tated. As regards the spiritual, however,
(they say) that it enters into the formation of
the animal, in order that it may be educated
in company with it and be disciplined by re-
peated intercourse with it. For the animal
(nature) was in want of training even by the
senses: for this purpose, accordingly, was the
whole structure of the world provided; for
this purpose also did Soter {the Saviour)
present Himself in the world — even for the
salvation of the animal (nature). By yet an-
other arrangement they will have it that He,
in some prodigious way,^ clothed Himself
with the primary portions* of those sub-
stances, the whole of which He was going to
restore to salvation; in such wise that He as-
sumed the spiritual nature from Achamoth,
whilst He derived the animal (being), Christ,
afterwards from the Demiurge; His corporal
substance, however, which was constructed of
an animal nature (only with wonderful and
indescribable skill), He wore for a dispensa-
tional purpose, in order that He might, in
spite of His own unwillingness, ^ be capable
of meeting persons, and of being seen and
touched by them, and even of dying. But
there was nothing material assumed by Him,
inasmuch as //m/ was incapable of salvation.
As if He could possibly have been more re-
quired by any others than by those who were
in want of salvation ! And all this, in order
that by severing the condition of our flesh
from Christ they may also deprive it of the
hope of salvation !

CHAP. XXVII. — THE CHRIST OF THE DEMIURGE,
SENT INTO THE WORLD BY THE VIRGIN. NOT
OF HER. HE FOUND IN HER, NOT A MOTHER,
BUT ONLY A PASSAGE OR CHANNEL. JESUS
DESCENDED UPON CHRIST, AT HIS BAPTISM,
LIKE A DOVE ; BUT, BEING INCAPABLE OF
SUFFERING, HE LEFT CHRIST TO DIE ON THE
CROSS ALONE.

1 now adduce^ (what they say) concerning
Christ, upon whom some of them engraft
Jesus with so much licence, that they foist
into Him a spiritual seed together with an
animal inflatus. Indeed, I will not undertake
to describes these incongruous crammings,*
which they have contrived in relation both to

^ Monstruosum ilium.

2 Prosicias induisse. Irenaeus says, " Assumed the first-fruits,"
Tas a.T!a.(t\a.<i.

3 Ingratis.

4 Reddo.
SNescio quae.
^Fartilia,


their men and their gods. Even the Demi-
urge has a Christ of His own — His natural Son.
An animal, in short, produced by Himself,
proclaimed by the prophets — His position
being one which must be decided by preposi-
tions; in other words. He was produced by
7fieans of a virgin, rather than of a virgin I
On the ground that, having descended into
the virgin rather in the manner of a passage
through her than of a birth by her. He came
into existence through her, not of her — not
experiencing a mother in her, but nothing
more than a way. Upon this same Christ,,
therefore (so they say), Jesus descended in
the sacrament of baptism, in the likeness of
a dove. Moreover, there was even in Christ
accruing from Achamoth the condiment of a
spiritual seed, in order of course to prevent
the corruption of all the other stuffing.^ For
after the precedent of the principal Tetrad,
they guard him with four substances — the
spiritual one of Achamoth, the animal one of
the Demiurge, the corporeal one, which
cannot be described, and that of Soter, or, in
other phrase, the columbine.^ As for Soter
{Jesus), he remained in Christ to the last,,
impassible, incapable of injury, incapable of
apprehension. By and by, when it came to a
question of capture, he departed from him
during the examination before Pilate. In
like manner, his mother's seed did not admit
of being injured, being equally exempt from
all manner of outrage, ^ and being undis-
covered even by the Demiurge himself. The
animal and carnal Christ, however, does suffer
after the fashion'" of the superior Christ,,
who, for the purpose of producing Achamoth^
had been stretched upon the cross, that is,
Horos, in a substantial though not a cogniza-
ble " form. In this manner do they reduce
all things to mere images — Christians them-
selves being indeed nothing but imaginary
beings !

CHAP. XXVIII. THE DEMIURGE CURED OF HIS

IGNORANCE BY THE SAVIOUR's ADVENT, FROM
WHOM HE HEARS OF THE GREAT FUTURE IN
STORE FOR HIMSELF.

Meanwhile the Demiurge, being still igno-
rant of everything, although he will actually
have to make some announcement himself by
the prophets, but is quite incapable of even
this part of his duty (because they divide au-
thority over the prophets" between Acha-
moth, the Seed, and the Demiurge), no sooner


7 Farsura.

8 That which descended like a dove.

9 iEque insujjditivam.
'o In delineationem.

" Agnitionali.

'2 Prophetiale patrocinium.


CHAP. XXX.]


AGAINST THE VALENTINIANS.


517


heard of the advent of Soter (Saviour) than
he runs to him with haste and joy, with all
his might, like the centurion in the Gospel.'
And being enlightened by him on all points,
he learns from him also of his own prospect
how that he is to succeed to his mother's
place. Being thenceforth free from all care,
he carries on the administration of this world,
mainly under the plea of protecting the
church, for as long a time as may be neces-
sary and proper.

CHAP. XXIX. THE THREE NATURES AGAIN AD-
VERTED TO. THEY ARE ALL EXEMPLIFIED
AMONGST MEN. FOR INSTANCE, BY CAIN,
AND ABEL, AND SETH.

I will now collect from different sources,
by way of conclusion, what they affirm con-
cerning the dispensation = of the whole human
race. Having at first stated their views as to
man's threefold nature — which was, however,
united in one^ in the case of Adam — they
then proceed after him to divide it (into three)
with their especial characteristics, finding op-
portunity for such distinction in the posterity
of Adam himself, in which occurs a three-
fold division as to moral differences. Cain,
and Abel, and Seth, who were in a certain
sense the sources of the human race, become
the fountain-heads of just as many qualities'*
of nature and essential character. s The ma-
terial nature,^ which had become reprobate
for salvation, they assign to Cain; the animal
nature, which was poised between divergent
hopes, they find 7 in Abel; the spiritual, pre-
ordained for certain salvation, they store up^
in Seth. In this way also they make a two-
fold distinction among souls, as to their prop-
erty of good and evil — according to the ma-
terial condition derived from Cain, or the
animal from Abel. Men's spiritual state they
derive over and above the other conditions,^
from Seth adventitiously,^ not in the way of
nature, butx)f grace, '° in such wise that Acha-
moth infuses it" among superior beings like
rain " into good souls, that is, those who are
enrolled in the animal class. Whereas the
material class — in other words, those which
are bad souls — they say, never receive the

1 Matt. viii. 5, 6.

2 De dispositione.

3 Inunitam.

4 Argumenta.

5 Essentiae.

6 Choicum : " the clayey." Having the doubtful issues, which
arise from freedom of the will (Oehler).

7 Recondunt : or, " discover."

8 Superducunt.

9 De obvenientia
1° Indulgentiam.

'I The " quos" here relates to "spiritalem statum," but express-
ing the sense rather than the grammatical propriety, refers to the
phiral idea of " good souls" (Oehler).

1= Depluat.

13 Salutaria.


blessings of salvation; '3 for that nature they
have pronounced to be incapable of any
change or reform in its natural condition.'*
This grain, then, of spiritual seed is modest
and very small when cast from her hand, but
under her instruction 's increases and advances
into full conviction, as we have already said;'^
and the souls, on this very account, so much ex-
celled all others, that the Demiurge, even then
in his ignorance, held them in great esteem.
For it was from their list that he had been
accustomed to select men for kings and for
priests; and these even now, if they have once
attained to a full and complete knowledge of
these foolish conceits of theirs, '^ since they
are already naturalized in the fraternal bond
of the spiritual state, will obtain a sure salva-
tion, nay, one which is on all accounts their
due.

CHAP. XXX. — THE LAX AND DANGEROUS VIEWS
OF THIS SECT RESPECTING GOOD WORKS.
THAT THESE ARE UNNECESSARY TO THE SPIRIT-
UAL MAN.

For this reason it is that they neither regard
works '^ as necessary for themselves, nor do
they observe any of the calls of duty, eluding
even the necessity of martyrdom on any pre-
tence which may suit their pleasure. For this
rule, (they say), is enjoined upon the animal
seed, in order that the salvation, which we do
not possess by any privilege of our state,''
we may work out by right =° of our conduct.
Upon us, who are of an imperfect nature,"
is imprinted the mark of this (animal) seed,
because we are reckoned as spnmg from the
loves of Theletus,^ and consequently as an
abortion, just as their mother was. But luoe
to us indeed, should we in any point trans-
gress the yoke of discipline, should we grow
dull in the works of holiness and justice,
should we desire to make our confession any-
where else, I know not where, and not before
the powers of this world at the tribunals of
the chief magistrates ! =^3 As for them, how-
ever, they may prove their nobility by the dis-
soluteness ^'^ of their life and their diligence =^5
in sin, since Achamoth fawns on them as her
own; for she, too, found sin no unprofitable
pursuit. Now it is held amongst them, that,
for the purpose of honouring the celestial


»4 We have tried to retain the emphatic repetition, " inreforma-
bilem naturae naturam."
'5 Eruditu hujus.
'6 Above, in ch. xxv. p. 515,
'7 Istarum naeniarum.

18 Operationes : the doing of (good) works."
'9 As, forsooth, we should m the spiritual state.
=° Suffragio.

21 Being animal, not spiritual.

22 See above, ch. ix. x. p. 508.

23 See Scorfiiace, ch. x. in/ra.

24 Passivitate.

25 " Diligentia" may mean " proclivity" (Rigalt.).


5i8


AGAINST THE VALENTINIANS.


[chap XXXII.


marriages,* it is necessary to contemplate
and celebrate the mystery always by cleaving
to a companion, that, is to a woman; other-
wise (they account any man) degenerate, and
a bastard =" to the truth, who spends his life
in the world without loving a woman or uniting
himself to her. Then what is to become of
the eunuchs whom we see amongst them ?

CHAP. XXXI. AT THE LAST DAY GREAT

CHANGES TAKE PLACE AMONGST THE /EONS
AS WELL AS AMONG MEN. HOW ACHAMOTH
AND THE DEMIURGE ARE AFFECTED THEN.
IRONY ON THE SUBJECT.

It remains that we say something about the
end of the world,^ and the dispensing of re-
ward. As soon as Achamoth has completed
the full harvest of her seed, and has then pro-
ceeded to gather it into her garner, or, after
it has been taken to the mill and ground to
fiour, has hidden it in the kneading-trough
with yeast until the whole be leavened, then
shall the end speedily come.-* Then, to begin
with, Achamoth herself removes from the
middle region, s from the second stage to the
highest, since she is restored to the Pleroma:
she is immediately received by that paragon
of perfection^ Soter, as her spouse of course,
and they two afterwards consummate ^ new
nuptials. This must be the spouse of the
Scripture,^ the Pleroma of espousals (for you
might suppose that the Julian laws^ were in-
terposing, since there are these migrations
from place to place). In like manner, the
Demiurge, too, will then change the scene of
his abode from the celestial Hebdomad '° to
the higher regions, to his mother's now vacant
saloon " — by this time knowing her, without
however seeing her. (A happy coincidence !)
For if he had caught a glance of her, he
would have preferred never to have known
her.

CHAP. XXXII. — INDIGNANT IRONY EXPOSING
THE VALENTINIAN FABLE ABOUT THE JUDI-
CIAL TREATMENT OF MANKIND AT THE LAST
JUDGMENT. THE IMMORALITY OF THE DOC-
TRINE.

As for the human race, its end will be to
the following effect: — To all which bear the
earthy " and material mark there accrues an

» Of the ^ons. ~~~

a Nee legitimum : " not a lawful son."
3De consummatione.

4 Urgebit.

5 See above, ch. xxiii. p. 514.

6 Compacticius ille.

7 Fient.

8 0uery,the Holy Scriptures,or the writingrs of the Valentintians ?

9 Very severe against adultery, and even against celibacy.

10 In ch. XX. this " scenam de Hebdomade caslesti" is called
"caelorura septemplicera scenam" = " the sevenfold stage of heav-
en."

" Coenaculum. See above, ch. vii. p. 506.

"Choicte: "clayey."


entire destruction, because "all flesh is
grass," '3 and amongst these is the soul of
mortal man, except when it has found salva-
tion by faith. The souls of just men, that is
to say, our souls, will be conveyed to the
Demiurge in the abodes of the middle region.
We are duly thankful; we shall be content to
be classed with our god, in whom lies our own
origin. '* Into the palace of the Pleroma
nothing of the animal nature is admitted —
nothing but the spiritual swarm of Valentinus.
There, then, the first process is the despoiling
of men themselves, that is, men within the
Pleroma. ^s Now this despoiling consists of
the putting off of the souls in which they
appear to be clothed, which they will give
back to their Demiurge as they had obtained'^
them from him. They will then become wholly
intellectual spirits— impalpable,'^ invisible '*
—and in this state will be readmitted invisibly
to the Pleroma — stealthily, if the case admits
of the idea.'9 What then ? They will be dis-
persed amongst the angels, the attendants on
Soter. As sons, do you suppose ? Not at
all. As servants, then ? Np, not even so.
Well, as phantoms ? Would that it were
nothing more ! Then in what capacity, if
you are ashamed to tell us? In the capacity
of brides. Then will they end =° their Sabine
rapes with the sanction of wedlock. This will
be the guerdon of the spiritual, this the rec-
ompense of their faith ! Such fables have
their use. Although but a Marcus or a Gaius,='
full-grown in this flesh of ours, with a beard
and such like proofs (of virility,) it may be a
stern husband, a father, a grandfather, a great-
grandfather (never mind what, in fact, if only
a male), you may perhaps in the bridal-cham-
ber of the Pleroma— I have already said so
tacitly =" — even become the parent by an angel
of some ^on of high numerical rank. =3 For
the right celebration of these nuptials, instead
of the torch and veil, I suppose that secret'
fire is then to burst forth, which, after dev-
astating the whole existence of things, will
itself also be reduced to nothing at last, after
everything has been reduced to ashes; and so
their fable too will be ended. '* But I, too,


13 Isa. xl. 6.

'4 See above, in ch. xxiv. p. 515.
'S Interiores.
'6 Averterant.
'7 Neque detentui obnoxii.
»8 Neque conspectui obnoxii.
»9 Si ita est: or, ** since such is the fact."
30 Claudent.
2> But slaves, in fact.

« This parenthetic clause, " tacendo jam dixi," perhaps means,
" I say this with shame," " I would rather not have to say it."

23 The common reading is, " Onesimum vEonem,' an Aion called
Onesimus, in supposed allusion to Philemon's Onesimus. But this
is too far-fetchecl. Oehler discovers in " Onesimum" the corrup-
tion of some higher number ending in " esimum."

24 This is Oehler's idea of " et nulla jam fabula." Rigaltius.
however, gives a good sense to this clause : "All will come true at
last : there will be no fable."


CHAP. XXXVI.]


AGAINST THE VALENTINIANS.


519


am no doubt a rash man, in having exposed
so great a mystery in so derisive a way: I
ought to be afraid that Achamoth, who did not
choose to make herself known even to her own
son, would turn mad, that Theletus would be
enraged, that Fortune' would be irritated.
But I am yet a liege-man of the Demiurge, I
have to return after death to the place where
there is no more giving in marriage, where I
have to be clothed upon rather than to be de-
spoiled,— where, even if I am despoiled of my
sex, I am classed with angels — not a male
angel, nor a female one. There will be no
one to do aught against me, nor will they fhen
find any male energy in me.

CHAP. XXXIII. — THESE REMAINING CHAPTERS
AN APPENDIX TO THE MAIN WORK. .IN THIS
CHAPTER TERTULLIAN NOTICES A DIFFERENCE
AMONG SUNDRY FOLLOWERS OF PTOLEMY, A
DISCIPLE OF VALENTINUS.

I shall now at last produce, by way of ^-
nale^"" after so long a story, those points which,
not to interrupt the course of it, and by the
interruption distract the reader's attention, I
have preferred Reserving to this place. They
have been variously advanced by those who
have improved on^ the doctrines of Ptolemy.
For there have been in his school "disciples
above their master, " who have attributed to
their By thus two wives — Cogitatio ( Thought)
and Voluntas {Will). For Cogitatio alone
was not sufficient wherewith to produce any
offspring, although from the two wives pro-
creation was most easy to him. The former
bore him Monogenes {Only-Begotten) and
Veritas {Truth). Veritas was a female after
the likeness of Cogitatio; Monogenes a male,
bearing a resemblance to Voluntas. For it is
the strength of Voluntas which procures the
masculine nature, '^ inasmuch as she affords
efficiency to Cogitatio.

CHAP. XXXIV. OTHER VARYING OPINIONS

AMONG THE VALENTINIANS RESPECTING THE
DEITY. CHARACTERISTIC RAILLERY.

Others of purer mind, mindful of the honour
of the Deity, have, for the purpose of freeing
him from the discredit of even single wedlock,
preferred assigning no sex whatever to By-
thus; and therefore very likely they talk of
"this deity " in the neuter gender rather
than " this god." Others again, on the other
hand, speak of him as both masculine and
feminine, so that the worthy chronicler Fen-
estella must not suppose that an hermaphrodite


1 The same as Macariotes^ in ch. viii. above, p. 507.

2 Velut epicitharisma.
S Emendatoribus.
4Censum.


was only to be found among the good people
of Luna.

CHAP. XXXV. —YET MORE DISCREPANCIES. JUST
NOW THE SEX OF BYTHUS WAS AN OBJECT OF
DISPUTE ; NOW HIS RANK COMES IN QUESTION.
ABSURD SUBSTITUTES FOR BYTHUS CRITICISED
BY TERTULLIAN.

There are some who do not claim the first
place for Bythus, but only a lower one. They
put their Ogdoad in the foremost rank; itself,
however, derived from a Tetrad, but under
different names. For they put Pro-arche {Be-
fore the Beghming) first, Anenncetos {Incoti-
ceivable) second, Arrhetos {Indescribable) third,
Aoratos {Invisible) fourth. Then after Pro-
arche they say Arche {Brginni7ig) came forth
and occupied the first and the fifth place; from
Anenncetos came Acataleptos {Incojuprehen-
sible) in the second and the sixth place; from
Arrhetos came Anonomastos {Nameless) in the
third and the seventh place; from Aoratos 5
came Agennetos {Unbegotten) in the fourth
and the eight place. Now by what method he
arranges this, that each of these -^ons should
be born in two places, and that, too^ at such
intervals, I prefer to be ignorant of than to
be informed. For what can be right in a
system which is propounded with such absurd
particulars ?

CHAP. XXXVI. LESS REPREHENSIBLE THEORIES

IN THE HERESY. BAD IS THE BEST OF VAL-
ENTINIANISM.

How much more sensible are they who,
rejecting all this tiresome nonsense, have re-
fused to believe that any one ^on has de-
scended from another by steps like these,
which are really neither more nor less Gemo-
7uan; ^ but that on a given signal "> the eight-
fold emanation, of which we have heard,'
issued all at once from the Father and His
Ennoea {Thought) ^^ — that it is, in fact, from
His mere motion that they gain their des-
ignations. When, as they say, He thought
of producing offspring. He on that account
gained the name of Father. After producing,
because the issue which He produced was
true. He received the name of Truth. When
He wanted Himself to be manifested. He on
that account was announced as Man. Those,
moreover, whom He preconceived in His
thought when He produced them, were then
designated the Church. As man. He uttered


S TertulHan, however, here gives the Latin synonyme, Irtvisi-
biiis.

6 The " Gemonian steps" on the Aventine led to the Tiber, to
which the bodies of executed criminals were dragged by hooks, to
be cast into the river.

7 Mappa, quod aiunt, missa : a proverbial expression.

8 Istam.

9 See above, ch. vii, p. 506.


520


AGAINST THE VALENTINIANS.


[chap. XXXIX.


His IVordj and so this ]Vord is His first-be- ', Tetrads, a right hand one and a left hand one,


gotten Son, and to the Word was added Life.
And by this process the first Ogdoad was com-
pleted. However, the whole of this tiresome
story is utterly poor and w£ak.

CHAP. XXXVII. OTHER TURGID AND RIDICU-
LOUS THEORIES ABOUT THE ORIGIN OF THE
.EONS AND CRE.\TI0N, STATED AND CON-
DEMNED.

Now listen to some other buffooneries ' of
a master who is a great swell among them,^
and who has pronounced his dicta with an even
priestly authority. They run thus: There
comes, says he, before all things Pro-arche,
the inconceivable, and indescribable, and
nameless, which I for my own part call Mo-
notes (Solitude). With this was associated
another power, to which also I give the name
of Henotes {Unity). Now, inasmuch as Mo-
notes and Henotes — that is to say, Solitude
and Union — were only one being, they pro-
duced, and yet not in the way of production, ^
the intellectual, innascible, invisible beginning
of all things, which human language "^ has
called Monad {Solitude).^ This has inherent
in itself a consubstantial force, which it calls
Unity.* These powers, accordingly. Solitude
or Solitariness, and Unity, or Union, prop-
agated all the other emanations of ^ons.^
Wonderful distinction, to be sure ! Whatever
change Union and Unity may undergo. Sol-
itariness and Solitude is profoundly supreme.
Whatever designation you give the power, it
is one and the same.

CHAP. XXXVIII. DIVERSITY IN THE OPINIONS

OF SECUNDUS, AS COMPARED WITH THE GEN-
ERAL DOCTRINE OF VALENTINUS.

Secundus is a trifle more human, as he is
briefer: he divides the Ogdoad into a pair of


» Oehler gives good reasons for the reading "ingenia circula-
toria," instead of the various readings of other editors.

2 Insignioris apud eos magistri.

3 Non proferentes. Another reading is " non proserentes " (not
generating).

4 Sermo.

5 Or, solitariness.
'Or, Union.

7 Compare our Irenacus, I. 2, 3. [Vol. I. p. 316.]


one light and the other darkness. Only he is
unwilling to derive the power which aposta-
tized and fell away^ from any one of the
^ons, but from the fruits which issued from
their substance.

CHAP. XXXIX. THEIR DIVERSITY OF SENTIMENT

AFFECIS THE VERY CENTRAL DOCTRINE OF
CHRISTIANITY, EVEN THE PERSON AND CHAR-
ACTER OF THE LORD JESUS. THIS DIVERSITY
VITIATES EVERY GNOSTIC SCHOOL.

Now, concerning even the Lord Jesus, into
how great a diversity of opinion are they di-
vided! One party form Him of the blossoms
of all the JEons.^ Another party will have it
that He is made up only of those ten whom
the VVord and the Z(/>'° produced; " from
which circumstance the titles of the Word and
the Life were suitably transferred to Him.
Others, again, that He rather sprang from the
twelve, the offspring of Ma7i and the Church f""
and therefore, they say. He was designated
"Son of man." Others, moreover, maintain
that He was formed by Christ and the Holy
Spirit, who have to provide for the establish-
ment of the universe, '3 and that He inherits
by right His Father's appellation. Some
there are who have imagined that another
origin must be found for the title "Son of
man; " for they have had the presumption to
call the Father Himself Ma?i, by reason of
the profound mystery of this title: so that
what can you hope for more ample concerning
faith in that God, with whom you are now
yourself on a par? Such conceits are con-
stantly cropping out^ amongst them, from
the redundance of their mother' s seed . 's And
so it happens that the doctrines which have
grown up amongst the Valentinians have al-
ready extended their rank growth to the woods
of the Gnostics.


8 Achamoth.

9 See above, ch. xii. p. 510.

»o The /Eons Sermo and Vita,
»i See above, ch. vii. p. 506.

12 See above, ch. viii. p. 507,

13 See above, ch. xiv. p. 511.
'4 Superfruticant.

JS Archamoth is referred to.


ON THE FLESH OF CHRIST;

THIS WAS WRITTEN BY OUR AUTHOR IN CONFUTATION OF CERTAIN
HERETICS WHO DENIED THE REALITY OF CHRIST'S FLESH, OR AT
LEAST ITS IDENTITY WITH HUMAN FLESH— FEARING THAT, IF THEY
ADMITTED THE REALITY OF CHRIST'S FLESH, THEY MUST ALSO
ADMIT HIS RESURRECTION IN THE FLESH ; AND, CONSEQUENTLY,
THE RESURRECTION OF THE HUMAN BODY AFTER DEATH.

[TRANSLATED BY DR. HOLMES.]


CHAP. I. — THE GENERAL PURPORT OF THIS WORK.
THE HERETICS, MARCION, APELLES, AND VAL-
ENTINUS, WISHING TO IMPUGN THE DOCTRINE
OF THE RESURRECTION, DEPRIVE CHRIST OF
ALL CAPACITY FOR SUCH A CHANGE BY DENY-
ING HIS FLESH.

They who are so anxious to shake that be-
lief in the resurrection which was firmly set-
tled ^ before the appearance of our modern
Sadducees,3 as even to deny that the ex-
pectation thereof has any relation whatever
to the flesh, have great cause for besetting
the flesh of Christ also with doubtful ques-
tions, as if it either had no existence at all,
or possessed a nature altogether different
from human flesh. For they cannot but be ap-
prehc7isive that, if it be once determined that
Chrisf s flesh was human, a presumption would
immediately arise in opposition to them, that
that flesh must by all means rise again, which
has already risen in Christ. Therefore we
shall have to guard our belief in the resurrec-
tion-* from the same armoury, whence they
get their weapons of destruction. Let us ex-
amine our Lord's bodily substance, for about
His spiritual nature all are agreed. s It is


1 In his work On the Resurrection of the Flesh (chap, ii.),
Tertullian refers to this tract, and calls it " De Came Domini ad-
versus quatuor haereses : " the four heresies being those of Mar-
cion, Apelles, Rasilides.and Valentinus. Pamelius, indeed, desig-
nates the tract by this fuller title instead of the usual one, " De
Carne Christi." [This tract contains references to works written
while our author was Montanistic, but it contains no positive Mon-
tanism. It should not be dated earlier than a.d. 207.]

2 Moratam.

3 The allusion is to Matt. xxii. 23 ; comp, de Preescr. Hteret.
33 (Fr. Junius).

4Tertullian"s phrase is "carnis vota" — the future prospects of
the flesh.

SCertum est.


His flesh that is in question. Its verity and
quality are the points in dispute. Did it ever
exist ? whence was it derived ? and of what
kind was it ? If we succeed in demonstrating
it, we shall lay down a law for our own resur-
rection. Marcion, in order that he might
deny the flesh of Christ, denied also His na-
tivity, or else he denied His flesh in order
that he might deny His nativity; because, of
course, he was afraid that His nativity and
His flesh bore mutual testimony to each
other's reality, since there is no nativity with-
out flesh, and no flesh without nativity. As
if indeed, under the prompting of that licence
which is ever the same in all heresy, he too
might not very well have either denied the
nativity, although admitting the flesh,— like
Apelles, who was first a disciple of his, and
afterwards an apostate, — or, while admitting
both the flesh and the nativity, have inter-
preted them in a different sense, as did Val-
entinus, who resembled Apelles both in his
discipleship and desertion of Marcion. At
all events, he who represented the flesh of
Christ to be imaginary was equally able to
pass off His nativity as a phantom; so that
the virgin's conception, and pregnancy, and
child-bearing, and then the whole course^ of
her infant too, would have to be regarded as
putative. 7 These facts pertaining to the na-
tivity of Christ would escape the notice of the
same eyes and the same senses as failed to
grasp the full idea^ of His flesh.


6 0rdo.

7 Tuj hoKtiv haberentur. This term gave name to the Docetic
rors. 8 Opinio.


ON THE FLESH OF CHRIST.


[chap. II.


CHAP. II. MARCION, WHO WOULD BLOT OUT

THE RECORD OF CHRIST* S NATIVITY, IS RE-
BUKED FOR SO STARTLING A HERESY.

Clearly enough is the nativity announced
by Gabriel.' But what has he to do with the
Creator's angel?' The conception in the
virgin's womb is also set plainly before us.
But what concern has he with the Creator's
prophet, Isaiah? 3 He '♦will not brook delay,
since suddenly (without any prophetic an-
nouncement) did he bring down Christ from
heaven. 5 Away," says he, "with that
eternal plaguey taxing of Caesar, and the scanty
inn, and the squalid swaddling-clothes, and
the hard stable.^ We do not care a jot for^
that multitude of the heavenly host which
praised their Lord at night.^ Let the shep-
herds take better care of their flock,^ and let
the wise men spare their legs so long a jour-
ney;" let them keep their gold to them-
selves." Let Herod, too, mend his manners,
so that Jeremy may not glory over him."
Spare also the babe from circumcision, that
he may escape the pain thereof; nor let him
be brought into the temple, lest he burden his
parents with the expense of the offering; '^ nor
let him be handed tO Simeon, lest the old man
be saddened at the point of death. ^"^ Let that
old woman also hold her tongue, lest she
should bewitch the child." 's After such a
fashion as this, I suppose you have had, O
Marcion, the hardihood of blotting out the
original records (of the history) of Christ,
that His flesh may lose the proofs of its real-
ity. But, prithee, on what grounds (do you
do this) ? Show me your authority. If you
are a prophet, foretell us a thing; if you are
an apostle, open your message in public; if a
follower of apostles,'^ side with apostles in
thought; if you are only a (private) Christian,
believe what has been handed down to us: if,
however, you are nothing of all this, then (as
I have the best reason to say) cease to live.'^
For indeed you are already dead, since you
are no Christian, because you do not believe
that which by being believed makes men
Christian, — nay, you are the more dead, the
more you are not a Christian; having fallen


» Luke j. 26-38.

'This is said in opposition to Marcion, who held the Creator's
angel, and everythinR else pertaining to him, to be evil.

3 A reference to Isa. vii. 14.

4 Marcion.

5 See also our A nti-Marcion^ iVt 71

6 Luke ii. 1-7.

7 Viderit.

8 Luke ii. 13.

9 Luke ii. 8.
»o Matt. ii. I.
"Matt. ii. II.

la Matt. ii. i6-r8, and Jer. xxxi. -15.
»3 Luke ii. 22-24.

14 Luke ii. 25-35.

15 Luke ii. 36-38.

16 Apostolicus.

17 Morere.


away, after you had been one, by rejecting '^
what you formerly believed, even as you
yourself acknowledge in a certain letter of
yours, and as your followers do not deny,
whilst our (brethren) can prove it.'' Reject-
ing, therefore, what you 07icc believed, you
have completed the act of rejection, by now
no longer believing: the fact, however, of your
having ceased to believe has not made your
rejection of the faith right and proper; nay,
rather,=° by your act of rejection you prove
that what you believed previous to the said
act was of a different character.^' What you
believed to bd of a different character, had
been handed down just as you belirced it.
Now ^'^ that which had been handed down was
true, inasmuch as it had been transmitted by
those whose duty it was to hand it down.
Therefore, when rejecting that which had been
handed down, you rejected that which was
true. You had no authority for what you
did. However, we have already in another
treatise availed ourselves more fully of these
prescriptive rules against all heresies. Our rep-
etition of them here after that large (treatise) is
superfluous, ^3 when we ask the reason why
you have formed the opinion that Christ was
not born.

CHAP. III. — Christ's nativity both possible
and becoming. the heretical opinion of
Christ's apparent flesh deceptive and

DISHONOURABLE TO GOD, EVEN ON MARCION's
PRINCIPLES.

Since =4 you think that this I'ay within the
competency of your own arbitrary choice, you
must needs have supposed that being born=^
was either impossible for God, or unbecoming
to Him. With God, however, nothing is im-
possible but what He does not will. Let us
consider, then, whether He willed to be born
(for if He had the will, He also had the power,
and was born). I put the argument very
briefly. If God had willed not to be born, it
matters not why. He would not have presented
Himself in the likeness of man. Now who,
when he sees a man, would deny that he had
been born ? What God therefore willed not to
be, He would in no wise have willed the seem-
ing to be. When a thing is distasteful, the
very notion =* of it is scouted; because it
makes no difference whether a thing exist or


»8 Rescindendo.

»9 Compare our Anti Marcion^ i. i, iv, 4 and dc Prcescr. Hcer.

C. XXX.

» Atquin.

" Aliter fuisse.

^ Porro.

23 Ex abundant!. [Dr. Holmes, in this sentence actually uses the
word lengthy^ for which I have said large.'\

24 Quatenus.

25 Nativitatem.

26 Opinio.


CHAP. III.]


ON THE FLESH OF CHRIST.


523


do not exist, if, when it does not exist, it is
yet assumed to exist. It is of course of the
greatest importance that there should be
nothing false {or pretended) attributed to that
which really does not exist.' But, say you,
His own consciousness (of the truth of His
nature) was enough for Him. If any sup-
posed that He had been born, because they
saw Him as a man, that was their concern."
Yet with how much more dignity and con-
sistency would He have sustained the human
character on the supposition that He was truly
born; for if He were not born, He could not
have undertaken the said character without
injury to that consciousness of His which
you on your side attribute to His confidence
of being able to sustain, although not born,
the character of having been born even against
His own consciousness ! ^ Why, I want to
know,"* was it of so much importance, that
Christ should, when perfectly aware what He
really was, exhibit Himself as being that
which He was not ? You cannot express any
apprehension that,^ if He had been born and
truly clothed Himself with man's nature. He
would have ceased to be God, losing what He
was, while becoming what He was not. For
God is in no danger of losing His own state
and condition. But, say you, I deny that
God was truly changed to man in such wise
as to be born and endued with a body of flesh,
on this ground, that a being who is without
end is also of necessity incapable of change.
For being changed into something else puts
an end to the former state. Change, there-
fore, is not possible to a Being wiio cannot
come to an end. Without doubt, the nature
of things which are subject to change is regu-
lated by this law, that they have no perma-
nence in the state which is undergoing change
in them, and that they come to an end from
thus wanting permanence, whilst they lose
that in the process of change which they pre-
viously were. But nothing is equal with God;
His nature is different* from the condition
of all things. If, then, the things which differ
from God, and from which God differs, lose
what existence they had whilst they are un-
dergoing change, wherein will consist the dif-
ference of the Divine Being from all other


1 If Christ's flesh was not real, the pretence of it was wholly
wron.£r.

2 Viderint homines.

3 It did not much matter (according to the view which Tertul-
l.an attributes to Marcion) if God did practise deception in affect-
ing the assumption of a humanity which He knew to be unreal.
Men took it to be real, and that answered every purpose. God
knew better; and He was moreover, strong enough to obviate all
inconveniences of the deception by His unfaltenng fortitude, etc.
All this, however, seemed to Tertullian to be simply damaging and
perilous to the character of God, even from Marcion's own point of
view.

4 Edoce.

5 Non potes dicere «^, etc.

6 Distat.


things except in His possessing the contrary
faculty of theirs, — in other words, that God
can be changed into all conditions, and yet
continue just as He is ? On any other sup-
position. He would be on the same level with
those things which, when changed, lose the
existence they had before; whose equal, of
course. He is not in any other respect, as He
certainly is not in the changeful issues ^ of
their tiature. You have sometimes read and
believed that the Creator's angels have been
changed into human form, and have even
borne about so veritable a body, that Abra-
ham even washed their feet,^ and Lot was
rescued from the Sodomites by their hands;*
an angel, moreover, wrestled with a man so
strenuously with his body, that the latter de-
sired to be let loose, so tightly was he held.**
Has it, then, been permitted to angels, which
are inferior to God, after they have been
changed into human bodily form," neverthe-
less to remain angels ? and will you deprive
God, their superior, of this faculty, as if
Christ could not continue to be God, after His
real assumption of the nature of man ? Or
else, did those angels appear as phantoms of
flesh ? You will not, however, have the cour-
age to say this; for if it be so held in your
belief, that the Creator's angels are in the
same condition as Christ, then Christ will be-
long to the same God as those angels do, who
are like Christ in their condition. If you had
not purposely rejected in some instances, and
corrupted in others, the Scriptures which are
opposed to your opinion, you would have been
confuted in this matter by the Gospel of John,
when it declares that the Spirit descended in
the body" of a dove, and sat upon the Lord.''
When the said Spirit was in this condition. He
was as truly a dove as He was also a spirit;
nor did He destroy His own proper substance
by the assumption of an extraneous substance.
But you ask what becomes of the dove's body,
after the return of the Spirit back to heaven,
and similarly in the case of the angels. Their
withdrawal was effected in the same manner
as their appearance had been. If you had
seen how their production out of nothing had
been effected, you would have known also the
process of their return to nothing. If the in-
itial step was out of sight, so was also the final
one. Still there was solidity in their bodily
substance, whatever may have been the force
by which the body became visible. What is
written cannot but have been.


7 In exitu conversionis.

8 Gen. xviii.

9 Gen. xix.
10 Gen. xxxii.

" See below in chap. vi. and in the A nti-Marcton, iii. q.
" Corpore.
»3Matt. iii. 16.


524


ON THE FLESH OF CHRIST.


[chap. IV.


CHAP. IV. — GOD S HONOUR IN THE INCARNATION
OF HIS SON VINDICATED. MARCION's DISPAR-
AGEMENT OF HUMAN FLESH INCONSISTENT AS
WELL AS IMPIOUS. CHRIST HA^ CLEANSED
THE FLESH. THE FOOLISHNESS OF GOD IS
MOST WISE.

Since, therefore, you do not reject the as-
sumption of a body ' as impossible or as haz-
ardous to the character of God, it remains
for you to repudiate and censure it as un-
worthy of Him, Come now, beginning from
the nativity itself, declaim ^^ against the un-
cleanness of the generative elements within
the womb, the filthy concretion of fluid and
blood, of the growth of the flesh for nine
months long out of that very mire. Describe
the womb as it enlarges ?• frorjf*day to day, —
heavy, troublesome, restless even in sleep,
changeful in its feelings of dislike and desire.
Inveigh now likewise against the shame itself
of a woman in travail,* which, however, ought
rather to be honoured in consideration of that
peril, or to be held sacred s in respect of (the
mystery of) nature. Of course you are hor-
rified also at the infant, which is shed into life
with the embarrassments which accompany it
from the womb;^ you likewise, of course,
loathe it even after it is washed, when it is
dressed out in its swaddling-clothes, graced
with repeated anointing,^ smiled on with
nurse's fawns. This reverend course of na-
ture,^ you, O Marcion, (are pleased to) spit
upon; and yet, in what way were you born?
You detest a human being at his birth; then
after what fashion do you love anybody?
Yourself, of course, you had no love of, when
you departed from the Church and the faith of
Christ. But never mind,^ if you are not on
good terms with yourself, or even if you were
born in a way different from other people.
Christ, at any rate, has loved even that man
who was condensed in his mother's womb
amidst all its uncleannesses, even that man
who was brought into life out of the said
womb, even that man who was nursed amidst
the nurse's simpers." For his sake He came
down (from heaven), for his sake He preached,
for his sake " He humbled Himself even unto


^ Corporationem.

2 Compare similar passages in the Anti-Marcion. iii. i and iv.

12%,

3 Insolescentem.
* Enitentis.

5 Religiosum.

6 Cum suis impedimentis profusum.

7 Unctionibiis formatur.

SHanc yenerationem naturae. Compare Tertullian's phrase,
*\Illa sanctissima et reverenda opera naturae," in the Anti-Mar-
cionAn. ii,

9Videris.
^ «oPer ludibria nutritum. Compare the phrase just before,
"smiled on with nurse's fawns"— " blanditiis deridetur." Oeh-
ler, however, compares the phrase with Tertullian's expression
(" puerperu spurcos, anxios, ludicros exitus,") in the A nti-Mar-
ct'on, iv. 21.


death-— the death of the cross." " He loved,
of course, the being whom He redeemed at so
great a cost. If Christ is the Creator's Son,
it was with justice that He loved His own
(creature); if He comes from another god.
His love was excessive, since He redeemed a
being who belonged to another. Well, then,
loving man He loved his nativity also, and his
flesh as well. Nothing can be loved apart
from that through which whatever exists has
its existence. Either take away nativity, and
then show us your man; or else withdraw the
flesh, and then present to our view the being
whom God ha*s redeemed — since it is these
very conditions" which constitute the man
whom God has redeemed. And are iw/ for
turning these conditions into occasfons of
blushing to the very creature whom He has
redeemed, (censuring them), too, us unworthy
of Him who certainly would not have re-
deemed them had He not loved them ? Our
birth He reforms from death by a second birth
from heaven; '3 our flesh He restores from
every harassing malady; when leprous. He
cleanses it of the stain; when blind, He re-
kindles its light; when palsied, He renews its
strength; when possessed with devils. He ex-
orcises it; when dead,. He reanimates it, —
then shall 7C'e blush to own it ? If, to be sure, '*
He had chosen to be born of a mere animal,
and were to preach the kingdom of heaven
invested with the body of a beast either wild
or tame, your censure (I imagine) would have
instantly met Him with this demurrer: " This
is disgraceful for God, and this is unworthy of
the Son of God, and simply foolish." For
no other reason than because one thus judges.
It IS of course foolish, if we are to judge God
by our own conceptions. But, Marcion, con-
sider well this Scripture, if indeed you have
not erased it: "God hath chosen the foolish
things of the world, to confound the wise." 's
Now what are those foolish things ? Are they
the conversion of men to the worship of the
true God, the rejection of error, the whole
training in righteousness, chastity, mercy,
patience, and innocence ? These things cer-
tainly are not "foolish." Inquire again,
then, of what things he spoke, and when you
imagine that you have discovered what they
are will you find anything to be so " foolish "
as believing in a God that has been born, and
that of a virgin, and of a fleshly nature too, who
wallowed in all the before-mentioned humilia-
tions of nature? But some one may say,


"Phil. ii. 8.

"Hsc: i. e. man's nathtity and \n?, flesh.
'3 Literally, " by a heavenly regeneration."

M Revera. [I cannot let the words which follow, stand in the
text ; they arc sufficiently rendered.]
'5 I Cpr. i. 27.


I


CHAP, v.]


ON THE FLESH OF CHRIST.


525


I


" These are not the foolish things; they must
be other things which God has chosen to con-
found the wisdom of the world." And yet,
acording to the world's wisdom, it is more
easy to believe that Jupiter became a bull or
a swan, if we listen to Marcion, than that
Christ really became a man.

CHAP. V. CHRIST TRULY LIVED AND DIED IN

HUMAN FLESH. INCIDENTS OF HIS HUMAN
LIFE ON EARTH, AND REFUTATION OF MAR-
CION's DOCETIC parody of the SAME.

There are, to be sure, other things also quite
as foolish (as the birth of Christ), which have
reference to the humiliations and sufferings
of God. Or else, let them call a crucified
God "wisdom." But Marcion will apply the
knife ^ to this doctrine also, and even with
greater reason. For which is more unworthy
of God, which is more likely to raise a blush
of shame, that God should be born, or that He
should die ? that He should bear the flesh, or
the cross ? be circumcised, or be crucified ?
be cradled, or be coffined ?=* be laid in a
manger, or in a tomb ? Talk of " wisdovi / "
You will show more of that if you refuse to
believe this also. But, after all, you will not
be " wise " unless you become a "fool" to
the world, by believing " the foolish things of
God." Have you, then, cut away 3 all suf-
ferings from Christ, on the ground that, as a
mere phantom, He was incapable of expe-
riencing them ? We have said above that He
might possibly have undergone the unreal
mockeries'* of an imaginary birth and in-
fancy. But answer me at once, you that
murder truth: Was not God really crucified?
And, having been really crucified, did He not
really die? And, having indeed really died,
did He not really rise again ? Falsely did
Pauls " determine to know nothing amongst
us but Jesus and Him crucified;"^ falsely
has he impressed upon us that He was buried;
falsely inculcated that He rose again. False,
therefore, is our faith also. And all that we
hope for from Christ will be a phantom. O
thou most infamous of men, who acquittest
of all guilt 7 the murderers of God ! P'or
nothing did Christ suffer from them, if He
really suffered nothing at all. Spare the
whole world's one only hope, thou who art
destroying the indispensable dishonour of our
faith. ^ Whatsoever is unworthy of God, is


1 Aufer, Marcion. Literally, " Destroy this also, O Marcion.'*

2 Educari an sepeliri.

3 Recidisti.

4 Vacua ludibria.

5 Paul was of great authority in Marcion's school.
6 1 Cor. ii. 2.

7 Excusas.

8 The humiliation which God endured, so indispensable a part of
the Christian faith.


of gain to me. I am safe, if I am not ashamed
of my Lord. " Whosoever," says He, " shall
be ashamed of me, of him will 1 also be
ashamed." ' Other matters for shame find I
none which can prove me to be shameless
in a good sense, and foolish in a happy one,
by my own contempt of shame. The Son of
God was crucified; I am not ashamed because
men must needs be ashamed of it. And the
Son of God died; it is by all means to be be-
lieved, because it is absurd. '° And He was
buried, and rose again; the fact is certain,
because it is impossible. But how will all this
be true in Him, if He was not Himself true
— if He really had not in Himself that which
might be crucified, might die, might be buried,
and might rise again ? / vican this flesh suf-
fused with blood, built up with bones, inter-
woven with nerves, entwined with veins, ajlcsh
which knew how to be born, and how to die, hu-
man without doubt, as born of a human being.
It will therefore be mortal in Christ, because
Christ is man and the Son of man. Else
why is Christ man and the Son of man, if he
has nothing of man, and nothing from man ?
Unless it be either that man is anything else
than flesh, or man's flesh comes from any
other source than man, or Mary is anything
else than a human being, or Marcion's man is
as Marcion's god." Otherwise Christ could
not be described as being man without flesh,
nor the Son of man without any human parent;
just as He is not God without the Spirit of
God, nor the Son of God without having God
for His father. Thus the nature '= of the two
substances displayed Him as man and God,
— in one respect born, in the other unborn;
in one respect fleshly, in the other spiritual;
in one sense weak in the other exceeding
strong; in on sense dying, in the other living.
This property of the two states — the divine
and the human — is distinctly asserted '^ with
equal truth of both natures alike, with the
same belief both in respect of the Spirit '* and
of the flesh. The powers of the Spirit,'*
proved Him to be God, His sufferings attested
the flesh of man. If His powers were not
without the Spirit '♦ in like manner, were not
His sufferings without the flesh. If His flesh
with its sufferings was fictitious, for the same
reason was the Spirit false with all its powers.
Wherefore halve 's Christ with a lie? He
was wholly the truth. Believe me, He chose


9 Matt. X. 33, Mark. viii. 38, and Luke ix. 26.

*oIneptum.

" That is, imaginary and unreal.

" Census : " the origin."

'3 Dispuncta est.

M This term is almost a technical designation of the divine nat-
ure of Chnst in Tertullian. (See our translation of the Anti-
Mnrcion, p. 247, note 7, Edin.)

15 Dimidias.


526


ON THE FLESH OF CHRIST.


[CHAI>. yi.


rather to be born, than in any part to pretend
— and that indeed to His own detriment — that
He was bearing about a flesh hardened with-
out bones, solid without muscles, bloody with-
out blood, clothed without the tunic 0/ ski'n,'^
hungry without appetite, eating without teeth,
speaking without a tongue, so that His word
was a phantom to the ears through an im-
aginary voice. A phantom, too, it was of
course after the resurrection, when, showing
His hands and His feet for the disciples to
examine, He said, *' Behold and see that it is
I myself, for a spirit hath not flesh and bones,
as ye see me have; " " without doubt, hands,
and feet, and bones are not what a spirit pos-
sesses, but on/y the flesh. How do you inter-
pret this statement, Marcion, you who tell us
that Jesus comes only from the most excellent
God, who is both simple and good ? See how
He rather cheats, and deceives, and juggles
the eyes of all, and the senses of all, as well
as their access to and contact with Him !
You ought rather to have brought Christ down,
not from heaven, but from some troop of
mountebanks, not as God besides man,
but simply as a man, a magician; not as the
High Priest of our salvation, but as the con-
jurer in a show; not as the raiser of the dead,
but as the misleader^ of the living, — except
that, if He were a magician, He must have
had a nativity !

CHAP. VI. THE DOCTRINE OP APELLES REFUTED,

THAT Christ's body was of sidereal sub-
stance, NOT BORN. NATIVITY AND MOR-
TALITY ARE correlative CIRCUMSTANCES,

AND IN Christ's case his death proves his

BIRTH.

But certain disciples* of the heretic of Pon-
tus, compelled to be wiser than their teacher,
concede to Christ real flesh, without effect,
however, ons their denial of His nativity.
He might have had, they say, a flesh which
was not at all born. So we have found our
way "out of a frying-pan," as the proverb
runs, "into the fire,"^ — from Marcion to
Apelles. This man having first fallen from
the principles of Marcion into (intercourse
with) a woman, in the flesh, and afterwards
shipwrecked himself, in the spirit, on the vir-
gin Philumene,' proceeded from that time^ to


» See his Adv. Valentin^ chap. 25.
3 Luke xxiv. 39.

3 Avocatorem.

4 He has Appelles mainly in view.

5 Sine praejudicio tamen. " Without prejudice to their denial,
etc."

6 The Roman version of the proverb is " out of the lime-kiln into
the coal-furnace."

7 See Tertullian, de Prascr. Haret. c. xxx.

8 Ab eo: or, " from that event of the carnal contact." A good
reading, found in most of the old books, is ab ea, that is, Philu-


preach that the body of Christ was of solid
flesh, but without having been born. To this
angel, indeed, of Philumene,'the apostle will
reply in tones like those in which he even
then predicted him, saying, "Although an
angel from heaven preach any other gospel
unto you than that which we have preached
unto you, let him be accursed."" To the
arguments, however, which have been indi-
cated just above, we have now to show our
resistance. They allow that Christ really had
a body. Whence was the material of it, if
not from the same sort of thing as ^° that in
which He appeared? Whence came His
body, if His body were not flesh ? Whence
came His flesh, if it were not born? Inas-
much as that which is born must undergo this
nativity in order to become flesh. He bor-
rowed, they say, His flesh from the stars, and
from the substances of the higher world.
And they assert it for a certain principle, that
a body without nativity is nothing to be aston-
ished at,4)ecause it has been submitted to
angels to appear even amongst ourselves in the
flesh without the intervention of the womb. We
admit, of course, that such facts have been
related. But then, how comes it to pass that
a faith which holds to a different rule borrows
materials for its own arguments from the faith
which it impugns ? What has it to do with
Moses, who has rejected the God of Moses ?
Since the God is a different one, everything
belonging to him must be different also. But
let the heretics always use the Scriptures of
that God whose world they also enjoy. The
fact will certainly recoil on them as a witness
to judge them, that they maintain their own
blasphemies from examples derived from
ZT/w." But it is an easy task for the truth
to prevail without raising any such demurrer
against them. When, therefore, they set
forth the flesh of Christ after the pattern of
the angels, declaring it to be not born, and
yet flesh for all that, I should wish them to
compare the causes, both in Christ's case and
that of the angels, wherefore they came in the
flesh. Never did any angel descend for the
purpose of being crucified, of tasting death,
and of rising again from the dead. Now,
since there never was such a reason for angels
becoming embodied, you have the cause why
they assumed flesh without undergoing birth.
They had not come to die, therefore they also
(came not) to be born. Christ, however,
having been sent to die, had necessarily to be
also born, that He might be capable of death;
for nothing is in the habit of dying but that


9Gal. i. 8.

1° Ex ea qualitate in qua.
i'lpsius: the Creator.


I


ni.]


ON THE FLESH OF CHRIST.


527


which is born. Between nativity and mor-
tality there is a mutual contrast. The law '
which makes us die is the cause of our being
born. Now, since Christ died owing to the
condition which undergoes death, but that
undergoes death which is also born, the con-
sequence was — nay, it was an antecedent neces-
sity— that He must have been born also,"* by
reason of the condition which undergoes birth;
because He had to die in obedience to that
very condition which, because it begins with
birth, ends in death.^ It was not fitting for
Him not to be born under the pretence ■* that
it was fitting for Him to die. But the Lord
Himself at that very time appeared to Abra-
ham amongst those angels without being born,
and yet in the flesh without doubt, in virtue
of the before-mentioned diversity of cause.
You, however, cannot admit this, since you
do not receive that Christ, who was even then re-
hearsing s how to converse with, and liberate,
and judge the human race, in the habit of a
flesh which as yet was not born, because it
did not yet mean to die until both its nativity
and mortality were previously (by prophecy)
announced. Let them, then, prove to us that
those angels derived their flesh from the stars.
If they do not prove it because it is not writ-
ten, neither will the flesh of Christ get its
origin therefrom, for which they borrowed the
precedent of the angels. It is plain that the
angels bore a flesh which was not naturally
their own; their nature being of a spiritual
substance, although in some sense peculiar
to themselves, corporeal; and yet they could
be transfigured into human shape, and for
the time be able to appear and have inter-
course with men. Since, therefore, it has not
been told us whence they obtained their flesh,
it remains for us not to doubt in our minds
that a property of angelic power is this, to
assume to themselves bodily shape out of no
material substance. How much more, you
say, is it (within their competence to take a
body) out of some material substance ? That
is true enough. But there is no evidence of
this, because Scripture says nothing. Then,
again, ^ how should they who are able to form
themselves into that which by nature they are
not, be unable to do this out of no material
substance ? If they become that which they
are not, why cannot they so become out of that
which is not? But that which has not ex-
istence when it comes into existence, is made
out of nothing. This is why it is unnecessary


^ Forma.
^Aeque.

3 Quod, quia nascitur, moritur.

4 Pro.

6 Ediscebat. Compare a fine passage of TertuUian on this sub-
ject in our Antt-Marcion, note 10, p. 112, Edin.
6 Ceterum,


either to inquire or to demonstrate what has
subsequently become of tneir' bodies. What
came out of nothing, came to nothing. They,
who were able to convert themselves into flesh
have it in their power to convert nothing itself
into flesh. It is a greater thing to change a
nature than to make matter. But even if it
were necessary, to suppose that angels derived
their flesh from some material substance, it is
surely more credible that it was from some
earthly matter than from any kind of celestial
substances, since it was composed of so pal-
pably terrene a quality that it fed on earthly
aliments. Suppose that even now a celestial
flesh^ had fed on earthly aliments, although
it was not itself earthly, in the same way that
earthly flesh actually fed on celestial aliments,
although it had nothing of the celestial nature
(for we read of manna having been food for
the people: "Man," says the Psabnist^ "did
eat angels' bread," «*) yet this does not once
infringe the separate condition of the Lord's
flesh, because of His different destination.
For One who was to be truly a man, even unto
death, it was necessary that He should be
clothed with that flesh to which death belongs.
Now that flesh to which death belongs is pre-
ceded by birth.

CHAP. VII. EXPLANATION OF THE LORD's

QUESTION ABOUT HIS MOTHER AND HIS
BRETHREN. ANSWER TO THE CAVILS OF
APELLES AND MARCION, WHO SUPPORT THEIR
DENIAL OF CHRIST'S NATIVITY BY IT.

But whenever a dispute arises about the
nativity, all who reject it as creating a pre-
sumption in favour of the reality of Christ's
flesh, wilfully deny that God Himself was
born, on the ground that He asked, " Who is
my mother, and who are my brethren ? " '"
Let, therefore, Apelles hear what was our
answer to Marcion in that little work, in which
we challenged his own (favourite) gospel to the
proof, even that the material circumstances
of that remark (of the Lord's) should be con-
sidered." First of all, nobody would have
told Him that His mother and brethren were
standing outside, if he were not certain both
that He had a mother and brethren, and that
they were the very persons whom he was then
announcing, — who had either been known to
him before, or were then and there discovered
by him; although heretics" have removed
this passage from the gospel, because those
who were admiring His doctrine said that His


7 The angels'.

SSidera. Drawn, as they thought, from the stars.

9Ps. Lxxviii. 24.

»o Matt. xii. 48; Luke viii. 20, 21.
II See our A nti-Marcion^ iv. 19.
J2 Literally, " heresies."


528


ON THE FLESH OF CHRIST.


[chap. VII.


supposed father, Joseph the carpenter, and
His mother Mary, and His brethren, and His
sisters, were very well known to them. But
it was with the view of tempting Him, that
they had mentioned to Him a mother and
brethren which He did not possess. The
Scripture says nothing of this, although it is
not in other instances silent when anything
was done against Him by way of temptation.
"Behold," it says, "a certain lawyer stood
up, and tempted Him."' And in another
passage: "The Pharisees also came unto
Him, tempting Him." Who' was to prevent
its being in this place also indicated that this
was done with the view of tempting Him? I
do not admit what you advance of your own
apart from Scripture. Then there ought to
be suggested ^ some occasion * for the temp-
tation. What could they have thought to be
in Him which required temptation? The
question, to be sure, whether He had been
born or not ? For if this point were denied
in His answer, it might come out on the an-
nouncement of a temptation. And yet no
temptation, when aiming at the discovery of
the point which prompts the temptation by
its doubtfulness, falls upon one so abruptly,
as not to be preceded by the question which
compels the temptation whilst raising the
doubt. Now, since the nativity of Christ had
never come into question, how can you con-
tend that they meant by their temptation to
inquire about a point on which they had never
raised a doubt? Besides,^ if He had to be
tempted about His birth, this of course was
not the proper way of doing it, — by announc-
ing those persons who, even on the supposi-
tion of His birth, might possibly not have
been in existence. We have all been born,
and yet all of us have not either brothers or
mother. He might with more probability
have had even a father than a mother, and
uncles more likely than brothers. Thus is
the temptation about His birth unsuitable,
for it might have been contrived without any
mention of either His mother or His brethren.
It is clearly more credible that, being certain
that He had both a mother and brothers, they
tested His divinity rather than His nativity,
whether, when within. He knew what was
without; being tried by the untrue announce-
ment of the presence of persons who were not
present. But the artifice of a temptation
might have been thwarted thus: it might have
happened that He knew that those whom they
were announcing to be "standing without,"


were in fact absent by the stress either of
sickness, or of business, or a journey which
He was at the time aware of. No one tempts
(another) in a way in which he knows that he
may have himself to bear the shame of the
temptation. There being, then, no suitable
occasion for a temptation, the announcement
that His mother and His brethren had actually
turned up^ recovers its naturalness. But
there is some ground for thinking that Chrisf s
answer denies His mother and brethren for
the present, as even Apelles might learn.
" The Lord's brethren had not yet believed
in Him." 7 So is it contained in the Gospel
which was published before Marcion's time;
whilst there is at the same time a want of evi-
dence of His mother's adherence to Him, al-
though the Marthas and the other Marys were
in constant attendance on Him. In this very
passage indeed, their unbelief is evident.
Jesus was teaching the way of life, preaching
the kingdom of God and actively engaged
in healing infirmities of body and soul; but
all the while, whilst strangers were intent on
Him, His very nearest relatives were absent.
By and by they turn up, and keep outside;
but they do not go in, because, forsooth, they
set small store ^ on that which was doing
within; nor do they even wait,^ as if they
had something which they could contribute
more necessary than that which He was so
earnestly doing; but they prefer to interrupt
Him, and wish to call Him away from His
great work Now, I ask you, Apelles, or will
you Marcion, please (to tell me), if you hap-
pened to be at a stage play, or had laid a
wager '° on a foot race or a chariot race, and
were called away by such a message, would
you not have exclaimed, "What are mother
and brothers to me ? " " And did not Christ,
whilst preaching and manifesting God, fulfill-
ing the law and the pi-ophets, and scattering
the darkness of the long preceding age,
justly employ this same form of words, in
order to strike the unbelief of those who stood
outside, or to shake off the importunity of
those who would call Him away from His
work ? If, however, He had meant to deny
His own nativity. He would have found place,
time, and means for expressing Himself very
differently," and not in words which might be
uttered by one who had both a mother and
brothers. When denying one's parents in in-
dignation, one does not deny their existence^


* Luke X. 25.

3 Literally, " nobody prevented its being, etc'

3 Subesse.

4 Materia.

5Eo adicimus etiam.


6 Supervenissent.

7 John vii. 5.

^Non computantes scilicet.

9 Nee sustinent saltern.

'oContendens: "videlicet sponsionibus" (Oehler).
" Literally, " Who is my mother, and who are my brethren ?" —
Christ's own words.

'2 The alius is a genitive, and must be taken with sertnonis.


CHAP. VIII.]


ON THE FLESH OF CHRIST.


529


I


but censures their faults. Besides, He gave
others the preference; and since He shows
their title to this favour — even because they
listened to the word (of God) — He points out
in what sense He denied His mother and His
brethren. For in whatever sense He adopted
as His own those who adhered to Him, in that
did He deny as His' those who kept aloof
from Him. Christ also is wont to do to the
utmost that which He enjoins on others.
How strange, then, would it certainly' have
been, if, while he was teaching others not to
esteem mother, or father, or brothers, as
highly as the word of God, He were Himself
to leave the word of God as soon as His mother
and brethren were announced to Him! He
denied His parents, then, in the sense in
which He has taught us to deny ours — for
God's work. But there is also another view
of the case: in the abjured mother there is a
figure of the synagogue, as well as of the Jews
in the unbelieving brethren. In their person
Israel remained outside, whilst the new disci-
ples who kept close to Christ within, hearing
and believing, represented the Church, which
He called mother in a preferable sense and a
worthier brotherhood, with the repudiation of
the carnal relationship. It was in just the same
sense, indeed, that He also replied to that
exclamation (of a certain woman), not deny-
ing His mother's " womb and paps," but des-
ignating those as more " blessed who hear the
word of God." ^

CHAP. VIII. APELLES AND HIS FOLLOWERS, DIS-
PLEASED WITH OUR EARTHLY BODIES, ATTRIB-
UTED TO CHRIST A BODY OF A PURF:R SORT.
HOW CHRIST WAS HEAVENLY EVEN IN HIS
EARTHLY FLESH.

These passages alone, in which Apelles and
Marcion seem to place their chief reliance
when interpreted according to the truth of the
entire uncorrupted gospel, ought to have been
sufficient for proving the human flesh of Christ
by a defence of His birth. But since Apelles'
precious sef^laya very great stress on the
shameful condition s of the flesh, which they
will have to have been furnished with souls
tampered with by the fiery author of evil,*^
and so unworthy of Christ; and because they
on that account suppose that a sidereal sub-
stance is suitable for Him, I am bound to re-
fute them on their own ground. They mention
a certain angel of great renown as having cre-
ated this world of ours, and as having, after


1 Abnegavit : " repudiated."

2 Force of the indicative quale erat.

3 Luke XI. 27, 28. See also our Anti-Marcton, p. 292, Edin.

4 Isti Apelleiaci. .

5 Ignominiam.

6 Ab igneo illo praeside mali : see Tertullian's de Anitna. xxiii.;
de Resur. Cam. v. ; Adv. Omnes Heeres. vi.

34


the creation, repented of his work. This in-
deed we have treated of in a passage by itself;
for we have written a little work m opposition
to them, 071 the question whether one who had
the spirit, and will, and power of Christ for
such operations, could have done anything
which required repentance, since they de-
scribe the said angel by the figure of " the lost
sheep." The world, then, must be a wrong
thing,'' according to the evidence of its
Creator's repentance; for all repentance is the
admission of fault, nor has it indeed any exist-
ence except through fault. Now, if the
world ^ is a fault, as is the body, such must
be its parts — faulty too; so in like manner
must be the heaven and its celestial (contents),
and everything which is conceived and pro-
duced out of it. And "a corrupt tree must
needs bring forth evil fruit."' The flesh of
Christ, therefore, if composed of celestial ele-
ments, consists of faulty materials, sinful by
reason of its sinful origin; '° so that it must
be a part of that substance which they disdain
to clothe Christ with, because of its sinfulness,
— in other words, our own. Then, as there is
no difference in the point of ignominy, let
them either devise for Christ some substance
of a purer stamp, since they are displeased
with our own, or else let them recognise this
too, than which even a heavenly substance
could not have been better. We read in so
many words: " " The first man is of the earth,
earthy; the second man is the Lord from
heaven."" This passage, however, has noth-
ing to do with any difference of substance;
it only contrasts with the once '^ " earthy "
substance of the flesh of the first man,
Adam, the "heavenly" substance of the
spirit of the second man, Christ. And so
entirely does the passage refer the celestial
man to the spirit and not to the flesh, that
those whom it compares to Him evidently be-
come celestial — by the Spirit, of course — even
in this " earthy flesh." Now, since Christ is
heavenly even in regard to the flesh, they could
not be compared to Him, who are not heavenly
in reference to their flesh.'* If, then, they
who become heavenly, as Christ also was,
carry about an "earthy" substance of flesh,
the conclusion which is affirmed by this fact is,
that Christ Himself also was heavenly, but in
an " earthy " flesh, even as they are who are
put on a level with Him. '5


7 Peccatum.

8 yiundtis is here the universe or entire creation.

9 Matt. vii. 17.
'° Censu.

" Plane.

12 I Cor. XV. 47

13 Retro.

'4 Secundum camem.
15 Ei adaequantur.


Do^


ON THE FLESH OF CHRIST.


[chap.


CHAP. IX. — CHRIST'S FLESH PERFECTLY NAT-
URAL, LIKE OUR OWN. NONE OF THE SUPER-
NATURAL FEATURES WHICH THE HERETICS
ASCRIBED TO IT DISCOVERABLE, ON A CARE-
FUL VIEW.

We have thus far gone on the principle, that
nothing which is derived from some other
thing, however different it may be from that
from which it is derived, is so different as not to
suggest the source from which it comes. No
material substance is without the witness of
its own original, however great a change into
new properties it may have undergone. There
is this very body of ours, the formation of
which out of the dust of the ground is a truth
which has found its way into Gentile fables;
it certainly testifies its own origin from the two
elements of earth and water, — from the former
by its flesh, from the latter by its blood.
Now, although there is a difference in the ap-
pearance of qualities (in other words, that which
proceeds from something else is in develop-
ment' different), yet, after all, what is blood
but red fluid ? what is flesh but earth in an
especial "^ form ? Consider the respective
qualities, — of the muscles as clods; of the
bones as stones; the mamillary glands as a
kind of pebbles. Look upon the close junc-
tions of the nerves as propagations of roots,
and the branching courses of the veins as
winding rivulets, and the down (which covers
us) as moss, and the hair as grass, and the
very treasures of marrow within our bones as
ores 3 of flesh. All these marks of the earthy
origin were in Christ; and it is they which ob-
scured Him as the Son of God, for He was
looked on as man, for no other reason what-
ever than because He existed in the corporeal
substance of a man. Or else, show us some
celestial substance in Him purloined from the
Bear, and the Pleiades, and the Hyades.
Well, then, the characteristics which we have
enumerated are so many proofs that His was
an earthy flesh, as ours is; but anything new
or anything strange I do not discover. In-
deed it was from His words and actions only,
from His teaching and miracles solely, that
men, though amazed, owned Christ to be
man.-* But if there had been in Him any
new kind of flesh miraculously obtained (from
the stars), it would have been certainly well
known. 5 As the case stood, however, it was
actually the ordinary* condition of His ter-
rene flesh which made all things else about
Him wonderful, as when they said, " Whence


hath this man this wisdom and these mighty
works ?"^ Thus spake even they who de-
spised His outward form. His body did not
reach even to human beauty, to say nothing
of heavenly glory.* Had the prophets given
us no information whatever concerning His
ignoble appearance, His very sufferings and
the very contumely He endured bespeak it all.
The sufferings attested His human flesh, the
contumely proved its abject condition. Would
any man have dared to touch even with his
little finger, the body of Christ, if it had been
of an unusual nature;^ or to smear His face
with spitting, if it had not invited it '° (by its
abjectness)? Why talk of a heavenly flesh,
when you have no grounds to offer us for your
celestial theory? " Why deny it to be earthy,
when you have the best of reasons for know-
ing it to be earthy? He hungered under the
devil's temptation; He thirsted with the
woman of Samaria; He wept over Lazarus;
He trembles at death (for "the flesh," as He
says, " is weak " "); at last, He pours out His
blood. These, I suppose, are celestial marks?
But how, I ask, could He have incurred con-
tempt and suffering in the way I have de-
scribed, if there had beamed forth in that
flesh of His aught of celestial excellence?
From this, therefore, we have a convincing
proof that in it there was nothing of heaven,
because it must be capable of contempt and
suffering.

CHAP. X. ANOTHER CLASS OF HERETICS RE-
FUTED. THEY ALLEGED THAT CHRIST's FLESH
WAS OF A FINER TEXTURE, ANIMALIS, COM-
POSED OF SOUL.

I now turn to another class, who are equally
wise in their own conceit. They affirm that
the flesh of Christ is composed of soul,'^ that
His soul became flesh, so that His flesh is
soul; and as His flesh is of soul, so is His
soul of flesh. But here, again, I must have
some reasons. If, in order to save the soul,
Christ took a soul within Himself, because it
could not be saved except by Him having it
within Himself, I see no reason why, in cloth-
ing Himself with flesh. He should have made
that flesh one of soul,'* as if He could not
have saved the. soul in any other way than by
making flesh of it. For while He saves our
souls, which are not only not of flesh, 's but are


I Fit.

»Sua.

3 Metalla.

■4 Christum hominem obstupescebant.

5 Notaretur.

^Non mira.


7 Matt. xiii. 54.

8 Compare Lsa. liii. 2. See also our A ntt-Marcion, p. 153, Edm.

9 Novum: made of the stars.
»o Merentem.

" Literally, " why do you suppose it to be celestial."
"Matt. xxvi. 41.

«3Animalem: " ethcrialized ; of a finer form, differing from
gross, earthy matter" (Neander).
'4 Animalem.
'5 Non carneas.


■CHAP. XI.]


ON THE FLESH OF CHRIST.


531


-even distinct from flesh, how much more able
was He to secure salvation to that soul
which He took Himself, when it was also not
of flesh ? Again, since they assume it as a
main tenet,' that Christ came forth not to
deliver the flesh, but only our soul, how ab-
surd it is, in the first place, that, meaning to
save only the soul. He yet made it into just
that sort of bodily substance which He had no
intention of saving ! And, secondly, if He
had undertaken to deliver our souls by means
■of that which He carried. He ought, in that
soul which He carried to have carried our sou/,
one (that is) of the same condition as ours;
and whatever is the condition of our soul in its
secret nature, it is certainly not one of flesh.
However, it was not our soul which He saved,
if His own was of flesh; for ours is not of flesh.
Now, if He did not save our soul on the ground
that it was a soul of flesh which He saved, He
is nothing to us, because He has not saved our
soul. Nor indeed did it need salvation, for
it was not our soul really, since it was, on the
supposition, = a soul of flesh. But yet it is
evident that it has been saved. Of flesh,
therefore, it was not composed, and it was
ours; for it was our soul that was saved, since
that was in peril 0/ dainnatio7i. We there-
fore now conclude that as in Christ the soul
was not of flesh, so neither could His flesh
have possibly been composed of soul.

CHAP. XI. THE OPPOSITE EXTRAVAGANCE EX-
POSED. THAT IS CHRIST WITH A SOUL COM-
POSED OF FLESH — CORPOREAL, THOUGH INVIS-
IBLE. CHRIST'S SOUL, LIKE OURS, DISTINCT
FROM FLESH, THOUGH CLOTHED IN IT.

But we meet another argument of theirs,
-when we raise the question why Christ, in as-
suming a flesh composed of soul, should
seem to have had a soul that was made of
flesh? For God, they say, desired to make
the soul visible to men, by enduing it with a
bodily nature, although it was before invisible;
of its own nature, indeed, it was incapable of
seeing anything, even its own self, by reason
of the obstacle of this flesh, so that it was
even a matter of doubt whether it was born or
not. The soul, therefore (they further say),
was made corporeal in Christ, in order that we
might see it when undergoing birth, and death,
and (what is more) resurrection. But yet, how
was this possible, that by means of the flesh
the soul should demonstrate itself ^ to itself
or to us, when it could not possibly be ascer-
tained that it would offer this mode of exhib-
iting itself by the flesh, until the thing came


^ Praesumant.

2 Scilicet.

3 Demonstraretur : or, " should become apparent.


into existence to which it was unknown,'* that
is to say, the flesh ? It received darkness,
forsooth, in order to be able to shine! Now,s
let us first turn our attention to this point,
whether it was requisite that the soul should
exhibit itself in the manner contended for;^
and next consider whether their previous
position beUhat the soul is wholly invisible —
(inquiring further) whether this invisibility is
the result of its incorporeality, or whether it
actually possesses some sort of body peculiar
to itself. And yet, although they say that it
is invisible, they determine it to be corporeal,
but having somewhat that is invisible. For if
it has nothing invisible how can it be said to
be invisible ? But even its existence is an im-
possibility, unless it has that which is instru-
mental to its existence.^ Since, however, it
exists, it must needs have a something through
which it exists. If it has this something, //
must be its body. Everything which exists is
a bodily existence J?// ^^rw/jr/j". Nothing lacks
bodily existence but that which is non-exist-
ent. If, then, the soul has an invisible body.
He who had proposed to make it^ visible
would certainly have done His work better'" if
He had made that part of it which was ac-
counted invisible, visible; because then there
would have been no untruth or weakness in
the case, and neither of these flaws is suitable
to God. (But as the case stands in the hy-
pothesis) there is tmtruth, since He has set
forth the soul as being a different thing from
what it really is; and there is weakness, since
He was unable to make it appear " to be that
which it is. No one who wishes to exhibit a
man covers him with a veil " or a mask. This,
however, is precisely what has been done to
the soul, if it has been clothed with a cover-
ing belonging to something else, by being con-
verted into flesh. But even if the soul is, on
their hypothesis, supposed '^ to be incorporeal,
so that the soul, whatever it is, should by
some mysterious force of the reason '-» be quite
unknown, only not be a body, then in that
case it were not beyond the power of God —
indeed it would be more consistent with His
plan — if He displayed 's the soul in some new
sort of body, different from that which we all
have in common, one of which we should
have quite a different notion, '<* (being spared


4Cuilatebat.

5 Denique.

6 Isto modo.

7 An retro allegent.

8 Per quod sit.

9 Earn : the soul.

loDignius : i.e., " in a manner more worthy of Himself,"

11 Demonstrare.

12 Cassidem.

13 Deputetur.

14 Aliqua vi rationis : or, "by some power of its own condition."

15 Demonstrare.

16 Notitiae.


532


ON THE FLESH OF CHRIST.


[chap. XII.


the idea that)' He had set His mind on'
making, without an adequate cause, a visible
soul instead of^ an invisible one — a fit in-
centive, no doubt, for such questions as they
start,* by their maintenance of a human
flesh for it.s Christ, however, could not have
appeared among men except as a man. Re-
store, therefore, to Christ His faith; believe
that He who willed to walk the earth as a man
exhibited even a soul of a thoroughly human
condition, not making it of flesh, but clothing
it with flesh.

CHAP. XII. THE TRUE FUNCTIONS OF THE SOUL.

CHRIST ASSUMED IT IN HIS PERFECT HUMAN
NATURE, NOT TO REVEAL AND EXPLAIN IT,
BUT TO SAVE IT. ITS RESURRECTION WITH
THE BODY ASSURED BY CHRIST.

Well, now, let it be granted that the soul is
made apparent by the flesh,^ on the assump-
tion that it was evidently necessary ^ that it
should be made apparent in someway or other,
that is, as being incognizable to itself and to
us: there is still an absurd distinction in this
hypothesis^ which implies that we are ourselves
separate from our soul, when all that we are
is soul. Indeed,^ without the soul we are
nothing; there is not even the name of a hu-
man being, only that of a carcase. If, then,
we are ignorant of the soul, it is in fact the
soul that is ignorant of itself. Thus the only
remaining question left for us to look into is,
whether the soul was in this matter so ignorant
of itself that it became known in any way it
could. 9 The soul, in my opinion, '° is sen-
sual." Nothing, therefore, pertaining to the
soul is unconnected with sense," nothing
pertaining to sense is unconnected with the
soul. '3 And if I may use the expression for
the sake of emphasis, I would say, '"'' Animm
anifna sensus est'' — " Sense is the soul's very
soul." Now, since it is the soul that imparts
the faculty of perception "-^ to all (that have
sense), and since it is itself that perceives the
very senses, not to say properties, of them all,
how is it likely that it did not itself receive
sense as its own natural constitution ? Whence
is it to know what is necessary for itself under
given circumstances, from the very necessity
of natural causes, if it knows not its own prop-


iNe.

a Gestisset.

3 Ex.

4 Istis.

5 In illam : perhaps " itt it,'" as if an ablative case, not an un-
usual construction in TertuUian,

6 Ostensa sit.

7 Si constiterit.

8 Denique.

9 Quoquo mode.
10 Opinor.

" Sensualis : endowed with sense.
'= Nihil animale sine sensu.
'3 Nihil sensuale sine anima.

14 We should have been glad of a shorter phrase for sentire (" to
use sense "), had the whole course of the passage permitted it.


erty, and what is necessary for it ? To rec-
ognise this indeed is within the competence
of every soul; it has, I mean, a practical
knowledge of itself, without which knowledge
of itself no soul could possibly have exercised
its own functions. 's I suppose, too, that it is-
especially suiteible that man, the only rational
animal, should have been furnished with such
a soul as would make him the rational animal^
itself being pre-eminently rational. Now,
how can that soul which makes man a rational
animal be itself rational if it be itself ignorant
of its rationality, being ignorant of its own
very self? So far, however, is it from being
ignorant, that it knows its own Author, its
own Master, and its own condition. Before
it learns anything about God, it names the
name of God. Before it acquires any knowl-
edge of His judgment, it professes to com-
mend itself to God. There is nothing one
oftener hears of than that there is no hope
after death; and yet what imprecations or dep-
recations does not the soul use according as.
the man dies after a well or ill spent life I
These reflections are more fully pursued in a
short treatise which we have written, " On the
Testimony of the Soul. ' ' '^ Besides, if the soul
was ignorant of itself from the beginning,
there is nothing it could '^ have learnt of Christ
except its own quality.'^ It was not its own
form that it learnt of Christ, but its salvation.
For this cause did the Son -of God descend
and take on Him a soul, not that the soul
might discover itself in Christ, but Christ in
itself. For its salvation is endangered, not
by its being ignorant of itself, but of the word
of God. "The life," says He, "was mani-
fested, "'!> not the soul. And again, "I am
come to save the soul." He did not say,
"to explain " "^ it. We could not know, of
course," that the soul, although an invisible
essence, is born and dies, unless it were ex-
hibited corporeally. We certainly were igno-
rant that it was to rise again with the flesh.
This is the truth which it will be found was
manifested by Christ. But even this He did
not manifest in Himself in a different way
than in some Lazarus, whose flesh was no
more composed of soul "" than his soul was of
flesh. =3 What further knowledge, therefore,
have we received of the structure'* of the soul
which we were ignorant of before ? What in-
visible part was there belonging to it which
wanted to be made visible by the flesh ?


'SSe ministrare.

'6 See especially chap. iv. supra.

'7 Debuerat.

'8 Nisi qualis esset.

'9 1 John i. 2.

20 Ostendcre ; see Luke ix. 56.

=" Nimirum.

22 Animalis.

23 Carnalis.


24 Dispositione.


■CHAP. XIV.]


ON THE FLESH OF CHRIST. ^


Do.


CHAP. XIII. CHJLIST's HUMAN NATURE. THE

FLESH AND THE SOUL BOTH FULLY AND UN-
CONFUSEDLV CONTAINED IN IT.

The soul became flesh that the soul might
become visible.' Well, then, did the flesh
likewise become soul that the flesh might be
manifested ? ^ If the soul is flesh, it is no
longer soul, but flesh. If the flesh is soul, it
is no longer flesh, but soul. Where, then,
there is flesh, and where there is soul, it has
become both one and the other. 3 Now, if
they are neither in particular, although they
become both one and the other, it is, to say
the least, very absurd, that we should under-
stand the soul when we name the flesh, and
when we indicate the soul, explain ourselves
as meaning the flesh. All things will be in
danger of being taken in a sense different
from their own proper sense, and, whilst taken
in that different sense, of losing their proper
one, if they are called by a name which differs
from their natural designation. Fidelity in
names secures the safe appreciation of prop-
erties. When these properties undergo a
change, they are considered to possess such
qualities as their names indicate. Baked
clay, for instance, receives the name of brick."*
It retains not the name which designated its
former state, ^ because it has no longer a
share in that state. Therefore, also, the soul
of Christ having become flesh, ^ cannot be
anything else than that which it has become;
Tior can it be any longer that which it once
Avas, having become indeed ^ something else.
And since we have just had recourse to an
illustration, we will put it to further use. Our
pitcher, then, which was formed of the clay,
is one body, and has one name indicative, of
course, of that one body; nor can the pitcher
be also called clay, because what it once was,
it is no longer. Now. that which is no longer
{what it was) is also not an inseparable prop-
erty.^ And the soul is not an inseparable
property. Since, therefore, it has become
flesh, the soul is a uniform solid body; it is
also a wholly incomplex being,' and an in-
divisible substance. But in Christ we find
the soul and the flesh expressed in simple un-
figurative'° terms; that is to say, the soul is
called soul, and the flesh, flesh; nowhere is
the soul termed flesh, or the flesh, soul; and
yet they ought to have been thus (confusedly)


1 Ostenderetur : or, " that it might prove itself soul."

2 Or, " that it might show itself flesh."

3 Alterutrum : " no matter which."

4 Testae : a pitcher, perhaps.

5 Generis.

^Tertullian quotes his opponent's opinion here,

7 Silicet : in reference to the alleged doctrine.

8 Non adhseret.

9 Singularitas tota.
30 Nudis.


named if such had been their condition. The
facf, however, is that even by Chris/ Himself
each substance has been separately mentioned
by itself, conformably of course, to the dis-
tinction which exists between the properties
of both, the soul by itself, and the flesh by
itself." " My soul,'' says He, " is exceeding
sorrowful, even unto death;"" and *' the
bread that I will give is iny flesh, (which I will
give) for the life " of the world." '^ Now, if
the soul had been flesh, there would have only
been in Christ the soul composed of flesh, or
else the flesh composed of soul.'* Since,
however. He keeps the species distinct, the
flesh and the soul, He shows them to be two.
If two, then they are no longer one; if not
one, then the soul is not composed of flesh,
nor the flesh of soul. For the soul-flesh, or
the flesh-soul, is but one; unless indeed He
even had some other soul apart from that
which was flesh, and bare about another flesh
besides that which was soul. But since He
had but one flesh and one soul, — that "soul
which was sorrowful, even unto death," and
t\\7\X flesh which was the " bread given for the
life of the world," — the number is unim-
paired '5 of two substances distinct in kind,
thus excludng the unique species of the flesh-
comprised soul.

CHAP. XIV. CHRIST TOOK NOT ON HIM AN AN-
GELIC NATURE, BUT THE HUMAN. IT WAS
MEN, NOT ANGELS, WHOM HE CAME TO SAVE.

But Christ, they say, bare '* (the nature of)
an angel. For what reason? The same
which induced Him to become man ? Christ,
then, was actuated by the motive which led
Him to take human nature. Man's salvation
was the motive, the restoration of that which
had perished. Man had perished; his re-
covery had become necessary. No such
cause, however, existed for Christ's taking on
Him the nature of angels. For although
there is assigned to angels also perdition in
"the fire prepared for the devil and his
angels," '^ yet a restoration is never promised
to them. No charge about the salvation of
angels did Christ ever receive from the
Father; and that which the Father neither
promised nor commanded, Christ could not
have undertaken. For what object, therefore,
did He bear the angelic nature, if it were Aot
(that He might have it) as a powerful helper"
wherewithal to execute the salvation of man ?


•'Matt. xxvi. 38. TertuUian's quotation is put interrogatively,

12 " The salvation " (salute) is TertuUian's word.

13 John vi. 51.

14 Above, beginning of chap. x.
'5 Salvus.

16 Gestavit.

17 Matt. XXV. 41.

18 Satellitem.


534


ON THE FLESH OF CHRIST.


[chap. XV-


The Son of God, in sooth, was not competent
alone to deliver man, whom a solitary and
single serpent had overthrown ! There is,
then, no longer but one God, but one Saviour,
if there be two to contrive salvation, and one
of them in need of the other. But was it His
object indeed to deliver man by an angel ?
Why, then, come down to do that which He
was about to expedite with an angel's help?
If by an angel's aid, why co7nc Himself also?
If He meant to do all by Himself, why have
an angel too ? He has been, it is true, called
"the Angel of great counsel," that is, a
messenger, by a term expressive of official
function, not of nature. For He had to an-
nounce to the world the mighty purpose of
the Father, even that which ordained the res-
toration of man. But He is not on this ac-
count to be regarded as an angel, as a Gabriel
or a Michael. For the Lord of the vineyard
sends even His Son to the labourers to require
fruit, as well as His servants. Yet the Son
will not therefore be counted as one of the
servants because He undertook the office of
a servant. I may, then, more easily say, if
such an expression is to be hazarded,^ that
the Son is actually an angel, that is, a mes-
senger, from the Father, than that there is an
angel in the Son. Forasmuch, however, as
it has been declared concerning the Son Him-
self, Thou hast made Him a little lower than
the angels " =" how will it appear that He put
on the nature of angels if He was made lower
than the angels, having become man, with
flesh and soul as the Son of man ? As " the
Spirit 3 of God," however, and " the Power of
the Highest," ^ can He be regarded as lower
than the angels, — He who is verily God, and
the Son of God ? Well, but as bearing human
nature. He is so far made inferior to the
angels; but as bearing angelic nature. He to
the same degree loses that inferiority. This
opinion will be very suitable for Ebion,s who
holds Jesus to be a mere man, and nothing
more than a descendant of David, and not
also the Son of God; although He is, to be
sure,*^ in one respect more glorious than the
prophets, inasmuch as he declares that there
was an angel in Him, just as there was in
Zechariah. Only it was never said by Christ,
" And the angel, which spake within me, said
unto me." 7 Neither, indeed, was ever used
by Christ that familiar phrase of all the proph-
ets, "Thus saith the Lord." For He was


I Si forte.
= Ps. viii. S.

3 For this designation of the divine nature in Christ, see our
Anii-Marcion^^fi. 247, note 7, Edin.

4 Luke i. 35.

5 Hebioni.

6 Plane.

7 Zech. i, 14.


Himself the Lord, who openly spake by His
own authority, prefacing His words with the
formula, "Verily, verily, / say unto you."
What need is there of further argument?"
Hear what Isaiah says in emphatic words, " It
was no angel, nor deputy, but the Lord Him-
self who saved them." ^

CHAP. XV. THE VALENTINIAN FIGMENT OF

CHRIST'S FLESH BEING OF A SPIRITUAL NA~
TURE, EXAMINED AND REFUTED OUT OF
SCRIPTURE.

Valentinus, indeed, on the strength of his
heretical system, might consistently devise a
spiritual flesh for Christ. Any one who re-
fused to believe that that flesh was human
might pretend it to be anything he liked, for-
asmuch as (and this remark is applicable to
all heretics)^ if it was not human, and was not
born of man, I do not see of what substance
Christ Himself spoke when He called Himself
man and the Son of man, saying: " But now
ye seek to kill me, a man that hath told
you the truth; "» and "The Son of man is
Lord of the Sabbath-day." ^° For it is of
Him that Isaiah writes: " A man of suffering,
and acquainted with the bearing of weak-
ness; "" and Jeremiah: " He is a man, and
who hath known Him?"" and Daniel::
" Upon the clouds (He came) as the Son of
man." '3 The Apostle Paul likewise says:
" The man Christ Jesus is the one Mediator
between God and man."'* Also Peter, in
the Acts of the Apostles, speaks of Him as
verily human (when he says), " Jesus Christ
was a man approved of God among you." 's-
These passages alone ought to suffice as a
prescriptive '^ testimony in proof that Christ
had human flesh derived from man, and not
spiritual, and that His flesh was not composed
of soul, '7 nor of stellar substance, and that it
was not an imaginary flesh; (and no doubt
they would be sufficient) if heretics could only
divest themselves of all their contentious
warmth and artifice. For, as I have read in
some writer of Valentinus' wretched faction,'®"
they refuse at the outset to believe that a
human and earthly substance was created ''•
for Christ, lest the Lord should be regarded
as inferior to the angels, who are not formed
of earthly flesh; whence, too, it would be


^Isa. Ixiii. 9.

9 John viii. 40.
»o Matt. xii. 8.
" Isa. liii. 3, .Sept.
" Jer, xvii. 9, Sept.
'3 Dan. vii. 13.
'4 1 Tim. ii. 5.
'5 Acts ii. 22.
'6 Vice prauscriptionis.
17 Animalis.
'8 Factiuncula,
>9 InformaUra.


CHAI', XVI.]


ON THE FLESH OF CHRIST


535


necessary that, if His flesh were like ours, it
should be similarly born, not of the Spirit,
nor of God, but of the will of man. Why,
moreover, should it be born, not of corrupti-
ble [seed], but of incorruptible ? Why, again,
since His flesh has both risen and returned
to heaven, is not ours, being like His, also
taken up at once ? Or else, why does not His
flesh, since it is like ours, return in like man-
ner to the ground, and suffer dissolution?
Such objections even the heathen used con-
stantly to bandy about/ Was the Son of
God reduced to such a depth of degradation ?
Again, if He rose again as a precedent for our
hope, how is it that nothing like it has been
thought desirable (to happen) to ourselves ? =
Such views are not improper for heathens;
and they are fit and natural for the heretics
too. For, indeed, what difference is there
between them, except it be that the heathen,
in not believing, do believe; while the here-
tics, in believing, do not believe ? Then,
again, they read: " Thou madest Him a little
less than angels; " ^ and they deny the lower
nature of that Christ who declares Himself to
be, "not a man, but a worm;"* who also
had *' no form nor comeliness, but His form
was ignoble, despised more than all men, a
man in suffering, and acquainted with the
bearing of weakness." ^ Here they discover
a human being mingled with a divine one,
and so they deny the manhood. They be-
lieve that He died, and maintain that a being
which has died was born of an incorruptible
substance;* as if, forsooth, corruptibility ^
were something else than death ! But our
flesh, too, ought immediately to have risen
again. Wait a while. Christ has not yet
subdued His enemies, so as to be able to tri-
umph over them in company with His friends.

CHAP. XVI. — Christ's flesh in nature, the

SAME AS OURS, ONLY SINLESS. THE DIFFER-
ENCE between carnem peccati and PEC-

CATUM CARNIS : IT IS THE LATTER WHICH
CHRIST ABOLISHED. THE FLESH OF THE FIRST
ADAM, NO LESS THAN THAT OF THE SECOND
ADAM, NOT RECEIVED FROM HUMAN SEED,
ALTHOUGH AS ENTIRELY HUMAN AS OUR OWN,
WHICH IS DERIVED FROM IT.

The famous Alexander,^ too, instigated by


^ Volutabant : see Lactantius, iv. 22.

2 De nobis probatum est : or, perhaps, " has been proved to
have happened in our own case."

3 Ps. viii. 6, Sept.
4Ps. xxii. 6.

5 Isa. liii. 3, Sept.

6 Ex incorruptela.
7Corruptela.

8 Although Tertullian dignifies him with an ille, we have no
particulars of this man. [It may be that this is an c/>ithet, rather
than a name, given to some enemy of truth like Alexander the
"Coppersmith ' (2 Tim. iv. 14) or like that (i Tim. i. 20), blas-
phemer, whose character suits the case.]


his love of disputation in the true fashion of
heretical temper, has made himself conspicu-
ous against us; he will have us .say that Christ
put on flesh of an earthly origin,' in order
that He might in His own person abolish sin-
ful flesh. "* Now, even if we did assert this as
our opinion, we should be able to defend it in
such a way as completely to avoid the extrava-
gant folly which he ascribes to us in making
us suppose that the very flesh of Christ was
in Himself abolished as being sinful; because
we mention our belief (in public)," that it is
sitting at the right hand of the Father in
heaven; and we further declare that it will
come again from thence in all the pomp " of
the Father's glory: it is therefore just as im-
possible for us to say that it is abolished, as
it is for us to maintain that it is sinful, and
so made void, since in it there has been no
fault. We maintain, moreover, that what has
been abolished in Christ is not car7ic7n peccati;
" sinful flesh," but peccatum carnis^ *' sin in
the flesh," — not the material thing, but its
condition; ^3 not the substance, but its flaw;'*
and (this we aver) on the authority of the
apostle, who says, *' He abolished sin in the
flesh." '5 Now in another sentence he says
that Christ was "in the likeness of sinful
flesh," '* not, however, as if He had taken on
Him " the likeness of the flesh," in the sense
of a semblance of body instead of its reality;
but he means us to understand likeness to the
flesh which sinned, '7 because the flesh of
Christ, which committed no sin itself, resem-
bled that which had sinned, — resembled it in
its nature, but not in the corruption it re-
ceived from Adam; whence we also affirm
that there was in Christ the same flesh as that
whose nature in man is sinful. In the flesh,
therefore, we say that sin has been abolished,
because in Christ that same flesh is main-
tained without sin, which in man was not
maintained without sin. Now, it would not
contribute to the purpose of Christ's abolish-
ing sin in the flesh, if He did not abolish it
in that flesh in which was the nature of sin,
nor (would it conduce) to His glory. For


9 Census.

loSoBp. Kaye renders " rar/K'w peccati." [See his valuable
note. p. 253.]

II We take the meminerimus to refer " to the Creed."

" Suggestu.

'SNaturam.

'4Culpam.

15 " Tertullian, referring to St. Paul, says of Christ : ' Evacuavit
peccatum in carne ;' alluding, as I suppose, to Romans viii. 3.
But the corresponding Greek in the printed editions is icaTCicpii'e
■n\v ajuopTcai/ «f t^ aapKi (' He condemned sin in the flesh'). Had
Tertullian a different reading in his Greek mss., or did he con-
found Romans viii. 3 with Romans vi. 6, ii'a KaLTapyr}9fj to o-w^a
rij? a^opriaf (' that the body of sin might be destroyed') ? Jerome
translates the Greek Karapytui by ' evacuo,' c. xvi. See Ae/j'. Mar-
cionetn, ver. 14. Dr. Neander has pointed out two passages in
which Tertullian has ' damnavit or damnaverit delinquentiam in
carne.' See dc Res. Carttis, 46; de Pudicitid. 17." — Bp. Kaye.

16 Also in Rom. viii. 3.

17 Peccatricis carnis.


536


ON THE FLESH OF CHRIST.


[chap. XVII.


surely it would have been no strange thing if
He had removed the stain of sin in some
better flesh, and one which should possess a
different, even a sinless, nature ! Then, you
say, if He took our flesh, Christ's was a sinful
one. Do not, however, fetter with mystery
a sense which is quite intelligible. For in
putting on our flesh. He made it His own; in
making it His own. He made it sinless. A
word of caution, however, must be addressed
to all who refuse to believe that our flesh was
in Christ on the ground that it came not of
the seed of a human father,' let them re-
member that Adam himself received this flesh
of ours without the seed of a human father.
As earth was converted into this flesh of ours
without the seed of a human father, so also
was it quite possible for the Son of God to
take to Himself^ the substance of the self-
same flesh, without a human father's agency.^

CHAP. XVII. — THE SIMILARITY OF CIRCUMSTAN-
CES BETWEEN THE FIRST AND THE SECOND
ADAM, AS TO THE DERIVATION OF THEIR
FLESH. AN ANALOGY ALSO PLEASANTLY
TRACED BETWEEN EVE AND THE VIRGIN
MARY.

But, leaving Alexander with his syllogisms,
which he so perversely applies in his discus-
sions, as well as with the hymns of Valentinus,
which, with consummate assurance, he inter-
polates as the production of some respecta-
ble* author, let us confine our inquiry to a
single point — Whether Christ received flesh
from the virgin ? — that we may thus arrive at
a certain proof that His flesh was human, if
He derived its substance from His mother's
womb, although we are at once furnished with
clear evidences of the human character of His
flesh, from its name and description as that of
a man, and from the nature of its constitution,
and from the system of its sensations, and
from its suffering of death. Now, it will first
by necessary to show what previous reason
there was for the Son of God's being born of a
virgin. He who was going to consecrate a
new order of birth, must Himself be born
after a novel fashion, concerning which Isa-
iah foretold how that the Lord Himself would
give the sign. What, then, is the sign ?
" Behold a virgin shall conceive and bear a
son," 5 Accordingly, a virgin did conceive
and bear " Emmanuel, God with us." *^ This
is the new nativity; a man is born in God.


iViri.

^Transire in : " to pass into.'

3 Sine coagulo.

4 Idonei.

5 Isa. vii, 14.

6 Matt. i. 23.


And in this man God was born, taking the
flesh of an ancient race, without the help, how-
ever, of the ancient seed, in order that He
might reform it with a new seed, that is, in a
spiritual manner, and cleanse it by the re-
moval of all its ancient stains. But the whole
of this new birth was prefigured, as was the
case in all other instances, in ancient type,
the Lord being born as man by a dispensation '
in which a virgin was the medium. The earth il
was still in a virgin state, reduced as yet by i
no human labour, with no seed as yet cast *
into its furrows, when, as we are told, God \
made man out of it into a living soul.^ As, 1
then, the first Adam is thus introduced to us,
it is a just inference that the second Adam
likewise, as the apostle has told us, was formed
by God into a quickening spirit out of the
ground, — in other words, out of a flesh
which was unstained as yet by any human gen-
eration. But that I may lose no opportunity
of supporting my argument from the name
of Adam, why is Christ called Adam by the
apostle, unless it be that, as man. He was of
that earthly origin? And even reason here
maintains the same conclusion, because it was
by just the contrary^ operation that God recov-
ered His own image and likeness, of which He
had been robbed by the devil. For it was while
Eve was yet a virgin, that the ensnaring word
had crept into her ear which was to build the
edifice of death. Into a virgin's soul, in like
manner, must be introduced that Word of
God which was to raise the fabric of life; so
that what had been reduced to ruin by this
sex, might by the selfsame sex be recovered
to salvation. As Eve had believed the ser-
pent, so Mary believed the angel. ' The de-
linquency which the one occasioned by believ-
ing, the other by believing effaced. But (it
will be said) Eve did not at the devil's word
conceive in her womb. Well, she at all events
conceived; for the devil's word afterwards
became as seed to her that she should con-
ceive as an outcast, and bring forth in sorrow.
Indeed she gave birth to a fratricidal devil;
whilst Mary, on the contrary, bare one who
was one day to secure salvation to Israel, His
own brother after the flesh, and the murderer
of Himself. God therefore sent down into
the virgin's womb His Word, as the good
Brother, who should blot out the memory of
the evil brother. Hence it was necessary that
Christ should come forth for the salvation of
man, in that condition of flesh into which man
had entered ever since his condemnation.


7 Gen. ii. 7.

8 ^mula.

9 Literally, " Gabriel."


CHAP. XIX.]


ON THE FLESH OF CHRIST.


537


CHAP. XVIII. — THE MYSTERY OF THE ASSUMP-
TION OF OUR PERFECT HUMAN NATURE BY
THE SECOND PERSON OF THE BLESSED TRINITY.
HE IS HERE CALLED, AS OFTEN ELSEWHERE,
THE SPIRIT.

Now, that we may give a simpler answer, it
was not fit that the Son of God should be
born of a human father's seed, lest, if He were
wholly the Son of a man, He should fail to
be also the Son of God, and have nothing
more than " a Solomon" or " a Jonas," ' — as
Ebion =" thought we ought to believe concerning
Him. In order, therefore, that He who was al-
ready the Son of God — of God the Father's
seed, that is to say, the Spirit — might also be the
Son of man. He only wanted to assume flesh,
of the flesh of man^ without the seed of a
man ; * for the seed of a man was unnecessary s
for One who had the seed of God. As, then,
before His birth of the virgin, He was able
to have God for His Father without a human
mother, so likewise, after He was born of the
virgin. He was able to have a woman for His
mother without a human father. He is thus
man with God, in short, since He is man's flesh
with God's Spirit^— ^es/i (I say) without seed
from man. Spirit with seed from God. For
as much, then, as the dispensation of God^ s
purpose 7 concerning His Son required that
He should be born ^ of a virgin, why should
He not have received of the virgin the body
which He bore from the virgin ? Because,
(forsooth) it is something else which He took
from God, for "the Word," say they, "was
made flesh,"' Now this very statement
plainly shows what it was that was made flesh;
nor can it possibly be that '° anything else than
the Word was made flesh. Now, whether it
was of the flesh that the Word was made flesh,
or whether it was so made of the (divine) seed
itself, the Scripture must tell us. As, how-
ever, the Scripture is silent about everything
except what it was that was made (flesh), and
says nothing of that from which it was so
made, it must be held to suggest that from
something else, and not from itself, was the
Word made flesh. And if not from itself, but
from something else, from what can we more
suitably suppose that the Word became -flesh
than from that flesh in which it submitted to
the dispensation? " And (we have a proof of

1 Matt. xii. 41, 42.

2 De Hebionis opinione.

3 Hominis.

4 Viri.

5 Vacabat.

6 As we have often observed, the term Spiritus is used by Ter-
tuUian to express the Divine Nature in Christ. Anti-Marcion,
p. 375, note 13.

7 Dispositio rationis.

8 Proferendum.


9 John 1. 14.
10 Ne


Tec periclitatus quasi.
II Literally, " in which it became yf^jA."


the same conclusion in the fact) that the Lord
Himself sententiously and distinctly pro-
nounced, "that which is born of the flesh is
flesh," '" even because it is born of the flesh.
But if He here spoke of a human being simply,
and not of Himself, (as you maintain) then
you must deny absolutely that Christ is man,
and must maintain that human nature was not
suitable to Him. And then He adds, " That
which is born of the Spirit is spirit," '^ because
God is a Spirit, and He was born of God.
Now this description is certainly even more
applicable to Him than it is to those who be-
lieve in Him. But if this passage indeed ap-
ply to Him, then why does not the preceding
one also ? For you cannot divide their rela-
tion, and adapt this to Him, and the previous
clause to all other men, especially as you do
not deny that Christ possesses the two sub-
stances, both of the flesh and of the Spirit.
Besides, as He was in possession both of flesh
and of Spirit, He cannot possibly, when speak-
ing of the condition of the two substances
which He Himself bears, be supposed to
have determined that the Spirit indeed was
His own, but that, the flesh was not His own.
Forasmuch, therefore, as He is of the Spirit
He is God the Spirit, and is born of God;
just as He is also born of the flesh of man,
being generated in the flesh as man.'-*

CHAP. XIX. CHRIST, AS TO HIS DIVINE NATURE,

AS THE WORD OF GOD, BECAME FLESH, NOT
BY CARNAL CONCEPTION, NOR BY THE WILL
OF THE FLESH AND OF MAN, BUT BY THE

WILL OF GOD. Christ's divine nature, of
ITS OWN accord, descended into the vir-
gin's WOMB.

What, then, is the meaning of this passage,
" Born '5 not of blood, nor of the will of the
flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God ? " '*
I shall make more use of this passage after
I have confuted those who have tampered
with it. They maintain that it was written
thus (in the plural) '^ " Who were borfi, not of
blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the
will of man, but of God," as if designating
those who were before mentioned as " believ-
ing in His name," in order to point out the
existence of that mysterious seed of the elect
and spiritual which they appropriate to them-
selves.'^ But how can this be, when all who


" John iii. 6.

13 John iii. 6.

'4 [A very perspicuous statement of the Incarnation is set forth
in this chapter.]

15 Tertullian reads this in the singular number, " natus est."

•6John i. 13.

17 We need not say that the mass of critical authority is against
Tertullian, and with his opponents, in their reading of this pas-
sage.

la He refers to the Valentinians. See our translation of this
tract against them, chap, xxv., etc., p. 515, supra.


538


ON THE FLESH OF CHRIST.


[chap. xxJH
: receivec^H


believe in the name of the Lord are, by rea-
son of the common principle of the human
race, born of blood, and of the will of the
flesh, and of man, as indeed is Valentinus him-
self ? The expression is in the singular num-
ber, as referring to the Lord, " He was born
of God." And very properly, because Christ
is the Word of God, and with the Word the
Spirit of God, and by the Spirit the Power of
God, and whatsoever else appertains to God.
As flesh, however, He is not of blood, nor of
the will of the flesh, nor of man, because it was
by the will of God that the Word was made
flesh. To the flesh, indeed, and not to the
Word, accrues the denial of the nativity which
is natural to us all as men,' because it was as
flesh that He had thus to be born, and not as
the Word. Now, whilst the passage actually
denies that He was born of the will of the
flseh, how is it that it did not also deny (that
He was born) of the substance of the flesh ?
For it did not disavow the substance of the
flesh when it denied His being "born of
blood," but only the matter of the seed,
which, as all know, is the warm blood as con-
verted by ebullition ' into the coagulum of the
woman's blood. In the cheese, it is from the
coagulation that the milky substance acquires
that consistency, 3 which is condensed by in-
fusing the rennet. ■♦ We thus understand that
what is denied is the Lord's birth after sexual
intercourse (as is suggested by the phrase,
" the will of man and of the flesh "), not His
nativity from a woman's womb. Wny, too, is
it insisted on with such an accumulation of em-
phasis that He was not born of blood, nor of the
will of the flesh, nor (of the will) of man, if it
were not that His flesh was such that no man
could have any doubt on the point of its being
born from sexual intercourse ? Again, al-
though denying His birth from such cohabi-
tation, the passage did not deny that He was
born of real flesh; it rather affirmed this, by
the very fact that it did not deny His birth in
the flesh in the same way that it denied His
birth from sexual intercourse. Pray, tell me,
why the Spirit of Gods descended into a
woman's womb at all, if He did not do so for
the purpose of partaking of flesh from the
womb. For He could have become spiritual
flesh ^ without such a process, — much more
simply, indeed, without the womb than in it.
He had no reason for enclosing Himself with-
in one, if He was to bear forth nothing from
it. Not without reason, however, did He de-


scend into a womb. Therefore He receive
(flesh) therefrom; else, if He received noth
ing therefrom. His descent into it would have
been without a reason, especially if He meant
to become flesh of that sort which was not de-
rived from a womb, that is to say, a spiritual
one. 7


CHAP. XX. CHRIST BORN OF A VIRGIN, OF HER

SUBSTANCE. THE PHYSIOLOGICAL FACTS OF j
HIS REAL AND EXACT BIRTH OF A HUMAK
MOTHER, AS SUGGESTED BY CERTAIN PAS-j
SAGES OF SCRIPTURE.

But to what shifts you resort, in your at-
tempt to rob the syllable ex [of) ^ of its.]
proper force as a preposition, and to substi-
tute another for it in a sense not found
throughout the Holy Scriptures! You say
that He was born through^ a virgin, not of""
a virgin, and in a womb, not of a womb, be-
cause the angel in the dream said to Joseph,.
"That which is born in her" (not of her)
" is of the Holy Ghost." " But the fact is,,
if he had meant " of her," he must have said
" in her;" for that which was of her, was also-
in her. The angel's expression, therefore,.
" in her," has precisely the same meaning as.
the phrase *' of her." It is, however, a fortu-
nate circumstance that Matthew also, when
tracing down the Lord's descent from Abra-
ham to Mary, says, " Jacob begat Joseph the
husband of Mary, of whom was bom Christ."'*
But Paul, too, silences these critics '^ when he
says, "God sent forth His Son, made of a
woman." "* Does he mean through a woman,
or in a woman ? Nay more, for the sake of
greater emphasis, he uses the word " made "
rather than dorn, although the use of the latter
expression would have been simpler. But by
saying ^^ madey" he not only confirmed the
statement, "The Word was made flesh,"'-
but he also asserted the reality of the flesh
which was made of a virgin We shall have
also the support of the Psalms on this point, —
not the "Psalms" indeed of Valentinus the
apostate, and heretic, and Platonist, but the
Psalms of David, the most illustrious saint
and well-known prophet. He sings to us of
Christ, and through his voice Christ indeed
also sang concerning Himself. Hear, then,
Christ the Lord speaking to God the Father:
" Thou art He that didst draw '* me out of my


» Formalis nostrae nativitatis.
sDespumatione.

3 Vis.

4 Medicant'o. [This is based on Job x. lo, a favourite passage
with the Fathers in expounding the generative process.]

5 i. e. The Son of God.

6 Which is all that the heretics assign to Him.


7 Such as Valentinus ascribed to Him. Sec above, c. xv. p. s^i-

8 Indicating the materia/ or ingredient, " out of.

9 Per.
10 Ex.

" Matt. i. 2o.

12 Matt. i. i6.

13 Grammaticis.

14 Gal. iv. 4.
J5 John i. 14.
16 Avulsisti.


CHAP. XXI.]


ON THE FLESH OF CHRIST.


539


mother's womb."* Here is the first point.
"Thou art my hope from my mother's
breasts; upon Thee have I been cast from the
womb."' Here is another point. "Thou
art my God from my mother's belly."'
Here is a third point. Now let us carefully
attend to the sense of these passages. " Thou
didst draw me," He says, "out of the
womb." Now what is it which is drawn, if it
be not that which adheres, that which is firm-
ly fastened to anything from which it is drawn
in order to be sundered ? If He clave not to
the womb, how could He have been drawn
from it ? If He who clave thereto was drawn
from it, how could He have adhered to it, if
it were not that, all the while He was in the
womb, He was ti6d to it, as to His origin,*
by the umbilical cord, which communicated
growth to Him from the matrix ? Even when
one strange matter amalgamates with another,
it becomes so entirely incorporated s with that
with which it amalgamates, that when it is
drawn off from it, it carries with it some part
of the body from which it is torn, as if in
consequence of the severance of the union
and growth which the constituent pieces had
communicated to each other. But what were
His " mother's breasts " which He mentions ?
No doubt they were those which He sucked.
Midwives, and doctors, and naturalists, can
tell us, from the nature of women's breasts,
whether they usually flow at any other time
than when the womb is affected with pregnancy,
when the veins convey therefrom the blood of
the lower parts ^ to the viamilla, and in the
act of transference convert the secretion into
the nutritious 7 substance of milk. Whence
it comes to pass that during the period of
lactation the monthly issues are suspended.
But if the Word was made flesh of Himself
without any communication with a womb, no
mother's womb operating upon Him with its
usual function and support, how could the
lacteal fountain have been conveyed (from
the womb) to the breasts, since (the womb)
can only effect the change by actual possession
of the proper substance 2 But it could not pos-
sibly have had blood for transformation into
milk, unless it possessed the causes of blood
also, that is to say, the severance (by birth)^
of its own flesh fro7n the mother's womb.
Now it is easy to see what was the novelty of
Christ's being born of a virgin. It was simply
this, that (He was born) of a virgin in the


1 Ps. xxii. 9.

2 Vers. 9, 10.
3Ver. 10.

4 i. e. of His flesh.

5 Concarnatus et convisceratiis
structure."

6 Sentinam illam infemi sanguinis.

7 Lactiorem.

^ Avulsionem.


united in flesh and internal


real manner which we have indicated, in order
that our regeneration might have virginal
purity, — spiritually cleansed from all pollu-
tions through Christ, who was Himself a vir-
gin, even in the flesh, in that He was born of
a virgin's flesh.

CHAP. XXI. — THE WORD OP GOD DID NOT BE-
COME FLESH EXCEPT IN THE VIROIN'S WOMB
AND OF HER SUBSTANCE. THROUGH HIS
MOTHER HE IS DESCENDED FROM HER GREAT
ANCESTOR DAVID. HE IS DESCRIBED BOTH IN
THE OLD AND IN THE NEW TESTamivi i^
<*THE FRUIT OF DAVID'S LOINS."

Whereas, then, they contend that the novelty
(of Christ's birth) consisted in this, that as the
Word of God became flesh without the seed
of a human father, so there should be no flesh
of the virgin mother (assisting in the trans-
action), why should not the novelty rather be
confined to this, that His flesh, although not
born of seed, should yet have proceeded from
flesh ? I should like to go more closely into
this discussion. " Behold," says he, "a vir-
gin shall conceive in the womb."' Cotueive
what ? I ask. The Word of God, of course,
and not the seed of man, and in order, cer-
tainly, to bring forth a son. "For," says
he, "she shall bring forth a son."'" There-
fore, as the act of conception was her own,"
so also what she brought forth was her own,
also, although the cause of conception" was
not. If, on the other hand, the Word became
flesh of Himself, then He both conceived and
brought forth Himself, and the prophecy is
stultified. For in that case a virgin did not
conceive, and did 7wt bring forth; since what-
ever she brought forth from the conception of
the Word, is not her own flesh. But is this
the only statement of prophecy which will be
frustrated ? '' Will not the angel's announce-
ment also be subverted, that the virgin should
" conceive in her womb arid bring forth a
son ?" '* And will not in fact every scripture
which declares that Christ had a mother?
For how could she have been His mother,
unless He had been in her womb ? But then
He received nothing from her womb which
could make her a mother in whose womb He
had been. '5 Such a name as this'* a strange
flesh ought not to assume. No flesh can speak
of a mother's womb but that which is itself
the offspring of that womb; nor can any be
the offspring of the said womb if it owe its


9 Isa. vii. 14 ; Matt. i. 23.
i<^ See the same passages.
Ipsi


'^ Ouod conccpit :
«^ Kvacuabitur.
"4 Luke i. 31.
'5 An objection.
"•The rejoinder.


what she conceived."


ON THE FLESH OF CHRIST.


[chat. XXII.


birth solely to itself. Therefore even Elisa-
beth must be silent although she is carrying
in her womb the prophetic babe, which was
already conscious of his Lord, and is, more-
over, filled with the Holy Ghost.' For with-
out reason does she say, '* and whence is this
to me that the mother of my Lord should
come to me ? " ' If it was not as her son, but
only as a stranger that Mary carried Jesus in
her womb, how is it she says, " Blessed is the
fruit of thy womb ? ^ What is this fruit of the
womb, which received not its germ from the
womb, which had not its root in the womb,
which belongs not to her whose is the womb,
and which is no doubt the real fruit of the
womb — even Christ? Now, since He is the
blossom of the stem which sprouts from the
root of Jesse; since, moreover, the root of
Jesse is the family of David, and the stem of
the root is Mary descended from David, and
the blossom of the stem is Mary's son, who is
-called Jesus Christ, will not He also be the
fruit ? For the blossom is the fruit, because
through the blossom and from the blossom
^very product advances from its rudimental
condition * to perfect fruit. What then ?
T/tey deny to the fruit its blossom, and to the
blossom its stem, and to the stem its root; so
that the root fails to secure s for itself, by
means of the stem, that special product
which comes from the stem, even the blossom
and the fruit; for every step indeed in a
genealogy is traced from the latest up to the
first, so that it is now a well-known fact that
the flesh of Christ is inseparable,^ not merely
from Mary, but also from David through
Mary, and from Jesse through David. " This
fruit," therefore, "of David's loins," that is
to say, of his posterity in the flesh, God swears
to him that " He will raise up to sit upon his
throne." ^ If " of David's loins," how much
rather is He of Mary's loins, by virtue of
whom He is in '* the loins of David ? "

-CHAP. XXII. HOLY SCRIPTURE IN THE NEW

TESTAMENT, EVEN IN ITS VERY FIRST VERSE,
TESTIFIES TO CHRIST's TRUE FLESH. IN
VIRTUE OF WHICH HE IS INCORPORATED IN
THE HUMAN STOCK OF DAVID, AND ABRAHAM,
AND ADAM.

They may, then, obliterate the testimony of
the devils which proclaimed Jesus the son of
David; but whatever unworthiness there be in
this testimony, that of the apostles they will
never be able to efface. There is, first of all,


I Luke i. 41.
«Ver. 43-
3Ver. 42.
4 Eruditur.
SQuominus vindicet.

6 Adhaerere.

7 Ps. cxxxii. 1 1 ; also Acts ii. 30.


Matthew, that most faithful chronicier® of the
Gospel, because the companion of the Lord;
for no other reason in the world than to show
us clearly the fleshly original ' of Christ, he
thus begins /lis Gospel: "The book of the
generation of Jesus Christ, the son of David,
the son of Abraham." '° With a nature issu-
ing from such fountal sources, and an order
gradually descending to the birth of Christ,
what else have we here described than the
very flesh of Abraham and of David conveying
itself down, step after step, to the very vir-
gin, and at last introducing Christ, — nay,
producing Christ Himself of the virgin?
Then, again, there is Paul, who was at once
both a disciple, and a master, and a witness
of the selfsame Gospel; as' an apostle of the
same Christ, also, he affirms that Christ
" was made of the seed of David, according to
the flesh," " — which, therefore, was His own
likewise. Christ's flesh, then, is of David's
seed. Since He is of the seed of David in
consequence of Mary's flesh, He is therefore
of Mary's flesh because of the seed of David.
In what way so ever you torture the statement.
He is either of the flesh of Mary because of
the seed of David, or He is of the seed of
David because of the flesh of Mary. The
whole discussion is terminated by the same
apostle, when he declares Christ to be "the seed
of Abraham." And if of Abraham, how much
more, to be sure, of David, as a more recent
progeriitor! For, unfolding the promised bless-
ing upon all nations in the person" of Abra-
ham, "And in thy seed shall all nations of
the earth be blessed," he adds, "He saith not,
And to seeds, as of many; but as of one. And
to thy seed, which is Christ." '^ When we
read and believe these things, what sort of
flesh ought we, and can we, acknowledge in
Christ? Surely none other than Abraham's,
since Christ is " the seed of Abraham;" none
other than Jesse's, since Christ is the blossom
of "the stem of Jesse;" none other than
David's, since Christ is "the fruit of David's
loins;" none other than Mary's, since Christ
came from Mary's womb; and, higher still,
none other than Adam's, since Christ is "the
second Adam." The consequence, therefore,
is that they must either maintain, that those
(ancestors) had a spiritual flesh, that so there
might be derived to Christ the same condi-
tion of substance, or else allow that the flesh of
Christ was not a spiritual one, since it is not
traced from the origin'* of a spiritual stock.


8 Commentator.

9 Originis carnalis :
loMatt. i. 1.
" Rom. i. 3 ; 2 Tim. ii. 8.

12 In nomine : or, " for the sake of
'3 Gal. iii. 8, 16.
14 Censetur.


origin of the flesh of.


CHAP. XXIV.l


ON THE FLESH OF CHRIST.


541


CHAP. XXIIl. SIMEON S '' SIGN THAT SHOULD

BE CONTRADICTED," APPLIED TO THE HER-
ETICAL GAINSAYING OF THE TRUE BIRTH OF
CHRIST. ONE OF THE HERETICS* PARADOXES
TURNED IN SUPPORT OF CATHOLIC TRUTH.

We acknowledge, however, that the pro-
phetic declaration of Simeon is fulfilled, which
he spoke over the recently-born Saviour: '
"Behold, this child is set for the fall and ris-
ing again of many in Israel, and for a sign
that shall be spoken against."^ The sign
(here meant) is that of the birth of Christ, ac-
cording to Isaiah: " Therefore the Lord Him-
self shall give you a sign: behold, a virgin
shall conceive and bear a son." 3 We dis-
cover, then, what the sign is which is to be
spoken against — the conception and the par-
turition of the Virgin Mary, concerning which
these sophists '^ say: "She a virgin and yet
not a virgin bare, and yet did not bear;" just
as if such language, if indeed it must be uttered,
would not be more suitable even for our-
selves to use ! For " she bare," because she
produced offspring of her own flesh and " yet
she did not bear," since she produced Him
not from a husband's seed; she was " a vir-
gin," so far as (abstinence) from a husband
went, and " yet not a virgin," as regards her
bearing a child. There is not, however, that
parity of reasoning 7vhich the heretics affect:
in other words it does not follow that for the
reason "she did not bear, "s she who was "not
a virgin" was "yet a virgin," even because
she became a mother without any fruit of her
own womb. But with us there is no equivo-
cation, nothing twisted into a double sense.*
Light is light; and darkness, darkness; yea is
yea; and nay, nay; "whatsoever is more than
these cometh of evil."^ She who bare
(really) bare; and although she was a virgin
when she conceived, she was a wife® when
she brought forth her son. Now, as a wife,
she was under the very law of " opening the
womb,"' wherein it was quite immaterial
whether the birth of the male was by virtue of
a husband's co-operation or not;'"' it was the
same sex " that opened her womb. Indeed,
hers is the womb on account of which it is
written of others also: "Every male that
openeth the womb shall be called holy to the
Lord."" For who is really holy but the Son


1 Literally, " Lord."

2 Luke ii. 34.

3 Isa. vii. 14.

4 Academici isti : " this school of theirs."

5 i. e. " Because she produced not her son from her husband's
seed."

6 Defensionem.

7 Matt. V. 37.
SNupsit.

9 Nupsit ipsa patefacti corporis lege.

10 De vi mascuii admissi an emissi.

11 i. e. " The male."

" Ex. .xiii. 2 : Luke ii. 23.


of God ? Who properly opened the womb but
He who opened a closed oTie ? '^ But it is mar-
riage which opens the womb in all cases.
7Xt<? virgin's womb, therefore, was especially '♦
opened, because it was especially closed.
Indeed 's she ought rather to be called not a
virgin than a virgin, becoming a mother at a
leap, as it were, before she was a wife. And
what must be said more on this point? Since
it was in this sense that the apostle declared
that the Son of God was born not of a virgin,
but "of a woman," he in that statement
recognised the condition of the " opened
womb " which ensues in marriage.'* We read
in Ezekiel of " a heifer '? which brought forth,
and still did not bring forth. ' ' Now,see whether
it was not in view of your own future conten-
tions about the womb of Mary, that even then
the Holy Ghost set His mark upon you in this
passage; otherwise'® He would not, contrary
to His usual simplicity of style (in this
prophet), have uttered a sentence of such
doubtful import, especially when Isaiah ^says,.
" She shall conceive and bear a son." '»

CHAP. XXIV. — DIVINE STRICTURES ON VARIOUS
HERETICS DESCRIED IN VARIOUS PASSAGES OF
PROPHETICAL SCRIPTURE. THOSE WHO ASSAIL
THE TRUE DOCTRINE OF THE ONE LORD JESUS
CHRIST, BOTH GOD AND MAN, THUS CON-
DEMNED.

For when Isaiah hurls denunciation against
our very heretics, especially in his "Woe to
them that call evil good, and put darkness for
light," ^ he of course sets his mark upon
those amongst you " who preserve not in the
words they employ the light of their true sig-
nificance, (by taking care) that the soul should
mean only that which is so called, and \)lv^ flesh
simply that which is confest to our view and
6^<7^none other than the One who is preached. ="
Having thus Marcion in his prophetic view^
he says, " I am God, and there is none else;
there is no God beside me." ^^ And when in
another passage he says, in like manner, " Be-
fore me there was no God," '^ he strikes at
those inexplicable genealogies of the Valentin-
ian ^ons. Again, there is an answer to Ebion
in the Scripture: " Born,'s not of blood, nor


»3Clausam : i.e. a virgrin's.

'4 Magis.

J5 Utique.

'6 Nuptialem passionem.

17 Epiphanius (Haer. xxx. 30) quotes from the apocryphal Ezekiel
this passage : Ttferai 19 fia/noAit, »cal cpoi/o'ii' — ov ti-TOKtv. So
Clem. Alex. Stromata^ vii. Oehler.

i8 Ceterum.

19 Isa. vii. 14.

20 Isa. V. 20.
2' Istos.

M Praedicatur.

23 Isa. xlv. 5.

24 Isa. xlvi. 9.

25 John i. 13. Tertullian's quotation is, as usual, in the singular,
" nattts."


542


ON THE FLESH OF CHRIST.


[chap. XXV


of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man,
but of God." In like manner, in the passage,
*' If even an angel of heaven preach unto you
any other gospel than that which we have
preached unto you, let him be anathema," '
he calls attention to the artful influence of
Philumene,^' the virgin friend of Apelles.
Surely he is antichrist who denies that Christ
has come in the flesh. ^ By declaring that
His flesh is simply and absolutely true, and
taken in the plafh sense of its own nature, the
Scripture aims a blow at all who make dis-
tinctions in it.-* In the same way, also,
when it defines the very Christ to be but one,
it shakes the fancies of those who exhibit a
multiform Christ, who make Christ to be one
being and Jesus another, — representing one
as escaping out of the midst of the crowds,
and the other as detained by them; one as ap-
pearing on a solitary mountain to three com-
panions, clothed with glory in a cloud, the
other as an ordinary man holding intercourse
with all, 5 one as magnanimous, but the other
as timid ; lastly, one as suffering death, the other
as risen again, by means of which event they
maintain a resurrection of their own also, only
in another flesh. Happily, however. He who
suffered "will come again from heaven,"^
and by all shall He be seen, who rose again
from the dead. They too who crucified Him
shall see and acknowledge Him; that is to say,
His very flesh, against which they spent their
fury, and without which it would be impossible
for Himself either to exist or to be seen; so


xGal. i. 8.

2 Comp de Praescr. Haret.

3 I John iv. 3.

4 Disceptatores ejus.

5 Ceteris passivum.
*Acts i, II.


c. XXX. p, 257, supra.


that they must blush with shame who afiirm
that His flesh sits in heaven void of sensation,
like a sheath only, Christ being withdrawn
from it; as well as those who (maintain) that
His flesh and soul are just the same thing,'
or else that His soul is all that exists,^ but
that His flesh no longer lives.


CHAP. XXV. — CONCLUSION. THIS TREATISE

FORMS A PREFACE TO THE OTHER WORK, *' ON
THE RESURRECTION OF THE FLESH," PROVING
THE REALITY OF THE FLESH WHICH WAS TRULY
BORN, AND DIED, AND ROSE AGAIN.

Bnt let this suflice on our present subject;
for I think that by this time proof enough has
been adduced of the flesh in Christ having
both been born of the virgin, and being
human in its nature. And this discussion
alone might have been sufficient, without en-
countering the isolated opinions which have
been raised from different quarters. We have,
however, challenged these opinions to the test,
both of the arguments which sustain them,
and of the Scriptures which are appealed to, —
and this we have done ex abtindanti; so that
we have, by showing what the flesh of Christ
was, and whence it was derived, also prede-
termined the question, against all objectors,
of what that flesh was not. The resurrection,
however, of our own flesh will have to be
maintained in another little treatise, and so
bring to a close this present one, which serves
as a general preface, and which will pave the
way for the approaching subject now that it is
plain what kind of body that was which rose
again in Christ.


7 Tantundem.

8 Tantummodo.


ELUCIDATIONS.


(In the body of a dove, cap. iii. p. 523.)

The learned John Scott, in his invaluable work The Christian Life, ^ identifies the
glory shed upon the Saviour at his baptism, with that mentioned by Ezekiel (Cap. xliii. 2)
and adds: " In this same glorious splendor was Christ arrayed first at his Baptism and after-
ward at his Transfiguration. ... By the Holy Ghost's descending like a Dove, it is not
necessary we should understand his descending in the shape or form of a Dove, but that in
some glorious form, or appearance, he descended in the same manner as a Dove descends
.... Came down from above just as a dove with his wings spread forth is observed to do,


I quote the Ed. London, 1739, Vol. V., p. 249.


ELUCIDATIONS. 543


and lighted upon our Saviour's head." I quote this as the opinion of one of the most
learned and orthodox of divines, but not as my own, for I cannot reconcile it, as he strives to
<lo, with St. Luke iii. 22. Compare Justin Martyr, vol. i. p. 243, and note 6, this series.
Grotius observes, says Dr. Scott, that in the apocryphal Gospel of the Nazarenes^ it is said
that at the Baptism of our Lord "a great light shone round about the place."

IL

(His mother and His brethren, cap. vii. p. 527.)

It is not possible that the author of this chapter had ever conceived of the Blessed
Virgin otherwise than as '* Blessed among women," indeed, but enjoying no especial prerog-
ative as the mother of our Lord. He speaks of " denying her " and "putting her away "
after He began His Ministry, as He requires His ministers to do, after His example. How
■extraordinary this language — *' the repudiation of carnal relationship. " According to our
author, never charged with heresy on this point, the high rewards of the holy Mary, in the
world to come will be those due to her faith, not to the blessing of " her breasts and of her
womb." Christ designates those as " more blessed," who hear His word and keep it. This
the Blessed Virgin did pre-eminently, and herein was her own greater blessedness; that is,
{our author shews) her crown of glory depends chiefly, like that of other saints, on her faith
and works, not on her mere Maternity.


VI.


ON THE RESURRECTION OF THE FLESH.

THE HERETICS AGAINST WHOM THIS WORK IS DIRECTED, WERE THE
SAME WHO MAINTAINED THAT THE DEMIURGE, OR THE GOD WHO
CREATED THIS WORLD AND GAVE THE MOSAIC DISPENSATION, WAS
OPPOSED TO THE SUPREME GOD. HENCE THEY ATTACHED AN IDEA
OF INHERENT CORRUPTION AND WORTHLESSNESS TO ALL HIS WORKS
—AMONGST THE REST, TO THE FLESH OR BODY OF MAN ; AFFIRM-
ING THAT IT COULD NOT RISE AGAIN, AND THAT THE SOUL ALONE
WAS CAPABLE OF INHERITING IMMORTALITY.^

[TRANSLATED BY DR. HOLMES.]


CHAP. I. — THE DOCTRINE OF THE RESURREC-
TION OF THE BODY BROUGHT TO LIGHT BY
THE GOSPEL. THE FAINTEST GLIMPSES OF
SOMETHING LIKE IT OCCASIONALLY MET WITH
IN HEATHENISM. INCONSISTENCIES OF PAGAN
TEACHING.

The resurrection of the dead is the Chris-
tian's trust.'' By it we are believers. To
the belief of this (article of the faith) truth
compels us — that truth which God reveals, but
the crowd derides, which supposes that nothing
will survive after death. And yet they do
honour 3 to their dead, and that too in the
most expensive way according to their be-
quest, and with the daintiest banquets which
the seasons can produce,'* on the presumption
that those whom they declare to be incapable
of all perception still retain an appetite. s But
(let the crowd deride): I on my side must de-
ride it still more, especially when it burns up
its dead with harshest inhumanity, only to
pamper them immediately afterwards with
gluttonous satiety, using the selfsame fires


1 See Bp. Kaye, On TertiiUian, p. 256. A full examination of
the tenets of these Gnostic heretics occurs in our author's Treatise
against Marcion. An able review of TertuUian's line of thouc^ht
in this work on the resurrection occurs in Neander's A ntignostikus,
Bohn's translation, ii. 478-486. [There is a decisive ebullition of
Montanistic fanaticism in cap. xi., and in the second chapter there
is a reference to the De Came Christi. Date this treatise circa

A.D. 208. 1

2 Fiducia.

3 Parentant.

4 Pro temporibus esculentorum.

5 Etiam desiderar-

35


to honour them and to insult them. What
piety is that which mocks its victims with
cruelty? Is it sacrifice or insult (which the
crowd offers), when it burns its offerings to
those it has already burnt?* But the wise,
too, join with the vulgar crowd in their opinion
sometimes. There is nothing after death,
according to the school of Epicurus. After
death all things come to an end, even death
itself, says Seneca to like effect. It is satis-
factory, however, that the no less important
philosophy of Pythagoras and Empedocles,
and the Plan'tonists, take the contrary view,
and declare the soul to be immortal; affirming,
morever, in a way which most nearly ap-
proaches (to our own doctrine), ^ that the soul
actually returns into bodies, although not the
same bodies, and not even those of human
beings inavariably: thus Euphorbus is sup-
posed to have passed into Phythagoras, and
Homer into a peacock. They firmly pro-
nounced the soul's renewal^ to be in a body,'
(deeming it) more tolerable to change the
quality (of the corporeal state) than to deny
it wholly: they at least knocked at the door
of truth, although they entered not. Thus
the world, with all its errors, does not ignore
the resurrection of the dead.


6 Cum crematis cremat.

7 Adhuc proxime : " Christianae scilicet doctrinae." Oehler-
SRecidivatum.

9Corporalem.


546


ON THE RESURRECTION OF THE FLESH.


[chap. II.


CHAP. n. — THE JEWISH SADDUCEES A LINK BE-
TWEEN THE PAGAN PHILOSOPHERS AND THE
HERETICS ON THIS DOCTRINE. ITS FUNDA-
MENTAL IMPORTANCE ASSERTED. THE SOUL
FARES BETTER THAN THE BODY, IN HERETI-
CAL ESTIMATION, AS TO ITS FUTURE STATE.
ITS EXTINCTION, HOWEVER, WAS HELD BY ONE
LUC AN.

Since there is even within the confines of
God's Church^ a sect which is more nearly
•allied to the Epicureans than to the prophets,
<in opportunity is afforded us of knowing^
what estimate Christ forms of the (said sect,
even the) Sadducees. For to Christ was it
reserved to lay bare everything which be-
fore was concealed: to impart certainty to
doubtful points; to accomplish those of which
men had had but a foretaste; to give present
reality to the objects of prophecy; and to fur-
nish not only by Himself, but actually in Him-
self, certain proofs of the resurrection of the
dead. It is, however, against other Sadducees
that we have now to prepare ourselves, but
still partakers of their doctrine. For instance,
they allow a moiety of the resurrection; that
is, simply of the soul, despising the flesh, just
as they also do the Lord of the flesh Himself.
No other persons, indeed, refuse to concede
to the substance of the body its recovery from
death, 3 than the heretical inventors of a second
deity. Driven then, as they are, to give a
different dispensation to Christ, so that He
may not be accounted as belonging to the
Creator, they have achieved their first error
in the article of Yi'is very flesh; contending
with Marcion and Basilides that it possessed
no reality; or else holding, after the heretical
tenets of Valentinus, and according to Ap-
elles, that it had qualities peculiar to itself.
And so it follows that they shut out from all
recovery from death that substance of which
they say that Christ did not partake, con-
fidently assuming that it furnishes the strong-
est presumption against the resurrection, since
the flesh is already risen in Christ. Hence it
is that we have ourselves previously issued
our volume 0?i the flesh of Christ; in which we
both furnish proofs of its reality,* in opposi-
tion to the idea of its being a vain phantom;
pnd claim for it a human nature without any
peculiarity of condition — such a nature as has
marked out Christ to be both man and the
Son of man. For when we prove Him to be
invested with the flesh and in a bodily condi-
tion, we at the same time refute heresy, by
establishing the rule that no other being than


» A pud Deum.
^Sciemus.

3 Salutem.

4 Earn s<:)lidam.


the Creator must be believed to be God, since
we show that Christ, in whom God is plainly
discerned, is precisely of such a nature as the
Creator promised that He should be. Being
thus refuted touching God as the Creator, and
Christ as the Redeemer of the flesh, they will
at once be defeated also on the resurrection of
the flesh. No procedure, indeed, can be more
reasonable. And we affirm that controversy
with heretics should in most cases be con-
ducted in this way. For due method requires
that conclusions should always be drawn from
the most important premises, in 9rder that
there be a prior agreement on the essential
point, by means of which the particular ques-
tion under review may be said to have been
determined. Hence it is that the heretics,
from their conscious weakness, never conduct
discussion in an orderly manner. They are
well aware how hard is their task in insinuating
the existence of a second god, to the disparage-
ment of the Creator of the world, who is
known to all men naturally by the testimony
of His works, who is before all others in the
mysteries s of His bei?ig, and is especially
manifested in the prophets;^ then, under the
pretence of considering a more urgent inquiry,
namely man's own salvation — a question which
transcends all others in its importance — they
begin with doubts about the resurrection; for
there is greater difficulty in believing the res-
urrection of the flesh than the oneness of the
Deity. In this way, after they have deprived
the discussion of the advantages of its logical
order, and have embarrassed it with doubtful
insinuations 7 in disparagement of the flesh,
they gradually draw their argument to the re-
ception of a second god after destroying and
changing the very ground of our hopes. For
when once a man is fallen or removed from
the sure hope which he had placed in the
Creator, he is easily led away to the obiect of
a different hope, whom however of his own
accord he can hardly help suspecting. Now
it is by a discrepancy in the promises that a
difference of gods is insinuated. How many
do we thus see drawn into the net, vanquished
on the resurrection of the flesh, before they
could carry their point on the oneness of the
Deity ! In respect, then, of the heretics, we
have shown with what weapons we ought to
meet them. And indeed we have already en-
countered them in treatises severally directed
against them: on the one only God and His
Christ, in our work against Marcion,* on the
Lord's flesh, in our book against the four


5 In sacramentis.

6 In praudicationibus : " in the declarations of the prophets.

7 Scrupulis.

S See books ii. and iii. of our A nti-Marcton.


CHAP. III.]


ON THE RESURRECTION OF THE FLESH.


547


heresies,' for the special purpose of opening
the way to the present inquiry : so that we
have now only to discuss the resurrection of the
flesh, (treating it) just as if it were uncertain
in regard to ourselves also, that is, in the
system of the Creator. = Because many persons
are uneducated; still more are of faltering
faith, and several are weak-minded: these will
have to be instructed, directed, strengthened,
inasmuch as the very oneness of the Godhead
will be defended along with the maintenance
of our doctrine. 3 For if the resurrection
of the flesh be denied, that prime article of the
faith is shaken; if it be asserted, that is es-
tablished. There is no need, I suppose, to
treat of the soul's safety ; for nearly all the
heretics, in whatever way they conceive of it,
certainly refrain from denying that. We may
ignore a certain Lucan,* who does not spare
€ven this part of our nature, which he follows
Aristotle in reducing to dissolution, and sub-
stitutes some other thing in lieu of it. Some
third nature it is which, according to him, is to
rise again, neither soul nor flesh; in other
words, not man, but a bear perhaps — for in-
stance, Lucan himself.^ Even he'^ has re-
ceived from us a copious notice in our book
on the entire condition of the soul,^ the es-
pecial immortality of which we there maintain,
whilst we also both acknowledge the dissolution
of the flesh alone, and emphatically assert its
restitution. Into the body of that work were
collected whatever points we elsewhere had to
reserve from the pressure of incidental causes.
For as it is my custom to touch some ques-
tions but lightly on their first occurrence, so I
am obliged also to postpone the consideration
of them, until the outline can be filled in with
complete detail, and the deferred points be
taken up on their own merits.

CHAP. III. — SOME TRUTHS HELD £. . EN BY THE
HEATHEN. THEY WERE, HOWEVER, MORE
OFTEN WRONG BOTH IN RELIGIOUS OPINIONS
AND IN MORAL PRACTICE. THE HEATHEN
NOT TO BE FOLLOWED IN THEIR IGNORANCE
OF THE CHRISTIAN MYSTERY. THE HERETICS
PERVERSELY PRONE TO FOLLOW THEM.

One may no doubt be wise in the things of
God, even from one's natural powers, but only
in witness to the truth, not in maintenance of

1 He means the De Came Christi.

2 Tanquam penes nos quoque incerta, id est penes Creatorem.
This obscure clause is very variously read. One reading, approved
by Fr. Junius, has: "Tanquam penes nos incertum, dum sit
quoque certum penes Creatorem," q. d., " As a subject full of un-
certainty as respects ourselves, although of an opposite character
in relation to the Creator;' whatever that may mean.

3 Hoc latere.

4Compare /Irt^7'. Omnes Hcereses, c. vi.

5 Varro's words help us to understand this rough joke : " Ursi
Lucana ori'g-o," etc. {De Ling. Lat. v. loo.)

6 Iste : rather )m.?. subject than his person.
7 i.e. the De Anitna.


error; (only) when one acts in accordance with,
not in opposition to, the divine dispensation.
For some things are known even by nature:
the immortality of the soul, for instance, is
held by many; the knowledge of our God is
possessed by all. I may use, therefore, the
opinion of a Plato, when he declares, ** Every
soul is immortal." I may use also the con-
science of a nation, when it attests the God of
gods. I may, in like manner, use all the other
intelligences of our common nature, when they
pronounce God to be a judge. *' God sees, "
(say they); and, " I commend you to God." ^
But when they say, "What has undergone
death is dead, " and, *' Enjoy life whilst you
live," and, " After death all things come to an
end, even death itself; " then I must remember
both that " the heart of man is ashes, " ' ac-
cording to the estimate of God, and that the
very "wisdom of the world is foolishness, "
(as the inspired word) pronounces it to be."
Then, if even the heretic seek refuge in the
depraved thoughts of the vulgar, or the imag-
inations of the world, I must say to him: Part
company with the heathen, O heretic ! for al-
though you are all agreed in imagining a God,
yet while you do so in the name of Christ, so
long as you deem yourself a Christian, you are
a different man from a heathen: give him
back his own views of things, since he does
not himself learn from yours. Why lean upon
a blind guide, if you have eyes of your own ?
Why be clothed by one who is naked, if you
have put on Christ ? Why use the shield of
another, when the apostle gives you armour
of your own ? It would be better for him to
learn from you to acknowledge the resurrection
of the flesh, than for you from him to deny it;
because if Christians must needs deny it, it
would be sufficient if they did so from their own
knowledge, without any instruction from the
ignorant multitude. He, therefore, will not
be a Christian who shall deny this doctrine
which is confessed by Christians; denying it,
moreover, on grounds which are adopted by a
man who is not a Christian. Take away, in-
deed, from the heretics the wisdom which they
share with the heathen, and let them support
tUeir inquiries from the Scriptures alone: they
will then be unable to keep their ground. For
that which commends men's common sense is
its very simplicity, and its participation in the
same feelings, and its community of opinions;
and it is deemed to be all the more trustworthy,
inasmuch as its definitive statements are naked
and open, and known to all. Divine reason,
on the contrary, lies in the very pith and mar-


8 Compare the De Test.

9 Isa. xliv. 2o.

'0 1 Cor. 1. 2o, iii. 19.


and De A nim. xlii.


548


ON THE RESURRECTION OF THE FLESH.


[chap. v.


row of things, not on the surface, and very
often is at variance with appearances.

CHAP. IV. HEATHENS AND HERETICS ALIKE IN

THEIR VILIFICATION OF THE FLESH AND ITS
FUNCTIONS. THE ORDINARY CAVILS AGAINST
THE FINAL RESTITUTION OF SO WEAK AND
IGNOBLE A SUBSTANCE.

Hence it is that heretics start at once from
this point,' from which they sketch the first
draft of their dogmas, and afterwards add the
details, being well aware how easily men's
minds are caught by its influence, (and ac-
tuated) by that community of human sentiment
which is so favourable to their designs. Is
there anything else that you can hear of from
the heretic, as also from the heathen, earlier
in time or greater in extent? Is not (their
burden) from the beginning and everywhere
an invective against the flesh — against its ori-
gin, against its substance, against the casual-
ties and the invariable end which await it; un-
clean from its first formation of the dregs of
the ground, uncleaner afterwards from the
mire of its own seminal transmission; worth-
less,=' weak, covered with guilt, laden with
misery, full of trouble; and after all this record
of its degradation, dropping into its original
earth and the appellation of a corpse, and
destined to dwindle away even from this ^
loathsome name into none henceforth at all —
into the very death of all designation ? Now
you are a shrewd man, no doubt: will you then
persuade jjw/r^^^, that after this flesh has been
withdrawn from sight, and touch, and memory,
it can never be rehabilitated from corruption
to integrity, from a shattered to a solid state,
from an empty to a full condition, from nothing
at all to something — the devouring fires, and
the waters of the sea, and the maws of beasts,
and the crops of birds and the stomachs of
fishes, and time's own great paunch ■♦ itself,
of course yielding it all up again ? Shall the
same flesh which has fallen to decay be so ex-
pected to recover, as that the lame, and the
one-eyed, and the blind, and the leper, and
the palsied shall come back again, although
there can be no pleasure in returning to thgir
old condition? Or shall they be whole, and
so have to fear exposure to such sufferings ?
What, in that case, (must we say) of the con-
sequences of resuming the flesh? Will it
again be subject to all its present wants, es-
pecially meats and drinks? Shall we have
with our lungs to float (in air or water), s and


I Of the resurrection of the body.

3 Frivolas.

3 Isto.

4Gula.

5 Natandum pulmonibus.


suffer pain in our bowels, and with organs of
shame to feel no shame, and with all our limbs
to toil and labour ? Must there again be ulcers,
and wounds, and fever, and gout, and once
more the wishing to die ? Of course these will
be the longings incident on the recovery of
the flesh, only the repetition of desires to es-
cape out of it. Well now, we have (stated)
all this in very subdued and delicate phrases, as
suited to the character of our style; but (would
you know) how great a licence of unseemly
language these men actually use, you must
test them in their conferences, whether they
be heathens or heretics.

CHAP. v. SOME CONSIDERATIONS IN REPLY

EULOGISTIC OF THE FLESH. IT WAS CREATED
BY GOD. THE BODY OF MAN WAS, IN FACT,
PREVIOUS TO HIS SOUL.

Inasmuch as all uneducated men, therefore,
still form their opinions after these common-
sense views, and as the falterers and the weak-
minded have a renewal of their perplexities
occasioned by the selfsame views; and as the
first battering-ram which is directed against
ourselves is that which shatters the condition
of the flesh, we must on our side neces-
sarily so manage our defences, as to guard,
first of all, the condition of the flesh, their
disparagement of it being repulsed by our
own eulogy. The heretics, therefore, chal-
lenged us to use our rhetoric no less than
our philosophy. Respecting, then, this frail
and poor, worthless body, which they do not
indeed hesitate to call evil, even if it had been
the work of angels, as Menander and Marcus,
are pleased to think, or the formation of some
fiery being,equally an angel, as Apelles teaches,
it would be quite enough for securing respect
for the body, that it had the support and pro-
tection of even a secondary deity. The angels,
we know, rank next to God. Now, whatever
be the supreme God of each heretic, I should
not unfairly derive the dignity of the flesh
likewise from Him to whom was present the
will for its production. For, of course, if He
had not willed its production. He would have
prohibited it, when He knew it was in progress.
It follows, then, that even on their principle
the flesh is equally the work of God. There
is no work but belongs to Him who has per-
mitted it to exist. It is indeed a happy cir-
cumstance, that most of their doctrines, in-
cluding even the harshest, accord to our God
the entire formation of man. How mighty
He is, you know full well who believe that He
is the only God. Let, then, the flesh begin
to give you pleasure, since the Creator thereof
is so great. But, you say, even the world is
the work of God, and yet " the fashion of this


I


CHAP. VI. J


ON THE RESURRECTION OF THE FLESH.


549


world passeth away,"' as the apostle himself
testifies; nor must it be predetermined that
the world will be restored, simply because it
is the work of God. And surely if the uni-
verse, after its ruin, is not to be formed again,
why should a portion of it be ? You are right,
if a portion is on an equality with the whole.
But we maintain that there is a difference. In
the first place, because all things were made
by the Word of God, and without Him was
nothing made.= Now the flesh, too, had its
existence from the Word of God, because of
the principle, 3 that here should be nothing
without that Word. "Let us make man,"'*
said He, before He created him, and added,
"with our hand," for the sake of his pre-
eminence, that so he might not be compared
with the rest of creation, 5 And "God," says
(the Scripture), "formed man."^ There is
undoubtedly a great difference in the pro-
cedure, springing of course from the nature of
the case. For the creatures which were made
were inferior to him for whom they were made;
and they were made for man, to whom they
were aferwards made subject by God. Right-
ly, therefore, had the creatures which were
thus intended for subjection, come forth into
being at the bidding and command and sole
power of the dhmie voice; whilst man, on the
contrary, destined to be their lord, was formed
by God Himself, to the intent that he might
be able to exercise his mastery, being created
by the Master the Lord Himself. Remember,
too, that man is properly called flesh, which
had a prior occupation in man's designation:
"And God formed man the clay of the
ground." 7 He now became man, who was
hitherto clay. " And He breathed upon his
face the breath of life, and man (that is, the
clay) became a living soul; and God placed
the man whom He had formed in the gar-
den."^ So that man was clay at first, and
only afterwards ma7i entire. I wish to impress
this on your attention, with a view to your
knowing, that whatever God has at all pur-
posed or promised to man, is due not to the
soul simply, but to the flesh also; if not arising
out of any community in their origin, yet at
all events by the privilege possessed by the latter
in its name.^


1 I Cor. vii. 31.

2 John i. 3.

3 Formam.

4 Gen. i. 26.

5 Universitati.

6 Gen. i. 27.

7 Limum de terra : Gen. ii. 7.

8 Gen. ii. 7, 8.

9 It having just been said that flesh was man's prior designa-
tion.

1° Quid enim si.

" Adeo.

I Ista.

13 Gen. i. 26.


CHAP. VI. NOT THK LOWLINKSS OF THE MA-

TKRIAL, HUT THE DIGNITY AND SKILL OK THE
MAKER, MUST HE REMEMBERED, IN GAUGING
THE EXCELLENCE OF THE FLESH. CHRIST
PARTOOK OF OUR FLESH.

Let me therefore pursue the subject before
me — if I can but succeed in vindicating for
the flesh as much as was conferred on it by Him
who made it, glorying as it even then was,
because that poor paltry material, clay, found
its way into the hands of God, whatever these
were, happy enough at merely being touched
by them. But why this glorying I Was it
that,'° without any further labour, the clay
had instantly assumed its form at the touch of
God ? The truth is," a great matter was in
progress, out of which the creature under con-
sideration " was being fashioned. So often
then does it receive honour, as often as it ex-
periences the hands of God, when it is touched
by them, and pulled, and drawn out, and
moulded into shape. Imagine God wholly
employed and absorbed in it — in His hand.
His eye. His labour. His purpose, His wis-
dom, His providence, and above all, in His
love, which was dictating the lineaments (of
this creature). For, whatever was the form
and expression which was then given to the
clay (by the Creator) Christ was in His
thoughts as one day to become man, because
the Word, too, was to be both clay and flesh,
even as the earth was then. For so did the
Father previously say to the Son: "Let us
make man in our own image, after our like-
ness." '3 And God made man, that is to say,
the creature which He moulded and fashioned;
after the image of God (in other words, of
Christ) did He make him And the Word was
God also, who being'* in the image of God,
" thought it not robbery to be equal to God." 's
Thus, that clay which was even then putting
on the image of Christ, who was to come in
the flesh, was not only the work, but also the
pledge and surety, of God. To what purpose
is it to bandy about the name earth, as that
of a sordid and grovelling element, with the
view of tarnishing the origin of the flesh, when,
even if any other material had been available
for forming man, it would be requisite that
the dignity of the Maker should be taken into
consideration, who even by His selection of
His material deemed it, and by His manage-
ment made it, worthy ? The hand of Phidias
forms the Olympian Jupiter of ivory; worship
is given to the statue, and it is no longer re-
garded as a god formed out of a most silly
animal, but as the world's supreme Deity —


14 Constitutus.

15 Phil. ii. 6.


550


ON THE RESURRECTION OF THE FLESH.


[chap. VII.


not because of the bulk of the elephant, but on
account of the renown of Phidias. Could not
therefore the living God, the true God, purge
away by His own operation whatever vileness
might have accrued to His material, and heal
it of all infirmity ? Or must this remain to
shcnu how much more nobly man could fabri-
cate a god, than God could form a man ?
Now, although the clay is offensive (for its
poorness), it is now something else. What I
possess is flesh, not earth, even although of
the flesh it is said: " Dust thou art, and unto
dust shalt thou return. " ' In these words there
is the mention of the origin, not a recalling of
the substance. The privilege has been granted
to the flesh to be nobler than its origin, and to
have its happiness aggrandized by the change
wrought in it. Now, even gold is earth, be-
cause of the earth; but it remains earth no
longer after it becomes gold, but is a far dif-
ferent substance, more splendid and more
noble, though coming from a source which is
comparatively faded and obscure. In like
manner, it was quite allowable for God that
He should clear the gold of our flesh from all
the taints, as you deem them, of its native
clay, by purging the original substance of its
dross.

CHAP. VII. THE EARTHY MATERIAL OF WHICH

FLESH IS CREATED WONDERFULLY IMPROVED
BY god's manipulation. BY THE ADDITION
OF THE SOUL IN MAN's CONSTITUTION IT BE-
CAME THE CHIEF WORK IN THE CREATION.

But perhaps the dignity of the flesh may
seem to be diminished, because it has not been
actually manipulated by the hand of God, as
the clay was at first. Now, when God handled
the clay for the express purpose of the growth
of flesh out of it afterwards, it was for the flesh
that He took all the trouble. But I want you,
moreover, to know at what time and in what
manner the flesh flourished into beauty out of
its clay. For it cannot be, as some will have
it, that those " coats of skins " "^ which Adam
and Eve put on when they were stripped of
paradise, were really themselves the forming
of the flesh out of clay, 3 because long before
that Adam had already recognised the flesh
which was in the woman as the propagation
of his own substance (" This is now bone of
my bone, and flesh of my flesh"-*), and the
very taking of the woman out of the man was
supplemented with flesh; but it ought, I should
suppose, to have been made good with clay,
if Adam was still clay. The clay, therefore.


* Gen. iii. 19. [" Earth thou art, etc.'^ io text.]

2 Gen. iii. 31.

3 A Valcntinian notion.

4 Gen. ii. 23.


was obliterated and absorbed into flesh. When
did this liappen ? At the time that man became
a living soul by the inbreathing of God — by
the breath indeed which w^is capable of har-
dening clay into another substance, as into
some earthenware, so now into flesh. In the
same way the potter, too, has it in his power,
by tempering the blast of his fire, to modify
his clayey material into a stiffer one, and to
mould one form after another more beautiful
than the original substance, and now possess-
ing both a kind and name of its own. For
although the Scripture says, "Shall the clay
say to the potter ? " s that is. Shall man contend
with God? although the apostle speaks of
"earthen vessels"^ he refers to man, who
was originally clay. And the vessel is the
flesh, because this was made of clay by the
breath of the divine afiiatusj and it was after-
wards clothed with " the coats of skins," that
is, with the cutaneous covering which was
placed over it. So truly is this the fact, that
if you withdraw the skin, you lay bare the
flesh. Thus, that which becomes a spoil when
stripped off, was a vestment as long as it re-
mained laid over. Hence the apostle, when
he call circumcision "'a putting off (or spolia-
tion) of the flesh," 7 affirmed the skin to be
a coat or tunic. Now this being the case, you
have both the clay made glorious by the hand
of God, and the flesh more glorious still by
His breathing upon it, by virtue of which the
flesh not only laid aside its clayey rudiments,
but also took on itself the ornaments of the
soul. You surely are not more careful than
God, that you indeed should refuse to mount
the gems of Scythia and India and the pearls
of the Red Sea in lead, or brass, or iron, or
even in silver, but should set them in the most
precious and most highly-wrought gold; or,
again, that you should provide for your finest
wines and most costly unguents the most fitting
vessels; or, on the same principle, should find
for your swords of finished temper scabbards
of equal worth; whilst God must consign to
some vilest sheath the shadow of His own
soul, the breath of His own Spirit, the opera-
tion of His own mouth, and by so ignominious
a consignment secure, of course, its condem-
nation. Well, then, has He placed, or rather
inserted and commingled, it with the flesh?
Yes; and so intimate is the union, that it may
be deemed to be uncertain whether the flesh
bears about the soul, or the soul the flesh; or
whether the flesh acts as apparitor to the soul,
or the soul to the flesh. It is, however, more
credible that the soul has service rendered to


5 Rom. ix. 2o.

6 2 Cor. vi. 7.
7Col. ii. II.


CHAP. IX.]


ON THE RESURRECTION OF THE FLESH.


551


it,' and has the mastery,' as being more
proximate in character to God.' This cir-
cumstance even redounds to the glory of the
flesh, inasmuch as it both contains an essence
nearest to God's, and renders itself a partaker
of (the soul's) actual sovereignty. For what
enjoyment of nature is there, what produce of
the world, what relish of the elements, which
is not imparted to the soul by means of the
body ? How can it be otherwise ? Is it not
by its means that the soul is supported by the
entire apparatus of the senses — the sight, the
hearing, the taste, the smell, the touch ? Is
it not by its means that it has a sprinkling of
the divine power, there being nothing which it
does not effect by its faculty of speech, even
when it is only tacitly indicated ? And speech
is the result of a feshly organ. The arts come
through the flesh; through the flesh also effect
is given to the mind's pursuits and powers;
all work, too, and business and offices of life,
are accomplished by the flesh; and so utterly
are the living acts of the soul the work of the
flesh, that for the soul to cease to do livmg
acts, would be nothing else than sundering
itself from the flesh. So also the very act of
dying is a function of the flesh, even as the
process of life is. Now, if all things are sub-
ject to the soul through the flesh, their sub-
jection is equally due to the flesh. That which
is the means and agent of your enjoyment,
must needs be also the partaker and sharer of
your enjoyment. So that the flesh, which is
accounted the minister and servant of the soul,
turns out to be also its associate and co-heir.
And if all this in temporal things, why not
also in things eternal ?

CHAP. VIII. — CHRISTIANITY, BY ITS PROVISION
FOR THE FLESH, HAS PUT ON IT THE GREAT-
EST HONOUR. THE PRIVILEGES OF OUR RE-
LIGION IN CLOSEST CONNECTION WITH OUR
FLESH. WHICH ALSO BEARS A LARGE SHARE
IN THE DUTIES AND SACRIFICES OF RELIGION.

Now such remarks have I wished to advance
in defence of the flesh, from a general view of
the condition of our human nature. Let us
now consider its special relation to Chris-
tianity, and see how vast a privilege before
God has been conferred on this poor and
worthless substance. It would suffice to say,
indeed, that there is not a soul that can at all
procure salvation, except it believe whilst it is
in the flesh, so true is it that the flesh is the
very , condition on which salvation hinges.
And since the soul is, in consequence of its
salvation, chosen to the service of God, it is

1 Invehi.

2 Uominari.

3 John iv. 24.


the flesh which actually renders it capable of
such service. The flesh, indeed, i$ washed,
in order that the soul may be cleansed; the
flesh is anointed, that the soul may be conse-
crated; the flesh is signed (with the cross),
that the soul too may be fortified; the flesh is
shadowed with the imposition of hands, that
the soul also maybe illuminated by the Spirit;
the flesh feeds on the body and blood of
Christ, that the soul likewise may fatten on
its God. They cannot then be separated in
their recompense, when they are united in their
service. Those sacrifices, moreover, which
are acceptable to God — I mean conflicts of the
soul, fastings, and abstinences, and the hu-
miliations which are annexed to such duty — it
is the flesh which performs again and again*
to its own especial suffering. Virginity, like-
wise, and widowhood, and the modest restraint
in secret on the marriage-bed, and the one
only adoptions of it, are fragrant offerings to
God paid out of the good services of the flesh.
Come, tell me what is your opinion of the
flesh, when it has to contend for the name of
Christ, dragged out to public view, and ex-
posed to the hatred of all men; when it pines
in prisons under the cruellest privation of.light,
in banishment from the world, amidst squalor,
filth, and noisome food, without freedom even
in sleep, for it is bound on its very pallet
and mangled in its bed of straw; when at
length before the public view it is racked by
every kind of torture that can be devised, and
when finally it is spent beneath its agonies,
struggling to render its last turn for Christ by
dying for Him — upon His own cross many
times, not to say by still more atrocious de-
vices of torment. Most blessed, truly, and
most glorious, must be the flesh which can
repay its Master Christ so vast a debt, and so
completely, that the only obligation remaining
due to Him is, that it should cease by death to
owe Him more — all the more bound e^'en then
in gratitude^ because (for ever) set free.

CHAP. IX. — god's LOVE FOR THE FLESH OF MAN,
AS DEVELOPED IN THE GRACE OF CHRIST TO-
WARDS IT. THE FLESH THE BEST MEANS OF
DISPLAYING THE BOUNTY AND POWER OF GOD.

To recapitulate, then: Shall that very fiesh,
which the Divine Creator formed with His
own hands in the image of God; which He
animated with His own afflatus^ after the like-
ness of His own vital vigour; which He set
over all the works of His hand, to dwell
amongst, to enjoy, and to rule them; which
He clothed with His sacraments and His in-
structions; whose purity He loves, whose mor-


4 Instaurat.

5 Una notitia ejus = monogamia.


552


ON THE RESURRECTION OF THE FLESH.


[chap. XI.


tifications He approves; whose sufferings for
Himself He deems precious; — (sliall that flesh,
I say), so often brought near to God, not rise
again? God forbid, God forbid, (I repeat),
that He should abandon to everlasting de-
struction the labour of His own hands, the care
of His own thoughts, the receptacle of His
own Spirit,* the queen of His creation, the
inheritor of His own liberality, the priestess
of His religion, the champion of His testimony,
the sister of His Christ ! We know by ex-
perience the goodness of God; from His Christ
we learn that He is the only God, and the
very good. Now, as He requires from us
love to our neighbour after love to Himself,^
so He will Himself do that which He has com-
manded. He will love the flesh which is, so
very closely and in so many ways, His neigh-
bour— (He will love it), although infirm, since
His strength is m.ade perfect in weakness; ^
although disordered, since "they that are
whole need not the physician, but they that
are sick;" ** although not honourable, since
"we bestow more abundant honour upon the
less honourable members; " s although ruined,
since He says, " I am come to save that which
was lost;"^ although sinful, since He says,
"I desire rather the salvation of the sinner
than his death; " 7 although condemned, for
says He, "I shall wound, and also heal. "^
Why reproach the flesh with those conditions
which wait for God, which hope in God, which
receive honour from God, which He succours ?
I venture to declare, that if such casualties as
these had never befallen the flesh, the bounty,
the grace, the mercy, (and indeed) all the
beneficent power of God, would have had no
opportunity to work.^

CHAP. X. — HOLY SCRIPTURE MAGNIFIES THE
FLESH, A5TO ITS NATURE AND ITS PROSPECTS.

You hold to the scriptures in which the flesh
is disparaged; receive also those in which it
is ennobled. You read whatever passage
abases it; direct your eyes also to that which
elevates it. " All flesh is grass." '° Well, but
Isaiah was not content to say only this; but he
also declared, " All flesh shall see the salvation
of God. " " They notice God when He says
in Genesis, *^ My Spirit shall not remain among
these men, because they are flesh ; " " but then


1 Afflatus.

2 Matt. xxii. 37-40.

3 2 Cor. xii. 9.

4 Luke V. ^i.

5 1 Cor. xii. 23.
* Luke xix. 10.

7 Ezek. xviii. 23.

8 Deut. xzxii. 39.

9 Vacuisset.
10 Isa. jtl. 7.
" Isa. xL 5.
"Gen. vi. 3, Sept.


He is also heard saying by Joel, "I will pour
out of my Spirit upo:: all flesh." '^ Even the
apostle ought not to be known for any one
statement in which he is wont to reproach the
flesh. For although he says that "in his flesh
dwelleth no good thing;" '•* although he affirms
that " they who are in the flesh cannot please
God, " '5 because " the flesh lusteth against the
Spirit;"*^ yet in these and similar assertions
which he makes, it is not the substa^ue of the
flesh, but its actiotis, which are censured.
Moreover, we shall elsewhere '^ take occasion
to remark, that no reproaches can fairly be
cast upon the flesh, without tending also to
the castigation of the soul, which compels the
flesh to do its bidding. However, let me
meanwhile add that in the same passage Paul
"carries about in his bod]f the marks of the
Lord Jesus; " '^ he also forbids our body to be
profaned, as being " the temple of God; " '' he
makes our bodies " the members of Christ; " =~
and he exhorts us to exalt and "glorify God
in our body." =' If, therefore, the humiliations
of the flesh thrust off its resurrection, why
shall not its high prerogatives rather avail to
bring it about? — since it better suits the char-
acter of God to restore to salvation what for a
while He rejected, than to surrender to per-
dition what- He once approved.

CHAP. XI. THE POWER OF GOD FULLY COMPE-
TENT TO EFFECT THE RESURRECTION OF THE
FLESH.

Thus far touching my eulogy of the flesh,
in opposition to its enemies, who are, notwith-
standing, its greatest friends also; for there is
nobody who lives so much in accordance with
the flesh as they who deny the resurrection of
the flesh, inasmuch as they despise all its dis-
cipline, while they disbelieve its punishment.
It is a shrewd saying which the Paraclete utters
concerning these persons by the mouth of the
prophetess Prisca: "They are carnal," and
yet they hate the flesh." Since, then, the
flesh has the best guarantee that could possi-
bly accrue for securing to it the recompense
of salvation, ought we not also to consider
well the power, and might, and competency^'
of God Himself, whether He be so great as to
be able to relniild and restore the edifice of
the flesh, which had become dilapidated and


■3 Joel iii. I.

'4 Rom. viii. 18.

>5 Rom. viii. 8.

>6Gal. V. 17.

>7 Below, in ch. xvi.

18 Gal. vj. 17.

»9 I Cor. iii. 16.

30 1 Cor. vi. 15.

21 Ver. 20.

"Carnes. [To explain the state of mind in which this sentence
is written, let the reader kindly turn back to Vol. 11. p. 4, the para-
graph. " As Eusebius informs us, etc' '\

33 Licentiam.


CHAP. XII.]


ON THE RESURRECTION OF THE FLESH.


553


blocked up/ and in every possible way dis-
located ? — whether He has promulgated in the
public domains of nature any analogies to
convince us of His power in this respect, lest
any should happen to be still thirsting for the
knowledge of God, when faith in Him must
rest on no other basis than the belief that He
is able to do all things ? You have, no doubt,
amongst your philosophers men who maintain
that this world is without a beginning or a
maker. It is, however, much more true, that
nearly all the heresies allow it an origin and a
maker, and ascribe its creation to our God.
Firmly believe, therefore, that He produced
it wholly out of nothing, and then you have
found the knowledge of God, by believing
that He possesses such mighty power. But
some persons are too weak to believe all this
at first, owing to their views about Matter.
They will rather have it, -after the philoso-
phers, that the universe was in the beginning
made by God out of underlying matter. Now,
even if this opinion could be held in truth,
since He must be acknowledged to have pro-
duced in His reformation of matter far differ-
ent substances and far different forms from
those which Matter itself possessed, I should
maintain, with no less persistence, that He
produced these things out of nothing, since
they absolutely had no existence at all pre-
vious to His production of them. Now, where
is the difference between a thing's being pro-
duced out of nothing or out of something, if
so be that what existed not comes into being,
when even to have had no existence is tanta-
mount to having been nothing ? The contrary
is likewise true; for having once existed
amounts to having been something. If, how-
ever, there is a difference, both alternatives
support my position. For if God produced
all things whatever out of nothing. He will be
able to draw forth from nothing even the flesh
which had fallen into nothing; or if He
moulded other things out of matter, He will
be able to call forth the flesh too from some-
where else, into whatever abyss it may have
been engulphed. And surely He is most
competent to re-create who created, inasmuch
as it is a far greater work to have produced
than to have reproduced, to have imparted
a beginning, than to have maintained a con-
tinuance. On this principle, you may be
fluite sure that the restoration of the flesh is
easier than its first formation.

CHAP. XII. — SOME ANALOGIES IN NATURE WHICH
CORROBORATE THE RESURRECTION OF THE
FLESH.

Consider now those very analogies of the


I Oehler explains " devoratum" by " interceptum.


divine power (to which we have just alluded).
Day dies into night, and is buried everywhere
in darkness. The glory of the world is ob-
scured in the shadow of death; its entire
substance is tarnished with blackness; all
things become sordid, silent, stupid; every-
where business ceases, and occupations rest.
And so over the loss of the light there is
mourning. But yet it again revives, with its
own beauty, its own dowry, is own sun, the
same as ever, whole and entire, over all the
world, slaying its own death, night — opening
its own sepulchre, the darkness — coming forth
the heir to itself, until the night also revives —
it, too, accompanied with a retinue of its own.
For the stellar rays are rekindled, which had
been quenched in the morning glow; the dis-
tant groups of the constellations are again
brought back to view, which the Jays
temporary interval had removed out of sight.
Readorned also are the mirrors of the moon,
which her monthly course had worn away.
Winters and summers return, as do the spring-
tide and autumn, with their resources, their
routines, their fruits. Forasmuch as earth
receives its instruction from heaven to clothe
the trees which had been stripped, to colour
the flowers afresh, to spread the grass again,
to reproduce the seed which had been con-
sumed, and not to reproduce them until con-
sumed. Wondrous method ! from a defrauder
to be a preserver, in order to restore, it takes
away; in order to guard, it destroys; that it
may make whole, it injures; and that it may
enlarge, it first lessens. (This process) in-
deed, renders back to us richer and fuller
blessings than it deprived us of — by a destruc-
tion which is profit, by an injury which is ad-
vantage, and by a loss which is gain. In a
word, I would say, all creation is instinct with
renewal. Whatever you may chance upon,
has already existed; whatever you have lost,
returns again without fail. All things return
to their former state, after having gone out of
sight; all things begin after they have ended;
they come to an end for the very purpose of
coming into existence again. Nothing perishes
but with a view to salvation. The whole,
therefore, of this revolving order of things
bears witness to the resurrection of the dead.
In His works did God write it, before He
wrote it in the Scriptures; He proclaimed it
in His mighty deeds earlier than in His in-
spired words. He first sent Nature to you as
a teacher, meaning to send Prophecy also as
a supplemental instructor, that, being Nature's
disciple, you may more easily believe Proph-
ecy, and without hesitation accept (its testi-
mony) when you come to hear what you have
seen already on every side; nor doubt that


554


ON THE RESURRECTION OF THE FLESH.


[chap, XIV.


God, whom you have discovered to be the re-
storer of all things, is likewise the reviver of
the flesh. And surely, as all things rise again
for man, for whose use they have been pro-
vided— but not for man except for his flesh
also — how happens it that (the flesh) itself can
perish utterly, because of which and for the
service of which nothing comes to nought ?

CHAP. XIII. — FROM OUR AUTHOR'S VIEW OF A
VERSE IN THE NINETY-SECOND PSALM, THE
PHCENIX IS MADE A SYMBOL OF THE RESUR-
RECTION OF OUR BODIES.

If, however, all nature but faintly figures
oiir resurrection; if creation affords no sign
precisely like it, inasmuch as its several phe-
nomena can hardly be said to die so much as
to come to an end, nor again be deemed to be
reanimated, but only re-formed; then take a
most complete and unassailable symbol of our
hope, for it shall be an animated being, and
subject alike to life and death. I refer to the
bird which is peculiar to the East, famous for
its singularity, marvellous from its posthu-
mous life, which renews its life in a voluntary
death; its dying day is its birthday, for on it
it departs and returns; once more a phoenix
where just now there was none; once more
himself, but just now out of existence; another,
yet the same. What can be more express and
more significant for our subject ; or to what
other thing can such a phenomenon bear wit-
ness ? God even in His own Scripture says:
*' 71ie righteous shall flourish like the phoe-
nix; " ' that is, shall flourish or revive, from
death, from the grave — to teach you to believe
that a bodily substance may be recovered even
from the fire. Our Lord has declared that we
are ''better than many sparrows:" =" well, if
not better than many a phoenix too, it were
no great thing. But must men die once for
all, while birds in Arabia are sure of a resur-
rection ?

CHAP. XIV. A SUFFICIENT CAUSE FOR THE

RESURRECTION OF THE FLESH OCCURS IN THE
FUTURE JUDGMENT OF MAN. IT WILL TAKE
COGNISANCE OF THE WORKS OF THE BODY NO
LESS THAN OF THE SOUL.

Such, then, being the outlines of the divine
energies which God has displayed as much in
the parables of 7iaturc as in His spoken word,
let us now approach His very edicts and
decrees, since this is the division which we
mainly adopt in our subject-matter. We began
with the dignity of the flesh, whether it were

1 Aixaio? u<« 0oiVi{ ovdrjaei, Sept. Ps. xcii. 12, — "like a palm
tree " (A. V.). We have here a characteristic -way of Tertullian's
quoting a scripture which has even the least bearing on his sub-
ject. [See Vol. I. (this series) p. 12, and same volume, p. viii.]

2 Matt. X. 33.


of such a nature that when once destroyed it
was capable of being restored. Then we pur-
sued an inquiry touching the power of God,
whether it was sufficiently great to be habitually
able to confer this restoration on a thing which
had been destroyed. Now, if we have proved
these two points, I should like you to inquire
into the [qiieslion of) cause, whether it be one of
sutficient weight to claim the resurrection of the
flesh as necessary and as conformable in every
way to reason; because there underlies this de-
murrer: the flesh may be quite capable of
being restored, and the Deity be perfectly
able to effect the restoration, but a cause for
such recovery must needs pre-exist. Admit
then a sufficient one, you who learn of a God
who is both supremely good as well as just ^ —
supremely good from His own (character),
just in consequence of ours. For if man had
never sinned, he \?ould simply and solely have
known God in His superlative goodness, from
the attribute of His nature. But now he ex-
periences Him to be a just God also, from
the necessity of a cause; still, however, re-
taining under this very circumstance His
excellent goodness, at the same time that He
is also just. For, by both succouring the good
and punishing the evil. He displays His
justice, and at the same time makes both proc-
esses contribute proofs of His goodness,
whilst on the one hand He deals vengeance,
and on the other dispenses reward. But with
Marcion^^ you will have the opportunity of
more fully learning whether this be the whole
character of God. Meanwhile, so perfect is
our (God), that He is rightly Judge, because
He is the Lord; rightly the Lord, because the
Creator; rightly the Creator, because He is
God. Whence it happens that that heretic,
whose name I know not, holds that He properly
is not a Judge, since He is not Lord; properly
not Lord, since He is not the Creator. And
so I am at a loss to know how He is God, who
is neither the Creator, which God is; nor the
Lord, which the Creator is. Inasmuch, then,
as it is most suitable for the great Beitig 7vho
is God, and Lord, and Creator to summon man
to a judgment on this very question, whether
he has taken care or not to acknowledge and
honour his Lord and Creator, this is just such
a judgment as the resurrection shall achieve.
The entire cause, then, or rather necessity of
the resurrection, will be this, namely, that
arrangement of the final judgment which shall
be most suitable to God. Now, in effecting
this arrangement, you must consider whether
the divine censure superintends a judicial ex-


3 He here refers to Marcion.

4 He here refers his reader to what he has written against Mar-
cion, especially in his books i. and ii.


CHAP. XV I. J


ON THE RESURRECTION OF THE FLESH.


555


ami nation of the two natures of man — both
his soul and his flesh. For that which is a
suitable object to be judged, is also a com-
petentone to be raised. Our position is, that
the judgment of God must be believed first of
all to be plenary, and then absolute, so as to
be final, and therefore irrevocable; to be also
righteous, not bearing less heavily on any
particular part; to be moreover worthy of God,
being complete and definite, in keeping with
His great patience. Thus it follows that the
fulness and perfection of the judgment consists
simply in representing the interests of the
entire human being. Now, since the entire
man consists of the union of the two natures,
he must therefore appear in both, as it is right
that he should be judged in his entirety; nor,
of course, did he pass through life except in
his entire state. As therefore he lived, so
also must he be judged, because he has to be
judged concerning the way in which he lived.
For life is the cause of judgment, and it must
undergo investigation in as many natures as
it possessed when it discharged its vital func-
tions.

CHAP. XV. AS THE FLESH IS A PARTAKER WITH

THE SOUL IN ALL HUMAN CONDUCT, SO WILL
IT BE IN THE RECOMPENSE OF ETERNITY.

Come now, let our opponents sever the
connection of the flesh with the soul in the
affairs of Hfe, that they may be emboldened to
sunder it also in the recompense of life. Let
them deny their association in acts, that they
may be fairly able to deny also their partici-
pation in rewards. The flesh ought not to
have any share in the sentence, if it had none
in the cause of it. Let the soul alone be
called back, if it alone went away. But
(nothing of the kind ever happened); for the
soul alone no more departed from life, than it
ran through alone the course from which it
departed — 1 mean this present life. Indeed,
the soul alone is so far from conducting (the
affairs of) life, that we do not withdraw from
community with the flesh even our thoughts,
however isolated they be, however unprecipi-
tated into act by means of the flesh; since
whatever is done in man's heart is done by
the soul in the flesh, and with the flesh, and
through the flesh. The Lord Himself, in
short, when rebuking our thoughts, includes
in His censures this aspect of the flesh,
(man's heart), the citadel of the soul: " Why
think ye evil in your hearts?"' and again:
"Whosoever looketh on a woman, to lust
after her, hath already committed adultery
with her in his heart. "^ So that even the


1 Matt. ix. 4.

2 Matt. V. 28.


thought, without operation and without effect,
is an act of the flesh. But if you allow that
the faculty which rules the senses, and which
they call Hcgemonikon,^ has its sanctuary in the
brain, or in the interval between the eyebrows,
or wheresoever the philosophers are pleased
to locate it, the flesh will still be the thinking
place of the soul. The soul is never without
the flesh, as long as it is in the flesh. There
is nothing which the flesh does not transact
in company with the soul, when without it
it does not exist. Consider carefully, too,
whether the thoughts are not administered by
the flesh, since it is through the flesh that they
are distinguished and known externally. Let
the soul only meditate some design, the fnce
gives the indication — the face being the mirror
of all our intentions. They may deny all com-
bination in acts, but they cannot gainsay their
co-operation in thoughts. Still they enumerate
the sins of the flesh; surely, then, for its sinful
conduct it must be consigned to punishment.
But we, moreover, allege against them //le
virtues of the flesh; surely also for its virtuous
conduct it deserves a future reward. Again,
as it is the soul which acts and impels us in
all we do, so it is the function of the flesh to
render obedience. Now we are not permitted
to suppose that God is either unjust or idle.
Unjust, (however He would be,) were He to
exclude from reward the flesh which is asso-
ciated in good works; and idle, were He to
exempt it from punishment, when it has been
an accomplice in evil deeds: whereas human
judgment is deemed to be the more perfect,
when it discovers the agents in every deed,
and neither spares the guilty nor grudges the
virtuous their full share of either punishment
or praise with the principals who employed
their services.

CHAP. XVI. — THE HERETICS CALLED THE FLESH
"THE VESSEL OF THE SOUL," IN ORDER TO
DESTROY THE RESPONSIBILITY OF THE BODY.
THEIR CAVIL TURNS UPON THEMSELVES AND
SHOWS THE FLESH TO BE A SHARER IN HUMAN
ACTIONS.

When, however, we attribute to the soul
authority, and to the flesh submission, we
must see to it that (our opponents) do not
turn our position by another argument, by
insisting on so placing the flesh in the service
of the soul, that it be not (considered as) its
sersMnt, lest they should be compelled, if it
were so regarded, to admit its companionship
(to the soul). For they would argue that
servants and companions possess a discretion
in discharging the functions of their respective


3 The leading power.


556


ON THE RESURRECTION OF THE FLESH.


[chap. XVII.


offices, and a po\ver over their will in both re-
lations: in short, (they would claim to be)
men themselves, and therefore (would expect)
to share the credit with their principals, to
whom they voluntarily yielded their assistance;
whereas the flesh had no discretion, no senti-
ment in itself, but possessing no power of its
own of willing or refusing, it, in fact, appears
to stand to the soul in the stead of a vessel,
as an instrument rather than a servant. The
soul alone, therefore, will have to be judged
(at the last day) pre-eminently as to how it
has employed the vessel of the flesh; the ves-
sel itself, of course, not being amenable to a
judicial award: for who condemns the cup if
any man has mixed poison in it ? or who sen-
tences the sword to the beasts, if a man has
perpetrated with it the atrocities of a brigand ?
Well, now, we will grant that the flesh is in-
nocent, in so far as bad actions will not be
charged upon it: what, then, is there to hinder
its being saved on the score of its innocence ?
For although it is free from all imputation of
good works, as it is of evil ones, yet it is more
consistent with the divine goodness to deliver
the innocent. A beneficent man, indeed, is
bound to do so: it suits then the character of
the Most Bountiful to bestow even gratuitously
such a favour. And yet, as to the cup, I will
not take the poisoned one, into which some
certain death is injected, but one which has
been infected with the breath of a lascivious
woman,' or of Cybele's priest, or of a gladia-
tor, or of a hangman: then I want to know
whether you would pass a milder condemna-
tion on it than on the kisses of such persons ?
One indeed which is soiled with our own filth,
or one which is not mingled to our own mind,
we are apt to dash to pieces, and then to in-
crease our anger with our servant. As for the
sword, which is drunk with the blood of the
brigand's victims, who would not banish it
entirely from his house, much more from his
bed-room, or from his pillow, from the pre-
sumption that he would be sure to dream of
nothing but the apparitions of the souls which
were pursuing and disquieting him for lying
down with the blade which shed their own
blood ? Take, however, the cup which has no
reproach on it, and which deserves the credit
of a faithful ministration, it will be adorned
by its drinking-master with chaplets, or be
honoured with a handful of flowers. The
sword also which has received honourable
stains in war, and has been thus engaged in
a better manslaughter, will secure its own
praise by consecration. It is quite possible,
then, to pass decisive sentences even on ves-
sels and on instruments, that so they too may

' " Frictricis" is Oehler's reading.


participate in the merits of their proprietors
and employers. Thus viuch do I say from a
desire to meet even this argument, although
there is a failure in the example, owing to the
diversity in the nature of the objects. For
every vessel or every instrument becomes use-
ful from without, consisting as it does of ma-
terial perfectly extraneous to the substance
of the human oumer or employer ; whereas the
flesh, being conceived, formed, and generated
along with the soul from its earliest existence
in the womb, is mixed up with it likewise in
all its operations. For although it is called
" a vessel " by the apostle, such as he enjoins
to be treated " with honour," = it is yet desig-
nated by the same apostle as "the outward
man," 3 — that clay, of course, which at the
first was inscribed with the title of. . . a
man, not of a cup or a sword, or any paltry
vessel. Now it is called a '''' vessel" in con-
sideration of its capacity, whereby it receives
and contains the soul; but ";//</«," from its
community of nature, which renders it in all
operations a servant and not an instrument.
Accordingly, in the judgment it will be held
to be a servant (even though it may have no
independent discretion of its own), on the
ground of its being an integral portion of that
which possesses such discretion, and is not a
mere chattel. And although the apostle is
well aware that the flesh does nothing of itself
which is not also imputed to the soul, he yet
deems the flesh to be ".$■/>//>//;"■* lest it
should be supposed to be free from all re-
sponsibility by the mere fact of its seeming
to be impelled by the soul. So, again, when
he is ascribing certain praiseworthy actions to
the flesh, he says, " Therefore glorify and
exalt God in your body,"^ — being certain
that such efforts are actuated by the soul; but
still he ascribes them to the flesh, because it
is to it that he also promises the recompense.
Besides, neither rebuke, (on the one hand),
would have been suitable to it, if free from
blame; nor, (on the other hand), would ex-
hortation, if it were incapable of glory. In-
deed, both rebuke and exhortation would be
alike idle towards the flesh, if it were an
improper object for that recompence which is
certainly received in the resurrection.

CHAP. XVII. THE FLESH WILL BE ASSOCIATED

WITH THE SOUL IN ENDURING THE PENAL
SENTENCES OF THE FINAL JUDGMENT.

"Every uneducated*^ person who agrees
with our opinion will be apt to suppose that


9 I Thes.s. iv. 4.

3 2 Cor. iv. 16.

4 Rom. viii. 3.

5 I Cor. vi. 20,

6 Simplicior.


%


CHAP. XVIII.]


ON THE RESURRECTION OF THE FLESH.


557


the flesh will havd to be present at \ht. final
judgment even on this account, because other-
wise the soul would be incapable of suffering
pain or pleasure, as being incorporeal; for this
is the common opinion. We on our part,
however, do here maintain, and in a special
treatise on the subject prove, that the soul is
corporeal, possessing a peculiar kind of solid-
ity in its nature, such as enables it both to
perceive and suffer. That souls are even now
susceptible of torment and of blessing in
Hades, though they are disembodied, and not-
withstanding their banishment from the flesh,
is proved by the case of Lazarus. I have no
doubt given to my opponent room to say:
Since, then, the soul has. a bodily substance of
its own, it will be sufficiently endowed with
the faculty of suffering and sense, so as not to
require the presence of the flesh. No, no,
(is my reply): it will still need the flesh; not
as being unable to feel anything without the
help of the flesh, but because it is necessary
that it should possess such a faculty along with
the flesh. For in as far as it has a sufficiency
of its own for action, in so far has it likewise
a capacity for suffering. But the truth is, in
respect of action, it labours under some
amount of incapacity; for in its own nature
it has simply the ability to think, to will, to
desire, to dispose: for fully carrying out the
purpose, it looks for the assistance of the
flesh. In like manner, it also requires the
conjunction of the flesh to endure suffering, in
order that by its aid it may be as fully able to
suffer, as without its assistance it was not fully
able to act. In respect, indeed, of those sins,
such as concupiscence, and thought, and wish,
which it has a competency of its own to commit,
it at once' pays the penalty of them. Now,
no doubt, if these were alone sufficient to con-
stitute absolute desert without requiring the
addition of «^/j-, the soul would suffice in itself
to encounter the full responsibility of the
judgment, being to be judged for those things
in the doing of which it alone had possessed a
sui^ciency. Since, however, acts too are in-
dissolubly attached to deserts; since also acts
// are ministerially effected by the flesh, it is
' no longer enough that the soul apart from the
flesh be requited with pleasure or pain for
what are actually works of the flesh, although
it has a body (of its own), although it has mem-
bers (of its own), which in like manner are in-
sufficient for its full perception, just as they
are also for its perfect action. Therefore as
it has acted in each several instance, so pro-
portionably does it suffer in Hades, being the
first to taste of judgment as it was the first to


Interim.


induce to the commission of sin; but still it is
waiting for the flesh in order that it may
through the flesh also compensate for its deeds,
inasmuch as it laid upon the flesh the execu-
tion of its own thoughts. This, in short, will
be the process of that judgment which is post-
poned to the last great day, in order that by
the exhibition of the flesh the entire course of
the divine vengeance may be accomplished.
Besides, (it is obvious to remark) there would
be no delaying to the end of that doom which
souls are already tasting in Hades, if it was
destined for souls alone.

CHAP. XVIII. — SCRIPTURE PHRASES AND PAS-
SAGES CLEARLY ASSERT **THE RESURRECTION
OF THE DEAD." THE FORCE OF THIS VERY
PHRASE EXPLAINED AS INDICATING THE
PROMINENT PLACE OF THE FLESH IN THE
GENERAL RESURRECTION.

Thus far it has been my object by prefatory
remarks to lay a foundation for the defence of
all the Scriptures which promise a resurrection
of the flesh. Now, inasmuch as this verity is
supported by so many just and reasonable
considerations — I mean the dignity of the flesh
itself, =" the power and might of God,^ the
analogous cases in which these are displayed,*
as well as the good reasons for the judgment,
and the need thereof s — it will of course be
only right and proper that the Scriptures
should be understood in the sense suggested
by such authoritative considerations, and not
after the conceits of the heretics, which arise
from infidelity solely, because it is deemed in-
credible that the flesh should be recovered
from death and restored to life; not l>ecause
(such a restoration) is either unattainable by
the flesh itself, or impossible for God to effect,
or unsuitable to the final judgment. Incred-
ible, no doubt, it might be, if it had not been
revealed in the word of God;* except that,
even if it had not been thus first announced
by God, it might have been fairly enough as-
sumed, that the revelation of it had been with-
held, simply because so many strong presump-
tions in its favour had been already furnished.
Since, however, (the great fact) is proclaimed
in so many inspired passages, that is so far a
dissuasive against understanding it in a sense
different from that which is attested by such
arguments as persuade us to its reception,
even irrespective of the testimonies of revela-
tion. Let us see, then, first of all in what
title this hope of ours is held out to our view.'


2 As stated in ch. v.-ix.

3 See ch. xi.

4 As stated in ch. xii. and xiii.

5 See ch. xiv.-xvii.

6 Divinitus.

7 Pro.scripta.


558


ON THE RESURRECTION OF THE FLESH.


[chap. XIX.


There is, I imagine, one divine edict which is
exposed to the gaze of all men: it is "The
Resurrection of the Dead."' These words
are prompt, decisive, clear. I mean to take
these very terms, discuss them, and discover
to what substance they apply. As to the word
resurrectio^ whenever I hear of its impending
over a human being, I am forced to inquire
what part of him has been destined to fally
since nothing can be expected to rise again,
unless it has first been prostrated. It is only
the man who is ignorant of the fact that the
flesh falls by death, that can fail to discover
that it stands erect by means of life. Nature
pronounces God's sentence: " Dust thou art,
and unto dust shall thou return." = Even the
man who has not heard the sentence, sees the
fact. No death but is the ruin of our limbs.
This destiny of the body the Lord also de-
scribed, when, clothed as He was in its very
substance. He said," Destroy this temple, and
in three days I will raise it up again." ^ For
He showed to what belongs (the incidents of)
being destroyed, thrown down, and kept down
— even to that to which it also appertains to
be lifted and raised up again; although He
was at the same time bearing about with Him
" a soul that was trembling even unto
death,"* but which did not fall through
death, because even the Scripture informs us
that " He spoke of His body."s So that it is
the flesh which falls by death; and accordingly
it derives its name, cadaver^ from cadetido.^
The soul, however, has no trace of 3. fall in its
designation, as indeed there is no mortality in
its condition. Nay it is the soul which com-
municates its ruin to the body when it is
breathed out of it, just as it is also destined to
raise it up again from the earth when it shall
re-enter it. That cannot fall which by its
entrance raises; nor can that droop which by
its departure causes ruin. I will go further,
and say that the soul does not even fall into
sleep along with the body, nor does it with its
companion even lie down in repose. For it is
agitated in dreams, and disturbed: it might,
however, rest, if it lay down; and lie down it
certainly would, if it fell. Thus that which does
not fall even into the likeness of death, does not
succumb to the reality thereof. Passing now
to the olher word viortuoruvi^ I wish you to look
carefully, and see to what substance it is ap-
plicable. Were we to allow, under this head,
as is sometimes held by the heretics, that the
soul is mortal, so that being mortal it shall at-

I Resurrectio Mortuorum.
sGen. iii. 19.
3 John ii. 19.
4Matt. xxvi. 38.

5 John ii. 21.

6 " Corpse from /ailing " This, of course, does not show the
connection of the words, like the Latin. [Elucidation I.]


tain to a resurrection; this would afford a pre-
sumption that the flesh also, being no less
mortal, would share in the safne resurrection.
But our present point is to derive from the
proper signification of this word an idea of the
destiny which it indicates. Now, just as the
term rcsiirrectio?i is predicated of that which
falls — ^^that is, the flesh — so will there be the
same application of the word dead, because
what is called " the resurrection of the dead "
indicates the rising up again of that which is
fallen down. We learn this from the case of
Abraham, the father of the faithful, a man
who enjoyed close intercourse with God. For
when he requested of the sons of Heth a spot
to bury Sarah in, he said to them, "Give me
the possession of a burying place with you,
that I may bury my dead,"^ — meaning, of
course, her flesh; for he could not have de-
sired a place to bury her soul in, even if the
soul is to be deemed mortal, and even if it
could bear to be described by the word
''dead.'' Since, then, this word indicates the
body, it follows that when "the resurrection
of the dead" is spoken of, it is the rising
again of men's bodies that is meant.

CHAP. XIX. THE SOPHISTICAL SENSE PUT BY

HERETICS ON THE PHRASE '' RESURRECTION
OF THE DEAD," AS IF IT MEANT THE MORAL
CHANGE OF A NEW LIFE.

Now this consideration of the phrase in
question, and its signification — besides main-
taining, of course, the true meaning of the
important words — must needs contribute to
this further result, that whatever obscurity
our adversaries throw over the subject under
the pretence of figurative and allegorical lan-
guage, the truth will stand out in clearer light,
and out of uncertainties certain and definite
rules will be prescribed. For some, when
they have alighted on a very usual form of
prophetic statement, generally expressed in
figure and allegory, though not always, dis-
tort into some imaginary sense even the most
clearly described doctrine of the resurrection
of the dead, alleging that even death itself
must be understood in a spiritual sense.
They say that that which is commonly sup-
posed to be death is not really so, — namely,
the separation of body and soul: it is rather
the ignorance of God, by reason of which man
is dead to God, and is not less buried in error
than he would be in the grave. Wherefore
that also must be held to be the resurrection,
when a man is reanimated by access to the
truth, and having dispersed the death of
ignorance, and being endowed with new life

7 Gen. xxiii. 4.


CHAP. XX.J


ON THE RESURRECTION OF THE FLESH.


559


by God, has burst forth from the sepulchre of
the old man, even as the Lord likened the
scribes and Pharisees to " whited sepul-
chres."' Whence it follows that they who
have by faith attained to the resurrection, are
with the Lord after they have once put Him
on in their baptism. By such subtlety, then,
even in conversation have they often been in
the habit of misleading our brethren, as if
they held a resurrection of the dead as luell
as we. Woe, say they, to him who has not
risen in the present body; for they fear that
they might alarm their hearers if they at once
denied the resurrection. Secretly, however,
in their minds they think this: Woe betide the
simpleton who during his present life fails to
discover the mysteries of heresy; since this, in
their view, is the resurrection. There are,
however, a great many also, who, claiming to
hold a resurrection after the soul's departure,
maintain that going out of the sepulchre
means escaping out of the world, since in
their view the world is the habitation of the
dead — that is, of those who know not God; or
they will go so far as to say that it actually
means escaping out of the body itself, since
they imagine that the body detains the soul,
when it is shut up in the death of a worldly
life, as in a grave.

CHAP. XX. — FIGURATIVE SENSES HAVE THEIR
FOUNDATION IN LITERAL FACT. BESIDES, THE
ALLEGORICAL STYLE IS BY NO MEANS THE
ONLY ONE FOUND IN THE PROPHETIC SCRIP-
TURES, AS ALLEGED BY THE HERETICS.

Now, to upset all conceits of this sort, let
me dispel at once the preliminary idea on
which they rest — their assertion that the
prophets make all their announcements in fig-
ures of speech. Now, if this were the case,
the figures themselves could not possibly have
been distinguished, inasmuch as the verities
would not have been declared, out of which
the figurative language is stretched. And,
indeed, if all are figures, where will be that of
which they are the figures ? How can you
hold up a mirror for your face, if the face no-
where exists ? But, in truth, all are not fig-
ures, but there are also literal statements; nor
are all shadows, but there are bodies too: so
that we have prophecies about the Lord Him-
self even, which are clearer than the day.
For it was not figuratively that the Virgin
conceived in her womb; nor in a trope did
she bear Emmanuel, that is, Jesus, God with
us.^ Even granting that He was figuratively
to take the power of Damascus and the spoils


of Samaria, 3 still it was literally that He was
to "enter into judgment with the elders and
princes of the people."* For in the person
of Pilate "the heathen raged," and in the
person of Israel " the people imagined vain
things;" " the kings of the earth " in Herod,
and the rulers in Annas and Caiaphas, were
gathered together against the Lord, and
against His anointed." ^ He, again, was
"led as a sheep to the slaughter, and as a
sheep before the shearer," that is, Herod,
"is dumb, so He opened not His mouth."*
" He gave His back to scourges, and His
cheeks to blows, not turning His face even
from the shame of spitting." ' "He was
numbered with the transgressors;" ^ " He was
pierced in His hands and His feet;" ^ " they
cast lots for his raiment" '° " they gave Him
gall, and made Him drink vinegar;" " " they
shook their heads, and mocked Him;" " " He
was appraised by the traitor in thirty pieces of
silver." *3 What figures of speech does Isaiah
here give us ? What tropes does David ? What
allegories does Jeremiah? Not even of His
mighty works have they used parabolic lan-
guage. Or else, were not the eyes of the blind
opened ? did not the tongue of the dumb recover
speech ? '•* did not the relaxed hands and pal-
sied knees become strong, '^ and the lame leap
as an hart ? '^ No doubt we are accustomed
also to give a spiritual significance to these
statements of prophecy, according to the anal-
ogy of the physical diseases which were healed
by the Lord; but still they were all fulfilled
literally: thus showing that the prophets fore-
told both senses, except that very many of
their words can only be taken in a pure and
simple signification, and free from all allegori-
cal obscurity; as when we hear of the down-
fall of nations and cities, of Tyre and Egypt,
and Babylon and Edom, and the navy of
Carthage; also when they foretell IsraePs own
chastisements and pardons, its captivities,
restorations, and at last its final dispersion.
Who would prefer affixing a metaphorical in-
terpretation to all these events, instead of ac-
cepting their literal truth ? The realities are
involved in the words, just as the words are
read in the realities. Thus, then, (we find
that) the allegorical style is not used in all


1 Matt, xxiii. 27.

2 Isa. vii. 14 ; Matt.


3 Isa. yiii. 4.

4 Isa. iii. 13.

5 Ps. ii. 1, 2.

6 Isa. liii. 7.

7 Isa. 1. 6, Sept

8 Isa. liii. 12.

9 Ps. xxii. 17.
>o Ver. 18.

'■Ps. Ixix. 22. Tertullian only briefV giv«s the sense in two
words : et potus amaros.
'-'Ps. xxii. 8.
•3 Zech. xi. 12.
•4 Isa. XXXV. s.
15 Ver. 3.
>6 Ver. 6.


56o


ON THE RESURRECTION OF THE FLESH.


[chap. XXII.


parts of the prophetic record, although it
occasionally occurs in certain portions of it.

CHAP. XXI. — NO MERE METAPHOR IN THE
PHRASE RESURRECTION OF THE DEAD. IN
PROPORTION TO THE IMPORTANCE OF ETERNAL
TRUTHS, IS THE CLEARNESS OF THEIR SCRIP-
TURAL ENUNCIATION.

Well, if it occurs occasionally in certain
portions of it, you will say, then why not in
that phrase,' wnere the resurrection might be
spiritually understood ? There are several
reasons why not. First, what must be the
meaning of so many important passages of
Holy Scripture, which so obviously attest the
resurrection of the body, as to admit not even
the appearance of a figurative signification ?
And, indeed, (since some passages are more
obscure than others), it cannot but be right —
as we have shown above = — that uncertain
statements should be determined by certain
ones, and obscure ones by such as are clear
and plain; else tnere is fear that, in the
conflict of certainties and uncertainties, of
explicitness and obscurity, faith may be
shattered, truth endangered, and the Di-
vine lacing Himself be branded as incon-
stant. Tiien arises the improbability that the
very mystery on which our trust wholly rests,
on whicn also our instruction entirely depends,
should have the appearance of being ambigu-
ously announced and obscurely propounded,
inasmuch as the hope of the resurrection,
unless it be clearly set forth on the sides both
of punishment and reward, would fail to per-
suade any to embrace a religion like ours, ex-
posed as it is to public detestation and the
imputation of hostility to others. There is
no certain work where the remuneration is
uncertain. There is no real apprehension
when the peril is only doubtful. But both the
recompense of reward, and the danger of los-
ing it, depend on the issues of the resurrection.
Now, if even those purposes of God against
cities, and nations, and kings, which are
merely temporal, local, and personal in their
character, have been proclaimed so clearly in
prophecy, how is it to be supposed that those
dispensations of His which are eternal, and of
universal concern to the human race, should
be void of all real light in themselves ? The
grander they are, the clearer should be their
announcement, in order that their superior
greatness might be believed. And I appre-
hend that God cannot possibly have ascribed
to Him either envy, or guile, or inconsistency,
or artifice, by help of which evil qualities it is


I Resurrectio Mortuorum, of which we have been speaking.
2 Seech, xix.


that all schemes of unusual grandeur are liti-
giously promulgated.

CHAP. XXII. — THE SCRIPTURES FORBID OUR
SUPPOSING EITHER THAT THE RESURRECTION-
IS ALREADY PAST, OR THAT IT TAKES PLACE
IMMEDIATELY AT DEATH. OUR HOPES AND
PRAYERS POINT TO THE LAST GREAT DAY AS
THE PERIOD OF ITS ACCOMPLISHMENT.

We must after all this turn our attention to
those scriptures also which forbid our belief in
such a resurrection as is held by your Animalisls
(for I will not call them Spiritualists),^ that it
is either to be assumed as taking place now,
as soon as men come to the knowledge of the
truth, or else that it is accomplished immedi-
ately after their departure from this Hfe. Now,
forasmuch as the seasons of our entire hope
have been fixed in the Holy Scripture, and
since we are not permitted to place the ac-
complishment thereof, as I apprehend, pre-
vious to Christ's coming, our prayers are di-
rected towards-* the end of this world, to the
passing away thereof at the great day of the
Lord — of His wrath and vengeance — the last
day, which is hidden (from all), and known
to none but the Father, although announced
beforehand by signs and wonders, and the
dissolution of the elements, and the conflicts
of nations. I would turn out the words of
the prophets, if the Lord Himself had said
nothing (except that prophecies were the
Lord's own word); but it is more to my pur-
pose that He by His own mouth confirms their
statement. Being questioned by His disciples
when those things were to come to pass which
He had just been uttering about the destruc-
tion of the temple, He discourses to them first
of the order of Jewish events until the over-
throw of Jerusalem, and then of such as con-
cerned all nations up to the very end of the
world. For after He had declared that " Jeru-
salem was to be trodden down of the Gentiles,
until the times of the Gentiles should be ful-
filled," 5 — meaning, of course, those which were
to be chosen of God, and gathered in with the
remnant of Israel — He then goes on to pro-
claim, against this world and dispensation
(even as Joel had done, and Daniel, and all
the prophets with one consent *•), that "there
should be signs in the sun, and in the moon,
and in the stars, distress of nations with per-
plexity, the sea and the waves roaring, men's
hearts failing them for fear, and for looking
after those things which are coming on Iik


3 For the opinions of those Valentinians who held that Chr.nt .^
flesh was composed of srml or of spirit— a refined, ethereal sub-
stance— see Tertullian's De Came Christi, cc. x.-xv.

4 Suspirant in.

5 Luke xxi. 24.

6 Joel iii. 9-15 ; Dan. vii. 13, 14.


CHAP. XXIII.]


ON THE RESURRECTION OF THE FLESH.


561


earth."' "For," says He, "the powers of
heaven shall be shaken; and then shall they
see the Son of man coming in the clouds, with
power and great glory. And when these
things begin to come to pass, then look up,
and lift up your heads, for your redemption
draweth nigh."=' He spake of its "drawing
nigh," not of its being present already; and
of " those things beginning to come to pass,"
not of their having happened: because when
they have come to pass, then our redemption
shall be at hand, which is said to be approach-
ing up to that time, raising and exciting our
minds to what is then the proximate harvest
of our hope. He immediately annexes a par-
able of this in " the trees which are tenderly
sprouting into a flower-stalk, and then de-
veloping the flower, which is the precursor of
the fruit."' "So likewise ye," (He adds),
"when ye shall see all these things come to
pass, know ye that the kingdom of heaven is
nigh at hand."/* "Watch ye, therefore, and
pray always, that ye may be accounted worthy
to escape all those things, and to stand before
the Son of man;"5 that is, no doubt, at the
resurrection, after all these things have been
previously transacted. Therefore, although
taere is a sprouting in the acknowledgment
of I'll this mystery, yet it is only in the actual
presence of the Lord that the flower is devel-
oped and the fruit borne. Who is it then,
that has aroused the Lord, now at God's right
hand, so unseasonably and with such severity
to "shake terribly" (as Isaiah^ expresses it
(" that earth," which, I suppose, is as yet un-
shattered ? Who has thus early put " Christ's
enemies beneath His feet" (to use the lan-
guage of David 7), making Him more hurried
than the Father, whilst every crowd in our
popular assemblies is still with shouts consign-
ing " the Christians to the lions ? " ^ Who has
yet beheld Jesus descending from heaven in
like manner as the apostles saw Him ascend,
according to the appointment of the two an-
gels P^ Up to the present moment they have
not, tribe by tribe, smitten their breasts, look-
ing on Him whom they pierced.'" No one
has as yet fallen in with Elias;" no one has
as yet escaped from Antichrist;" no one has
as yet had to bewail the downfall of Babylon. '^


1 Luke xxi. 25, 26.

2 Vers. 26-28.

3 lAike xxi. 29, 30; Matt. xxiv. 32.

4 Luke xxi. 31 ; Matt. xxiv. 33.

5 Luke xxi. 36.

6 Isa. ii. 19.

7 Ps. ex. I.

8 Compare The Apology^ xl. ; De Sped, xxvii. ; De Exhort.
Cast. xii.

9 Acts 1. II.

10 Zech. xii. 10 ; comp. John xix. 37.
" Mai. iv. 5.

12 1 John iv. 3.

13 Rev. xviii. 2.

36


And is there now anybody who has risen again,
except the heretic? He^ of course, has al-
ready quitted the grave of his own corpse —
although he is even now liable to fevers and
ulcers; he, too, has already trodden down his
enemies — although he has even now to strug-
gle with the powers of the world. And as a
matter of course, he is already a king — al-
though he even now owes to Caesa' the things
whicii are Caesar's.'*

CHAP. XXin. SUNDRY PASSAGES OF ST. PAUL,

WHICH SPEAK OF A SPIRITUAL RESURRECTION,
COMPATIBLE WITH THE FUTURE RESURREC-
TION OF THE BODY, WHICH IS EVEN ASSUMED
IN THEM.

The apostle indeed teaches, in his Epistle
to the Colossians, that we were once dead,
alienated, and enemies to the Lord in our
minds, whilst we were living in wicked works; 's
that we were then buried with Christ in bap-
tism, and also raised again with Him through
the faith of the operation of God, who hath
raised Him from the dead.'^ " And you,
(adds he), when ye were dead in sins and the
uncircumcision of your flesh, hath He quick-
ened together with Him, having forgiven you
all trespasses." '7 And again: "If ye are
dead with Christ from the elements of the
world, why, as though living in the world, are
ye subject to ordinances? " '^ Now, since he
makes us spiritually dead — in such a way,
however, as to allow that we shall one day
have to undergo a bodily death, — so, consider-
ing indeed that we have been also raised in a
like spiritual sense, he equally allows that
we shall further have to undergo a bodily
resurrection. In so many words '^ he says:
" Since ye are risen with Christ, seek those
things which are above, where Christ sitteth
at the right hand of God. Set your affection
on things above, not on things on the earth." ^
Accordingly, it is in our mind that he shows
that we rise (with Christ), since it is by this
alone that we are as yet able to reach to
heavenly objects. These we should not
"seek," nor "set our affection on," if we
had them already in our possession. He also
adds: " For ye are dead " — to your sins, he
means, not to yourselves — "and your life is
hid with Christ in God.""' Now that life is
not yet apprehended which is hidden. In like
manner John says: " And it doth not yet ap-


14 Matt. xxii. 21.
'5 Col. i. 21.
'6 Col. ii. 12.
17 Ver. 13.

iSVer. 20. The last clause in Tertullian is, " Quomodo
tentiam fertis ?"
'9 Denique.
20C0I. iii. I, 2.
21 Ver. 3.


562


ON THE RESURRECTION OF THE FLESH.


[chap.


pear what we shall be: we know, however,
that when He shall be manifest, we shall be
like Him."* We are far indeed from being
already what we know not of; we should, of
course, be sure to know it if we were already
(like Him). It is therefore the contempla-
tion of our blessed hope even in this life by
'faita (that he speaks of)— not its presence nor
'its possession, but only its expectation. Con-
cerning this expectation and hope Paul writes
to the Galatians: " For we through the Spirit
wait for the hope of righteousness by faith." =
He says **we wait for it," not we are in pos-
session of it. By the righteousness of God,
he means that judgment which we shall have
to undergo as the recompense of our deeds.
It is in expectation of this for himself that the
apostle writes to the Philippians: " If by any
means," says he, " I might attain to the resur-
rection of the dead. Not as though I had
already attained, or were already perfect." ^
And yet he had believed, and had known all
mysteries, as an elect vessel and the great
teacher of the Gentiles; but for all that he
goes on to say: " I, however, follow on, if so
be I may apprehend that for which I also am ap-
prehended of Christ." " Nay, more: " Breth-
ren, "(he adds), " I count not myself to have
apprehended: but this one thing (I do), for-
getting those things which are behind, and
reaching forth unto those things which are
before, I press toward the mark for the prize
of blamelessness,s whereby I may attain it; "
meaning the resurrection from the dead in its
proper time. Even as he says to the Gala-
tians: "Let us not be weary in well-doing:
for in due season we shall reap." ^ Similarly,
concerning Onesiphorus, does he also write
to Timothy: "The Lord grant unto him that
he may find mercy in that day; " ^ unto which
day and time he charges Timothy himself " to
keep what had been committed to his care,
without spot, unrebukable, until the appear-
ing of the Lord Jesus Christ: which in His
times He shall show, who is the blessed and
only Potentate, the King of kings and Lord
of lords," ^ speaking of (Him as) God It is
to these same times that Peter in the Acts
refers, when he says: " Repent ye therefore,
and be converted, that your sins may be blotted
out, when the times of refreshing shall come
from the presence of the Lord; and He shall
send Jesus Christ, which before was preached


» I John iii. a.

2 Gal. V. 5.

3 Phil. iii. II, 12.
4Ver. 12.

5 Vers. 13, 14. In the last clause Tertullian reads 1^9 aveywX^o-ew?
= blanieles.sness, or purity, instead of t^s dfw xAiya-eajs =" our high
calling."

6 Gal. vi. 9.

7 2 Tim i. 18.

** I Tim. vi. 14, 15, 20.


unto you: whom the hea^^ien-' nmnst receive-

until the times of restitution oi all things^,

which God Uath spoken by^thenacmth of His
holy prophefls."''

CHAP. XXIV. OTHER PASSAGES QOOTED FROM

ST. PAUL, WHICH CATEGORIC A LL\r ASSERT THE .
RESURRECTION. OF THE FLESH AT THE FINAL .
JUDGMENT.

The character of these times- Icarn, along
with the Thessatonians. Foiiweread: *' How
ye turned from idols to> ser«e the living and
true God, and to wait for His.Sonfrom heaven,
whom He raised' from the dead, evtan Jesus." '*
And again: ""For what is ©ur hope, or joy,
or crown of rerjoicing ? Ase not even ye in
the presence of our Lord G«d, Jesus Christ,,
at His coming ?"' " Likewise: '"** Before God, ,
even our Father, at the coming of the Lord
Jesus Christ, with the whoife company of His>
saints. " " He teaches them that they must
" not sorrow concerning tli€m that are asleep,""
and at the same time explains to them the-
times of the resurrection, saying, " For if we-
believe that Jesus died and rose again, even;
so them also which sleep in Jesus shall Godi
bring with Him. For this we say unto youi
by the word of the Lord, that we which are-
alive and remain unto the coming of our Lord;,,
shall not prevent them that are asleep. For
the Lord Himself shall descend from heaven
with a shout, with the voice of the archangel.,,
and with the trump of God; and the dead in
Christ shall rise first: then we which are alive
and remain shall be caught up together with
them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the
air; and so shall we be ever with the Lord." ^
What archangel's voice, (I wonder), what
trump of God is now heard, except it bc^ for-
sooth, in the entertainments of the heretics ?
For, allowing that the word of the gospel may
be called '*the trump of God," since it was
still calling men, yet they must at that time
either be dead as to the body, that they may
be able to rise again; and then how are they
alive? Or else caught up into the clouds;
and how then are they here ? "Most misera-
ble," no doubt, as the apostle declared them,
are they "who in this life only" sliall be
found to have hope:'* they will have to be
excluded while they are with premature haste
seizing that which is promised after this life;
erring concerning the truth, no less than
Phygellus and Hermogenes.'s Hence it is
that the Holy Ghost, in His greatness, foresee-


9 Acts iii. 19-21.
'o I Thess. i. 9, 10.
" I Thess. ii. 19. Some mss. omit
'^ I Thess. iii. 13.
13 I Thess. iv. 13-17.
14 1 Cor. XV. 19.
15 2 Tim. i. 15.


God.


CHAP. XXVI.]


ON THE RESURRECTION OF THE FLESH.


5^3


ing clearly all such interpretations as these,
suggests (to the apostle), in this very epistle
■of his to the Thessalonians, as follmns: " But
of the times and the seasons, brethren, there
is no necessity for my writing unto you. For
je yourselves know perfectly, that the day of
the Lord cometh as a thief in the night. For
waen they shall say, * Peace,* and ' All things
are safe,' then sudden destruction shall come
upon them."' Again, in the second epistle
he addresses them with even greater earnest-
ness: " Now I beseech you, brethren, by the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by our
gathering together unto Him, that ye be not
soon shaken in mind, nor be troubled, either
b)"- spirit, or by word," that is, the word of
false prophets, **or by letter," that \Sy the
letter of false apostles, "as if from us, as that
the day of the Lord is at hand. Let no man
•deceive you by any means. For that day
shall not come^ unless indeed there first come
a falling away," he means indeed of this
present empire, " and that man of sin be re-
vealed," that is to say. Antichrist, "the son
of perdition, who opposeth and exalteth him-
self above all that is called God or religion; so
that he sitteth in the temple of God, affirming
that he Is God. Remember ye not, that when
I was with you, I used to tell you these things ?
And now ye know what detaineth, that he
might be revealed in his time. For the mys-
tery of iniquity doth already work; only he
who now hinders must hinder, until he be
taken out of the way/'^" What obstacle is
there but the Roman state, the falling away
of which, by being scattered into ten king-
doms, shall introduce Antichrist upon (its own
Tuins) ? " And then shall be revealed the
wicked one, whom the Lord shall consume
with the spirit of His mouth, and shall destroy
with the brightness of His coming: even hi?n
whose coming is after the working of Satan,
with all power, and signs, and lying wonders,
and with all deceivableness of unrighteousness
in them that perish." ^

CHAP. XXV. ST. JOHN, IN THE APOCALYPSE,

EQUALLY EXPLICIT IN ASSERTING THE SAME
GREAT DOCTRINE.

In the Revelation of John, again, the order
of these times is spread out to view, which
*' the souls of the martyrs " are taught to wait
for beneath the altar, whilst they earnestly pray
to be avenged and judged: '^ (taught, I say,
to wait), in order that the world may first
drink to the dregs the plagues that await it
out of the vials of the angels, s and that the


1 1 Thess. V. 1-3.

2 2 Thess. ii. 1-7.

3 2 Thess. ii. 8-10.

4 Rev. vi. 9, 10.

5 Rev. xvi.


city of fornication may receive from the ten
kings its deserved doom, <" and that the beast
Antichrist with his false prophet may wage war
on the Church of God; and that, after the
casting of the devil into the bottomless pit for
a while, ^ the blessed prerogative of the first
resurrection may be ordained from the
thrones;^ and then again, after the consign-
ment of him to the fire, that the judgment of
the final and universal resurrection may be
determined out of the books. ^ Since, then,
the Scriptures both indicate the stages of the
last times, and concentrate the harvest of the
Christian hope in the very end of the world, it
is evident, either that all which God promises
to us receives its accomplishment then, and
thus what the heretics pretend about a resur-
rection here falls to the ground; or else, even
allowing that a confession of the mystery (of
divine truth) is a resurrection, that there is,
without any detriment to this view, room for
believing in that which is announced for the
end. It moreover follows, that the very main-
tenance of this spiritual resurrection amounts
to a presumption in favour of the other bodily
resurrection; for if none were announced for
that time, there would be fair ground for as-
serting only this purely spiritual resurrection.
Inasmuch, however, as (a resurrection) is
proclaimed for the last time, it is proved to
be a bodily one, because there is no spiritual
one also then announced. For why make a
second announcement of a resurrection of only
one character, that is, the spiritual one, since
this ought to be undergoing accomplishment
either now, without any regard to different
times, or else then, at the very conclusion of
all the periods ? It is therefore more com-
petent for us even to maintain a spiritual res-
urrection a the commencement of a life of
faith, who acknowledge the full completion
thereof at the end of the world

CHAP. XXVI. EVEN THE METAPHORICAL DE-
SCRIPTIONS OF THIS SUBJECT IN THE SCRIP-
TURES POINT TO THE BODILY RESURRECTION,
THE ONLY SENSE WHICH SECURES THEIR CON-
SISTENCY AND DIGNITY.

To a preceding objection, that the Scriptures
are allegorical, I have still one answer to make
— that it is open to us also to defend the bodily
character of the resurrection by means of the
language of the prophets, which is equally
figurative. For consider that primeval sen-
tence which God spake when He called man
earth; saying, " Earth thou art, and to earth
shalt thou return."" In respect, of course,

6 Rev. xviii.

7 Rev. XX. 2.

8 Vers. 4-6.

9 Vers. 12-14.
w Gen, iii. 19.


5^4


ON THE RESURRECTION OF THE FLESH.


[chap. XXVII.


to his fleshly substance, which had been taken
out of the ground, and which was the first to
receive the name of man, as we have already
shown,' does not this passage give one in-
struction to interpret in relation to Xhe flesh
also whatever of wrath or of grace God has
determined for the earth, because, strictly
speaking, the earth is not exposed to His
judgment, since it has never done any good
or evil ? " Cursed, " no doubt, it was, for it
drank the blood of man;" but even this was
as a figure of homicidal flesh. For if the
earth has to suffer either joy or injury, it is
simply on man's account, that he may suffer
the joy or the sorrow through the events which
happen to his dwelling-place, whereby he will
rather have to pay the penalty which, simply
on his account, even the earth must suffer.
(When, therefore, God even threatens the
jearth, I would prefer saying that He threatens
' the flesh : so likewise, when He makes a
promise to the earth, I would rather under-
stand Him as promising the flesh; as in that
passage of David: "The Lord is King, let
the earth be glad, " 3 — meaning the flesh of
the saints, to which appertains the enjoyment
of the kingdom of God. Then he afterwards
says: "The earth saw and trembled; the
mountains melted like wax at the presence of
the Lord," — meaning, no doubt the flesh of
the wicked; and (in a similar sense) it is
written: " For they shall look on Him whom
they pierced."^ If indeed it will be thought
that both these passages were pronounced
simply of the element earth, how can it be con-
sistent that it should shake and melt at the
presence of the Lord, at whose royal dignity
it before exulted ? So again in Isaiah, " Ye
shall eat the good of the land, " s the ex-
pression means the blessings which await the
flesh when in the kingdom of God it shall be
renewed, and made like the angels, and waiting
to obtain the things " which neither eye hath
seen, nor ear heard, and which have not
entered into the heart of man." ^ Otherwise,
how vain that Ood should invite men to
obedience by the fruits of the field and the
elements of this life, when He dispenses these
to even irreligious men and blasphemers; on
a general condition once for all made to man,
" sending rain on the good and on the evil,
and making His sun to shine on the just and
on the unjust ! "' Happy, no doubt, is faith,
if it is to obtain gifts which the enemies of
God and Christ not only use, but even abuse,

I See above, ch. v.
^Gen. iv. ii.

3 Ps. xcvii. I.

4 Zech. xii. lo.

5 Isa. i. 19.

6 I Cor. ii. 9.

7 Matt. V. 45.


" worshipping the creature itself in opposition
to the Creator ! " ^ You will reckon, (I sup-
pose) onions and truffles among earth's boun-
ties, since the Lord declares that "man shall
not live on bread alone ! " ' In this way the
Jews lose heavenly blessings, by confining
their hopes to earthly ones, being ignorant of
the promise of heavenly bread, and of the oil
of God's unction, and the wine of the Spirit,,
and of that water of life which has its vigour
from the vine of Christ. On exactly the same
principle, they consider the special soil of
Judasa to be that very holy land, which ought /
rather to be interpreted of the Lord's flesh, .
which, in all those who put on Christ, is 1
thenceforward the holy land; holy indeed by
the indwelling of the Holy Ghost, truly flow-
ing with milk and honey by the sweetness of
His assurance, truly Judaean by reason of the
friendship of God. For " he is not a Jew
which is one outwardly, but he who is one in-
wardly."'" In the same way it is that both
God's temple and Jerusalem (must be under-
stood) when it is said by Isaiah: " Awake,
awake, O Jerusalem ! put on the strength of
thine arm; awake, as in thine earliest time," "
that is to say, in that innocence which pre-
ceded the fall into sin. For how can words of
this kind of exhortation and invitation be suit-
able for that Jerusalem which killed the proph-
ets, and stoned those that were sent to them,
and at last crucified its very Lord ? Neither
indeed is salvation promised to any one land
at all, which must needs pass away with the
fashion of the whole world. Even if anybody
should venture strongly to contend that para-
dise is the holy land, which it may be possible
to designate as the land of our first parents
Adam and Eve, it will even then follow that
the restoration of paradise will seem to be
promised to the flesh, whose lot it was to in-
habit and keep it, in order that man may be
recalled thereto just such as he was driven
from it.

CHAP. XXVII. CERTAIN METAPHORICAL TERMS

EXPLAINED OF THE RESURRECTION OF THE
FLESH.

We have also in the Scriptures robes men-
tioned as allegorizing the hope of the flesh.
Thus in the Revelation of John it is said:
" These are they which have not defiled their
clothes with women,"" — indicating, of course,
virgins, and such as have become "eunuchs
for the kingdom of heaven's sake." '^ There-
fore they shall be "clothed in wliite rai-


8 Rom. i. 25.

9 Matt. iv. 4.

10 Rom. ii. 28, 29.

n Isa. Ii. 9, Sept.

»2 Rev. iii. 4 and xiv. 4.

13 Matt. XIX. 12.


CHAP. XXIX.]


ON THE RESURRECTION OF THE FLESH.


.'•-0


ment,"' that is, in the bright beauty of the
unwedded flesh. In the gospel even, "the
wedding garment" may be regarded as the
sanctity of the flesh. = And so, when Isaiah
tells us what sort of " fast the Lord hath
chosen," and subjoins a statement about the
reward of good works, he says: " Then shall
thy light break forth as the morning, and thy
garments, 3 shall speedily arise; "^ where he
has no thought of cloaks or stuff gowns, but
means the rising of the flesh, which he declared
the resurrection of, after its fall in death.
Thus we are furnished even with an allegori-
cal defence of the resurrection of the body.
When, then, we read, " Go, my people, enter
into your closets for a little season, until my
anger pass away,"s we have in the closets
graves, in which they will have to rest for a
little while, who shall have at the end of the
world departed this life in the last furious
onset of the power of Antichrist. Why else
did He use the expression closets^ in prefer-
ence to some other receptacle, if it were not
that the flesh is kept in these closets or cellars
salted and reserved for use, to be drawn out
thence on a suitable occasion ? It is on a like
principle that embalmed corpses are set aside
for burial in mausoleums and sepulchres, in
order that they may be removed therefrom
when the Master shall order it. Since, there-
fore, there is consistency in thus understanding
the passage (for what refuge of little closets
could possibly shelter us from the wrath of
God?), it appears that by the very phrase
which he uses, " Until His anger pass
away," 5 which shall extinguish Antichrist,
he in fact shows that after that indignation
the flesh will come forth from the sepulchre,
in which it had been deposited previous to the
bursting out of the anger. Now out of the
closets nothing else is brought than that which
had been put into them, and after the extir-
pation of Antichrist shall be busily transacted
the great process <?/"the resurrection.

CHAP. XXVIII. PROPHETIC THINGS AND AC-
TIONS, AS WELL AS WORDS, ATTEST THIS
GREAT DOCTRINE.

But we know that prophecy expressed
itself by things no less than by words. By
words, and also by deeds, is the resurrec-
tion foretold. When Moses puts his hand
into his bosom, and then draws it out again
dead, and again puts his hand into his


1 Rev. lii. 5

2 Matt. xxii. ii, 12.

3 There is a curious change of the word here made by Tertullian,
who reads i/aarta instead of ia/uiara, " thy health," OX "healings,"
which is the word in the Sept.

4lsa. Iviii. 8.
5 Isa. xxvi, 20.


bosom, and plucks it out living,* does not
this apply as a presage to all mankind ? —
inasmuch as those three signs ^ denoted the
threefold power of God: when it shall, first, in
the appointed order, subdue to man the old
serpent, the devil, ^ however formidable; then,
secondly, draw forth the flesh from the bosom
of death;' and then, at last, shall pursue all
blood (shed) in judgment.'" On this subject
we read in the writings of the same prophet,
(how that) God says: " For your blood of
your lives will I require of all wild beasts;
and I will require it of the hand of man, and
of his brother's hand."" Now nothing is re-
quired except that which is demanded back
again, and nothing is thus demanded except
that which is to be given up; and that
will of course be given up, which shall be
demanded and required on the ground of
vengeance. But indeed there cannot possibly
be punishment of that which never had any
existence. Existence, however, it will have,
when it is restored in order to be punished.
To the flesh, therefore, applies everything
which is declared respecting the blood, for
without the flesh there cannot be blood. The
flesh will be raised up in order that the blood
may be punished. There are, again, some
statements (of Scripture) so plainly made as
to be free from all obscurity of allegory, and
yet they strongly require '^ their very simplic-
ity to be interpreted. There is, for instance,
that passage in Isaiah: "I Will kill, and I
will make alive." '^ Certainly His making
alive is to take place after He has killed. As,
therefore, it is by death that He kills, it is by
the resurrection that He will make alive.
Now it is the flesh which is killed by death;
the flesh, therefore, will be revived by the
resurrection. Surely if killing means taking
away life from the flesh, and its opposite, re-
viving, amounts to restoring life to the flesh,
it must needs be that the flesh rise again, to
which the life, which has been taken away by
killing, has to be restored by vivification.

CHAP. XXIX. — EZEKIEL's VISION OF THE DRY
BONES QUOTED.

Inasmuch, then, as even the figurative por-
tions of Scripture, and the arguments of facts,
and some plain statements of Holy IVrit,
throw light upon the resurrection of the flesh
(although without specially naming the very
substance), how much more effectual for de-


6 Ex. iv. 6, 7.

7 Ex. iv. 2-9.

8 Comp. vers. 3, 4.
9Comp. vers. 6, 7.

10 Comp. ver. 9.
" Gen. ix. 5.

12 Sitiant.

13 Isa. xxxviii. 12, 13, 16. The very words, however, occur not
in Isaiah, but in i Sam. ii. 6, Deut. xxxii. 39.


566


ON THE RESURRECTION OF THE FLESH.


[chap. XXX.


termining the question will not those passages
be which indicate the actual substance of the
body by expressly mentioning it ! Take
Ezekiel: " And the hand of the Lord," says
he, ** was upon me; and the Lord brought me
forth in the Spirit, and set me in the midst of
a plain which was full of bones; and He led
me round about them in a circuit: and, be-
hold, there were many on the face of the
plain; and, lo, they were very dry. And He
said unto me. Son of man, will these bones
live ? And I said, O Lord God, Thou know-
est. And He said unto me. Prophesy upon
these bones; and thou shalt say. Ye dry
bones, hear the word of the Lord. Thus
saith the Lord God to these bones, Behold, I
bring upon you the breath of life ^ and ye shall
live: and I will give unto you the spirit, and
I will place muscles over you, and I will
spread skin upon you; and ye shall live, and
shall know that I am the Lord. And I
prophesied as the Lord commanded me: and
while I prophesy, behold there is a voice, be-
hold also a movement, and bones approached
bones. And I saw, and behold sinews and
flesh came up over them, and muscles were
placed around them; but there was no breath
in them. And He said unto me, Prophesy to
the wind, son of man, prophesy and say.
Thus saith the Lord God, Come from the four
winds, O breath, and breathe in these dead
men, and let them live. So I prophesied to
the wind, as He commanded me, and the
spirit entered into the bones, and they lived,
and stood upon their feet, strong and exceed-
ing many. And the Lord said unto me. Son
of man, these bones are the whole house of
Israel. They say themselves. Our bones are
become dry, and our hope is perished, and we
in them have been violently destroyed. There-
fore prophesy unto them, (and say). Behold,
even I will open your sepulchres, and will
bring you out of your sepulchres, O my peo-
ple, and will bring you into the land of Israel:
and ye shall know how that I the Lord
opened your sepulchres, and brought you, O
my people, out of your sepulchres; and I will
give my Spirit unto you, and ye shall live,
and shall rest in your own land: and ye shall
know how that I the Lord have spoken and
done these things, saith the Lord."'

CHAP. XXX. THIS VISION INTERPRETED BY TER-

TULLIAN OF THE RESURRECTION OF THE BODIES
OF THE DEAD. A CHRONOLOGICAL ERROR OF
OUR AUTHOR, WHO SUPPOSES THAT EZEKIEL IN
HIS CH. XXXI. PROPHESIED BEFORE THE CAP-
TIVITY.

I am well aware how they torture even this


Ezek.


1. 1-14.


prophecy into a proof of the allegorical sense,
on the ground that by saying, " These bones
are the whole house of Israel," He made them
a figure of Israel, and removed them from
their proper literal condition; and therefore
(they contend) that there is here a figurative,
not a true prediction of the resurrection, for
(they say) the state of the Jews is one of
humiliation, in a certain sense dead, and very
dry, and dispersed over the plain of the world.
Therefore the image of a resurrection is alle-
gorically applied to their state, since it has to
be gathered together, and recompacted bone
to bone (in other words, tribe to tribe, and
people to people), and to be reincorporated
by the sinews of power and the nerves of
royalty, and to be brought out as it were from
sepulchres, that is to say, from the most
miserable and degraded abodes of captivity,
and to breathe afresh in the way of a restora-
tion, and to live thenceforward in their own
land of Judaea. And what is to happen after
all this ? They will die, no doubt. And what
will there be after death ? No resurrection
from the dead, of course, since there is noth-
ing of the sort here revealed to Ezekiel.
Well, but the resurrection is elsewhere fore-
told: so that there will be one even in this
case, and they are rash in applying this pas-
sage to the state of Jevish affairs; or even if
it do indicate a different recovery from the
resurrection which we are maintaining, what
matters it to me, provided there be also a
resurrection of the body, just as there is a
restoration of the Jewish state ? In fact, by
the very circumstance that the recovery of the
Jewish state is prefigured by the reincorpora-
tion and reunion of bones, proof is offered
that this event will also happen to the bones
themselves; for the metaphor could not have
been formed from bones, if the same thing
exactly were not to be realized in them also.
Now,although there is a sketch of the true thing
in its image, the image itself still possesses a
truth of its own: it must needs be, therefore,
that that must have a prior existence for itself,
which is used figuratively to express some
other thing. Vacuity is not a consistent basis
for a similitude, nor does nonentity form a
suitable foundation for a parable. It will
therefore be right to believe that the bones
are destined to have a rehabiliment of flesh
and breath, such as it is here said they will
have, by reason indeed of which their renewed
state could alone express the reformed con-
dition of Jewish affairs, which is pretended
to be the meaning of this passage. It is,
however, more characteristic of a religious
spirit to maintain the truth on the authority
of a literal interpretation, such as is required


CWAP. -KXXII.]


ON THE RESURRECTION OF THE FLESH.


567


toy the rsense of the inspired passage. Now,
if this .vision had reference to the condition
of the Jews, as soon as He liad revealed to
hian the position of the bones, He would at
once have added, " These bones are the whole
hou.«e of Israel," and so forth. But immedi-
ately on showing the bones, He interrupts the
scene by saying somewhat of the prospect
which is most suited to bones; without yet
naming Israel, He tries the prophet's own
faith: ^'Soa oi man, can these bones ever
live?" so that he makes answer: "O Lord,
Thou knowest/' Now God would not, you
may be sure, have tried the prophet's faith on
a point which was never to be a real one, of
which Israel should never hear, and in which
it was not proper to repose belief. Since,
however, the resurrection of the dead was
indeed foretold, but Lsrael, in the distrust of
iais great unbelief, was offended at it; and,
whilst gazing on the condition of the crumb-
ling grave, despaired of a resurrection; or
rather, did not direct his mind mainly to it,
but to his own harassing circumstances, —
therefore God first instructed the prophet
(since he, too, was not free from doubt), by
revealing to him the process of the resurrec-
tion, with a view to his earnest setting forth
of the same. He then charged the people to
believe what He had revealed to the prophet,
telling them that they were themselves,
though refusing to believe their resurrection,
the very b6nes which were destined to rise
again. Then in the concluding sentence He
says, *' And ye shall know how that I the
Lord have spoken and done these things,"
intending of course to do that of which He
had spoken; but cer,tainly not meaning to do
that which He had spoken of, if His design
had been to do something different from what
He had said.


CHAP. XXXI. OTHER PASSAGES OUT OF THE

PROPHETS APPLIED TO THE RESURRECTION
OF THE FLESH.

Unquestionably, if the people were indulg-
ing in figurative murmurs that their bones
were become dry, and that their hope had
perished — plaintive at the consequences of
their dispersion — then God might fairly
enough seem to have consoled then figurative
despair with 2i figurative promise. Since, how-
ever, no injury had as yet alighted on the
people from their dispersion, although the
hope of the resurrection had very frequently
failed amongst them, it is manifest that it was
owing to the perishing condition of their
bodies that their faith in the resurrection was
shaken. God, therefore, was rebuilding the


faith which the people were pulling down.
But even if it were true that Israel was then
depressed at some shock in their existing cir-
cumstances, we must not on that acconnt sup-
pose that the purpose of revelation could have
rested in a parable: its aim must have been to
testify a rciiurrection, in order to raise the
nation's hope to even an eternal salvation and
an indispensable restoration, and thereby
turn off their minds from brooding oyer their
present affairs. This indeed is the aim c^
other prophets likewise. " Ye shall go forth,"
(says Malachi), " from your sepulchres, as
young calves let loose from their bonds, and
ye shall tread down your enemies."' And
again, (Isaiah says): "Your heart shall re-
joice, and your bones shall spring up like the
grass," = because the grass also is renewed by
the dissolution and corruption of the seed.
In a word, if it is contended that the figure of
the rising bones refers properly to the state
of Israel, why is the same hope announced to
all nations, instead of being limited to Israel
only, of reinvesting those osseous remains
with bodily substance and vital breath, and
of raising up their dead out of the grave ?
For the language is universal: "The dead
shall arise, and come forth from their graves;
for the dew which cometh from Thee is medi-
cine to their bones." ^ In another passage
// is written: " All flesh shall come to worship
before me, saith the Lord." -» When? When
the fashion of this world shall begin to pass
away. For He said before: "As the new
heaven and the new earth, which I make, re-
main before me, saith the Lord, so shall your
seed remain, "s Then also shall be fulfilled
what is written afterwards: "And they shall
go forth" (namely, from their graves), "and
shall see the carcases of those who have trans-
gressed: for their worm shall never die, nor
shall their fire be quenched; and they shall
be a spectacle to all flesh" ^ even to that
which, being raised again from the dead and
brought out from the grave, shall adore the
Lord for this great grace.

CHAP. XXXII. EVEN UNBURIED BODIES WILL

BE RAISED AGAIN. WHATEVER BEFALLS THEM
GOD WILL RESTORE THEM AGAIN. JONAH's
CASE QUOTED IN ILLUSTRATION OF GOD's
POWER.

But, that you may not suppose that it is
merely those bodies which are consigned to
tombs whose resurrection is foretold, you have
it declared in Scripture: "And I will com-


1 Mai. iv. 2, 3,

2 Isa. Ixvi. 14.
3lsa. xxvi. 19.
4 Isa. Ixvi. 23.
SVer. 22.

^ Isa. Ixvi. 24.


568


ON THE RESURRECTION OF THE FLESH.


[CHAl. XXXllI.


mand the fishes of the sea, and they shall cast
up the bones which they have devoured; and
I will bring joint to joint, and bone to bone."
You will ask, Will then the fishes and other
animals and carnivorous birds be raised again,
in order that they may vomit up what they
have consumed, on the ground of your read-
ing in the law of Moses, that blood is required
of even all the beasts ? Certainly not But
the beasts and the fishes are mentioned in re-
lation to the restoration of flesh and blood, in
order the more emphatically to express the
resurrection of such bodies as have even
been devoured, when redress is said to be
demanded of their very devourers. Now I
apprehend that in the case of Jonah we have
a fair proof of this divine power, when he
comes forth from the fish's belly uninjured
in both his natures — his flesh and his soul. \ No
doubt the bowels of the whale would have
had abundant time during three days for con-
suming and digesting /onak's flesh, quite as
effectually as a coffin, or a tomb, or the gradual
decay of some quiet and concealed grave;
only that he wanted to prefigure even those
beasts {rivhich symibolize) especially the men
who are wildly opposed to the Christimi name,
or the angels of iniquity, of whom blood will
be required by the full exaction of an aveng-
ing judgment. Where, then, is the man who,
being more disposed to learn than to assume,
more careful to believe than to dispute, and
more scrupulous of the wisdom of God than
wantonly bent on his own, when he hears of
a divine purpose respecting sinews and skin,
and nerves and bones, will forthwith devise
some different application of these words, as
if all that is said of the substances in question
were not naturally intended for man ? For
either there is here no reference to the destiny
of man — in the gracious provision of the
kingdom (of heaven), in the severity of the
judgment-day, in all the incidents of the resur-
rection; or else, if there is any reference to
his destiny, the destination must necessarily
be made in reference to those substances of
which the man is composed, for whom the des-
tiny is reserved. Another question I have also
to ask of these very adroit transformers of bones
and sinews, and nerves and sepulchres: Why,
when anything is declared of the soul, do they
not interpret the soul to be something else, and
transfer it to another signification? — since,
whenever any distinct statement is made of a
bodily substance, they will obstinately prefer
taking any other sense whatever, rather than
that which the name indicates. If things
which pertain to the body are figurative, why
are not those which pertain to the soul figura-
tive also ? Since, however, things which be-


long to the soul have nothing allegorical in
them, neither therefore have those which be-
long to the body. For man is as much body
as he is soul; so that it is impossible for one
of these natures to admit a figurative sense,
and the other to exclude it.

CHAP. XXXIII. so MUCH FOR THE PROPHETIC

SCRIPTURES. IN THE GOSPELS, CHRIST's PAR-
ABLES, AS EXPLAINED BY HIMSELF, HAVE A
CLEAR REFERENCE TO THE RESURRECTION OF
THE FLESH.

This is evidence enough from the prophetic
Scriptures. I now appeal to the Gospels.
But here also I must first meet the same
sophistry as advanced by those who contend
that the Lord, like (the prophets), said every-
thing in the way of allegory, because it is
written: "All these things spake Jesus in
parables, and without a parable spake He not
unto them,"^ that is, to the Jews. Now the
disciples also asked Him, " Why speakest
Thou in parables ? " = And the Lord gave
them this answer: "Therefore I speak unto
them in parables: because they seeing, see
not; and hearing, they hear not, according to
the prophecy of Esaias."^ But since it was
to the Jews that He spoke in parables, it was
not then to all men; and if not to all, it fol-
lows that it was not always and in all things
parables with Him, but only in certain things,
and when addressing a particular, class. But
He addressed a particular class when He
spoke to the Jews. It is true that He spoke
sometimes even to the disciples in parables.
But observe how the Scripture relates such a
fact: " And He spake a parable unto them." *
It follows, then, that He did not usually ad-
dress them in parables; because if He always
did so, special mention would not be made of
His resorting to this mode of address. Be-
sides, there is not a parable which you will
not find to be either explained by the Lord
Himself, as that of the sower, (which He in-
terprets) of the management of the word of
God; 5 or else cleared by a preface from the
writer of the Gospel, as in the parable of the
arrogant judge and the importunate widow,
which is expressly applied to earnestness in
prayer;*' or capable of being spontaneously
understood, 7 as in the parable of the fig-tree,
which was spared a while in hopes of improve-
ment— an emblem of Jewish sterility. Now,


' Matt. xiii. 34.
2Ver. 10.

3 Matt. xiii. 13 ; comp. Isa. vi. 9.

4 See Luke vi. 39' comp. with ver. 20, and other places, espe-
cially in this Gospel.

5 See Luke viii. ir.

6 See Luke xviii, i.

7 Such cases of obvious meaning, which required no explana-
tion, are referred to in Matt. xxi. 45 and Luke xx. 19.


%


CHAP. XXXIV.]


ON THE RESURRECTION OF THE FLESH.


569


if even parables obscure not the light of the
gospel, how unlikely it is that plain sentences
and declarations, which have an unmistakea-
ble meaning, should signify any other thing
than their literal sense ! But it is by such
declarations and sentences that the Lord sets
forth either the last judgment, or the king-
dom, or the resurrection: " It shall be more
tolerable," He says, " for Tyre and Sidon in
the day of judgment than for you.'" "" And,
*'Tell them that the kingdom of God is at
hand."'' And again, "It shall be recom-
pensed to you at the resurrection of the
just." 3 Now, if the mention of these events
(I mean the judgmept-day, and the kingdom
of God, and the resurrection) has a plain and
absolute sense, so that nothing about them
can be pressed into an allegory, neither should
those statements be forced into parables which
describe the arrangement, and the process,
and the experience of the kingdom of God^
and of the judgment, and of the resurrection.
On the contrary, things which are destined
for the body should be carefully understood
in a bodily sense, — not in a spiritual sense,
as having nothing figurative in their nature.
This is the reason why we have laid it down
as a preliminary consideration, that the bodily
substance both of the soul and of the flesh is
liable to the recompense, which will have to
be awarded in return for the co-operation of
the two natures, that so the corporeahty of the
soul may not exclude the bodily nature of the
flesh by suggesting a recourse to figurative
descriptions, since both of them must needs
be regarded as destined to take part in the
kingdom, and the judgment, and the resurrec-
tion. And now we proceed to the special
proof of this proposition, that the bodily
character of the flesh is indicated by our Lord
whenever He mentions the resurrection, at the
same time without disparagement to the cor-
poreal nature of the soul, — a point which has
been actually admitted but by a few.

CHAP. XXXIV. CHRIST PLAINLY TESTIFIES TO

THE RESURRECTION OF THE ENTIRE MAN.
NOT IN HIS SOUL ONLY, WITHOUT THE BODY.

To begin with the passage where He says
that He is come to '''to seek mid to save that
which is lost." '' What do you suppose that to
be which is lost? Man, undoubtedly. The
entire man, or only a part of him ? The
whole man, of course. In fact, since the
trangression which caused man's ruin was
committed quite as much by the instigation


1 Matt. xi. 22.

2 Matt. X. 7.

3 Luke xiv. 14.

4 Luke xix. 10.


of the soul from concupiscence as by the
action of the flesh from actual fruition, it has
marked the entire man with the sentence of
transgression, and has therefore made him
deservedly amenable to perdition. So that
he will be wholly saved, since he has by sin-
ning been wholly lost. Unless it be true
that the sheep (of the parable) is a " lost " one,
irrespective of its body; then its recovery may
be effected without the body. Since, however,
it is the bodily substance as well as the soul,
making up the entire animal, which was carried
on the shoulders of the Good Shepherd, we
have here unquestionably an example how
man is restored in both his natures. Else
how unworthy it were of God to bring only a
moiety of man to salvation — and almost less
than that; whereas the munificence of princes
of this world always claims for itself the merit
of a plenary grace ! Then must the devil be
understood to be stronger for injuring man,
ruining him wholly ? and must God have the
character of comparative weakness, since He
does not relieve and help man in his entire
state ? The apostle, however, suggests that
"where sin abounded, there has grace much
more abounded." s How, in fact, can he be
regarded as saved, who can at the same time
be said to be lost — lost, that is, in the flesh,
but saved as to his soul ? Unless, indeed,
their argufnent now makes it necessary that the
soul should be placed in a " lost " condition,
that it may be susceptible of salvation, on the
ground that that is properly saved which has
been lost. We, however, so understand the
soul's immortality as to believe it " lost," not
in the sense of destruction, but of punish-
ment, that is, in hell. And if this is the case,
then it is not the soul which salvation will
affect, since it is " safe " already in its own
nature by reason of its immortality, but rather
the flesh, which, as all readily allow, is sub-
ject to destruction. Else, if the soul is also
perishable (in this sense), in other words, not
immortal — the condition of the flesh — then
this same condition ought in all fairness to
benefit the flesh also, as being similarly mortal
and perishable, since that which perishes the
Lord purposes to save. I do not care now to
follow the clue of our discussion, so far as to
consider whether it is in one of his natures
or in the other that perdition puts in its
claim on man, provided that salvation is
equally distributed over the two substances,
and makes him its aim in respect of them
both. For observe, in which substance so-
ever you assume man to have perished,
in the other he does not perish. He will
therefore be saved in the substance in which


570


ON THE RESURRECTION OF THE FLESH.


[chap. XXXV.


he does not perish, and yet obtain salva-
tion in that in which he does perish. You
have (then) the restoration of the entire man,
inasmuch as the Lord purposes to save that
part of him which perishes, whilst he will not
of course lose that portion which cannot be
lost. Who will any longer doubt of the safety
of both natures, when one of them is to obtain
salvation, and the other is not to lose it?
And, still further, the Lord explains to us the
meaning of the thing whei> He says: " I came
not to do my own will, but the Father's, who
hath sent me."' What, I ask, is that will?
" That of all which He hath given me I should
lose nothing, but should raise it up again at
the last day."' Now, what had Christ re-
ceived of the Father but that which He had
Himself put on ? Man, of cours'e, in his text-
ure of flesh and soul. Neither, therefore, of
those parts which He has received will He
allow to perish; nay, no considerable portion
— nay, not the least fraction, of either. If
the flesh be, as our opp07ie7its slightingly fhi?ik,
but a poor fraction, then the flesh is safe, be-
cause not a fraction of 7nan is to perish; and
no larger portion is in danger, because every
portion of man is in equally safe keeping with
Him. If, however. He will not raise the flesh
also up at the last day, then He will permit
not only a fraction of man to perish, but (as
I will venture to say, in consideration of so
important a part) almost the whole of him.
But when He repeats His words with increased
emphasis, " And this is the Father's will, that
every one which seeth the Son, and believeth
on Him, may have eternal life: and I will
raise him up at the last day,"^ — He asserts
the full extent of the resurrection. For He
assigns to each several nature that reward
which is suited to its services: both to the
flesh, for by it the Son was "seen;" and to
the soul, for by it He was "believed on."
Then, you will say, to them was this promise
given by whom Christ was " seen." Well, be
it so; only let the same hope flow on from
them to us ! For if to them who saw, and
therefore believed, such fruit then accrued to
the operations of the flesh and the soul, how
much more to us I For more "blessed,"
says Christ, " are they who have not seen, and
yet have believed; " * since, even if the resur-
rection of the flesh must be denied to them, it
must at any rate be a fitting boon to us, who
are the more blessed. For how could we be
blessed, if we were to perish in any part of
us?


CHAP. XXXV. EXPLANATION OF WHAT IS MEANT

BY THE BODY, WHICH IS TO BE RAISED AGAIN.
I NOT THE CORPOREALITY OF THE SOUL.

But He also teaches us, that " He is rather
to be feared, who is able to destroy both body
I and soul in hell," that is, the Lord alone;
"not those which kill the body, but are not
able to hurt the soul,"s that is to say, all
human powers. Here, then, we have a recog-
nition of the natural immortality of the soul,
which cannot be killed by men; and of the
mortality of the body, which may be killed:
whence we learfi that the resurrection of the
dead is a resurrection of the flesh; for unless
it were raised again, it would be impossible
for the flesh to be " killed in hell." But as a
question may be here captiously raised about
the meaning of " the body " (or " the flesh "),
I will at once state that I understand by the
human body nothing else than that fabric of
the flesh which, whatever be the kind of ma-
terial of which it is constructed and modified,
is seen and handled, and sometimes indeed
killed, by men. In like manner, I should not
admit that anything but cement and stones
and bricks form the body of a wall. If any
one imports into our argument some body of
a subtle, secret nature, he must show, dis-
close, and prove to me that that identical body
is the very one which was slain by human vio-
lence, and then (I will grant) that it is of such
a body that (our scripture) speaks. If, again,
the body or corporeal nature of the soul^ is
cast in my teeth, it will only be an idle sub-
terfuge ! For since both substances are set
before us (in this passage, which affirms) that
" body and soul " are destroyed in hell, a dis-
tinction is obviously made between the two;
and we are left to understand the body to be
that which is tangible to us, that is, the flesh,
which, as it will be destroyed in hell — since it
did not "rather fear" being destroyed by
God — so also will it be restored to life eter-
nal, since it preferred to be killed by human
hands. If, therefore, any one shall violently
suppose that the destruction of the soul and
the flesh in hell amounts to a final annihila-
tion of the two substances, and not to their
penal treatment (as if they were to be con-
sumed, not punished), let him recollect that
the fire of hell is eternal — expressly an-
nounced as an everlasting penalty; and let
him then admit that it is from this circum-
stance that this never-ending "killing" is
more formidable than a merely human mur-
der, which is only temporal. He will then


' John vi. 38.
= Ver. 39.
3Ver. 40.
4 John XX. 29.


5 Matt. X. 28.

6 Tertullian supposed that even the soul was in a certain sense
of a corporeal essence. [Compare the speculations of Crusius in
Auberlen, Divine Revelation, (Translation of A. B. Paton, Edin-
burgh, Clarks, 1867).]


A


CHAP. XXXVI.]


ON THE RESURRECTION OF THE FLESH.


571


come to the conclusion that substances must
be eternal, when their penal "killing" is an
eternal one. Since, then, the body after the
resurrection has to be killed by God in hell
along with the soul, we surely have sufficient
information in this fact respecting both the
issues which await it, namely the resurrection
of the flesh, and its eternal " killing." Else
it would be most absurd if the flesh should be
raised up and destined to " the killing in hell,"
in order to be put an end to, when it might
suffer such an annihilation (more directly) if
not raised again at all. A pretty paradox,'
to be sure, that an essence must be refitted with
life, in order that it may receive that annihila-
tion which has already in fact accrued to it !
But Christy whilst confirming us in the self-
same hope, adds the example of "the spar-
rows"— how that "not one of them falls to
the ground without the will of God."^ He
says this, that you may believe that the flesh
which has been consigned to the ground, is
able in like manner to rise again by the will
of the same God. For although this is not
allowed to the sparrows, yet "we are of more
value than many sparrows," ^ for the very
reason that, when fallen, we rise again. He
affirms, lastly, that "the very hairs of our
head are all numbered," '* and ir the affirma-
tion He of course includes the promise of
their safety; for if they were to be lost, where
would be the use of having taken such a nu-
merical care of them ? Surely the only use
lies (in this truth): "That of all which the
Father hath given to me, I should lose none," s
— not even a hair, as also not an eye nor a
tooth. And yet whence shall come that
"weeping and gnashing of teeth," *^ if not
from eyes and teeth ? — even at that time when
the body shall be slain in hell, and thrust out
into that outer darkness which shall be the
suitable torment of the eyes. He also who
shall not be clothed at the marriage feast in
the raiment of good works, will have to be
" bound hand and foot," — as being, of course,
raised in his body. So, again, the very re-
clining at the feast in the kingdom of God,
and sitting on Christ's thrones, and standing
at last on His right hand and His left, and
eating of the tree of life: what are all these
but most certain proofs of a bodily appoint-
ment and destination ?

CHAP. XXXVI. — Christ's refutation of the

SADDUCEES, AND AFFIRMATION OF CATHOLIC
DOCTRINE.

Let us now see whether (the Lord). has not

' Scilicet.
2 Matt. X. 29.
3Ver. 31.
4 Matt. X. ^o.


imparted greater strength to our doctrine in
breaking down the subtle cavil of the Saddu-
cees. Their great object, I take it, was to do
away altogether with the resurrection, for the
Sadducees in fact did not admit any salvation
either for the soul or the flesh ;' and there-
fore, taking the strongest case they, could for
impairing the credibility of the resurrection,
they adapted an argument from it in support
of the question which they started. Their
specious inquiry concerned the flesh, whether
or not it would be subject to marriage after
the resurrection; and they assumed the case
of a woman who had married seven brothers,
so that it was a doubtful point to which of
them she should be restored.^ Now, let the
purport both of the question and the answer be
kept steadily in view, and the discussion is
settled at once. For since the Sadducees
indeed denied the resurrection, whilst the
Lord affirmed it; since, too, (in affirming it,)
He reproached them as being both ignorant
of the Scriptures — those, of course which had
declared the resurrection — as well as incredu-
lous of the power of God, though, of course,
effectual to raise the dead, and lastly, since
He immediately added the words, " Now, that
the dead are raised, " ^ (speaking) without
misgiving, and affirming the very thing which
was being denied, even the resurrection of the
dead before Him who is " the God of the liv-
ing, " — (it clearly follows) that He affirmed
this verity in the precise sense in which they
were denying it; that it was, in fact, the resur-
rection of the two natures of man. Nor does
it follow, (as they would have it,) that because
Christ denied that men would marry. He there-
fore proved that they would not rise again.
On the contrary, He called them " the children
of the resurrection, " '° in a certain sense
having by the resurrection to undergo a birth;
and after that they marry no more, but in their
risen life are " equal unto the angels, "" in-
asmuch as they are not to marry, because they
are not to die, but are destined to pass into
the angelic state by putting on the raiment of
incorruption, although with a change in the
substance which is restored to life. Besides,
no question could be raised whether we are to
marry or die again or not, without involving
in doubt the restoration most especially of
that substance which has a particular relation
both to death and marriage — that is, the flesh.
Thus, then, you have the Lord affirming
against the Jewish heretics what is now en-


S John vi. 39.

6Matt. viii. 12, xiii. 42, xxii. 13, xxv. 30.

7 Compare Tertullian's De Prascript. Heeret. c. xxxiii.

8 Matt. xxii. 23-32 ; Mark xii. 18-27 ; Luke xx. 27-38.

9 Luke XX. 37.
>oVer. 36.

" Ver. 36.


572


ON THE RESURRECTION OF THE FLESH.


[chap. XXXVIII.


countering the denial of the Christian Saddu-
cees — the resurrection of the entire man.

CHAP, xxxvii. — Christ's assertion about the

UNPROFITABLENESS OF THE FLESH EXPLAINED
CONSISTENTLY WITH OUR DOCTRINE.

He says, it is true, that " the flesh profiteth
nothing; " ' but then, as in the former case,
the meaning must be regulated by the subject
which is spoken of. Now, because they
thought His discourse was harsh and in-
tolerable, supposing that He had really and
literally enjoined on them to eat his flesh, He,
with the view of ordering the state of salvation
as a spiritual thing, set out with the principle,
*' It is- the spirit that quickeneth;" and then
added, "The flesh profiteth nothing," —
meaning, of course, to the giving of life. He
also goes on to explain what He would have
us to understand by spirit: " Tiie words that
I speak unto you, they are spirit, and they are
life." In a like sense He had previously said:
*' He that heareth my words, and believeth
on Him that sent m.e, hath everlasting life,
and shall not come into condemnation, but
shall pass from death unto life." ^ Con-
stituting, therefore. His word as the life-
giving principle, because that word is spirit
and life. He likewise called His flesh by the
same appelation; because, too, the Word had
become flesh, ^ we ought therefore to desiire
Him in order that we may have life, and to
devour Him with the ear, and to ruminate on
Him with the understanding, and to digest
Him by faith. Now, just before (the passage
in hand). He had declared His flesh to be
** the bread which cometh down from
heaven,"'* impressing on (His hearers) con-
stantly under the figure of necessary food the
memory of their forefathers, who had pre-
ferred the bread and flesh of Egypt to their
divine calling. ^ Then, turning His subject
to their reflections, because He perceived that
they were going to be scattered from Him, He
says: "The flesh profiteth nothing." Now
what IS there to destroy the resurrection of
the flesh ? As if there might not reasonably
enough be something which, although it " pro-
fiteth nothing" itself, might yet be capable of
being profited by something else. The spirit
"profiteth," for it imparts life. The flesh
profiteth nothing, for it is subject to death.
Therefore He has rather put the two prop-
ositions in a way which favours our belief:
for by showing what " profits, " and what
" does not profit, " He has likewise thrown


' John vi. 63.
='John V. 34.

3 John i. 14.

4 John vi. 51.

5 John vi. 31, 49, 58.


light on the object which receives as well as
the subject which gives the " profit." Thus,
/>/ the present instance, we have the Spirit giving
life to the flesh which has been subdued by
death; for " the hour," says He, " is coming,
when the dead shall hear the voice of the
Son of God, and they that hear shall live."^
Now, what is " the dead " but the flesh ? and
what is "the voice of God" but the Word?
and what is the Word but the Spirit, ^ who
shall justly raise the flesh which He had once
Himself become, and that too from death,
which He Himself suffered, and from the
grave, which He Himself once entered ?
Then again, when He says, " Marvel not at
this: for the hour is coming, in which all that
are in the graves shall hear the voice of the
Son of God, and shall come forth; they that
have done good, to the resurrection of life;
and they that have done evil, unto the resur-
rection of damnation," ^ — none will after such
words be able to interpret the dead " that are
in the graves " as any other than the bodies of
the flesh, because the graves themselves are
nothing but the resting-place of corpses: for it
is incontestable that even those who partake
of "the old man," that is to say, sinful men
— in other words, those who are dead through
their ignorance of God (whom our heretics,
forsooth, foolishly insist on understanding by
the word "graves"') — are plainly here
spoken of as having to come from their graves
for judgment. But how are graves to come
forth from graves ?

CHAP. XXXVIII. CHRIST, BY RAISING THE DEAD,

ATTESTED IN A PRACTICAL WAY THE DOCTRINE
OF THE RESURRECTION OF THE FLESH.

After the Lord's words , what are we to
think of the purport of His actiotis, when He
raises dead persons from their biers atid t\\e\T
graves ? To what end did He do so ? If it
was only for the mere exhibition of His power,
or to afford the temporary favour of res-
toration to life, it was really no great mattii
for Him to raise men to die over again. 1;.
however, as was the truth, it was rather to put
in secure keeping men's belief in a future re-
surrection, then it must follow from tiie par-
ticular form of His own examples, that the
said resurrection will be a bodily one. I can
never allow it to be said that the resurrection
of the future, being destined for the soul only,
did then receive these preliminary illustrations
of a raising of the flesh, simply because it
would have been impossible to have shown the


6 John V. 25.

7 The ■


divine nature of the Son.
129, 247, note 7, Edin.

8 John v.'aS, 29.

9 Compare c. xix. above.


See our A nti-Marcion, piK


CHAI". XXXIN.J


ON THE RESURRECTION OF THE EI.J:SH


573


resurrection of an invisible soul except by the
resuscitation of a visible substance. They
have but a poor knowledge of God, who sup-
pose Him to be only capable of doing what
comes within the compass of their own
thoughts; and after all, they cannot but know
full well what His capability has ever been, if
they only make acquaintance with the writings
of John. For unquestionably he, who has
exhibited to our sight the martyrs' hitherto
disembodied souls resting under the altar, '
was quite able to display them before our
eyes rising without a body of flesh. I, how-
ever, for my part prefer (believing) that it is
impossible for God to practise deception (weak
as He only could be in respect of artifice),
from any fear of seeming to have given pre-
liminary proofs of a thing in a way which is in-
consistent with His actual disposal of the thing;
nay more, from a fear that, since He was not
powerful enough to show us a sample of the
resurrection without the flesh. He might with
still greater infirmity be unable to display (by
and by) the full accomplishment of the sam-
ple in the self-same substance of the flesh. No
example, indeed, is greater than the thing of
which it is a sample. Greater, however, it is,
if souls with their body are to be raised as the
evidence of their resurrection without the
body, so as that the entire salvation of man in
soul atid body should become a guarantee for
only the half, the soul; whereas the condition
in all examples is, that that which would be
deemed the less — I mean the resurrection of
the soul only — should be the foretaste, as it
were, of the rising of the flesh also at its ap-
pointed time. And therefore, according to
our estimate of the truth, those examples of
dead persons who were raised by the Lord
were indeed a proof of the resurrection both
of the flesh and of the soul, — a proof, in fact,
that this gift was to be denied to neither
substance. Considered, however, as examples
only, they expressed all the less significance
— less, indeed, than Christ will express at last
— for they were not raised up for glory and
immortality, but only for another death.

CHAP. XXXIX. ADDITIONAL EVIDENCE AF-
FORDED TO US IN THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES.

The Acts of the Apostles, too, attest " the
resurrection. Now the apostles had nothing
else to do, at least among the Jews, than to-
explain ^ the Old Testament and confirm ^
the New, and above all, to preach God in
Christ. Consequently they introduced noth-
ing new concerning the resurrection, besides


1 Rev. vi. 9-11.

2 Tertullian always refers to this book hy & plural phrase.

3 Resi^nandi.

4 Consignandi.


announcing it to the glory of Christ: in every
other respect it had been already received in
simple and intelligent faitii, witiiout any ques-
tion as to what sort of resurrection it was to
be, and without encountering any other op-
ponents than the Sadducees. So much easier
was it to deny the resurrection altogether, than
to understand it in an alien sense. You find
Paul confessing his faith before the chief
priests, under the shelter of the chief captain, 5
among the Sadducees and the Pharisees:
"Men and brethren," he says, " I am a Phari-
see, the son of a Pharisee; of the hope and
resurrection of the dead I am now called in
question by you,"* — referring, of course, to
the nation's hope; in order to avoid, in his
present condition, as an apparent transgressor
of the law, being thought to approach to the
Sadducees in opinion on the most important
article of the faith — even the resurrection.
That belief, therefore, in the resurrection
which he would not appear to impair, he really
confirmed in the opinion of the Pharisees,
since he rejected the views of the Sadducees,
who denied it. In like manner, before Agrippa
also, he says that he was advancing " none
other things than those which the prophets
had announced." 7 He was therefore main-
taining just such a resurrection as the prophets
had foretold. He mentions also what is writ-
ten by " Moses", touching the resurrection
of the dead; (and in so doing) he must have
known that it would be a rising in the body,
since requisition will have to be made therein
of the blood of man.^ He declared it then
to be of such a character as the Pharisees had
admitted it, and such as the Lord had Himself
maintained it, and such too as the Sadducees
refused to believe it — such refusal leading
them indeed to an absolute rejection of the
whole verity. Nor had the Athenians pre-
viously understood Paul to announce any
other resurrection. » They had, in fact,
derided his announcement; but they would
have indulged no such derision if they had
heard from him nothing but the restoration
of the soul, for they would have received that
as the very common anticipation of their own
native philosophy. But when the preaching
of the resurrection, of which they had pre-
viously not heard, by its absolute novelty ex-
cited the heathen, and a not unnatural in-
credulity in so wonderful a matter began to
harass the simple faith with many discussions,
then the apostle took care in almost every one
of his writings to strengthen men's belief of

5 Sub tribuno.

6 Acts xxiii. 6.

7 Acts xxvi. 22.

8 Gen. ix. 5, 6.

9 Acts xvii. 32,


574


ON THE RESURRECTION OF THE FLESH.


[chap. XL.


this Christian hope, pointing out that there
was such a hope, and that it had not as yet
been realized, and that it would be in the
body, — a point which was the especial object
of inquiry, and, what was besides a doubtful
question, not in a body of a different kind
from ours.

CHAP. XL. — SUNDRY PASSAGES OF ST. PAUL
WHICH ATTEST OUR DOCTRINE RESCUED FROM
THE PERVERSIONS OF HERESY.

Now it is no matter of surprise if arguments
are captiously taken from the writings of (the
apostle) himself, inasmuch as there " must
needs be heresies; " ' but these could not be,
if the Scriptures were not capable of a false
interpretation. Well, then, heresies finding
that the apostle had mentioned two " men " —
*'the inner man," that is, the soul, and "the
outward man," that is, the flesh — awarded
salvation to the soul or inward man, and de-
struction to the flesh or outward man, because
it is written (in the Epistle) to the Corinthians:
"Though our outward man decayeth, yet the
inward man is renewed day by day.''^" Now,
neither the soul by itself alone is " man "
(it was subsequently implanted in the clayey
mould to which the name ma7i had been
already given), nor is the flesh without the soul
" man ": for after the exile of the soul from it,
it has the title of corpse. Thus the desig-
nation man is, in a certain sense, the bond
between the two closely united substances,
under which designation they cannot but be
coherent natures. As for the inward man,
indeed, the apostle prefers its being regarded
as the mind and heart ^ rather than the
soul;* in other words, not so much the sub-
stance itself as the savour of the substance.
Thus when, writing to the Ephesians, he
spoke of " Christ dwelling in their inner
man," he meant, no doubt, that the Lord
ought to be admitted into their senses. s He
then added, "in your hearts by faith, rooted
and grou?id€d\n\owG.j'' — making "faith" and
"love" not substantial parts, but only con-
ceptions of the soul. But when he used the
phrase " in your hearts," seeing that these are
substantial parts of the flesh, he at once as-
signed to the flesh the actual " inward man,"
which he placed in the heart. Consider now
in what sense he alleged that "the outward
man decayeth, while the inward man is re-
newed day by day." You certainly would not
maintain that he could mean that corruption
of the flesh which it undergoes from the mo-


' I Cor. xi. 19.

2 2 Cor. iv. 16.

3 Animura.

4 Animam.

5 Eph. iii. 17.


ment of death, in its appointed state of per-
petual decay; but the wear ami tear which for
the name of Christ it experiences during its
course of life before and until death, in harass-
ing cares and tribulations as well as in tortures
and persecutions. Now the inward man will
have, of course, to be renewed by the sugges-
tion of the Spirit, advancing by faith and holi-
ness day after day, here\n this life, not there
after the resurrection, wbre our renewal is not
a gradual process from day to day, but a con-
summation once for all complete. You may
learn this, too, from the following passage,
where the apostle says: " For our light afflic-
tion, which is but for a moment, worketh for
us a far more exceeding and eternal weight
of glory; while we look not at the things
which are seen," that is, our sufferings, " but
at the things which are not seen," that is, our
rewards: " for the things which are seen are
temporal, but the things which are not seen
are eternal." ^ For the afflictions and injuries
wherewith the outward man is worn away, he
affirms to be only worthy of being despised by
us, as being light and temporary; preferring
those eternal recompenses which are also in-
visible, and that " weight of glory " which will
be a counterpoise for the labours in the en-
durance of which the flesh here suffers decay.
So that the subject in this passage is not that
corruption which they ascribe to the outward
man in the utter destruction of the flesh, with
the view of nullifying the resurrection. So
also he says elsewhere: " If so be that we suf-
fer with Him, that we may be also glorified to-
gether; for I reckon that the sufferings of the
present time are not worthy to be compared
with the glory that shall be revealed in us." '
Here again he shows us that our sufferings
are less than their rewards. Now, since it is
through the flesh that we suffer with Christ —
for it is the property of the flesh to be worn
by sufferings — to the same flesh belongs the
recompense which is promised for suffering
with Christ. Accordingly, when he is going
to assign afflictions to the flesh as its especial
liability — according to the statement he had
already made — he says, " When we were come
into Macedonia, our flesh had no rest;"'
then, in order to make the soul a fellow-
sufferer with the body, he adds, " We were
troubled on every side; without were fight-
ings," which of course warred down the flesh,
"within were fears," which afflicted the soul.'
Although, therefore, the outward man decays
— not in the sense of missing the resurrection,
but of enduring tribulation — it will be under-


6 2 Cor. iv. 17, 18.

7 Rom. viii. 17, 18.
82 Cor. vii. 5.

9 Same verse.


CHAP. XLII.]


ON THE RESURRECTION OF THE FLESH.


575


stood from this scripture that it is not exposed
to its suffering without the inward man. Both,
therefore, will be glorified together, even a.s
they have suffered together. Parallel witVi
their participation in troubles, must necessarily
run their association also in rewards.

CHAP. XLI. THE DISSOLUTION OF OUR TABER-
NACLE CONSISTENT WITH THE RESURRECTION
OF OUR BODIES.

It is Still the same sentiment which he fol-
lows up in the passage in which he puts the
recompense above the sufferings: *' for we
know," he says, " that if our earthly house of
this tabernacle were dissolved, we have a house
not made with hands, eternal in the heav-
ens; " ' in other words, owing to the fact that
our flesh is undergoing dissolution through its
sufferings, we shall be provided with a home —
in heaven. He remembered the award (which
the Lord assigns) in the Gospel: " Blessed are
they who are persecuted for righteousness'
sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven." ^
Yet, when he thus contrasted the recompense
of the reward, he did not deny the flesh's res-
toration; since the recompense is due to the
same substance to which the dissolution is
attributed, — that is, of course, the flesh.
Because, however, he had called the flesh a
house, he wished elegantly to use the same
term in his comparison of the ultimate reward;
promising to the very house, which undergoes
dissolution through suffering, a better house
through the resurrection. Just as the Lord
also promises us many mansions as of a house
in His Father's home;^ although this may
possibly be understood of the domicile of
this world, on the dissolution of whose fabric
an eternal abode is promised in heaven, inas-
much as the following context, having a mani-
fest reference to the flesh, seems to show that
these preceding words have no such reference.
For the apostle makes a distinction, when he
goes on to say, " For in this we groan,
earnestly desiring to be clothed upon with our
house which is from heaven, if so be that be-
ing clothed we shall not be found naked;"*
which means, before we put off the garment
of the flesh, we wish to be clothed with the
celestial glory of immortality. Now the priv-
ilege of this favour awaits those who shall at
the coming of the Lord be found in the flesh,
and who shall, owing to the oppressions of the
time of Antichrist, deserve by an instantaneous
death, s which is accomplished by a sudden


1 2 Cor. V. I.

2 Matt. V. lo.

3 John xiv. 2.

4 2 Cor. V. 2. 3.

5 Compendio mortis. Compare our A nti-Marcion for the same
thoughts and words, v. 12. [p. 455, supra.'\


change, to become qualified to join the rising
saints; as he writes to the Thessalonians:
" For this we say unto you by the word of the
Lord, that we which are alive and remain unto
the coming of the Lord shall not prevent them
which are asleep. For the Lord Himself shall
descend from heaven with a shout, with the
voice of the archangel, and with the trump of
God: and the dead in Christ shall rise first:
then we too shall ourselves be caught up to-
gether with them in the clouds, to meet the
Lord in the air: and so shall we ever be with
the Lord."^

CHAP. XLII. DEATH CHANGES, WITHOUT DE-
STROYING, OUR MORTAL BODIES. REMAIWS OF
THE GIANTS.

It is the transformation these shall undergo
which he explains to the Corinthians, when he
writes: " We shall all indeed rise again (though
we shall not all undergo the transformation)
in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the
last trump" — for none shall experience this
change but those only who shall be found in
the flesh. " And the dead," he says, " shall
be raised, a7id we shall be changed." Now,
after a careful consideration of this appointed
order, you will be able to adjust what follows
to the preceding sense. For when he adds,
"This corruptible must put on incorrruption,
and this mortal must put on immortality," ^
this will assuredly be that house from heaven,
with which we so earnestly desire to be clothed
upon, whilst groaning in this our present body,
— meaning, of course, over this flesh in which
we shall be surprised at last; because he says
that we are burdened whilst in this tabernacle,
which we do not wish indeed to be stripped of,
but rather to be in it clothed over, in sugh a
way that mortality may be swallowed up of
life, that is, by putting on over us whilst we
are transformed that vestiture which is from
heaven. For who is there that will not desire,
while he is in the flesh, to put on immortality,
and to continue his life by a happy escape
from death, through the transformation which
must be experienced instead of it, without
encountering too that Hades which will exact
the very last farthing?^ Nothwithstanding,
he who has already traversed Hades is destined
also to obtain the change after the resurrec-
tion. For from this circumstance it is that
we definitively declare that the flesh will by all
meafis rise again, and, from the change that is
to come over it, will assume the condition of
angels. Now, if it were merely in the case of
those who shall be found in the flesh that the

^iThess. iv. 15-17.
7 I Cor. XV. 51-53.

SComp. Matt. v. 26, and see Tertullian's De Anima, xxxv.
[and see cap. xliii., in/ra, p. 576.]


576


ON THE RESURRECTION OF THE FLESH.


[chap, xliii.


change must be undergone, in order that mor-
tality may be swallowed up of life — in ot.ier
words, that the flesh (be covered) with the
heavenly and eternal raiment — it would either
follow that those who shall be found in death
would not obtain life, deprived as they would
then be of the material and so to say the ali-
ment of life, that is, the flesh; or else, these
also must needs undergo the change, that in
them too mortality may be swallowed up of
life, since it is appointed that they too should
obtain life. But, you say, in the case of the
dead, mortality is already swallowed up of
life. No, not in all cases, certainly. For
how many will most probably be found of
men who had just died — so recently put into
their graves, that nothing in them would seem
to be decayed ? For you do not of course
deem a thing to be decayed unless it be cut
off, abolished, and withdrawn from our percep-
tion, as having in every possible way ceased
to be apparent. There are the carcases of the
giants of old time; it will be obvious enough
that they are not absolutely decayed, for their
bony frames are still extant. We have al-
ready spoken of this elsewhere.' For in-
stance," even lately in this very city,^ when
they were sacrilegiously laying the foundations
of the Odeum on a good many ancient graves,
people were horror-stricken to discover, after
some five hundred years, bones, which still
retained their moisture, and hair which had
not lost its perfume. It is certain not only
t.iat bones remain indurated, but also that
teeth continue undecayed for ages — both of
them the lasting germs of that body which is
to sprout into life again in the resurrection.
Lastly, even if everything that is mortal in
all the dead shall then be found decayed — at
any rate consumed by death, by time, and
through age, — is there nothing which will be
*' swallowed up of life," * nor by being covered
over and arrayed in the vesture of immortal-
ity? Now, he who says that mortality is going
to be swallowed up of life has already admit-
ted that what is dead is 7iot destroyed by those
other before-mentiofied devourers. And verily
it will be extremely fit that all shall be con-
summated and brought about by the opera-
tions of God, a7id not by the laws of nature.
Therefore, inasmuch as what is mortal has to
be swallowed up of life, it must needs be
brought out to view in order to be so swal-
lowed up; (needful) also to be swallowed up,
m order to undergo the ultimate transforma-
tion. If you were to say that a fire is to be


^ De Anini. c. li.
aSed : for "scilicet.'

3 Carthage.

4 2 Cor. V. 4. [Against Marcion, p. 455, note 24.]


lighted, you could not possibly alUege that
waat is to kindle it is sometimes necessary
^//^/ sometimes not. In like manner, when he
inserts the words " If so be that being un-
clothed s we be not found naked."* — refer-
ing, of course, to those who shall not be found
in the day of the Lord alive and in the flesh —
he did not say that they whom he had just
described as unclothed or stripped, were
naked in any other sense than meaning that
they should be understood to be reinvested
with the very same substance they had been
divested of. F^or although they shall be
found naked when their flesh has been laid
aside, or to some extent sundered or worn
away (and this condition may well be called
nakedness^ they shall afterwards recover it
again, in order that, being reinvested with the
flesh, they may be able also to have put over
that the supervestment of immortality; for it
will be impossible for the outside garment to-
fit except over one who is already dressed.

CHAP. XLIII. NO DISPARAGEMENT OF OUR DOC-
TRINE IN ST. Paul's phrase, which calls

OUR RESIDENCE IN THE FLESH ABSENCE FROM
THE LORD.

In the same way, when he says, " Therefore
we are always confident, and fully aware, that
while we are at home in the body we are ab-
sent from the Lord; for we walk by faith, not
be sight," 7 it is manifest that in this state-
ment there is no design of disparaging the
flesh, as if it separated us from the Lord.
For there is here pointedly addressed to us
an exhortation to disregard this present life,
since we are absent from the Lord as long as
we are passing through it — walking by faith,
not by sight; in other words, in hope, not in
reality. Accordingly he adds: "We are
indeed confident and deem it good rather to
be absent from the body, and present with the
Lord;"^ in order, that is, that we may walk
by sight rather than by faith, in realization
rather than in hope. Observe how he here
also ascribes to the excellence of martyrdom a
contempt for the body. For no one, on be-
coming absent from the body, is at once a
dweller in the presence of the Lord, except by
the prerogative of martyrdom,' he gains a
lodging in Paradise, not in the lower regions.
Now, had the apostle l)een at a loss for words
to describe the departure from the body ? Or
does he purposely use a novel phraseology?
For, wanting to express our temporary absence


5 Exuti. He must have read e«c£v(ra/itci'oi, instead of the read-
ing of nearly all the ms. authorities, efSvcrd/xevot.
62 Cor. V. 3.
7 s Cor. V. 6, 7.
8Ver. 8.
9Comp. his /?^/i«/wa, c. Iv. [Elucidation III.]


CHAP. XLIV.]


ON THE RESURRECTION OF THE FLESH.


577


from the body, he says that we are strangers,
absent from it, because a man who goes
abroad returns after a while to his home.
Then he says even to all: "We therefore
earnestly desire to be acceptable unto God,
whether absent or present; for we must all
appear before the judgment-seat of Christ
Jesus." ^ If all of us, then all of us wholly;
if wholly, then our inward man and outward
too — that is, our bodies no less than our souls.
"That every one," as he goes on to say,
"may receive the things done in his body,
according to that he hath done, whether it be
good or bad."'' Now I ask, how do you
read this passage ? Do you take it to be con-
fusedly constructed, with a transposition 3 of
ideas ? Is the question about what things will
have to be received by the body, or the things
which have been already done in the body?
Well, if the things which are to be borne by
the body are meant, then undoubtedly a res-
urrection of the body is implied; and if the
things which have been already done in the
body are referred to, (the same conclusion
follows): for of course the retribution will
have to be paid by the body, since it was by the
body that the actions were performed. Thus
the apostle's whole argument from the begin-
ning is unravelled in this concluding clause,
wherein the resurrection of the flesh is set
forth; and it ought to be understood in a
sense which is strictly in accordance with this
conclusion.

CHAP. XLIV. SUNDRY OTHER PASSAGES OF ST.

PAUL EXPLAINED IN A SENTENCE CONFIRMA-
TORY OF OUR DOCTRINE.

Now, if you will examine the words which
precede the passage where mention is made
of the outward and the inward man, will you
not discover the whole truth, both of the dig-
nity and the hope of the flesh ? For, when
he speaks of the " Hght which God hath
commanded to shine in our hearts, to give
the light of the knowledge of the glory of the
Lord in the person of Jesus Christ," ^ and
says that "we have this treasure in earthen
vessels," 5 meaning of course the flesh, which
is meant — that the flesh shall be destroyed,
because it is "an earthen vessel," deriving
its origin from clay; or that it is to be glori-
fied, as being the receptacle of a divine treas-
ure ? Now if that true light, which is in the
person of Christ, contains in itself life, and
that life with its light is committed to the


1 2 Cor. V. 9, lo.

2 2 Cor. V. lo.

3 Per hyperbaton.

4 2 Cor. iv. 6.

5 Ver. 7.

37


flesh, is that destined to perish which has life
entrusted to it ? Then, of course, the treas-
ure will perish also; for perishable things are
entrusted to things which are themselves per-
ishable, which is like putting new wine into old
bottles. When also he adds, "Always bearing
about in our body the dying of the Lord Jesus
Christ" ^ what sort of substance is that which,
after (being called) the temple of God, can now
be also designated the tomb of Christ ? But
why do we bear about in the body the dying of
the Lord? In order, as he says, "that His
life also may be manifested." ^ Where? "In
the body." In what body? "Incur mor-
tal body."^ Therefore in the flesh, which is
mortal indeed through sin, but living through
grace — how great a grace you may see when
the purpose is, "that the life of Christ may
be manifested in it." Is it then in a thing
which is a stranger to salvation, in a substance
which is perpetually dissolved, that the life
of Christ will be manifested, which is eternal,
continuous, incorruptible, and already the
life of God ? Else to what epoch belongs
that life of the Lord which is to be manifested
in our body ? It surely is the life which He
lived up to His passion, which was not only
openly shown among the Jews, but has now
been displayed even to all nations. There-
fore that life is meant which " has broken the
adamantine gates of death and the brazen
bars of the lower world," ' — a life which
thenceforth has been and will be ours. Last-
ly, it is to be manifested in the body. When ?
After death. How? By rising in our body,
as Christ also rose m Jits. But lest any one
should here object, that the life of Jesus has
even now to be manifested in our body by the
discipline of holiness, and patience, and
righteouness, and wisdom, in which the Lord's
life abounded, the most provident wisdom of
the apostle inserts this purpose: " For we
which live are alway delivered unto death for
Jesus' sake, that His life may be manifested
in our mortal body."'° In us, therefore,
even when dead, does he say that this is to
take place in us. And if so, how is this pos-
sible except in our body after its resurrection ?
Therefore he adds in the concluding sentence:
" Knowing that He which raised up the Lord
Jesus, shall raise up us also with Him," "
risen as He is already from the dead. But
perhaps "?£////% Him" means ^' like Him:"
well then, if it be like Him, it is not of course
without the flesh.


62 Cor. iv. 10.

7 Ver. 10.

8 Ver. 10.
9Ps. cvii. 16.

'° 2 Cor. iv. II,
"Ver. 14.


578


ON THE RESURRECTION OF THE FLESH.


[chap. xlvi.


CHAP. XLV. THE OLD MAN AND THE NEW MAN

OF ST. PAUL EXPLAINED.

But in their blindness they again impale
themselves on the point of the old and the
new man. When the apostle enjoins us " to
put off the old man, which is corrupt accord-
ing to the deceitful lusts; and to be renewed
in the spirit of our mind; and to put on the
new man, which after God is created in right-
eousness and true holiness,"' (they maintain)
that by here also making a distinction between
the two substances, a7id applying the old one
to the flesh and the new one to the spirit, he
ascribes to the old man — that is to say, the
fiesh — a permanent corruption. Now, if you
follow the order of the substances, the soul
cannot be the new man because it comes the
later of the two; nor can the flesh be'the old
man because it is the former. For what frac-
tion of time was it that intervened between
the creative hand of God and His afflatus ? I
will venture to say, that even if the soul was
a good deal prior to the flesh, by the very cir-
cumstance that the soul had to wait to be it-
self completed, it made the other = really the
former. For everything which gives the fin-
ishing stroke and perfection to a work, al-
though it is subsequent in its mere order, yet
has the priority in its effect. Much more is
that prior, without which preceding things
could have no existence. If the flesh be the
old man, when did it become so? From the
beginning? But Adam was wholly a new
man, and of that new man there could be no
part an old man. And from that time, ever
since the blessing which was pronounced upon
man's generation,^ the flesh and the soul have
had a simultaneous birth, without any calcu-
able difference in time; so that the two have
been even generated together in the womb,
as we have shown in our Treatise on the Soul.'-
Contemporaneous in the womb, they are also
temporally identical in their birth. The two
are no doubt produced by human parents s
of two substances, but not at two different
periods; rather they are so entirely one, that
neither is before the other in point of time. It
is more correct (to say), that we are either
entirely the old man or entirely the new, for
we cannot tell how we can possibly be any-
thing else. But the apostle mentions a very
clear mark of the old man. P'or " put off," says
he, " concerning the former conversation, the
old man;"*5 (he does) not say concerning the
seniority of either substance. It is not indeed

1 Eph. iv. 22-24.

2 The flesh.

3 Gen. i. 28.

4 See ch. xxvii.

5 We tre.ii " homines" as a nominative, after Oehler

6 Eph. iv. 22.


the flesh which he bids us to put off, but the
works which he in another passage shows to be
"works of the flesh." ^ He brings no accu-
sation against men's bodies, of which he even
writes as follows: *' Putting away lying, speak
every man truth with his neighbor: for we are
members one of another. Be ye angry, and
sin not: let not the sun go down upon your
wrath: neither give place to the devil. Let
him that stole steal no more: but rather let
him labour, working with his hands (the thing
which is good), that he may have to give to
him that needeth. Let no corrupt communi-
cation proceed out of your mouth, but that
which is good for the edification of faith, that
it may minister grace unto the hearers. And
grieve not the Holy Spirit of God, whereby
ye are sealed unto the day of redemption.
Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and
clamour, and evil-speaking, be put away from
you, with all malice: but be ye kind one to
another, tender-hearted, forgiving one an-
other, even as God in Christ hath forgiven
you."« Why, therefore, do not those who
suppose the flesh to be the old man, hasten
their own death, in order that by laying aside
the old man they may satisfy the apostle's
precepts ? As for ourselves, we believe that
the whole of faith is to be administered in the
flesh, nay more, by the flesh, which has both
a mouth for the utterance of all holy words,
and a tongue to refrain from blasphemy, and
a heart to avoid all irritation, and hands to
labour and to give; while we also maintain
that as well the old man as the new has rela-
tion to the difference of moral conduct, and
not to any discrepancy of nature. And just
as we acknowledge that that which according
to its former conversation was "the old man"
was also corrupt, and received its very name
in accordance with " its deceitful lusts," so
also (do we hold) that it is " the old man in
reference to its former conversation,"' and
not in respect of the flesh through any per-
manent dissolution. Moreover, it is still un-
impaired in the flesh, and identical in that
nature, even when it has become " the new
man;" since it is of its sinful course of life,
and not of its corporeal substance, that it has
been divested.


CHAP. XLVI. IT IS THE WORKS OF THE FLESH,

NOT THE SUBSTANCE OF THE FLESH, WHICH
ST. PAUL ALWAYS CONDEMNS.

You may notice that the apostle everywhere
condemns the works of the flesh in such a


7 f lal. V. 19.

8 Eph. iv. 25-32,

9 Eph, iv, 32.


CHAP. XLVII.J


ON THE RESURRECTION OF THE FLESH.


579


way as to appear to condemn the flesh; but
no one can suppose him to have any such
view as this, since he goes on to suggest an-
other sense, even tliough somewhat resemb-
ling it. For when he actually declares that
** they who are in the flesh cannot please God,"
he immediately recalls the statement from an
heretical sense to a sound one, by adding,
" But ye are not in the flesh, but in the
Spirit." ' Now, by denying them to be in
the flesh who yet obviously were in the flesh,
he showed that they were not living amidst the
works of the flesh, and therefore that they
who could not please God were not those who
were in the flesh, but only those who were
living after the flesh; whereas they pleased
God, who, although existing in the flesh, were
yet walking after the Spirit. And, again, he
says that " the body is dead; " but it is " be-
cause of sin," even as " the Spirit is Ufe be-
cause of righteousness."'' When, however,
he thus sets life in opposition to the death
which is constituted in the flesh, he unques-
tionably promises the Hfe of righteousness to
the same state for which he determined the
death of sin. But unmeaning is this opposi-
tion which he makes between the " life" and
the *' death," if the life is not there where
that very thing is to which he opposes it — even
the death which is to be extirpated of course
from the body. Now, if life thus extirpates
death from the body, it can accomplish this
only by penetrating thither where that is which
it is excluding. But why am I resorting to
knotty arguments, 3 when the apostle treats
the subject with perfect plainness ? *' For if,"
says he, "the Spirit of Him that raised up
Jesus from the dead dwell in you. He that
raised up Jesus from the dead shall also
quicken your mortal bodies, because of His
Spirit that dwelleth in you; "^ so that even if
a person were to assume that the soul is '' the
mortal body," he would (since he cannot pos-
sibly deny that the flesh is this also) be con-
strained to acknowledge a restoration even of
the flesh, in consequence of its participation
in the selfsame state. From the following
words, moreover, you may learn that it is the
works of the flesh which are condemned, and
not the flesh itself: "Therefore, brethren,
we are debtors, not to the fleshy to live
after the flesh: for if ye live after the flesh
ye shall die; but if ye, through the Spirit,
do mortify the deeds of the body, ye
shall live." 5 Now (that I may answer each
point separately), since salvation is promised


I Rom. viii. 8,
2Ver. lo.

3 Nodosius.

4 Rom. viii. ii

5 Vers. 12, 13.


to those who are living in the flesh, but walk-
ing after the Spirit, it is no longer the flesh
which is an adversary to salvation, but the
working of the flesh. When, however, this
operativeness of the flesh is done away with,
which is the cause of death, the flesh is shown
to be safe, since it is freed from the cause of
death. "For the law," says he, "of the
Spirit of life in Christ Jesus hath made me
free from the law of sin and death," *^ — that,
surely, which he previously mentioned as
dwelling in our members. ^ Our members,
therefore, will no longer be subject to the law
of death, because they cease to serve that of
sin, from both which they have been set free.
" For what the law could not do, in that it
was weak through the flesh, God sending His
own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and
through^ sin condemned sin in the flesh " ' —
not the flesh in sin, for the house is not to be
condemned with its inhabitant. He said, in-
deed, that "sin dwelleth in our body." '°
But the condemnation of sin is the acquittal
of the flesh, just as its non-condemnation sub-
jugates it to the law of sin and death. In like
manner, he called "the carnal mind" first
"death,"" and afterwards "enmity against
God; " " but he never predicated this of the
flesh itself. But to what then, you will say,
must the carnal mind be ascribed, if it be not
to the carnal substance itself? I will allow
your objection, if you will prove to me that
the flesh has any discernment of its own. If,
however, it has no conception of anything
without the soul, you must understand that
the carnal mind must be referred to the soul,
although ascribed sometimes to the flesh, on
the ground that it is ministered to for the
flesh and through the flesh. And therefore
(the apostle) says that " sin dwelleth in the
flesh," because the soul by which sin is pro-
voked has its temporary lodging in the flesh,
which is doomed indeed to death, not how-
ever on its own account, but on account of
sin. For he says in another passage also:
" How is it that you conduct yourselves as if
you were even now living in the world ? " '3
where he is not writing to dead persons, biit
to those who ought to have ceased to live
after the ways of the world

CHAP. XLVII. ST. PAUL, ALL THROUGH, PROM-
ISES ETERNAL LIFE TO THE BODY.

For that must be living after the world,


6Ver. 2.

7 Rom. vii. 17, 20, 23..

8 Per delinquentiam : see the De Carne Christi, xvi.

9 Rom. viii. 3.
1° Rom. vii. 20.
" Rom. viii. 6.
^ Ver. 7.

13 Col. ii. 20.


58o


ON THE RESURRECTION OF THE FLESH.


[CHAI\ XLVII.


which, as the old man, he declares to be
"crucified with Christ,"' not as a bodily
structure, but as moral behaviour. Besides,
if we do not understand it in this sense, it is
not our bodily frame which has been trans-
fixed (at all events), nor has our flesh endured
the cross of Christ; but the sense is that which
he has subjoined, " that the body of sin might
be made void,"" by an amendment of life,
not by a destruction of the substance, as he
goes on to say, "that henceforth we should
not serve sin;"^ and that we should believe
ourselves to be " dead with Christ," in such a
manner as that "we shall also live with
Him."* On the same principle he says:
" Likewise reckon ye also yourselves to be
dead indeed." s To what? To the flesh?
No, but "unto sin."^ Accordingly as to
the flesh they will be saved — " alive unto God
in Christ Jesus," ^ through the flesh of
course, to which they will not be dead; since
it is "unto sin," and not to the flesh, that
they are dead. For he pursues the point
still further: " Let not sin therefore reign in
your mortal body, that ye should obey it, and
that ye should yield your members as instru-
ments of unrighteousness unto sin: but yield
ye yourselves unto God, as those that are
alive from the dead" — not simply alive, but
as alive from the dead — " and your members
as instruments of righteousness."^ And
again: "As ye have yielded your members
servants of uncleanness, and of iniquity unto
iniquity, even so now yield your members
servants of righteousness unto holiness; for
whilst ye were the servants of sin, ye were
tree from righteousness. What fruit had ye
then in those things of which ye are now
ashamed ? For the end of those things is
death. But now, being made free from sin,
and become servants to God, ye have your
fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting
life. For the wages of sin is death, but the
s;ift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ
our Lord. "9 Thus throughout this series
of passages, whilst withdrawing our members
from unrighteousness and sin, and applying
them to righteousness and holiness, and trans-
ferring the same from the wages of death to
t.ie donative of eternal life, he undoubtedly
promises to the flesh the recompense of sal-
vation. Now it would not at all have been
consistent that any rule of holiness and right-


' Rom. vi. 6.

2 Evacuetur : KarapYn^V- A. V. destroyed^ i.e. deprived of all
activity, Rom. vi. 6.

3 Rom. vi. 6. TertuUian's reading literally is, "that thus far
(and no further) we should be servants of sin."

4Ver. 8.

5Ver. II.

6Vcr. II.

7Vcr. 11.

8 Vers. 12, T3.

9 Vers. 19-23.


eousness should be especially enjoined for the
flesh, if the reward of such a discipline were
not also within its reach; nor could even bap-
tism be properly ordered for the flesh, if by
its regeneration a course were not inaugurated
tending to its restitution; the apostle himself
suggesting this idea: " Know ye not, that so
many of us as are baptized into Jesus Christ,
are baptized into His death ? We are therefore
buried with Him by baptism into death, that
just as Christ was raised up from the dead,
even so we also should walk in newness of
life." '° And that you may not suppose that
this is said merely of that life which we have
to walk in the newness of, through baptism,
by faith, the apostle with superlative fore-
thought adds: " For if we have been planted
together in the likeness of Christ's death, we
shall be also in the likeness of His resurrec-
tion."" By a figure we die in our baptism^
but in a reality we rise again in the flesh, even
as Christ did, " that, as sin has reigned in
death, so also grace might reign through
righteousness unto life eternal, through Jesus
Christ our Lord." " But how so, unless
equally in the flesh ? For where the death is,
there too must be the life after the death, be-
cause also the life was first there, where the
death subsequently was. Now, if the domin-
ion of death operates only in the dissolution
of the flesh, in like manner death's contrary,
life, ought to produce the contrary effect,
even the restoration of the flesh; so that, just
as death had swallowed it up in its strength,
it also, after this mortal was swallowed up of
immortality, may hear the challenge pro-
nounced against it: "O death, where is thy
sting? O grave, where is thy victory ?"'5
For in this way " grace shall there much more
abound, where sin once abounded." "^ In this
way also " shall strength be made perfect in
weakness," '5 — saving what is lost, reviving
what is dead, healing what is stricken, curing
what is faint, redeeming what is lost, freeing
what is enslaved, recalling what has strayed,
raising what is fallen; and this from earth to
heaven, where, as the apostle teaches the
Philippians, "we have our citizenship,'^ from
whence also we look for our Saviour Jesus
Christ, who shall change our body of humilia-
tion, that it may be fashioned like unto His
glorious body " '^ — of course after the resur-
rection, because Christ Himself was not glori-
fied before He suffered. These must be " the
bodies" which he "beseeches" the. Romans


'o Rom. vi. 3, 4.
" Ver. 5.
12 Rom. V. 21.
»3 1 Cor. XV. ss.

14 Rom. V. 20.

15 2 Cor. xii. 9.

16 Municipatum.
'7 Phil. iii. 20, 21.


CHAP. XLVIII.


ON THE RESURRECTION OF THE FLESH.


581


to " present " as "a living sacrifice, holy, ac-
ceptable unto God." * But how a living sac-
rifice, if these bodies are to perish ? How a
holy one, if they are profanely soiled ? How
acceptable to God, if they are condemned ?
Come, now, tell me how that passage (in the
Epistle) to the Thessalonians — which, because
of its clearness, I should suppose to have been
written with a sunbeam — is understood by
our heretics, who shun the light of Scripture:
*'And the very God of peace sanctify you
wholly." And as if this were not plain
enough, it goes on to say: "And may your
whole body, and soul, and spirit be preserved
blameless unto the coming of the Lord." =
Here you have the entire substance of man
destined to salvation, and thatsit no other time
than at the coming of the Lord, which is the
key of the resurrection. 3

CHAP. XLVIII. SUNDRY PASSAGES IN THE GREAT

CHAPTER OF THE RESURRECTION OF THE DEAD
EXPLAINED IN DEFENCE OF OUR DOCTRINE.

But "flesh and blood," you say, "cannot
inherit the kingdom of God." ^ We are quite
aware that this too is written; but although
our opponents place it in the front of the bat-
tle, we have intentionally reserved the objec-
tion until now, in order that we may in our
last assault overthrow itj after we have re-
moved out of the way all the questions which
are auxiliary to it. However, they must
contrive to recall to their mind even now our
preceding arguments, in order that the occa-
sion which originally suggested this passage
may assist our judgment in arriving at its
meaning. The apostle, as I take it, having
set forth for the Corinthians the details of
their church discipline, had summed up the
substance of his own gospel, and of their be-
lief in an exposition of the Lord's death and
resurrection, for the purpose of deducing
therefrom the rule of our hope, and the
groundwork thereof. Accordingly he sub-
joins this statement: " Now if Christ be
preached that He rose from the dead, how
say some among you that there is no resur-
rection of the dead ? If there be no resurrec-
tion of the dead, then Christ is not risen: and
if Christ be not risen, then is our preaching
vain, and your faith is also vain. Yea, and
we are found false witnesses of God;, because
we have testified of God that He raised up
Christ, whom He raised not up, if so be that
the dead rise fiot. For if the dead rise not,
then is not Christ raised: and if Christ be not

1 Rom. xii. i.

2 I Thess. V. 23.

3 [Note Tertullian's summary of the text, in harmony with the
Tripartite philosophy of humanity.]

4 I Cor. XV. 50.


raised, your faith is vain, because ye are yet
in your sins, and they which have fallen asleep
in Christ are perished." s Now, what is the
point which he evidently labours hard to make
us believe throughout this passage? The
resurrection of the dead, you say, which was
denied: he certainly wished it to be believed
on the strength of the example which he ad-
duced— the Lord's resurrection. Certainly,
you say. Well now, is an example borrowed
from different circumstances, or from like
ones ? From like ones, by all means, is your
answer. How then did Christ rise again ? In
the flesh, or not ? No doubt, since you are
told that He "died according to the Scrip-
tures,"^ and "that He was buried according
to the Scriptures," 7 no otherwise than in the
flesh, you will also allow that it was in the flesh
that He was raised from the dead. For the
very same body which fell in death, and which
lay in the sepulchre, did also rise again; (and
it was) not so much Christ in the flesh, as the
flesh in Christ. If, therefore, we are to rise
again after the example of Christ, who rose in
the flesh, we shall certainly not rise according
to that example, unless we also shall ourselves
rise again in the flesh. " For," he says,
" since by man came death, by man came
also the resurrection of the dead."^ (This
he says) in order, on the one hand, to distin-
guish the two authors — Adam of death, Christ
of resurrection; and, on the other hand, to
make the resurrection operate on the same
substance as the death, by comparing the
authors themselves under the designation
7?tan. For if "as in Adam all die, even so in
Christ shall all be made alive," ^ their vivifi-
cation in Christ must be in the flesh, since it
is in the flesh that arises their death in Adam.
" But every man in his own order," '° because
of course // 7i'ill be also every 7ftan in his own
body. For the order will be arranged sever-
ally, on account of the individual merits.
Now, as the merits must be ascribed to the
body, it must needs follow that the order also
should be arranged in respect of the bodies,
that it may be in relation to their merits.
But inasmuch as " some are also baptized for
the dead," " we will see whether there be a
good reason for this. Now it is certain that
they adopted this (practice) with such a pre-
sumption as made them suppose that the vica-
rious baptism (in question) would be beneficial
to the flesh of another in anticipation of the
resurrection; for unless it were a hod^\\y resur-


5 I Cor. XV. 12-18.

6 Ver. 3.
7Ver 4.

8 Ver. 21.
9 1 Cor. XV. 22.
10 Ver. 23.
I 'Ver. 29.


582


ON THE RESURRECTION OF THE FLESH.


[chap. xlix»


recfiofi, there would be no pledge secured by
this process of a corporeal baptism. *' Why
are they then baptized for the dead," * he
asks, unless the bodies rise again which are
thus baptized ? For it is not the soul which
is sanctified by the baptismal bath:" its sanc-
tification comes from the " answer." ^ *'And
why," he inquires, " stand we in jeopardy
every hour?"^ — meaning, of course, through
the flesh. "I die daily," s (says he); that
is, undoubtedly, in the perils of the body, in
which " he even fought with beasts at Ephe-
sus,"^ — even with those beasts which caused
him such peril and trouble in Asia, to which
he alludes in his second epistle to the same
church of Corinth: " For we would not, breth-
ren, have you ignorant of our trouble which
came to us in Asia, that we were pressed
above measure, above strength, insomuch that
we despaired even of life."^ Now, if I mis-
take not, he enumerates all these particulars
in order that in his unwillingness to have his
conflicts in the flesh supposed to be useless,
he may induce an unfaltering belief in the
resurrection of the flesh. For useless must
that conflict be deemed (which is sustained
in a body) for which no resurrection is in


prospect. ' But some man will say. How are
the dead to be raised ? And with what body
will they come? "^ Now here he discusses
the qualities of bodies, whether it be the very
same, or different ones, which men are to re-
sume. Since, however, such a question as
this must be regarded as a subsequent one,
it will in passing be enough for us that the
resurrection is determined to be a bodily one
even from this, that it is about the quality of
bodies that the inquiry arises.


CHAP. XLIX. THE SAME SUBJECT CONTINUED.

WHAT DOES THE APOSTLE EXCLUDE FROM THE
DEAD ? CERTAINLY NOT THE SUBSTANCE OF
THE FLESH.

We come now to the very gist' of the whole
question: What are the substances, and of
what nature are they, which the apostle has
disinherited of the kingdom of God ? The
preceding statements give us a clue to this
point also. He says: "The first man is of
the earth, earthy" — that is, made of dust,
that is, Adam; "the second man is from
heaven " '° — that is, the Word of God, which
is Christ, in no other way, however, man (al-


*Ver, 2^.
» I^vatione.
3Comp. I Pet. iii. 21.
4 1 Cor. XV. 30.
5Ver. 31.
«Ver. 32.
7 2 Cor. i. 8.
8 1 Cor. XV. 35.

9 Ad camem et sani^uinem revera.
»o I Cor. sv. 47.


though from heaven "), than as being Him-
self flesh and soul, just as a human being is,
just as Adam was. Indeed, in a previous
passage He is called "the second Adam,""
deriving the identity of His name from His
participation in the substance, because not
even Adam was flesh of human seed, in which
Christ is also like Him." "As is the earthy,
such are they also that are earthy; and as is
the heavenly, such are they also that are heav-
enly," "3 Such (does he mean), in substance;
or first of all in training, and afterwards in the
dignity and worth which that training aimed
at acquiring ? Not in substance, however, by
any means will the earthy and the heavenly
be separated, designated as they have been by
the apostle once for all, as men. For even if
Christ were the only true "heavenly," nay,
super-celestial Being, He is still man, as com-
posed of body and soul; and in no respect is
He separated from the quality of " earthi-
ness," owing to that condition of His which
makes Him a partaker of both substances.
In like manner, those also who after Him are
heavenly, are understood to have this celestial
quality predicated of them not from their
present nature, but from their future glory;
because in a preceding sentence, which origi-
nated this distinction respecting difference of
dignity, there was shown to be "one glory
in celestial bodies, and another in terrestrial
ones," ^* — " one glory of the sun, and another
glory of the moon, and another glory of the
stars: for even one star differeth from another
star in glory, " 's although not in substance.
Then, after having thus premised the differ-
ence in that worth or dignity which is even
now to be aimed at, and then at last to be
enjoyed, the apostle adds an exhortation, that
we should both here in our training follow the
example of Christ, and there attain His emi-
nence in glory: "As we have borne the image
of the earthy, let us also bear the image of
the heavenly." '^ We have indeed borne the
image of the earthy, by our sharing in his
trangression, by our participation in his death,
by our banishment from Paradise. Now, al-
though the image of Adam is here borne by
(|s in the flesh, yet we are not exhorted to put
off the flesh; but if not the flesh, it is the con-
versation, in order that we may then bear the
image of the heavenly in ourselves, — no longer
indeed the ifnage of God, and no longer f/ie
image of a Being whose state is in heaven;
but after the lineaments of Christ, by our
walking here in holiness, righteousness, and


" Ver. 45.

"See De Carne Christi. ch. xvi.

13 I Cor. XV. 48.

'4 I Cor. XV. 40.

'5 Ver. 41.

■6 Ver. 49.


I


CHAP. L.]


ON THE RESURRECTION OF THE FLESH.


583


truth. And so wholly intent on the inculca-
tion of moral conduct is he throughout this
passage, that he tells us we ought to bear the
image of Christ in this flesh of ours, and in
this period of instruction and discipline.
For when he says " /<?/ us bear'' in the im-
perative mood, he suits his words to the pres-
ent life, in which man exists in no other sub-
stance than as flesh and soul; or if it is
another, even the heavenly, substance to
which this faith (of ours) looks forward, yet
the promise is made to that substance to which
the injunction is given to labour earnestly to
merit its reward. Since, therefore, he makes
the image both of the earthy and the heavenly
consist of moral conduct — the one to be ab-
jured, and the other to be pursued — and then
consistently adds, "For this I say" (on ac-
count, that is, of what I have already said, be-
cause the conjunction "/^/-"connects what fol-
lows with the preceding words) " that flesh and
blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God,"^ —
he means the flesh and blood to be understood
in no other sense than the before-mentioned
" image of the earthy; " and since this is reck-
oned to consist in "the old conversation," ^^
which old conversation receives not the king-
dom of God, therefore flesh and blood, by
not receiving the kingdom of God, are re-
duced to the life of the old conversation. Of
course, as the apostle has never put the sub-
stance for the works of man, he cannot use
such a construction here. Since, however,
he has declared of men which are yet alive
in the flesh, that they " are not in the flesh," 3
meaning that they are not living in the works
of the flesh, you ought not to subvert its form
nor its substance, but only the works done
in the substance (of the flesh), alienating us
from the kingdom of God. It is after dis-
playing to the Galatians these pernicious
works that he professes to warn them before-
hand, even as he had " told them in time past,
that they which do such things should not in-
herit the kingdom of God,"'* even because
they bore not the image of the heavenly, as
they had borne the image of the earthy; and
so, in consequence of their old conversation,
they were to be regarded as nothing else than
flesh and blood. But even if the apostle had
abruptly thrown out the sentence that flesh
and blood must be excluded from the king-
dom of God, without any previous intimation
of his meaning, would it not have been equally
our duty to interpret these two substances as
the old man abandoned to mere flesh and
blood — in other words, to eating and drink-


1 I Cor. XV. 50.

2 See Eph. iv. 22.

3 Rom. viii. 9.

4 Gal. V. 21.


ing, one feature of which would be to speak
against the faith of the resurrection: " Let us
eat and drink, for to-morrow we die."5
Now, when the apostle parenthetically inserted
this, he censured flesh and blood because of
their enjoyment in eating and drinking.

CHAP. L. IN WHAT SENSE FLESH AND BLOOD

ARE EXCLUDED FROM THE KINGDOM OF GOD.

Putting aside, however, all interpretations
of this sort, which criminate the works of
the flesh and blood, it may be permitted me
to claim for the resurrection these very sub-
stances, understood in none other than their
natural sense. For it is not the resurrection
that is directly denied to flesh and blood,
but the kingdom of God, which is incidental
to^ the resurrection (for there is a resurrec-
tion of judgment 7 also); and there is even a
confirmation of the general resurrection of
the flesh, whenever a special one is excepted.
Now, when it is clearly stated what the condi-
tion is to which the resurrection does not lead,
it is understood what that is to which it does
lead; and, therefore, whilst it is in considera-
tion of men's merits that a difference is made
in their resurrection by their conduct in the
flesh, and not by the substance thereof, it is
evident even from this, that flesh and blood
are excluded from the kingdom of God in re-
spect of their sin, not of their substance; and
although in respect of their natural condi-
tion^ they will rise again for the judgment,
because they rise not for the kingdom. Again,
I will say, " Flesh and blood cannot inherit
the kingdom of God; " ^ and justly (does the
apostle declare this of them, considered) alone
and in themselves, in order to show that the
Spirit is still needed (to qualify them) for the
kingdom.'" For it is "the Spirit that quick-
eneth " us for the kingdom of God; "the
flesh profiteth nothing."" There is, however,
something else which can be profitable there-
unto, that is, the Spirit; and through the
Spirit, the works also of the Spirit. Flesh
and blood, therefore, must in every case rise
again, equally, in their proper .quality. But
they to whom it is granted to enter the king-
dom of God, will have to put on the power of
an incorruptible and immortal life; for with-
out this, or before they are able to obtain it,
they cannot enter into the kingdom of God.
With good reason, then, flesh and blood, as
we have already said, by themselves fail to


5 I Cor. XV. 32.

6 Obvenit.

7 A. V. damnation, John v. 29.

8 Forma.

9 I Cor. XV. 50.

»o This must be the meaning of the dative Hit.
II John vi. 63.


584


ON THE RESURRECTION OF THE FLESH.


[cnAi


obtain the kingdom of God. But inasmuch
as "this corruptible (that is, the flesh) must
put on incorruption, and this mortal (that is,
the blood) must put on immortality,"' by
the change which is to follow the resurrection,
it will, for the best of reasons, happen that
flesh and blood, after that change and inves-
titure,^ will become able to inherit the king-
dom of God — but not without the resurrec-
tion. Some will have it, that by the phrase
" flesh and blood," because of its rite of cir-
cumcision, Judaism is meant, which is itself
too alienated from the kingdom of God, as
being accounted " the old or former conver-
sation," and as being designated by this title
in another passage of the apostle also, who,
"when it pleased God to reveal to him His
Son, to preach Him amongst the heathen,
immediately conferred not with flesh and
blood," as he writes to the Galatians,^ (mean-
ing by the phrase) the circumcision, that is to
say, Judaism.

CHAP. LI. THE SESSION OF JESUS IN HIS INCAR-
NATE NATURE AT THE RIGHT HAND OF GOD A
GUARANTEE OF THE RESURRECTION OF OUR
FLESH.

That, however, which we have reserved for
a concluding argument, will now stand as a
plea for all, and for the apostle himself, who
in very deed would have to be charged with
extreme indiscretion, if he had so abruptly, as
some will have it, and as they say, blindfold,
and so indiscriminately, and so uncondition-
ally, excluded from the kingdom of God, and
indeed from the court of heaven itself, all
flesh and blood whatsoever; since Jesus is still
sitting there at the right hand of the Father,'*
man, yet God — the last Adam,^ yet the pri-
mary Word — flesh and blood, yet purer than
ours — who " shall descend in like manner as
He ascended irito heaveti " ^ the same both in
substance and form, as the angels affirmed,''
so as even to be recognised by those who
pierced Him.^ Designated, as He is, "the
Mediator 9 between God and man," He keeps
in His own self the deposit of the flesh which
has been committed to Him by both parties —
the pledge and security of its entire perfection.
For as "He has given to us the earnest of
the Spirit," '° so has He received from us the

1 1 Cor. XV. 53.

2 We have kept this word to suit the last Scripture quotation ;
but Tertullian's word, both here and in the quotation, is " devo-
rata,'* swallowed up.

3 See i. 15, 16.

4 Mark xvi. 19.
S I Cor. X'. . 45.
6 Acts i. 9.
7Ver. 10.

8 Zech. xii. 10 ; John xix. 37 ; Rev. i. 7.

9 I Tim. ii. 5. Tertullian's word is " sequester," the guardian
of a deposit.

10 2 Cor. v. 5.


earnest of the flesh, and has carried it with
Him into heaven as a pledge of that complete
entirety which is one day to be restored to it.
Be not disquieted, O flesh and blood, with any
care; in Christ you have acquired both heaven
and the kingdom of God. Otherwise, if they
say that you are not in Christ, let them also
say that Christ is not in heaven, since they
have denied you heaven. Likewise " neither
shall corruption," says he, " inherit incorrup-
tion." This he says^ not that you may take
flesh and blood to be corruption, for they are
themselves rather the subjects of corruption,
— I mean through death, since death does not
so much corrupt, as actually consume, our
flesh and blood. But inasmuch as he had
plainly said that the works of the flesh and
blood could not obtain the kingdom of God,
with the view of stating this with accumulated
stress, he deprived corruption itself — that is,
death, which profits so largely by the works
of the flesh and blood — from all inheritance
of incorruption. For a little afterwards, he has
described what is, as it were, the death of
death itself: " Death," says he, " is swallowed
up in victory. O death, where is thy sting ?
O grave, where is thy victory ? The sting of
death is sin " — here is the corruptmi; "and
the strength of sin is the law"" — that other
law, no doubt, which he has described " in
his members as warring against the law of his
mind,"*3 — meaning, of course, the actual
power of sinning against his will. Now he
says in a previous passage (of our Epistle to
the Corinthians), that "the last enemy to be
destroyed is death." '* In this way, then, it
is that corruption shall not inherit incorrup-
tion; in other words, death shall not continue.
When and how shall it cease ? In that " mo-
ment, that twinkling of an eye, at the last
trump, when the dead shall rise incorrupt-
ible." 's But what are these, if not they who
were corruptible before — that is, our bodies;
in other words, our flesh and blood ? And we
undergo the change. But in what condition,
if not in that wherein we shall be found ?
"For this corruptible must put on incorrup-
tion, and this mortal must put on immortal-
ity. ' ' '^ What mortal is this but the flesh ? what
corruptible but the blood. Moreover, that you
may not suppose the apostle to have any other
meaning, in his care to teach you, and that you
may understand him seriously to apply his state-
ment to the flesh, when he says ''''this corrup-
tible " and ''''this mortal," he utters the words


" I Cor. XV. 50.
" I Cor. XV. 54-56.
13 Rom. vii. 23.
'4 1 Cor. XV. 26.
'S Ver. 52.
16 Ver. 53.


4


CHAI'. LII.J


ON THE RESURRECITON OF THE FLESH.


585


while touching the surface of his own body.'
He certainly could not have pronounced these
phrases except in reference to an object which
was palpable and apparent. The expression
indicates a bodily exhibition. Moreover, a
corruptible body is one thing, and corruption
is another; so a mortal body is one thing, and
mortality is another. For that which suffers
is one thing, and that which causes it to suffer
is another. Consequently, those things which
are subject to corruption and mortality, even
the flesh and blood, must needs also be sus-
ceptible of incorruption and immortality.

CHAP. LII. FROM ST. PAUL's ANALOGY OF THE

SEED WE LEARN THAT THE BODY WHICH DIED
VILL RISE AGAIN, GARNISHED WITH THE AP-
LIANCES OF ETERNAL LIFE.

Let us now see in what body he asserts that
the dead will come. And with a felicitous
sally he proceeds at once to illustrate the point,
as if an objector had plied him with some
such question. " Thou fool," says he, *' that
which thou sowest is not quickened, except it
die."^ From this example of the x^^^ it is
then evident that no other flesh is quickened
than that which shall have undergone death,
and therefore all the rest of the question will
become clear enough. For nothing which is
incompatible with the idea suggested by the
example can possibly be understood; nor
from the clause which follows, " That which
thou sowest, thou sowest not the body which
shall be," 3 are you permitted to suppose
that in the resurrection a different body is to
arise from that which is sown in death.
Otherwise you have run away from the ex-
ample. For if wheat be sown and dis-
solved in the ground, barley does not spring
up. Still it is not 4 the very same grain in
kind; nor is its nature the same, or its quality
and form. Then whence comes it, if it is not
the very same? For even the decay is a proof
of the thing itself, since it is the decay of the
actual grain. Well, but does not the apostle
himself suggest in what sense it is that " the
body which shall be " is not the body which
is sown, even when he says, " But bare grain,
it may chance of wheat, or of some other
grain; but God giveth it a body as it pleaseth
Him ? " s Gives it of course to the grain which
he says is sown bare. No doubt, you say.
Then the grain is safe enough, to which God
has to assign a body. But how safe, if it is


1 Cutem ipsam. ^ Rufinus says that in the church of Aquileia
they touched their bodies when they recited the clause of the
creed which they rendered " the resurrection of this body."

2 I Cor. XV. 36.

3 Ver. 37.

4 An objection of the opponent.

5 Vers. 37, 38.


nowhere in existence, if it does not rise again
if it rises not again its actual self? If it rises
not again, it is not safe; and if it is not even
safe, it cannot receive a body from God.
But there is every possible proof that it is
safe. For what purpose, therefore, will God
give it "a body, as it pleases Him," even
when it already has its own "bare" body,
unless it be that in its resurrection it may be
no longer bare ? That therefore will be ad-
ditional matter which is placed over the bare
body; nor is that at all destroyed on which the
superimposed matter is put, — nay, it is in-
creased. That, however, is safe which re-
ceives augmentation. The truth is, it is sown
the barest grain, without a husk to cover it,
without a spike even in germ, without the pro-
tection of a bearded top, without the glory of
a stalk. It rises, however, out of the furrow
enriched with a copious crop, built up in a
compact fabric, constructed in a beautiful
order, fortified by cultivation, and clothed
around on every side. These are the circum-
stances which make it another body from God,
to which it is changed not by abolition, but
by amplification. And to every seed God has
assigned its own body^ — not, indeed, its own
in the sense of its primitive body — in order
that what it acquires from God extrinsically
may also at last be accounted its own.
Cleave firmly then to the example, and keep
it well in view, as a mirror of what happens
to the flesh: believe that the very same y?^j>4
which was once sown ifi death will bear fruit />/
resurrection-life — the same in essence, only
more full and perfect; not another, although
reappearing in another form. For it shall re-
ceive in itself the grace and ornament which
God shall please to spread over it, according
to its merits. Unquestionably it is in this
sense that he says, *' All flesh is not the same
flesh;" 7 meaning not to deny a community
of substance, but a parity of prerogative, —
reducing the body to a difference of honour,
not of nature. With this view he adds, in a
figurative sense, certain examples of animals
and heavenly bodies: " There is one flesh of
man" (that is, servants of God, but really
human), "another flesh of beasts" (that is,
the heathen, of whom the prophet actually
says, "Man is like the senseless cattle"^),
" another flesh of birds " (that is, the martyrs
which essay to mount up to heaven), " another
of fishes " (that is, those whom the water of
baptism has submerged). » In like manner
does he take examples from the heavenly


6 1 Cor. XV. 38.

7 Ver. 39.

8 Ps. xlix. 20, Sept.
9 1 Cor. XV. 39.


586


ON THE RESURRECTION OF THE FLESH.


[chap. liii.


bodies: "There is one glory of the sun"
(that is, of Christ), '* and another glory of the
moon " (that is, of the Church), " and another
glory of the stars" (in other words, of the
seed of Abraham). For one star differeth
from another star in glory: so there are bod-
ies terrestrial as well as celestial " (Jews, that
is, as well as Christians).' Now, if this
language is not to be construed figuratively,
it was absurd enough for him to make a con-
trast between the flesh of mules and kites, as
well as the heavenly bodies and human bod-
ies; for they admit of no comparison as to
their condition, nor in respect of their attain-
ment of a resurrection. Then at last, having
conclusively shown by his examples that the
difference was one of glory, not of substance,
he adds: "So also is the resurrection of the
dead."' How so? In no other way than as
differing in glory only. For again, predica-
ting the resurrection of the same substance,
and returning once more to (his comparison
of) the grain, he says: "It is sown in corrup-
tion, it is raised in incorruption; it is sown in
dishonour, it is raised in glory; it is sown in
weakness, it is raised in power; it is sown a
natural body, it is raised a spiritual body."^
Now, certainly nothing else is raised than that
which is sown; and nothing else is sown than
that which decays in the ground; and it is
nothing else than the flesh which is decayed
in the ground. For this was the substance
which God's decree demolished, " Earth thou
art, and to earth shalt thou return;" '^ because
it was taken out of the earth. And it was
from this circumstance that the apostle bor-
rowed his phrase of the flesh being " sown,"
since it returns to the ground, and the ground
is the grand depository for seeds which are
meant to be deposited in it, and again sought
out of it. And therefore he confirms the pas-
sage afresh, by putting on it the impress (of
his own inspired authority), saying, " For so
it is written;" 5 that you may not suppose
that the "being sown" means anything else
than " thou shalt return to the ground, out of
which thou wast taken;" nor that the phrase
"for so it is written " refers to any other
thing that the flesh.

CHAP. LIII. NOT THE SOUL, BUT THE NATURAL

BODY WHICH DIED, IS THAT WHICH IS TO
RISE AGAIN. THE RESURRECTION OF LAZARUS
COMMENTED ON. CHRIST's RESURRECTION,
AS THE SECOND ADAM, GUARANTEES OUR OWN.

Some, however, contend that the soul is


1 1 Cor. XV. 41.
aVer. 42.

3 Vers. ^2-44.

4 Gen. hi. 19.

5 1 Cor. XV. 45.


"the natural (or animate) body, "^ with the
view of withdrawing the ftesh from all con-
nection with the risen body. Now, since it
is a clear and fixed point that the body which
is to rise again is that which was sown in death,
they must be challenged to an examination of
the very fact itself. Else let them show that
the soul was sown after death; in a word, that
it underwent death, — that is, was demolished,
dismembered, dissolved in the ground, nothing
of which was ever decreed against it by God:
let them display to our view its corruptibility
and dishonour (as well as) its weakness, that
it may also accrue to it to rise again in in-
corruption, and in glory, and in power.' Now
in the case of Lazarus, (which we may take
as) the palmary instance of a resurrection, the
flesh lay prostrate in weakness, the flesh was
almost putrid in the dishonour of its decay , the
flesh stank in corruption, and yet it was as
flesh that Lazarus rose again — with his soul,
no doubt. But that soul was incorrupt; no-
body had wrapped it in its linen swathes; no-
body had deposited it in a grave; nobody had
yet ptfteived it "stink;" nobody for four
days had seen it " sown." Well, now, this
entire condition, this whole end of Lazarus,
the flesh indeed of all men is still experienc-
ing, but the soul of no one. That substance,
therefore, to which the apostle's whole descrip-
tion manifestly refers, of which he clearly
speaks, must be both the natural (or animate)
body when it is sown, and the spiritual body
when it is raised again. For in order that
you may understand it in this sense, he points
to this same conclusion, when in like manner,
on the authority of the same passage of Scrip-
ture, he displays to us " the first man Adam
as made a living soul."^ Now since Adam
was the first man, since also the flesh was man
prior to the soul,' it undoubtedly follows
that it was the flesh that became the living
soul. Moreover, since it was a bodily sub-
stance that assumed this condition, it was of
course the natural (or animate) body that be-
came the living soul. By what designation
would they have it called, except that which
it became through the soul, except that which
it was not previous to the soul, except that
which it can never be after the soul, but
through its resurrection? For after it has re-
covered the soul, it once more becomes the
natural (or animate) body, in order that it may
become a spiritual body. For it only resumes
in the resurrection the condition which it once


*What in our version is rendered "a natural body,'" is St
Paul's <Tiafx.a \l/vx*-Kov, which the heretics held to be merely a per-
iphrasis for \lnxv- We have rendered Tertullian's phrase corpux
nnimale by "animate body," the better to suit the argument.

7 I Cor. XV. 42, 43.

•* Compare ver. 45 with Gen. ii. 7.

9 See this put more fully above, c. v., near the end.


I


CHAP. LlV.j


ON THE RESURRECTION OF THE FLESH.


587


had. There is therefore by no means the
same good reason why the soul should be
called the natural (or animate) body, which
the flesh has for bearing that designation.
The flesh, in fact, was a body before it was an
animate body. When the flesh was joined by
the soul,' it then became the natural (or ani-
mate) body. Now, although the soul is a
corporeal substance,'' yet, as it is not an ani-
mated body, but rather an animating one, it
cannot be called the animate (or natural)
body, nor can it become that thing which it
produces. It is indeed when the soul accrues
to something else that it makes that thing
animate; but unless it so accrues, how will it
ever produce animation? As therefore the
flesh was at first an animate (or natural) body
on receiving the soul, so at last will it become
a spiritual body when invested with the spirit.
Now the apostle, by severally adducing this
order in Adam and in Christ, fairly dis-
tinguishes between the two states, in the very
essentials of their difference. And when he
calls Christ '* the last Adam," ^ you may from
this circumstance discover how strenuously
he labours to establish throughout his teach-
ing the resurrection of the flesh, not of the
soul. Thus, then, the first man Adam was
flesh, not soul, and only afterwards became a
living soul; and the last Adam, Christ, was
Adam only because He was man, and only
man as being flesh, not as being soul. Ac-
cordingly the apostle goes on to say: ** How-
beit that was not first which is spiritual, but
that which is natural, and afterward that which
is spiritual,"-* as in the case of the two
Adams. Now, do you not suppose that he is
distinguishing between the natural body and
the spiritual body in the same flesh, after hav-
ing already drawn the distinction therein in
the two Adams, that is, in the first man and
in the last ? For from which substance is it
that Christ and Adam have a parity with each
other? No doubt it is from their flesh, al-
though it may be from their soul also. It is,
however, in respect of the flesh that they are
both man; for the flesh was man prior to the
soul. It was actually from it that they were
able to take rank, so as to be deemed — one
the first, and the other the last man, or Adam.
Besides, things which are different in char-
acter are only incapable of being arranged
in the same order when their diversity is one
of substance; for when it is a diversity
either in respect of place, or of time, or of
condition, they probably do admit of classifi-


I Animata.

2|See the Dc Anima, v.-ix., for a full statement of TertulHan's
view of the soul's corporeality.

3 1 Cor. XV. 45.

4 I Cor. XV. 46.


cation together. Here, however, they are
called first and last, from the substance of
their (common) flesh, just as afterwards again
the first man (is said to be) of the earth, and
the second of heaven ;s but although He is
"of heaven" in respect of the spirit. He is
yet man according to the flesh. Now since it
is the flesh, and not the soul, that makes an
order (or classification together) in the two
Adams compatible, so that the distinction is
drawn between them of " the first man becom-
ing a living soul, and the last a quickening
spirit," ^ so in like manner this distinction be-
tween them has already suggested the conclu-
sion that the distinction is due to the flesh; so
that it is of the flesh that these words speak:
" Howbeit that was not first which is spiritual,
but that which is natural, and afterward that
which is spiritual. "7 And thus, too, the
S2im.G. flesh must be understood in a preceding
passage: "That which is sown is the natural
body, and that which rises again is the spirit-
ual body; because that is not first which is
spiritual, but that which is natural: since the
first Adam was made a living soul, the last
Adam a quickening spirit."^ It is all about
man, and all about the flesh because about man.
What shall we say then ? Has not the flesh
even now (in this life) the spirit by faith ? so
that the question still remains to be asked,
how it is that the animate (or natural) body
can be said to be sown ? Surely the flesh has
received even here the spirit — but only its
"earnest;" 5 whereas of the soul (it has re-
ceived) not the earnest, but the full possession.
Therefore it has the name of afiimate (or
natural) body, expressly because of the higher
substance of the soul (or a?iima,) in which it
is sown, destined hereafter to become, through
the full possession of the spirit which it shall
obtain, the spiritual body, in which it is raised
again. What wonder, then, if it is more com-
monly called after the substance with which it
is fully furnished, than after that of which it
has yet but a sprinkling ?

CHAP. LIV. DEATH SWALLOWED UP OF LIFE.

MEANING OF THIS PHRASE IN RELATION TO
THE RESURRECTION OF THE BODY.

Then, again, questions very often are sug-
gested by occasional and isolated terms, just
as much as they are by connected sentences.
Thus, because of the apostle's expression,
"that mortality may be swallowed up of
life" ^° — in reference to the flesh — they wrest


SVer. 47.
6Ver. 45.
7Ver. 46.

8 I Cor. XV. 44, 45.

9 2 Cor. i. 22, V. 5, and Eph. i. 14.
»o 2 Cor, V. 4.


588


ON THE RESURRECTION OF THE FLESH.


[chap. lv.


the word sivallmved up into the sense of the
actual destruction of the flesh; as if we might
not speak of ourselves as swallowing bile, or
swallowing grief, meaning that we conceal and
hide it, and keep it within ourselves. The
truth is, when it is written, " This mortal must
put on immortality,"' it is explained in what
sense it is that '* mortality is swallowed up of
life" — even whilst, clothed with immortality,
it is hidden and concealed, and contained
within it, not as consumed, and destroyed,
and lost. But death, you will say in reply to
me, at this rate, must be safe, even when it
has been swallowed up. Well, then, I ask you
to distinguish words which are similar in form
according to their proper meanings. Death is
one thing, and mortality is another. It is one
thing for death to be swallowed up, and
another thing for mortality to be swallowed
up. Death is incapable of immortality, but
not so mortality. Besides, as it is written
that " this mortal must put on immortality," ""
how is this possible when it is swallowed up
of life ? But how is it swallowed up of life, (in
the sense of destroyed by it) when it is actually
received, and restored, and included in it?
For the rest, it is only just and right that
death should be swallowed up in utter destruc-
tion, since it does itself devour with this same
intent. Death, says the apostle, has devoured
by exercising its strength, and therefore has
been itself devoured in the struggle ^^ S7val-
Imved up in victory y ^ *'0 death, where is
thy sting? O death, where is thy victory?" *
Therefore life, too, as the great antagonist of
death, will in the struggle swallow up for sal •
vation what death, in its struggle, had swal-
lowed up for destruction.

CHAP. LV. — THE CHANGE OF A THING'S CONDI-
TION IS NOT THE DESTRUCTION OF ITS SUB-
STANCE. THE APPLICATION OF THIS PRINCI-
PLE TO OUR SUBJECT.

Now although, in proving that the flesh shall
rise again we ipso facto prove that no other
flesh will partake of that resurrection than
that which is in question, yet insulated ques-
tions and their occasions do require even dis-
cussions of their own, even if they have been
already sufficiently met. We will therefore
give a fuller explanation of the force and the
reason of a change which (is so great, that it)
almost suggests the presumption that it is a
different flesh which is to rise again; as if,
indeed, so great a change amounted to utter
cessation, and a complete destruction of the

^ I Cor. XV. 53.
* I Cor. XV. S3.
3Ver.54.
4Ver.55.


former self. A distinction, however, must be
made between a change^ however great, and
everything which has the character of distruc-
tiofi. For undergoing change is one thing,
but being destroyed is another thing. Now
this distinction would no longer exist, if the
flesh were to suffer such a change as amounts
to destruction. Destroyed, however, it must be
by the change, unless it shall itself persistently
remain throughout the altered condition which
shall be exhibited in the resurrection. For
precisely as it perishes, if it does not rise
again, so also does it equally perish even if it
does rise again, on the supposition that it is
lost 5 in the change. It will as much fail of
a future existence, as if it did not rise again at
all. And how absurd is it to rise again for
the purpose of not having a being, when it had
it in its power not to rise again, and so lose
its being — because it had already begun its
non-existence ! Now, things which are ab-
solutely different, as mutation and destruction
are, will not admit of mixture and confusion;
in their operations, too, they differ. One
destroys, the other changes. Therefore, as
that which is destroyed is not changed, so that
which is changed is not destroyed. To perish
is altogether to cease to be what a thing once
was, whereas to be changed is to exist in
another condition. Now, if a thing exists in
another condition, it can still be the same thing
itself; for since it does not perish, it has its
existence still. A change, indeed, it has ex-
perienced, but not a destruction, A thing
may undergo a complete change, and yet re-
main still the same thing. In like manner, a
man also may be quite himself in substance
even in the present life, and for all that un-
dergo various changes — in habit, in bodily
bulk, in health, in condition, in dignity, and
in age — in taste, business, means, houses,
laws and customs — and still lose nothing of his
human nature, nor so to be made another man
as to cease to be the same; indeed, I ought
hardly to say another man, but another thing.
This form of change even the Holy Scriptures
give us instances of. The hand of Moses is
changed, and it becomes like a dead one,
bloodless, colourless, and stiff with cold; but
on the recovery of heat, and on the restoration
of its natural colour, it is again the same flesh
and blood. ^ Afterwards the face of the same
Moses is changed, ^ with a brightness which
eye could not bear. But he was Moses still,
even when he was not visible. So also
Stephen had alrendy put on the appearance
of an angel, ^ altiiough tliey were none other


SSubducitur.

6 Ex. iv. 6, 7.

7 Ex. xxxiv. 29, 35.


CHAP. LVII.]


ON THE RESURRECTION OF THE FLESH.


589


than his human knees ' which bent beneath
the stoning. The Lord, again, in the retirement
of the mount, had changed His raiment for a
robe of hght; but He still retained features
which Peter could recognise. " In that same
scene Moses also and Elias gave proof that
the same condition of bodily existence may con-
tinue even in glory — the one in the likeness of a
flesh which he had not yet recovered, the other
in the reality of one which he had not yet put
off.3 It was as full of this splendid example
that Paul said: "Who shall change our vile
body, that it may be fashioned like unto His
glorious body." * But if you maintain that a
transfiguration and a conversion amounts to
the annihilation of any substance, then it fol-
lows that " Saul, when changed into another
man, " s passed away from his own bodily
substance; and that Satan himself, when
"transformed into an angel of light, " ^ loses
his own proper character. Such is not my
opinion. So likewise changes, conversions,
and reformations will necessarily take place
to bring about the resurrection, but the sub-
stance of the flesh will still be preserved safe.

CHAP. LVI. THE PROCEDURE OF THE LAST

JUDGMENT, AND ITS AWARDS, ONLY POSSIBLE
ON THE IDENTITY OF THE RISEN BODY WITH
OUR PRESENT FLESH.

For how absurd, and in truth how unjust,
and in both respects how unworthy of God, for
one substance to do the work, and another to
reap the reward: that this flesh of ours should
be torn by martyrdom, and another wear the
crown; or, on the other hand, that this flesh
of ours should wallow in uricleanness, and an-
other receive the condemnation ! Is it not
better to renounce all faith at once in the hope
of the resurrection, ^ than to trifle with the
wisdom and justice of God?^ Better that
Marcion should rise again than Valentinus.
For it cannot be beheved that the mind, or
the memory, or the conscience of existing man
is abolished by putting on that change of rai-
ment which immortality and incorruption sup-
plies; for in that case all the gain and fruit of
the resurrection, and the permanent effect ^
of God's judgment both on soul and body,'°
would certainly fall to the ground. If I re-
member not that it is I who have served Him,
how shall I ascribe glory to God ? How sing


1 Acts vii. 59, 60.

2 Matt. xvii. 2-4.

3 Ver. 3.

4 Phil. iii. 21.

5 I Sam. X. 6.

6 2 Cor. xi. 14.

7 With Marcion.
SW^ith Valentinus.
9 Statu.

10 Utrobique.


to Him " the new song, " " if I am ignorant
that it is I who owe Him thanks ? But why is
exception taken only against the change of
the flesh, and not of the soul also, which
in all things is superior to the flesh ? How
happens it, that the self-same soul which
in our present flesh has gone through all
Hfe's course, which has learnt the knowl-
edge of God^ and put on Christ, and sown
the hope of salvation in this flesh, must
reap its harvest in another flesh of which we
know nothing ? Verily that must be a most
highly favoured flesh, which shall have the
enjoyment of life at so gratuitous a rate ! But
if the soul is not to be changed also, then
there is no resurrection of the soul; nor will it
be believed to have itself risen, unless it has
risen some different thing.

CHAP. LVII. OUR BODIES, HOWEVER MUTILAT-
ED BEFORE OR AFTER DEATH, SHALL RECOVER
THEIR PERFECT INTEGRITY IN THE RESURREC-
TION. ILLUSTRATION OF THE ENFRANCHISED
SLAVE.

We now come to the most usual cavil of
unbelief. If, they say, it be actually the self-
same substance which is recalled to life with
all its form, and lineaments, and quality, then
why not with all its other characteristics?
Then the blind, and the lame, and the palsied,
and whoever else may have passed away with
any conspicuous mark, will returrt again with
the same. What now is the fact, although
you in the greatness of your conceit" thus
disdain to accept from God so vast a grace ?
Does it not happen that, when you now admit
the salvation of only the soul, you ascribe it
to men at the cost of half their nature ? What
is the good of believing in the resurrection,
unless your faith embraces the whole of it ?
If the flesh is to be repaired after its dissolu-
tion, much more will it be restored after some
violent injury. Greater cases prescribe rules
for lesser ones. Is not the amputation or the
crushing of a limb the death of that limb ?
Now, if the death of the whole person is re-
scinded by its resurrection, what must we say
of the death of a part of him? If we are
changed for glory, how much more for integ-
rity !'3 Any loss sustained by our bodies is an
accident to them, but their entirety is their
natural property. In this condition we are
born. Even if we become injured in the
womb, this is loss suffered by what is already
a human being. Natural condition '■*' is prior
to injury. As life is bestowed by God, so is


i^ Rev. V. 9, xiv. 3.

" Qualiscunque.

'3 Or the recovery of our entire person.

M Genus.


590


ON THE RESURRECTION OF THE FLESH.


[chap, lviii.


it restored by Him. As we are when we re-
ceive it, so are we when we recover it. To
nature, not to injury, are we restored; to our
state by birth, not to our condition by acci-
dent, do we rise again. If God raises not
men entire. He raises not the dead. For
what dead man is entire, although he dies
entire ? Who is without hurt, that is without
Hfe ? What body is uninjured, when it is dead,
when it is cold, when it is ghastly, when it is
stiff, when it is a corpse ? When is a man
more infirm, than when he is entirely infirm ?
When more palsied, than when quite motion-
less ? Thus, for a dead man to be raised
again, amounts to nothing short of his being
restored to his entire condition, — lest he,
forsooth, be still dead in that part in which he
has not risen again. God is quite able to re-
make what He once made. This power and
this unstinted grace of His He has already
sufficiently guaranteed in Christ; and has dis-
played Himself to us (in Him) not only as the
restorer of the flesh, but as the repairer of its
breaches. And so the apostle says: "The
dead shall be raised incorruptible " (or unim-
paired).' But how so, unless they become
entire, who have wasted away either in the
loss of their health, or in the long decrepitude
of the grave ? For when he propounds the
two clauses, that "this corruptible must put
on incorruption, and this mortal must put on
immortality,"' he does not repeat the same
statement, but sets forth a distinction. For,
by assigning immortality to the repeating of
death, and incorruption to the repairing of the
wasted body, he has fitted one to the. raising
and the other to the retrieval of the body. I
suppose, moreover, that he promises to the
Thessalonians the integrity of the whole sub-
stance of man. 3 So that for the great future
there need be no fear of blemished or defec-
tive bodies. Integrity, whether the result of
preservation or restoration, will be able to lose
nothing more, after the time that it has given
back to it whatever it had lost. Now, when
you contend that the flesh will still have to
undergo the same sufferings, if the same flesh
be said to have to rise again, you rashly set
up nature against her Lord, and impiously
contrast her law against His grace; as if it
were not permitted the Lord God both to
change nature, and to preserve her, without
subjection to a law. How is it, then, that we
read, *' With men these things are impossible,
but with God all things are possible;"^ and
again, " God hath chosen the foolish things
of the world to confound the wise ?" s i^et

' I Cor. XV. 52.
2 1 Cor. XV. 53.

3 I TheiB. iv. 13-17 and v. 23.

4 Matt. six. 26.


me ask you, if you were to manumit your
slave (seeing that the same flesh and soul will
remain to him, which once were exposed to
the whip, and the fetter, and the stripes), will
it therefore be fit for him to undergo the same
old sufferings ? I trow not. He is instead
thereof honoured with the grace of the white
robe, and the favour of the gold ring, and the
name and tribe as well as table of his patron.
Give, then, the same prerogative to God, by
virtue of such a change, of reforming our con-
dition, not our nature, by taking away from
it all sufferings, and surrounding it with safe-
guards of protection. Thus our flesh shall
remain even after the resurrection — so far
indeed susceptible of suffering, as it is the
flesh, and the same flesh too; but at the same
time impassible, inasmuch as it has been lib-
erated by the Lord for the very end and pur-
pose of being no longer capable of enduring
suffering.

CHAP. LVIII. FROM THIS PERFECTION OF OUR

RESTORED BODIES WILL FLOW THE CONSCIOUS-
NESS OF UNDISTURBED JOY AND PEACE.

"Everlasting joy," says Isaiah, "shall be
upon their heads. "^ Well, there is nothing
eternal until after the resurrection. " And
sorrow and sighing," continues he, "shall
flee away. "7 The angel echoes the same to
John: "And God shall wipe away all tears
from their eyes;"^ from the same eyes in-
deed which had formerly wept, and which
might weep again, if the loving-kindness of
God did not dry up every fountain of tears.
And again: "God shall wipe away all tears
from their eyes; and there shall be no more
death,"' and therefore no more corruption,
it being chased away by incorruption, even
as death is by immortality. If sorrow, and
mourning, and sighing, and death itself, as-
sail us from the afflictions both of soul and
body, how shall they be removed, except by
the cessation of their causes, that is to say, the
afiiictions of flesh and soul ? where will you
find adversities in the presence of Gcd ?
where, incursions of an enemy in the bosom
of Christ ? where, attacks of the devil in the
face of the Holy Spirit ? — now that the devil
himself and his angels are " cast into the lake
of fire." *° Where now is necessity, and what
they call fortune or fate ? What plague awaits
the redeemed from death, after their eternal
pardon ? What wrath is there for the recon-
ciled, after grace ? What weakness, after their


5 I Cor. i. 27.
6Isa. XXXV. 10,
7Ver. 10.

8 Rev. vii. 17.

9 Rev. xxi. 4.

'o Rev. XX. 10, 13-15


CHAP. LX.]


ON THE RESURRECTION OF THE FLESH.


591


renewed strength ? What risk and danger,
after their salvation ? That the raiment and
shoes of the children of Israel remained un-
worn and fresh for the space of forty years;'
that in their very persons the exact point ^ of
convenience and propriety checked the rank
growth of their nails and hair, so that any ex-
cess herein might not be attributed to inde-
cency; that the fires of Babylon injured not
either the mitres or the trousers of the three
brethren, however foreign such dress might
be to the Jews;^ that Jonah was swallowed
by the monster of the deep, in whose belly
whole ships were devoured, and after three
days was vomited out again safe and sound;'*
that Enoch and Elias, who even now, without
experiencing a resurrrection (because they
have not even encountered death), are learn-
ing to the full what it is for the flesh to be ex-
empted from all humilation, and all loss, and
all injury, and all disgrace — translated as they
have been from this world, and from this very
cause already candidates for everlasting life;^
— to what faith do these notable facts bear
witness, if not to that which ought to inspire
in us the belief that they are proofs and docu-
ments of our own future integrity and perfect
j-estirrection? For, to borrow the apostle's
phrase, these were "figures of ourselves;"^
and they are written that we may believe both
that the Lord is more powerful than all natural
laws about the body, and that He shows Him-
self the preserver of the flesh the more em-
phatically, in that He has preserved for it its
very clothes and shoes.

CHAP. LIX. OUR FLESH IN THE RESURRECTION

CAPABLE, WITHOUT LOSING ITS ESSENTIAL
IDENTITY, OF BEARING THE CHANGED CON-
DITIONS OF ETERNAL LIFE, OR OF DEATH
ETERNAL.

But, you object, the world to come bears
the character of a different dispensation, even
an eternal one; and therefore, you maintain,
that the non-eternal substance of this life is
incapable of possessing a state of such differ-
ent features. This would be true enough, if
man were made for the future dispensation,
and not the dispensation for man. The apos-
tle, however, in his epistle says, "Whether it
be the world, or life, or death, or things
present, or things to come; all are yours: "^
and he here constitutes us heirs even of the
future world. Isaiah gives you no help when
he says, "All flesh is grass; "^ and in an-


1 Deut. xxix. 5.

2 Justitia.

3 Dan. iii. 27.

4 Jonah i. 17, ii. 10.

5 Gen. V. 24 ; 2 Kings ii. 11.

6 I Cor. X. 6.


Other passage, " All flesh shall see the salva-
tion of God." ' It is the issues of men, not
their substances, which he distinguishes. But
who does not hold that the judgment of God
consists in the twofold sentence, of salvation
and of punishment ? Therefore it is that " all
flesh is grass," which is destined to the fire; and
"all flesh shall see the salvation of God,"
which is ordained to eternal life. For my-
self, I am quite sure that it is in no other
flesh than my own that I have committed
adultery, nor in any other flesh am I striv-
ing after continence. If there be any one
who bears about in his person two instru-
ments of lasciviousness, he has it in his
power, to be sure, to mow down '° "the
grass" of the unclean flesh, and to reserve
for himself only that which shall see the sal-
vation of God. But when the same prophet
represents to us even nations sometimes esti-
mated as " the small dust of the balance," "
and as "less than nothing, and vanity,""
and sometimes as about to hope and "trust
in the name " '^ and arm of the Lord, are we
at all misled respecting the Gentile nations by
the diversity of statement? Are some of them
to turn believers, and are others accounted
dust, from any difference of nature ? Nay,
rather Christ has shone as the true light on
the nations within the ocean's limits, and from
the heaven which is over us all.''* Why, it is
even on this earth that the Valentinians have
gone to school for their errors; and there will
be no difference of condition, as respects their
body and soul, between the nations which be-
lieve and those which do not believe. Pre-
cisely, then, as He has put a distinction of
state, not of nature, amongst the same nations,
so also has He discriminated their flesh, which
is one and the same substance in those nations,
not according to their material structure, but
according to the recompense of their merit.

CHAP. LX. ALL THE CHARACTERISTICS OF OUR

BODIES— SEX, VARIOUS LIMBS, ETC. — WILL BE
RETAINED, WHATEVER CHANGE OF FUNCTIONS
THESE MAY HAVE, OF WHICH POINT, HOWEVER,
WE ARE NO JUDGES. ANALOGY OF THE RE-
PAIRED SHIP.

But behold how presistently they still ac-
cumulate their cavils against the flesh, especi-
ally against its identity, deriving their argu-


7 I Cor. iii. 22.

8 Isa. xl. 7.
9Ver. 5.

10 Demetere.

" Isa. xl. 15.

12 Ver. 17. The word is sf title, which the LXX. uses in the
fifteenth verse for the " dust of the Hebrew Bible.

»3 Isa. xhi. 4, Sept. ; quoted from the I. XX. by Christ in Matt,
xii. 21, and by St. Paul in Rom. xv. 12.

'4 An allusion to some conceits of the Valentinians, who put
men of truest nature and fit for Christ's grace outside of the ocean-
bounded earth, etc.


592


ON THE RESURRECTION OF THE FLESH.


[chap. lxi.


ments even from the functions of our limbs;
on the one hand saying that these ought to
continue permanently pursuing their labours
and enjoyments, as appendages to the same
corporeal frame; and on the otiier hand con-
tending that, inasmuch as the functions of the
limbs shall one day come to an end, the bodily
frame itself must be destroyed, its permanence
without its limbs being deemed to be as in-
conceivable, as that of the limbs themselves
without their functions ! What, they ask, will
then be the use of the cavity of our mouth,
and its rows of teeth, and the passage of the
throat, and the branch-way of the stomach,
and the gulf of the belly, and the entangled
tissue of the bowels, when there shall no
longer be room for eating and drinking?
What more will there be for these members to
take in, masticate, swallow, secrete, digest,
eject? Of what avail will be our very hands,
and feet, and all our labouring limbs, when
even all care about food shall cease ? What
purpose can be served by loins, conscious of
seminal secretions, and all the other organs of
generation, in tfte two sexes, and the labora-
tories of embryos, and the fountains of the
breast, when concubinage, and pregnancy,
and infant nurture shall cease? In short,
what will be the use of the entire body, when
the entire body shall become useless? In
reply to all this, we have then already settled
the principle that the dispensation of the future
state ought not to be compared with that of
the present world, and that in the interval be-
tween them a change will take place; and we
now add the remark, that these functions of
our bodily limbs will continue to supply the
needs of this life up to the moment when life
itself shall pass away from time to eternity,
as the natural body gives place to the spiritual,
until "this mortal puts on immortality, and
this corruptible puts on incorruption:"* so
that when life shall itself become freed from
all wants, our limbs shall then be freed also
from their services, and therefore will be no
longer wanted. Still, although liberated from
their offices, they will be yet preserved for
judgment, "that every one may receive the
things done in his body. " =" For the judg-
ment-seat of God requires that man be kept
entire. Entire, however, he cannot be without
his limbs, of the substance of which, not the
functions, he consists; unless, forsooth, you
will be bold enough to maintain that a ship is
perfect without her keel, or her bow, or her
stern, and without the solidity of her entire
frame. And yet how often have we seen the
same ship, after being shattered with the storm


1 1 Cor. XV, 53.
2 2 Cor. V. 10.


and broken by decay, with all her timbers
repaired and restored, gallantly riding on the
wave in all the beauty of a renewed fabric !
Do we then disquiet ourselves with doubt
about God's skill, and will, and rights? Be-
sides, if a wealthy shipowner, who does not
grudge money merely for his amusement or
show, thoroughly repairs his ship, and then
chooses that she should make no further voy-
ages, will you contend that the old form and
finish is still not necessary to the vessel, al-
though she is no longer meant for actual ser-
vice, when the mere safety of a ship requires
such completeness irrespective of service ?
The sole question, therefore, which is enough
for us to consider here, is whether the Lord,
when He ordains salvation for man, intends it
for his flesh; whether it is His will that the
selfsame flesh shall be renewed. If so^ it will
be improper for you to rule, from the inutility
of its limbs in the future state, that the flesh
will be incapable of renovation. For a thing
may be renewed, and yet be uselessy><?^« having
nothing to do; but it cannot be said to be use-
less if it has no existence. If, indeed, it has
existence, it will be quite possible for it also
not to be useless; it may possibly have some-
thing to do; for in the presence of God there
will be no idleness.

CHAP. LXI. THE DETAILS OF OUR BODILY SEX,

AND OF THE FUNCTIONS OF OUR VARIOUS
MEMBERS. APOLOGY FOR THE NECESSITY
WHICH HERESY IMPOSES OF HUNTING UP ALL
ITS UNBLUSHING CAVILS.

Now you have received your mouth, O man,
for the purpose of devouring your food and
imbibing your drink: why not, however, for
the higher purpose of uttering speech, so as to
distinguish yourself from all other animals ?
Why not rather for preaching the gospel of
God, that so you may become even His priest
and advocate before men ? Adam indeed gave
their several names to the animals, before he
plucked the fruit of the tree; before he ate, he
prophesied. Then, again, you received your
teeth for the consumption of your meal: why
not rather for wreathing your mouth with
suitable defence on every opening thereof,
small or wide ? Why not, too, for moderating
the impulses of your tongue, and guarding
your articulate speech from failure and vio-
lence ? Let me tell you, (if you do not know),
that there are toothless persons in the world.
Look at them, and ask whether even a cage of.
teeth be not an honour to the mouth. There
are apertures in the lower regions of man an(
woman, by means of which they gratify n<
doubt their animal passions; but why are theyj
not rather regarded as outlets for the cleanly


I.XIII.]


ON THE RESURRECTION OF THE FLESH.


593


discharge of natural fluids ? Women, more-
over, have within them receptacles where
human seed may collect; but are they not de-
signed for the secretion of those sanguineous
issues, which their tardier and weaker sex is
inadequate to disperse ? For even details like
these require to be mentioned, seeing that
heretics single out what parts of our bodies
may suit them, handle them without delicacy,
and, as their whim suggests, pour torrents of
scorn and contempt upon the natural functions
of our members, for the purpose of upsetting
the resurrection, and making us blush over
their cavils; not reflecting that before the func-
tions cease, the very causes of them will have
passed away. There will be no more meat,
because no more hunger; no more drink, be-
cause no more thirst; no more concubinage,
because no more child-bearing; no more eat-
ing and drinking, because no more labour and
toil. Death, too, will cease; so there will be
no more need of the nutriment of food for the
defence of life, nor will mothers' limbs any
longer have to be laden for the replenishment
of our race. But even in the present life there
may be cessations of their office for our stom-
achs and our generative organs. For forty
days Moses ' and Elias =" fasted, and lived
upon God alone. For even so early was the
principle consecrated: " Man shall not live by
bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth
out of the mouth of God. " ^ See here faint
outlines of our future strength ! We even, as
we may be able, excuse our mouths from food,
and withdraw our sexes from union. How
many voluntary eunuchs are there ! How
many virgins espoused to Christ ! How many,
both of men and women, whom nature has
made sterile, with a structure which cannot
procreate ! Now, if even here on earth both
the functions and the pleasures of our members
may be suspended, with an intermission which,
like the dispensation itself, can only be a tem-
porary one, and yet man's safety is nevertheless
unimpaired, how much more, when his salva-
tion is secure, and especially in an eternal dis-
pensation, shall we not cease to desire those
things, for which, even here below, we are not
unaccustomed to check our longings !

CHAP. LXII. OUR DESTINED LIKENESS TO THE

ANGELS IN THE GLORIOUS LIFE OF THE RE-
SURRECTION.

To this discussion, however, our Lord's
declaration puts an effectual end: " They shall
be," says He, "equal unto the angels. " '*

' Ex. xxiv. 8.

2 1 Kings xix. 8.

3 Deut. viii. 3 ; Matt. iv. 4.

4 Luke XX. 36; Matt. xxii. 30.

88 •


As by not marrying, because of not dying, so,
of course, by not having to yield to any like
necessity of our bodily state; even as the
angels, too, sometimes were *' equal unto"
men, by eating and drinking, and submitting
their feet to the washing of the bath — having
clothed themselves in human guise, without
the loss of their own intrinsic nature. If there-
fore angels, when they became as men, sub-
mitted in their own unaltered substance of
spirit to be treated as if they were flesh, why
shall not men in like manner, when they be-
come "equal unto the angels," undergo in
their unchanged substance of flesh the treat-
ment of spiritual beings, no more exposed to
the usual solicitations of the flesh in their an-
gelic garb, than were the angels once to those
of the spirit when encompassed in human form ?
We shall not therefore cease to continue in the
flesh, because we cease to be importuned by
the usual wants of the flesh; just as the angels
ceased not therefore to remain in their spiritual
substance, because of the suspension of their
spiritual incidents. Lastly, Christ said not,
" They shall be angels," in order not to repeal
their existence as men; but He said, "They
shall be equal unto the angels, s that He
might preserve their humanity unimpaired.
When He ascribed an angelic likeness to the
flesh,** He took not from it its proper sub-
stance.

CHAP. LXIII. — CONCLUSION, THE RESURREC-
TION OF THE FLESH IN ITS ABSOLUTE IDENTI-
TY AND PERFECTION. BELIEF OF THIS HAD
BECOME WEAK. HOPES FOR ITS REFRESHING
RESTORATION UNDER THE INFLUENCES OF
THE PARACLETE.

And SO the flesh shall rise again, wholly in
every man, in its own identity, in its absolute
integrity. Wherever it may be, it is in safe
keeping in God's presence, through that most
faithful "Mediator between God and man,
(the man) Jesus Christ," ^ who shall reconcile
both God to man, and man to God; the spirit
to the flesh, and the flesh to the spirit. Both
natures has He already united in His own
self; He has fitted ftiem together as bride and
bridegroom in the reciprocal bond of wedded
life. Now, if any should insist on making the
soul the bride, then the flesh will follow the
soul as her dowry. The soul shall never be
an outcast, to be 4iad home by the bridegroom
bare and naked. She has her dower, her out-
fit, her fortune in the flesh, which shall ac-
company her with the love and fidelity of a
foster-sister. But suppose the flesh to be the

5 i<rayy«Aoi,

6Cui.

7 I Tim. ii. 5.


594


ELUCIDATIONS.


bride, then in Christ Jesus she has in the
contract of His blood received His Spirit as
her spouse. Now, what you take to be her
extinction, you may be sure is only her tem-
porary retirement. It is not the soul only
which withdraws from view. The flesh, too,
has her departures for a while — in waters, in
fires, in birds, in beasts; she may seem to be
dissolved into these, but she is only poured
into them, as into vessels. And should the
vessels themselves afterwards fail to hold her,
escaping from even these, and returning to
her mother earth, she is absorbed once more,
as it were, by its secret embraces, ultimately
to stand forth to view, like Adam when sum-
moned to hear from his Lord and Creator the
words, " Behold, the man is become as one of
us!"' — thoroughly "knowing" by that time
"the evil" which she had escaped, "and the
good " which she has acquired. Why, then,
O soul, should you envy the flesh? There is
none, after the Lord, whom you should love
so dearly; none more like a brother to you,
which is even born along with yourself in God.
You ought rather to have been by your prayers
obtaining resurrection for her: her sins, what-
ever they were, were owing to you. However,
it is no wonder if you hate her; for you have
repudiated her Creator. ^^ You have accus-
tomed yourself either to deny or change her
existence even in Christ ^ — corrupting the very
Word of God Himself, who became flesh, either
by mutilating or misinterpreting the Scrip-
ture,* and introducing, above all, apocryphal
mysteries ^«^ blasphemous fables. s But yet


» Gen. hi. 32.

» In this apostrophe to the soul, he censures Marcion's heresy.

3 Compare the De Carne Christ i.

4 See the Pe Pnescript. Hteret. ch. xxxviii. siiprn^ for in-
stances of these diverse methods of heresy. Marcion is men-
tioned as the inntilnior of Scripture, by cutting away from it
whatever opposed his views ; Valentinus as the corrupter thereof,
by his manifold and fantastic interpretations.

5 See the Adv. VaUntinianos^ supra.


Almighty God, in His most gracious provi-
dence, by " pouring out of His Spirit in these
last days, upon all flesh, upon His servants
and on His handmaidens,"* has checked these
impostures of unbelief and perverseness, reani-
mated men's faltering faith in the resurrec-
tion of the flesh, and cleared from all obscurity
and equivocation the ancient Scriptures (of
both God's Testaments 7) by the clear light
of their (sacred) words and meanings. Now,
since it was " needful that there should be
heresies, in order that they which are approved
might be made manifest;"^ since, however,
these heresies would be unable to put on a
bold front without some countenance from the
Scriptures, it therefore is plain enough that
the ancient Holy Writ has furnished them
with sundry materials for their evil doctrine,
which very materials indeed (so distorted) are
refutable from the same Scriptures. It was
fit and proper, therefore, that the Holy Ghost
should no longer withhold the effusions of His
gracious light upon these inspired writings, in
order that they might be able to disseminate
the seeds of truth with no admixture of hereti-
cal subtleties, and pluck out from it their tares.
He has accordingly now dispersed all the per-
plexities of the past, and their self-chosen al-
legories and parables, by the open and per-
spicuous explanation of the entire mystery,
through the new prophecy, which descends in
copious streams from the Paraclete. If you
will only draw water from His fountains, you
will never thrist for other doctrine: no feverish
craving after subtle questions will again con-
sume you; but by drinking in evermore the
resurrection of the flesh, you will be satisfied
with the refreshing draughts.


6Joel ii. 28, 29; Acts ii. 17, 18. [See last sentence. He im-
proves upon St. Peter's interpretation of this text (as see below) by
attributing his own clear views to the charismata^ which he re-
gards as still vouchsafed to the more spiritual.]

7 We follow Oehlcr's view here, by all means.

8 I Cor. xi. 19.


ELUCIDATIONS.
I.

(Cadaver, cap. xviii. p. 558.)

The Schoolmen and middle-age jurists improved on Tertullian's etymology.


He


says, — ' a cadendo — cadaver.'" But they form the word thus;

Caxo da\.2?verm\\iM% = Ca-da-ver.
On this subject see a most interesting discourse of the (paradoxical and sophistical,
nay the whimsical) Count Joseph de Maistre, in his Soirees de St. Pdtersbourg.'^ He


* GEuvres, Tom. v. p. ui.


ELUCIDATIONS. 595

remarks on the happy formation of many Latin words, in this manner: e. g.^ Ccecus iit
ire = Ccecuftre, "to grope like a blind man." The French, he says, are not without such ex-
amples, and he instances the word ancHre = ancestor, as composed out of ancie7i and etre,
i.e., one of a former existence. Courage^ he says, is formed from ccBur and rage, this use
of rage being the Greek Qviioq. He supposes that the English use the word rage in this sense,
but 1 recall only the instance:

" Chill penury repressed their noble rage,"

from Gray's Elegy. The Diversims of Purley^ of Horne-Tooke, supply amusing examples
of the like in the formation of English words.

II.

(His flesh, the Bread, cap. xxxvii. p. 572.)

Note our author's exposition. He censures those who understood our Lord's words
after the letter, as if they were to eat the carnal body. He expounds the spiritual thing
which gives life as to be understood by the text: "the words that I speak unto you, they
are spirit and they are life." His word is the life-giving principle and therefore he called
his flesh by the same name: and we are to "devour Him with the ear and to ruminate on
Him with the understanding, and to digest Him by faith." The flesh profits nothing, the
spirit imparts life. Now, was Tertullian ever censured for this exposition ? On the contrary,
this was the faith of the Catholic Church, from the beginning. Our Saxon forefathers
taught the same, as appears from the Homily of Ailfric,^ a.d. 980, and from the exposition
of Ratramn, a.d. 840. The heresy of Transubstantiation was not dogmatic even among
Latins, until the Thirteenth century, and it prevailed in England less than three hundred
years, when the Catholic doctrine was restored, through the influence of Ratramn' s treatise
first upon the mind of Ridley and then by Ridley's arguments with Cranmer. Thus were
their understandings opened to the Scriptures and to the acknowledging of the Truth, for
which they suffered martyrdom. To the reformation we owe the rescue of Ante-Nicene
doctrine from the perversion^ of the Schoolmen and the gradual corruptions of doctrine after
the Ninth Century.

III.

(Paradise, cap. xliii. p. 576.)

This sentence reads, in the translation I am editing, as follows: "No one, on becoming
absent from the body, is at once a dweller in the presence of the Lord, except by the pre-
rogative of martyrdom, whereby (the saint) gets at once a lodging in Paradise, not in Hades y
But the original does not say precisely this, nor does the author use the Greek word Hades.
His words are: " Nemo enim peregrinatus a corpore statim immoratur penes Dominum nisi
ex martyrii proerogativa Paradise silicet non Inferis diversurus." The passage therefore,
Is not necessarily as inconsistent with the author's topography of the invisible world, as
might seem. " Not in the regions beneath Paradise but in Paradise itself," seems to be the
idea; Paradise being included in the world of Hades, indeed, but in a lofty region, far
enough removed from the Inferi, and refreshed by light from the third Heaven and the
throne itself, (as this planet is by the light of the Sun,) immensely distant though it be from
the final abode of the Redeemed.


I See Soames' Anglo Saxon Church, cap. xii. p. 465, and cap. xi. pp. 423-430. See also the valuable annotations of Dr. Routh's
Opuscula^ Vol. II. pp. 167-186.


Ilii:


n


VII.


AGAINST PRAXEAS;'


IN WHICH HE DEFENDS, IN ALL ESSENTIAL POINTS, THE DOCTRINE OF

THE HOLY TRINITY.^

[TRANSLATED BY DR. HOLMES.]


CHAP. I. — SATAN S WILES AGAINST THE TRUTH.
HOW THEY TAKE THE FORM OF THE PRAXEAN
HERESY. ACCOUNT OF THE PUBLICATION OF
THIS HERESY.

In various ways has the devil rivalled and
resisted the truth. Sometimes his aim has
been to destroy the truth by defending it. He
maintains that there is one only Lord, the
Almighty Creator of the world, in order that
out of this doctrine of the unity he may fab-
ricate a heresy. He says that the Father
Himself came down into the Virgin, was
Himself born of her, Himself suffered, indeed
was Himself Jesus Christ. Here the old ser-
pent has fallen out with himself, since, when
he tempted Christ after John's baptism, he
approached Him as " the Son of God; " surely
intimating that God had a Son, even on the
testimony of the very Scriptures, out of which
he was at the moment forging his temptation:
** If thou be the Son of God, command that
these stones be made bread. "^ Again: "If
thou be the Son of God, cast thyself down
from hence;* for it is written. He shall give
His angels charge concerning thee" — referring
no doubt, to the Father — " and in their hands
they shall bear thee up, that thou hurt not thy
foot against a stone. "^ Or perhaps, after all,
he was only reproaching the Gospels with a lie,
saying in fact: *' Away with Matthew; away
with Luke! Why heed their words ? In spite of
them, / declare that it was God Himself that


I The error of Praxeas appears to have originated in anxiety to
maintain the unity of God; which, he thought, could only be
done by saying that the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost were one
and the same. He contended, therefore, according to Tertullian,
that the Father himself descended into the Virgin, was born of her,
suffered, and was in a word Jesus Christ. From the most start-
ling of the deductions from Praxeas' general theory, his opponents
gave him. and his followers the name of Patrlpassians ; from
another point in his teaching they were callea Monarchians.
£Probable date not earlier than a.u. 208].

■^ [Elucidatif)n I.]

i Matt. iv. 3.

4 Ver. 6.

sPs. xci. II.


I approached; it was the Almighty Himself
that I tempted face to face; and it was for no
other purpose tiian to tempt Him that I ap-
proached Him. If, on the contrary, it had
been 07ily the Son of God, most likely I should
never have condescended to deal with Him. "
However, he is himself a liar from the be-
ginning, ^ and whatever man he instigates in
his own way; as, for instance, Praxeas. For
he was the first to import into Rome from Asia
this kind of heretical pravity, a man in other
respects of restless disposition, and above all
inflated with the pride of confessorship simply
and solely because he had to bear for a short
time the annoyance of a prison; on which oc-
casion, even "if he had given his body to be
burned, it would have profited him nothing,"
not having the love of God, ^ whose very gifts
he has resisted and destroyed. For after the
Bishop of Rome ^ had acknowledged the pro-
phetic gifts of Montanus, Prisca, and Maxi-
milla, and, in consequence of the acknowledg-
ment, had bestowed his peace' on the churches
of Asia and Phrygia, he^ by importunately
urging false accusations against the prophets
themselves and their churcnes, and insisting
on the authority of the bishop's predecessors
in the see, compelled him to recall the pacific
letter which he had issued, as well as to desist
from his purpose of acknowledging the said
gifts. By this Praxeas did a twofold service
for the devil at Rome: he drove away prophecy,
and he brought in heresy; he put to flight the
Paraclete, and he crucified the Father. Prax-
eas' tares had been moreover sown, and had
produced their fruit here also,'° while many

6 John viii. 44.

7 I Cor. xiii. 3.

8 Probably Victor. [Elucidation II.]

9 Had admitted then to communion.

10 "The connection renders it very probable that the hie
quoque of this sentence forms an antithesis to Rome, mentioned
before, and that Tertullian expresses himself as if he had written
from the very spot where these things had transpired. Hence we
I are led to conclude that it was Carthage.'''' — Neandkr, ^«//^-
nostikus, ii. 519, note 2, Bohn.


59B


AGAINST PRAXEAS.


[chap. III.


were asleep in their simplicity of doctrine; but
these tares actually seemed to have been
plucked up, having been discovered and ex-
posed by him whose agency God was pleased
to employ. Indeed, Praxeas had deliberately
resumed his old (true) faith, teaching it after
his renunciation of error; and there is his own
handwriting in evidence remaining among the
carnally-minded, ' in whose society the trans-
action then took place; afterwards nothing was
heard of him. We indeed, on our part, sub-
sequently withdrew from the carnally-minded
on our acknowledgment and maintenance of
the Paraclete.' But the tares of Praxeas had
then everywhere shaken out their seed, which
having lain hid for some while, with its vitality
concealed under a mask, has now broken out
with fresh life. But again shall it be rooted
up, if the Lord will, even now; but if not now,
in the day when all bundles of tares shall be
gathered together, and along with every other
stumbling-block shall be burnt up with un-
quenchable fire. 3

CHAP. II. — THE CATHOLIC DOCTRINE OF THE
TRINITY AND UNITY. SOMETIMES CALLED
THE DIVINE ECONOMY, OR DISPENSATION OF
THE PERSONAL RELATIONS OF THE GODHEAD.

In the course of time, then, the Father
forsooth was born, and the Father suffered, —
God Himself, the Lord Almighty, whom in
their preaching they declare to be Jesus Christ.
We, however, as we indeed always have done
(and more especially since we have been better
instructed by the Paraclete, who leads men
indeed into all truth), believe that there is one
only God; but under the following dispensa-
tion, or o'lKovofiiaj as it is called, that this one
only God has also a Son, His Word, who
proceeded* from Himself, by whom all things
were made, and without whom nothing was
made. Him we belie^ie to have been sent by
the Father into the Virgin, and to have been
born orher — being both Man and God, the Son
of Man and the Son of God, and to have been
called by the name of Jesus Christ; we believe
Him to have suffered, died, and been buried,
according to the Scriptures, and, after He had
been raised again by the Father and taken
back to heaven, to be sitting at the right hand
of the Father, and that He will come to judge

' On the designation Fsychici^ see our Antt-Marcion, p. 267.
note 5. Edin.

= [This statement may only denote a withdrawal from the com-
munion of the Bishop of Rome, like that of Cypnan afterwards.
That prelate had stultified himself and broken faith with Ter-
tullian ; but, it does not, necessarily, as Bp. Bull too easily con-
cludes, define his ultimate separation from his own bishop and the
North-African church.]

3 Matt. xiii. 30.

4 The Church after\vards applied this term exclusively to the
Holy Ghost. [That is, the Nicene Creed made it technically
applicable to the Spirit, mp.kini: the distinction marked between the
generation of the Word and x)Mt procession of the Holy Ghost.]


the quick and the dead; who sent also from
heaven from the Father, according to His own
promise, the Holy Ghost, the Paraclete, s the
sanctifier of the faith of those who believe in
the Father, and in the Son, and in the Holy
Ghost. That this rule of faith has come dowH^-
to us from the beginning of the gospel, even |
before any of the older heretics, much more i
before Praxeas, a pretender of yesterday, will \
be apparent both from the lateness of date^ I
which marks all heresies, and also from the (
absolutely novel character of our new-fangled 1
Praxeas. In this principle also we must hence--^
forth find a presumption of equal force against
all heresies whatsoever — that whatever is first
is true, whereas that is spurious which is later '^
in date. ^ But keeping this prescriptive rule
inviolate, still some opportunity must be given
for reviewing (the statements of heretics), with
a view to the instruction and protection of
divers persons; were it only that it may not
seem that each perversion of the truth is con-
demned without examination, and simply pre-
judged;^ especially in the case of this heresy,
which supposes itself to possess the pure truth,
in thinking that one cannot believe in One
Only God in any other way than by saying
that the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost
are the very selfsame Person. As if in this
way also one were not All, in that All are of
One, by unity (that is) of substance; while the
mystery of the dispensation ' is still guarded,
which distributes the Unity into a Trinity,
placing in their order" the three Persons —
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost:
three, however, not in condition, " but in de-
gree;" not in substance, but in form; not in
power, but in aspect; '^ yet of one substance,
and of one condition, and of one power, inas-
much as He is one God, from whom these de-
grees and forms and aspects are reckoned, under
the name of the Father, and of the Son, and
of the Holy Ghost. '* How they are suscept-
ible of number without division, will be shown
as our treatise proceeds.

CHAP. III. — SUNDRY POPULAR FEARS AND
PREJUDICES. THE DOCTRINE OF THE TRINITY
IN UNITY RESCUED FROM THESE MISAPPRE-
HENSIONS.

The simple, indeed, (I will not call them
unwise and unlearned,) who always constitute


5 The "Comforter."

6 See our Anti-Marcion^ p>. 119, n. i. Edin.

7 See his De Prcescri^t. xxix.

8 Tertullian uses similar precaution in his argument elsewhere.
See our Anti-Marcion, pp. 3 and 119. Edin.

9 o'lKovofJiia.
'o Dirigens.
" Statu.

»2See The Apology, ch. xxi.
13 Specie.

MSee Bull's De/. Fid. Nic, and the translation (by the trans-
lator of this work), in the Oxford Series, p. 202.


AGAINST PRAXEAS.


599


the majority of believers, are startled kt the
dispensation ' (of the Three in One), on the
ground that their very rule of faith withdraws
taem from the world's plurality of gods to the
one only true God; not understanding that,
although He is the one only God, He must
yet be believed in with His own o'lKovofxia. The
numerical order and distribution of the Trinity
they assume to be a division of the Unity;
whereas the Unity which derives the Trinity
out of its own self is so far from being de-
stroyed, that it is actually supported by it.
They are constantly throwing out against us
that we are preachers of two gods and three
gods, while they take to themselves pre-emi-
nently the credit of being worshippers of the
One God; just 'as if the Unity itself with ir-
rational deductions did not produce heresy,
and the Trinity rationally considered consti-
tute the truth. We, say they, maintain the
Monarchy (or, sole government of God).* And
so, as far as the sound goes, do even Latins
(and ignorant ones too) pronounce the word
in such a way that you would suppose their
understanding of the [lovapxia (or Monarchy)
was as complete as their pronunciation of the
term. Well, then Latins take pains to pro-
nounce the fiovapx'ta (or Monarchy), while
Greeks actually refuse to understand the
oiKovo/uia, or Dispensation [of the Three in One).
As for myself, however, if I have gleaned any
knowledge of either language, I am sure that
/iiovapxla (or Monarchy) has no other meaning
than single and individual ^ rule; but for all
that, this monarchy does not, because it is the
government of one, preclude him whose gov-
ernment it is, either from having a son, or
from having made himself actually a son to
himself,-* or from ministering his own mon-
archy by whatever agents he will. Nay more,
I contend that no dominion so belongs to one
only, as his own, or is in such a sense singu-
lar, or is in such a sense a monarchy, as not
also to be administered through other persons
most closely connected with it, and whom it
has itself provided as officials to itself. If,
moreover, there be a son belonging to him
whose monarchy it is, it does not forthwith
become divided and cease to be a monarchy,
if the son also be taken as a sharer in it; but
it is as to its origin equally his, by whom it is
communicated to the son; and being his, it
is quite as much a monarchy (or so/e empire),
since it is held together by two who are so in-
separable.^ Therefore, inasmuch as the Di-
vine Monarchy also is administered by so manj


1 OlKOfOftlO

2 So Bp. kaye, On Tertullian, p. 499.

3 Unlcum.

4 This was a notion of Praxeas. See ch. x.

5 Tam unicis.


legions and hosts of angels, according as it
is written, "Thousand thousands ministered
unto Him, and ten thousand times ten thou-
sand stood before Him;"* and since it has
not from this circumstance ceased to be the
rule of one (so as no longer to be a monarchy),
because it is administered by so many thou-
sands of powers; how comes it to pass that
God should be thought to suffer division and
severance in the Son and in the Holy Ghost,
who have the second and the third places as-
signed to them, and who are so closely joined
with the Father in His substance, when He
suffers no such (division and severance) in
the multitude of so many angels ? Do you
really suppose that Those, who are naturally
members of the Father's own substance,
pledges of His love,^ instruments of His
might, nay. His power itself and the entire
system of His monarchy, are the overthrow
and destruction thereof? You are not right
in so thinking. I prefer your exercising your-
self on the meaning of the thing rather than
on the sound of the word. Now you must
understand the overthrow of a monarchy to
be this, when another dominion, which has a
framework and a state peculiar to itself (and
is therefore a rival), is brought in over and
above it: when, e.g., some other god is intro-
duced in opposition to the Creator, as in the
opinions of Marcion; or when many gods are
introduced, according to your Valentinuses and
your Prodicuses. Then it amounts to an
overthrow of the Monarchy, since it involves
the destruction of the Creator.^

CHAP. IV. THE UNITY OF THE GODHEAD AND

THE SUPREMACY AND SOLE GOVERNMENT OF
THE DIVINE BEING. THE MONARCHY NOT AT
ALL IMPAIRED BY THE CATHOLIC DOCTRINE.

But as for me, who derive the Son from no
other source but from the substance of the
Father, and (represent Him) as doing nothing
without the Father's will, and as having re-
ceived all powe'r from the Father, how can I
be possibly destroying the Monarchy from the
faith, when I preserve it in the Son just as it
was committed to Him by the Father? The
same remark (I wish also to be formally) made
by me with respect to the third degree in the God-
head, because I believe the Spirit to proceed ixova
no other source than from the Father through
the Son.' Look to it then, that it be not you
rather who are destroying the Monarchy, when
you overthrow the arrangement and dispensa-

6 Dan. vii. 10.

7 " Pij^nora " is often used of children and dearest relations,

8 [The first sentence of this chapter is famous for a controversy
between Priestly and Bp. Horsley, the latter having translated
idiotce by the word idiots. See Kaye, p. 498.]

9 [Compare Cap. viii. in/ra ]


6oo


AGAINST PRAXEAS.


[CHAr


tion of it, which has been constituted in just
as many names as it has pleased God to em-
ploy. But it remains so firm and stable in its
own state, notwithstanding the introduction
into it of the Trinity, that the Son actually
has to restore it entire to the Father; even as
the apostle says in his epistle, concerning the
very end of all: "When He shall have de-
livered up the kingdom to God, even the
Father; for He must reign till He hath put
all enemies under His feet;"' following of
course the words of the Psalm: " Sit Thou on
my right hand, until I make Thine enemies
Thy footstool."' *'When, however, all
things shall be subdued to Him, (with the ex-
ception of Him who did put all things under
Him,) then shall the Son also Himself be sub-
ject unto Him who put all things under Him,
that God may be all in all."^ We thus see
that the Son is no obstacle to the Monarchy,
although it is now administered by^ the Son;
because with the Son it is still in its own state,
and with its own state will be restored to the
Father by the Son. No one, therefore, will
impair it, on account of admitting the Son (to
it), since it is certain that it has been com-
mitted to Him by the Father, and by and by
has to be again delivered up by Him to the
Father. Now, from this one passage of the
epistle of the inspired apostle, we have been
already able to show that the Father and the
Son are two separate Persons^ not only by the
mention of their separate names as Father and
the Son, but also by the fact that He who de-
livered up the kingdom, and He to whom it
is delivered up — and in like manner. He who
subjected (all things), and He to whom they
were subjected — must necessarily be two dif-
ferent Beings.

CHAP. V. THE EVOLUTION OF THE SON OR

WORD OF GOD FROM THE FATHER BY A DIVINE
PROCESSION. ILLUSTRATED BY THE OPERA-
TION OF THE HUMAN THOUGHT AND CON-
SCIOUSNESS.

But since they will have the Two to be but
One, so that the Father shall be deemed to
be the same as the Son, it is only right that
the whole question respecting the Son should
be examined, as to whether He exists, and
who He is and the mode of His existence.
Thus shall the truth itself s secure its own
sanction ^ from the Scriptures, and the inter-
pretations which guard 7 them. There are


1 1 Cor. XV. 24, 25.

= P9. ex. 1.

3 1 Cor. XV. 27, 28.
4Apud.

5 Res ipsa.

6 Formam, or shape.

7 Patrocinantibus.


some who allege that even Genesis opens thus
in Hebrew: " In the beginning God made for
Himself a Son." ^ As there is no ground for
this, I am led to other arguments derived
from God's own dispensation,^ in which He
existed before the creation of the world, up to
the generation of the Son. For before all
things God was alone — being in Himself and
for Himself universe, and space, and all
things. Moreover, He was alone, because
there was nothing external to Him but Him-
self. Yet even not then was He alone; for
He had with Him that which He possessed in
Himself, that is to say. His own Reason.
For God is rational, and Reason was first in
Him; and so all things were from Himself.
This Reason is His own Thought (or Con-
sciousness) '° which the Greeks call U-)oq, by
which term we also designate Word or Dis-
course " and therefore it is now usual with our
people, owing to the mere simple interpreta-
tion of the term, to say that the Word " was
in the beginning with God; although it would
be more suitable to regard Reason as the more
ancient; because God had not Word '^ from
the beginning, but He had Reason ''^ even be-
fore the beginning; because also Word itself
consists of Reason, which it thus proves to
have been the prior existence as being its own
substance. '5 Not that this distinction is of
any practical moment. For although God
had not yet sent out His Word,"^ He still had
Him within Himself, both in company with
and included within His very Reason, as He
silently planned and arranged within Himself
everything which He was aftenvards about to
utter '7 through His Word. Now, whilst He
was thus planning and arranging with His own
Reason, He was actually causing that to be-
come Word which He was dealing with in the
way of Word or Discourse .^^ And that you
may the more readily understand this, con-
sider first of all, from your own self, who are
made " in the image and likeness of God," ''
for what purpose it is that you also possess
reason in yourself, who are a rational creature,
as being not only made by a rational Artificer,
but actually animated out of His substance.
Observe, then, that when you are silently con-


8 See St. Jerome's Qucestt. Hebr. in Genesim, ii. 507.

9 " Dispositio" means " mutual relations in the Godhead." Sec
Bp. Bull's Def. Fid. Nicen.^ Oxford translation, p. 516.

■o Sensus ipsius.

" Sermonem. [He always calls the I.okos not Ferhuvt^ but
Sernio. in this treatise. A masculine word was better to exhibit our
author s thought. So Erasmus translates Logos in his N. Testa-
ment, on whicn see Kaye, p. 516.]

'2 Sermonen.
. ' < Sermonalis.

'4 Rationalis.

'5 i.e., " Reason is manifestly prior to the Word, which it dic-
tates" (Rp. Kaye, p. 501).

'6 Sermonem.

17 Dicturus. Another reading is " daturus," about to give

'8 Sermone.

»9 Gen. i. 26.


«


CHAP. VII.]


AGAINST PRAXEAS.


6oi


Ni


versing with yourself, this very process is
carried on within you by your reason, which
meets you with a word at every movement of
your thought, at every impulse of your con-
ception. Whatever you think, there is a word;
Wiiatever you conceive, there is reason. You
must needs speak it in your mind; and while
you are speaking, you admit speech as an inter-
locutor with you, involved in which there is
this very reason, whereby, while in thought
you are Holding converse with your word, you
are (by reciprocal action) producing thought
by means of that converse with your word.
Thus, in a certain sense, the word is a second
persofi within you, through which in thinking
you utter speech, and through which also, (by
reciprocity of process,) in uttering speech you
generate thought. The word is itself a differ-
ent thing from yourself. Now how much
more fully is all this transacted in God, whose
image and likeness even you are regarded as
being, inasmuch as He has reason within
Himself even while He is silent, and involved
in that Reason His Word! I may therefore
without rashness first lay this down (as a fixed
principle) that even then before the creation
of the universe God was not alone, since He
had within Himself both Reason, and, inhe-
rent in Reason, His Word, which He made
second to Himself by agitating it within Him-
self.

CHAP. VI. THE WORD OF GOD IS ALSO THE WIS-
DOM OF GOD. THE GOING FORTH OF WISDOM
TO CREATE THE UNIVERSE, ACCORDING TO
THE DIVINE PLAN.

This power and disposition' of the Divine
Intelligence^ is set forth also in the Scrip-
tures under the name of ^o^ia, Wisdom; for
what can be better entitled to the name of
Wisdom 3 than the Reason or the Word of
God ? Listen therefore to Wisdom herself,
constituted in the character of a Second Per-
son: " At the first the Lord created me as the
beginning of His ways, with a view to His
own works, before He made the earth, before
the mountains were settled; moreover, before
all the hills did He beget me;" * that is to
say. He created and generated me in His own
intelligence. Then, again, observe the dis-
tinction between them implied in the compan-
ionship of Wisdom with the Lord. "When
He prepared the heaven," says Wisdom^ "I
was present with Him; and when He made
His strong places upon the winds, which are
the clouds above; and when He secured the
fountains, (and all things) which are beneath


the sky, I was by, arranging all things with
Him; I was by, in whom He delighted; and
daily, too, did I rejoice in His presence." s
Now, as soon as it pleased God to put forth
into their respective substances and forms the
things which He had planned and ordered
within Himself, in conjunction with His Wis-
dom's Reason and Word, He first put forth
the Word Himself, having within Him His
own inseparable Reason and Wisdom, in
order that all things might be made through
Him through whom they had been planned
and disposed, yea, and already made, so far
forth as (they were) in the mind and intelli-
gence of God. This, however, was still want-
ing to them, that they should also be openly
known, and kept permanently in their proper
forms and substances

CHAP. VII. THE SON BY BEING DESIGNATED

WORD AND WISDOM, (ACCORDING TO THE IM-
PERFECTION OF HUMAN THOUGHT AND LAN-
GUAGE) LIABLE TO BE DEEMED A MERE AT-
TRIBUTE. HE IS SHOWN TO BE A PERSONAL
BEING.

Then, therefore, does the Word also Him-
self assume His own form and glorious garb,*^
His oian sound and vocal utterance, when God
says, "Xet there be light."' This is tae
perfect nativity of the Word, when He pro-
ceeds forth from QiO<\— formed^ by Him first
to devise and think out all lhi?igs under t.ie
name of Wisdom — " The Lord created or
forjued^ me as the beginning of His ways;" '°
then afterward begotfe?i, to carry all into
effect — "When He prepared the heaven, I
was present with Him." " Thus does He
make Him equal to Him: for by proceeding
from Himself He became His first-begotten
Son, because begotten before all things; " and
His only-begotten also, because alone begot-
ten of God, in a way peculiar to Himself, from
the womb of His own heart — even as the
Father Himself testifies: "My heart," says
He, " hath emitted my most excellent
Word." '3 The Father took pleasure ever-
more in Him, who equally rejoiced with a re-
ciprocal gladness in the Father's presence:

Thou art my Son, to-day have I begotten
Thee;" '* even before the morning star did I


note I, p.

On the

■ PP- 58s-


1 " Mutual relations in the Godhead.

2 Sensus.

3 Sapientius.

4 Prov. viii. 22-25.


5 Prov. viii. 27-30.

6 Omatum.

7 Gen. i. 3.
SConditus. [See Theophilus To Autolycus,ca.^. x.

Vol. II. of this series. Also Ibid. p. 103, note 5.
whole subject, Bp. Bull, De/ensio Fid. Nicance. Vol. V

592L ,. ..
9 Condidit.
'o Prov. viii. 22.
" Ver. 27.
I '^ Col. i. 15.

13 Ps. xlv. 1. See this reading, and its application, fully dis-
I cussed in our note 5, p. 66, of the Anti-Marcion, Edin.
• " 'H. ii. 7.


6o2


AGAINST PRAXEAS.


[chap. Vlll.


beget Thee. The Son likewise acknowledges
the Father, speaking in His own person,
under the name of Wisdom: "The Lord
formed Me as the beginning of His ways, with
a view to His own works; before all the hills
did He beget Me." ' For if indeed Wisdom
in this passage seems to say that She was
created by the Lord wit.i a view to His works,
and to accomplish His ways, yet proof is
given in another Scripture that " all things
were made by the Word, and without Him was
there nothing made;"' as, again, in another
place (it is said), " By His word were the hea-
vens established, and all the powers thereof
by His Spirit " ^ — that is to say, by the Spirit
(or Divine Nature) which was in the Word:
thus is it evident tnat it is one and the same
power which is in one place described under
the name of Wisdom, and in another passage
under the appellation of the Word, which was
initiated for the works of God,* which
"strengthened the heavens;" s "by which
all things were made,"^ "and without which
nothing was made."^ Nor need we dwell
any longer on this point, as if it were not the
very Word Himself, who is spoken of under
the name both of Wisdom and of Reason, and
of the entire Divine Soul and Spirit. He be-
came also the Son of God, and was begotten
when He proceeded forth from Him. Do you
then, (you ask,) grant that the Word is a cer-
tain substance, constructed by the Spirit and
the communication of Wisdom ? Certainly I
do. But you will not allow Him to be really
a substantive being, by having a substance of
His own; in such a way that He may be re-
garded as an objective thing and a person,
and so be able (as being constituted second to
God the Father^) to make two, the Father and
the Son, God and the Word. For you will
say, what is a word, but a voice and sound of
the mouth, and (as the grammarians teach)
air when struck against,^ intelligible to the
ear, but for the rest a sort of void, empty, and
incorporeal thing. I, on the contrary, con-
tend that nothing empty and void could have
come forth from God, seeing that it is not put
forth from that which is empty and void; nor
could that possibly be devoid of substance
which has proceeded from so great a sub-
stance, and has produced such mighty sub-
stances: for all things which were made
through Him, He Himself (personally)
made. How could it be, that He Himself is


' Prov. viii. 22, 25.
2 John i. 3.
3Ps. xxxiii. 6.

4 Prov. viii. 22,

5 Ver. 38.

6 John 1.3.

7 John 1. 3.

8 Offensus.


nothing, without whom nothing was made?
How could He who is empty have made things
which are solid, and He who is void have made
things which are full, and He who is incorpor-
eal have made things which have body ? For
although a thing may sometimes be made
different from him by whom it is made, yet
nothing can be made by that which is a void
and empty thing. Is that Word of God, then, a
void and empty thing, which is called the
Son, who Himself is designated God .? " The
Word was with God, and the Word was
God." 9 It is written, " Tiiou shalt not take
God's name in vain." '° This for certain is
He "who, being in the form of God, thought
it not robbery to be equal with God." " In
what form of God ? Of course he means in
some form, not in none. For who will deny
that God is a body, although " God is a
Spirit?" '= For Spirit has a bodily substance
of its own kind, in its own form.'^ Now, even
if invisible things, whatsoever they be, have
both their substance and their form in God,
whereby they are visible to God alone, how
much more shall that which has been sent
forth from His substance not be without sub-
stance! Whatever, therefore, was the sub-
stance of the Word that I designate a Person,
I claim for it the name of Soti; and while I
recognize the Son, I assert His distinction as
second to the Father.'*

CHAP. VIII. — THOUGH THE SON OR WORD OF
GOD EMANATES FROM THE FATHER, HE IS NOT,
LIKE THE EMANATIONS OF VALENTINUS, SEP-
ARABLE FROM THE FATHER. NOR IS THE
HOLY GHOST SEPARABLE FROM EITHER. IL-
LUSTRATIONS FROM NATURE.

If any man from this shall think that I am
introducing some 7rpo/3o?i/ — that is to say, some
prolation 's of one thing out of another, as
Valentinus does when he sets forth A\ov\ from
^on, one after another — then this is my first
reply to you: Truth must not therefore refrain
from the use of such a term, and its reality
and meaning, because heresy also employs it.
The fact is, heresy has rather taken it from
Truth, in order to mould it into its own coun-


9 John i. I.

10 Ex. XX. 7.

" Phil. ii. 6.

"John iv. 24. •

13 This doctrine of the soul's corporeality in a certain sense is
treated by Tertullian in his De Resurr. Carn. xvii., and De
Anima v. By Tertullian, spirit and soul were considered identi-
cal. See our Anti-Afarcion, p. 451, note 4, Edin.

'4 [On Tertullian's orthodoxy, here, see Kaye, p. 502.1

»5" The word 7rpo/3oA)7 properly means anything which proceeds
or is sent forth from the substance of another, as the fruit of a tree
or the rays of the sun. In Latin it is translated by prolntioy
emissio, or editio. or what we now express by the word di";clop-
ment. In Tertullian's time, Valentinus had given the term a
material signification. Tertullian, therefore, has to apologize for
using it, when writing against Praxeas, the forerunner of the
Sabellians" (Newman's Arians, ii. 4 ; reprint, p. loi).


<.;iiAi'. IX.]


AGAINST PRAXEAS.


603


terfeit. Was the Word of God put forth or
not? Here take your stand with me, and
flinch not. If He was put forth, then ac-
knowledge that the true doctrine has a prola-
tion;' and never mind heresy, when in any
point it mimics the truth. The question now
is, in what sense each side uses a given thing
and the word which expresses it. Valentinus
divides and separates his prolations from their
Author, and places them at so great a dis-
tance from Him, that the ^on does not know
the Father: he longs, indeed, to know Him,
but cannot; nay, he is almost swallowed up
and dissolved into the rest of matter. = With
us, however, the Son alone knows the Father,^
and has Himself unfolded "the Father's
bosom."'* He has also heard and seen all
things with the Father; and what He has been
commanded by the Father, that also does He
speak. 5 And it is not His own will, but the
Father's, which He has accomplished,^ which
He had known most intimately, even from the
beginning. " For what man knoweth the
tilings which be in God, but the Spirit which
is in Him?" 7 But the Word was formed by
the Spirit, and (if I may so express myself)
the Spirit is the body of the Word. The
Word, therefore, is both always in the Father,
as He says, "I am in the Father;"^ and is
always with God, according to what is written,
" And the Word was with God;" » and never
separate from the Father, or other than the
Father, since " I and the Father are one." '°
This will be the prolation, taught by the
truth," the guardian of the Unity, wherein
we declare that the Son is a prolation from the
Father, without being separated from Him.
For God sent forth the Word, as the Para-
clete also declares, just as the root puts forth
J the tree, and the fountain the river, and the
^ sun the ray." For these are 7rpo/3oAai, or
emanations, of the substances from which they
proceed. I should not hesitate, indeed, to call
the tree the son or offspring of the root, and
the river of the fountain, and the ray of the
sun; because every original, source is a parent,
and everything which issues from the origin is
an offspring. Much more is (this true of) the
Word of God, who has actually received as His
own peculiar designation the name of Son.
But still the tree is not severed from the root,
nor the river from the fountain, nor the ray


* TTpojSoArj.

2 See Adv. Valentin, cc, xiv. xv.

3 Matt. xi. 27.

4 John 1. 18.

5 John viii. 26.

6 John \'i. 38.

7 I Cor. ii. II.

8 John xiv. II.

9 John i. I.
1° John X. 30.

" I.iterally, the npofioXiq, " of the truth.'*
12 [Co;npare cap. iv. su/^ra.'\


from the sun; nor, indeed, is the Word separ-
ated from God. Following, therefore, the
form of these analogies, I confess that I call
God and His Word — the Father and His Son
— ^ao. For the root and the tree are dis-
tinctly two things, but correlatively joined; the
fountain and the river are also two forms, but
indivisible; so likewise the sun and the ray are
two forms, but coherent ones. Everything
waich proceeds from something else must
needs be second to that from which it pro-
ceeds, without being on that account separated.
Where, however, there is a second, there must
be two; and where there is a third, there must
be three. Now the Spirit indeed is third from
God and the Son; just as the fruit of the tree
is third from the root, or as the stream out of
the river is third from the fountain, or as the
apex of the ray is third from the sun. Noth-
ing, however, is alien from that original source
whence it derives its own properties. In like
manner the Trinity, flowing down from the
Father through intertwined and connected
steps, does not at all disturb the Monarchy ^^^
whilst it at the same time guards the state of
the Economy.^''

CHAP. IX. — THE CATHOLIC RULE OF FAITH EX-
POUNDED IN SOME OF ITS POINTS. ESPECIAL-
LY IN THE UNCONFUSED DISTINCTION OF THE
SEVERAL PERSONS OF THE BLESSED TRINITY.

Bear always in mind that this is the rule of
faith which I profess; by it I testify that the
Father, and the Son, and the Spirit are in-
separable from each other, and so will you
know in what sense this is said. Now, ob-
serve, my assertion is that the Father is one,
and the Son one, and the Spirit one, and that
They are distinct from Each Other. This
statement is taken in a wrong sense by every
uneducated as well as every perversely dis-
posed person, as if it predicated a diversity,
in such a sense as to imply a separation among
the Father, and the Son, and the Spirit. I
am, moreover, obliged to say this, when (ex-
tolling the Mo7iarchy at the expense of the
Economy^ they contend for the identity of the
Father and Son and Spirit, that it is not by
way of diversity that the Son differs from the
Father, but by distribution: it is not by divi-
sion that He is different, but by distinction;
because the Father is not the same as the Son,
since they differ one from the other in the
mode of their being.^s For the Father is the
entire substance, but the Son is a derivation


13 Or oneness of the divine empire.

»4 Or dispensation of the divine tripersonality. See above ch. u.
"5 " Modulo," in the sense of dispensation or economy. See
Oehler and Rigault. on The Apology, c. xxi.


6c4


AGAINST PRAXEAS.


[CIIAI'. X.


and portion of the whole,' as He Himself
acknowledges: *' My Father is greater than
I."' In the Psalm His inferiority is de-
scribed as being "a little lower than the an-
gels." ^ Thus tiie Father is distinct from the
Son, being greater than the Son, inasmuch as
He who begets is one, and He who is begotten
is another; He, too, who sends is one, and
He who is sent is another; and He, r'gain,
who makes is one, and He through wiiom the
thing is made is another. Happily the Lord
Himself employs this expression of the person
of U\e Paraclete, so as to signify not a divi-
sion or severance, but a disposition (of mutual
relations in the Godhead); for He says, '* I
will pray the Father, and He shall send you
another Comforter. . . . even the Spirit of
truth,"* thus making the Paraclete distinct
from Himself, even as we say that the Son is
also distinct from the Father; so that He showed
a third degree in the Paraclete, as we believe
the second degree is in the Son, by reason of
the order observed in the Econoviy. Besides,
does not the very fact that they have the dis-
tinct names of Father and Scni amount to a
declaration that they are distinct in person-
ality ?s For, of course, all things will be
what their names represent them to be; and
what they are and ever will be, that will they
be called; and the distinction indicated by
the names does not at all admit of any con-
fusion, because there is none in the things
which they designate. " Yes is yes, and no
is no; for what is more than these, cometh of
evil." *

CHAP. X. THE VERY NAMES OF FATHER AND

SON PROVE THE PERSONAL DISTINCTION OF
THE TWO. THEY CANNOT POSSIBLY BE IDEN-
TICAL, NOR IS THEIR IDENTITY NECESSARY TO
PRESERVE THE DIVINE MONARCHY.

So it is either the Father or the Son, and
the day is not the same as the night; nor is
the Father the same as the Son, in such a way
that Both of them should be One, and One or
the Other should be Both, — an opinion which
the most conceited *' Monarchians " maintain.
He Himself, they say, made Himself a Son
to Himself.7 Now a Father makes a Son,


* In his representation of the distinction (of the Persons of the
Blessed Trinity), Tertullian sometimes uses expressions which in
aftertimes, when controversy had introduced greater precision of
languajre, were studiously avoided by the orthodox. Thus he calls
the Father the whole substance, the Son a derivation from or por-
tion of the whole." (Hp. Kaye, On Tertullian, p. 505). After
Arius the language of theology received greater precision ; but
as it is, there is no doubt of the orthodoxy of Tertullian's doctrine,
since he .so firmly and ably teaches the Son's consiihstantiality
with the Father— equal to Him and in.separable from him. [In
other words, Tertullian could not employ a technical phraseology
afterwards adopted to give precision to the same orthodox ideas.]

2 John xiv. 28.

3 Ps. viii. 5.

4 John xiv. 16.

5 Aliud ab alio.
6M«tt. V. 37. ;


and a Son makes a Father;^ and they who
thus become reciprocally related out of each
other to each other cannot in any way by
themselves simply become so related to them-
selves, that the Father can make Himself a
Son to Himself, and the Son render Himself
a Father to Himself. And the relations which
God establishes, them does He also guard.
A father must needs have a son, in order to
be a father; so likewise a son, to be a son,
must have a father. It is, however, one thing
to have, and another thing to be. For in-
stance, in order to be a husband, 1 must have
a wife; I can never myself be my own wife.
In like manner, in order to be a father, I liave
a son, for I never can be a son to myself; and
in order to be a son, I have a father, it being
impossible for me ever to be my own father.
And it is these relations which make me (what
I am), when I come to possess them: I shall
then be a father, when I have a son; and a
son, when I have a father. Now, if I am to
be to myself any one of these relations, I no
longer have what I am myself to be: neither
a father, because I am to be my own father;
nor a son, because I shall be my own son.
Moreover, inasmuch as I ought to Jiave one of
these relations in order to be the other; so, if
I am to be both together, I shall fail to be one
while I possess not the other. For if I must
be myself my son, who am also a father, I
now cease to have a son, since I am my own
son. But by reason of not having a son, since
I am my own son, how can I be a father?
For I ought to have a son, in order to be a
father. Therefore I am not a son, because I
have not a father, who makes a son. In like
manner, if I am myself my father, who am
also a son, I no longer have a father, but am
myself my father. By not having a father,
however, since I am my own father, how can
I be a son ? For I ought to have a father, in
order to be a son. I cannot therefore be a
father, because I have not a son, who makes
a father. Now all this must be the device of
the devil — this excluding and severing one
from the other — since by including both to-
gether in one under pretence of the Mcmarchyy
he causes neither to be held and acknowl-
edged, so that He is not the Father, since in-
deed He has not the Son; neither is He the
Son, since in like manner He has not the
Father: for while He is the Father, He will
not be the Son. In this way they hold the
Monarchy, but they hold neither the Fatner
nor the Son. Well, but "with God nothing
is impossible. "5 True enough; who can be


7 [Kaye, p. 507, note 3.]

8 As correlatives, one implying the existence of the other.

9 Matt. XIX. 26.


'^


CHAl'. XI. J


AGAINST PRAXEAS.


60 !


ignorant of it ? W.io also can l)e unaware that
" tne things which are impossible with men
are possible with God?"' "The foolish
things also of the world hath God chosen to
confound the things which are wise."'' We
have read it all. Therefore, they argue, it was
not difficult for God to make Himself both a
Father and a Son, contrary to the condition
of things among men. For a barren woman
to have a child against nature was no difficulty
with God; nor was it for a virgin to conceive.
Of course nothing is "too hard for the
Lord." 3 But if we choose to apply this
principle so extravagantly and harshly in our
capricious imaginations, we may then make
out God to have done anything we please, on
the ground that it was not impossible for Him
to do it. We must not, however, because He
\s able to do all things suppose that He has
actually done what He has not done. But
we must inquire whether He has really done it.
God could, if He had liked, have furnished
man with wings to fly with, just as He gave
wings to kites. We must not, however, run
to the conclusion that He did this because He
was able to do it. He might also have ex-
tinguished Praxeas and all other heretics at
once; it does not follow, however, that He
did, simply because He was able. For it was
necessary that there should be both kites and
heretics; it was necessary also that the Father
should be crucified.'* In one sense there will
be something difficult even for God — namely,
that which He has not done — not because Fie
could not, but because He would not, do it.
For with God, to be willing is to be able, and to
be unwilling is to be unable; all that He has
willed, however, He has both been able to
accomplish, and has disployed His ability.
Since, therefore, if God had wished to make
Himself a Son to Himself, He had it in His
power to do so; and since, if He had it in
His power. He effected His purpose, you will
then make good your proof of His power and
His will (to do even this) when you shall have
proved to us that He actually did it.

CHAP. XI. THE IDENTITY OF THE FATHER AND

THE SON, AS PRAXEAS HELD IT, SHOWN TO BE
FULL OF PERPLEXITY AND ABSURDITY. MANY
SCRIPTURES QUOTED IN PROOF OF THE DIS-
TINCTION OF THE DIVINE PERSONS OF THE
TRINITY.

It will be your duty, however, to adduce
your proofs out of the Scriptures as plainly as
we do, when we prove that He made His Word


I Luke xviii. 27.

-\ C^or. i. 27.

3 Gen. xviii. 14.

4 An ironical reference to a great paradox in the Praxean her-


a Son to Himself. For if He calls Him Son,
and if tne Son is none other than He who has
proceeded from the Father Himself, and if
tne Word has proceeded from the Father Him-
self, He will then be tae Son, and not Himself
from whom He i:>r{)ceeded. For the Father
Himself did not proceed from Himself. Now,
you who say that the Fatner is the same as
the Son, do really make the same Person both
to have sent forth from Himself (and at the
same time to have gone out from Himself as)
that Being which is God. If it was possible
for Him to have done tnis. He at all events
did not do it. You must bring forth the proof
which I require of you — one like my own;
that is, (you must prove to me) tliat the Scrip-
tures show the Son and the Father to l)e the
same, just as on our side the Father and the
Son are demonstrated to be distinct; I say dis- K
tinct, but not separate:^ for as on my part I
produce the words of God Himself, " My heart
hath emitted my most excellent Word,"*^ so
you in like manner ought to adduce in op-
position to me some text where God has said,
" My heart hath emitted Myself as my own
most excellent Word, " in such a sense that
He is Himself both the Emitter and the
Emitted, both He who sent forth and He who
was sent forth, since He is both the Word and
God. I bid you also observe,^ that on my
side I advance the passage where the Father
said to the Son, " Thou art my Son, this day
have I begotten Thee."^ If you want me to
believe Him to be both the Father and the
Son, show me some other passage where it is
declared, " The Lord said unto Himself, I am
my own Son, to-day have I begotten myself; "
or again, " Before the morning did I beget
myself; "9 and likewise, "I the Lord pos-
sessed Myself the beginning of my ways for
my own works; before all the hills, too, did I
beget myself; " '° and whatever other passages
are to the same effect. Why, moreover, could
God the Lord of all things, have hesitated to
speak thus of Himself, if the fact had been so ?
Was He afraid of not being believed, if He had
in so many words declared Himself to be both
the Father and the Son ? Of one thing He
was at any rate afraid — of lying. Of Himself,
too, and of His own truth, was He afraid.
Beiieving Him, therefore, to be the true God,
I am sure that He declared nothing to exist in
any other way than according to His own dis-
pensation and arrangement, and that He had
arranged nothing in any other way than ac-


5 Distincte, non divise.

6 For this version of Ps. xlv. i,
note |, Edin.

7 Kcce.
**Ps. ii. 7.

9 In allusion to Ps. ex. 3 (Sept.)
>' In uUusion to Prov, viii. 22.


see our Anti-Marcfon, p. 66,


6o6


AGAINST PRAXEAS.


[ciiAr. XII.


cording to His own declaration. On your side,
however, you must make Him out to be a liar,
and an impostor, and a tamperer witii His
word, if, when He was Himself a Son to Him-
self, He assigned the part of His Son to be
played by another, when all the Scriptures
attest the clear existence of, and distinction in,
(the Persons of) the Trinity, and indeed fur-
nish us with our Rule of faith, that He who
spenks, and He of whom He speaks, and to
wiiom He speaks, cannot possibly seem to be
One and the Same. So absurd and misleading
a statement would be unworthy of God, that,
when it was Himself to whom He was speak-
ing. He speaks rather to another, and not to
His very self. Hear, then, other utterances
also of the Father concerning the Son by the
mouth of Isaiah: "Behold my Son, whom I
have chosen; my beloved, in whom I am well
pleased: I will put my Spirit upon Him, and
He shall bring forth judgment to the Gen-
tiles. " ' Hear also what He says to the Son:
"Is it a great thing for Thee, that Thou
shouldest be called my Son to raise up the
tribes of Jacob, and to restore the dispersed
of Israel ? I have given Thee for a light to
the Gentiles, that Thou mayest be their sal-
vation to the end of the earth. " "" Hear now
also the Son's utterances respecting the Father:
*' The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because
He hath anointed me to preach the gospel
unto men." 3 He speaks of Himself likewise
to the Father in the Psalm: " Forsake me not,
until I have declared the might of Thine arm
to all the generation that is to come. " '' Also
to the same purport in another Psalm: "O
Lord, how are they increased that trouble
me! "5 But almost all the Psalms which
prophesy of ^ the person of Christ, represent
the Son as conversing with the Father — that
is, represc7it Christ (as speaking) to God. Ob-
serve also the Spirit speaking of the Father
and the Son, in the character of^ a third
Person: "The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit
Thou on my right hand, until I make Thine
enemies Thy footstool. " ^ Likewise in the
words of Isaiah: "Thus saith the Lord to
the Lord 9 mine Anointed."" Likewise, in
the same prophet, He snys to the Father re-
specting the Son: " Lord, who hath believed
our report, and to whom is the arm of the
Lord revealed? We brought a report con-
cerning Him, as if He were a little child, as

' Isa. xlii. I.
3 Isa. xlix. 6.

3 Isa. Ixi. I and Luke iv. i8.

4 Ps. Ixxi. i8.

5 Ps. iii, X.

6 Sustinent.

7 Ex.
SPs. ex. I.

9 TertuUian read Kvpicj) instead of Kvpcp, " Cyrus."
i°Isa. xlv. 1.


I if He were a root in a dry ground, who had
no form nor comeliness." " These are a few
testimonies out of many; for we do not pre-
tend to bring up all the passages of Scripture,
because we have a tolerably large accumula-
tion of them in the various heads of our sub-
ject, as we in our several chapters call them
in as our witnesses in the fulness of their
dignity and authority." Still, in these few
quotations the distinction of Persons in the
Trinity is clearly set forth. For there is the
Spirit Himself who speaks, and the Father to
whom He speaks, and the Son of whom He
speaks. '3 In the same manner, the other
passages also establish each one of several
Persons in His special character — addressed
as they in some cases are to the Father or to
the Son respecting the Son, in other cases to
tlie Son or to the Father concerning the Father,
and again in other instances to the (Holy)
Spirit.

CHAP. XII. OTHER QUOTATIONS FROM HOLY

SCRIPTURE ADDUCED IN PROOF OF THE PLU-
RALITY OF PERSONS IN THE GODHEAD.

If the number of the Trinity also offends
you, as if it were not connected in the simple
Unity, I ask you how it is possible for a Being
who is merely and absolutely One and Singu-
lar, to speak in plural phrase, saying, " Let
us make man in our own image, and after our
own likeness;"'* whereas He ought to have
said, " Let me make man in my own image,
and after my own likeness," as being a unique
and singular Being? In the following pas-
sage, however, "Behold the man is become
as one of us," 's He is either deceiving or
amusing us in speaking plurally, if He is One
only and singular. Or was it to the angels
that He spoke, as the Jews interpret the pas-
sage, because these also acknowledge not the
Son ? Or was it because He was at once the
Father, the Son, and the Spirit, that He spoke
to Himself in plural terms, making Himself
plural on that very account? Nay, it was be-
cause He had already His Son close at His
side, as a second Person, His own Word, and
a third Person also, the Spirit in the Word,
that He purposely adopted the plural phrase,
" Let us make;" and, " in our image; " and,
" become as one of us.'' For with whom did
He make man ? and to whom did He make
him like? (The answer must be), the Son on


>i Isa. liii. 1, 2.

"[See Elucidation III., and also cap. xxv. infra.'\

nlStc De Bn/ity wo, cap. v. p. 344, Ed. Oehler, and note how
often our author cites an important text, l>^ half qttotation, leav-
ing the residue to the reader's memory, owing to the impetuosity
of his genius and his .style: " Monte decurrens velut amnis, imbres
quern super notasaluere ripasfervet, etc."]

'4 Gen. i. 26.

^S Gen. iii. 22.


CHAP. XIII.]


AGAiNiST TRAXEAS.


607


the one hand, who was one day to put on
human nature; and the Spirit on the other,
who was to sanctify man. With these did He
then speak, in the Unity of the Trinity, as
with His ministers and witnesses In the fol-
lowing text also He distinguishes among the
Persons: " So God created man in His own
image; in the image of God created He
liim."' Why say "image of God?" Why
not " His own image" merely, if He was only
one who was the Maker, and if there was not
also One in whose image He made man ? But
there was One in whose image God was mak-
ing man, that is to say, Christ's image, who,
being one day about to become Man (more
surely and more truly so), had already caused
the man to be called His image, who was then
going to be formed of clay — the image and
similitude of the true and perfect Man. But
in respect of the previous works of the world
what says the Scripture ? Its first statement
indeed is made, when the Son has not yet ap-
peared: " And God said, Let there be light,
and there was light." ^ Immediately there

i.3 appears the Word, " that true light, which
lighteth man on his coming into the world," ^
and through Him also came light upon the
world.* From that moment God willed crea-
tion to be effected in the Word, Christ being

1,0 present and ministering unto Him: 'and so
God created. And God said, "Let there be
a firmament, . . . and God made the firma-
ment; "s and God also said, "Let there be
lights (in the firmament); and so God made a

if greater and a lesser light." ^ But all the rest
of the created things did He in like manner
make, who made the former ones — I mean the
Word of God, " through whom all things were
made, and without whom nothing was made." ^

jC Now if He too is God, according to John,

(who says,) "The Word was God,"^ then

you have two Beings — One that commands

that the thing be made, and the Other that

executes the order and creates. In what sense,

S however, you ought to understand Him to be

another, I have already explained, on the

y ground of Personality, not of Substance — in

tne way of distinction, not of division. ' But

although I must everywhere hold one only

"'"' substance in three coherent and inseparable

(Persons), yet I am bound to acknowledge,

from the necessity of the case, that He who

issues a command is different from Him who


1 Gen. i. 27.

2 Gen. i. 3.

3 John i. q.
4Mundiafis lux.
SGen. i. 6, 7.

6 Gen. i. 14, 16.

7 John i. 3.

8 John i. 1.

9[Kaye thinks the Athanasian hymn (so called) was composed
by some one who had this treatise always in mind. See p. 526.]


executes it. For, indeed. He would not be
issuing a command if He were all the while
doing the work Himself, while ordering it to
be done by the second.'" But still He did
issue the command, although He would not
have intended to command Himself if He
were only one; or else He must have worked
without any command, because He would not
have waited to command Himself-

CHAP. XIII. — THE FORCE OF SUNDRY PASSAGES
OF SCRIPTURE ILLUSTRATED IN RELATION TO
THE PLURALITY OF PERSONS AND UNITY OF
SUBSTANCE. THERE IS NO POLYTHEISM HERE,
SINCE THE UNITY IS INSISTED ON AS A REM-
EDY AGAINST POLYTHEISM.

Well then, you reply, if He was' God who
spoke, and He was also God who created, at
this rate, one God spoke and another created;
(and thus) two Gods are declared. If you
are so venturesome and harsh, reflect a while;
and that you may think the better and more
deliberately, listen to the psalm in which Two
are described as God: " Thy throne, O God,
is for ever and ever; the sceptre of Thy king-
dom is a sceptre of righteousness. Thou hast
loved righteousness, and hated iniquity: there-
fore God, even Thy God, hath anointed Thee
or made Thee His Christ.'' " Now, since He
here speaks to God, and affirms that God is
anointed by God, He must have affirmed that
Two are God, by reason of the sceptre's royal
power. Accordingly, Isaiah also says to the
Person of Christ: "The Sabaeans, men of
stature, shall pass over to Thee; and they
shall follow after Thee, bound in fetters; and
they shall worship Thee, because God is in
Thee: for Thou art our God, yet we knew it
not; Thou art the God of Israel."" For
here too, by saying, " God is in Thee, and
" Thou art God," he sets forth Two who
were God: (in the former expression in
Thee, he means) in Christ, and (in the other
he means) the Holy Ghost. That is a still
grander statement which you w'ill find ex-
pressly made in the Gospel: " In the begin-
ning was the Word, and the Word was with
God, and the Word was God." '^ There was
One " who was," and there was another " with
whom " He was. But I find in Scripture the
name Lord also applied to them Both: " The
Lord said unto my Lord, Sit Thou on my right
hand."'* And Isaiah says this: "Lord, who
hath believed our report, and to whom is the
arm of the Lord revealed ? " 's Now he would


10 Per eum.

" Ps. xlv. 6, 7.

"■ Isa. xlv. 14, 15 (Sept.)

n John i. I.

14 Ps. ex. I.

»? Is.-., liii. I.


6o8


AClAlNSr TRAXEAS.


['JIIAP Mil.


most certainly have said 71iifie Arnty if he had ;
not wished us to understand that tlie Father
is Lord, and the Son also is Lord. A muc^i
more ancient testimony we have also in Gene- !
sis: " Then the Lord rained upon Sodo*n and
upon Gomorrah brimstone and fire from the |
Lord out of heaven."' Now, either deny j
that this is Scripture; or else (let me ask) what ;
sort of man you are, that you do not t.iink ;
words ought to be taken and understo(xl in
the sense in which they are written, especially j
wnen they are not expressed in allegories and I
parables, but in determinate and simple decla-
rations ? If, indeed, you follow those who did
not at the time endure the Lord when showing
Himself to be the Son of God, because they
would not believe Him to be the Lord, then
(I ask you) call to mind along with them the
passage where it is written, " I have said. Ye
are gods, and ye are children of the Most
High;"^ and again, "God standeth in the
congregation of gods;"^ in order that, if the
Scripture has not been afraid to designate as
gods human beings, who have become sons of
God by faith, you may be sure that the same
Scripture has with greater propriety conferred
the name of the Lord on the true and one-only
Son of God. Very well ! you say, I shall
challenge you to preach from this day forth
(and that, too, on the authority of these same
Scriptures) two Gods and two Lords, consist-
ently with your views. God forbid, (is my
reply.) For we, who by the grace of God
possess an insight into both the times and the
occasions of the Sacred Writings, especially
we who are followers of the Paraclete, not of
human teachers, do indeed definitively declare
that T7CI0 Beings are God, the Father and the
Son, and, with the addition of the Holy Spirit,
even Three, according to the principle of the
divine economy, which introduces ?mmber, in
order that the Father may not, as you per-
versely infer, be Himself believed to have been
born and to have suffered, which it is not law-
ful to believe, forasmuch as it has not been
so handed down. That there are, however,
two Gods or two Lords, is a statement which
at no time proceeds out of our mouth: not
as if it were untrue that the Father is God,
and the Son is God, and the Holy Ghost is
God, and each is God; but because in earlier
times Two were actually spoken of as God,
and two as Lord, that when Christ should come
He might be both acknowledged as God and
designated as Lord, being the Son of Him
who is both God and Lord. Now, if there
were found in the Scriptures but one Person-


' Gen. xix. 24.
• Ps. Irxxii. 6,

Ver. I.


ality of Him who is God and Lord, Christ
would justly enough be inadmissible to the
title of God and Lord: for (in the Scriptures)
tiiere was declared to be none other than One
God and One Lord, and it must have followed
that the Father should Himself seem to have
come down (to earth), inasmuch as only One
God and One Lord was ever read of (in the
Scriptures), and His entire Economy would be
involved in obscurity, which has been planned
and arranged with so clear a foresight in His
providential dispcnsatio7i as matter for our faith.
As soon, however, as Christ came, and was
recognised by us as the very Being who had
from the beginning^ caused plurality ^ (in
the Divine Economy), being tlie second from
the Father, and with the Spirit the third, and
Himself declaring and manifesting the Father
more fully (than He had ever been before),
the title of Him who is God and Lord was at
once restored to the Unity (of the Divine
Nature), even because the Gentiles would have
to pass from the multitude of their idols to
the One Only God, in order that a difference
might be distinctly settled between the wor-
shippers of One God and the votaries of poly-
theism. For it was only right that Christians
should shine in the world as ** children of
light," adoring and invoking Him who is the
One God and Lord as "the light of the
world." Besides, if, from that perfect knowl-
edge^ which assures us that the title of God
and Lord is suitable both to the Father, and
to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, we were
to invoke a plurality of gods and lords, we
should quench our torches, and we should be-
come less courageous to endure the martyr's
sufferings, from which an easy escape would
everywhere lie open to us, as soon as we swore
by a plurality of gods and lords, as sundry
heretics do, who hold more gods than One. I
will therefore not speak of gods at all, nor of
lords, but I shall follow the apostle; so that
if the Father and the Son, are alike to be in-
voked, I shall call the Father " God,'' and in-
voke Jesus Christ as ''''Lord.''"' But when
Christ alone (is mentioned), I shall be able
to call Him " God,'' as the same apostle says:
"Of whom is Christ, who is over all, God
blessed for ever."^ For I should give the
name of " sun " even to a sunbeam, considered
in itself; but if I were mentioning the sun
from which the ray emanates, I certainly
should at once withdraw the name of sun from
the mere beam. For although I make not
two suns, still I shall reckon both the sun and


4 Retro.

5 Nurnerum. I

6 Conscientia.

7 Rom. i. 7.

8 Rom. ix. 5.


CHAP. XIV.]


AGAINST PRAXEAS.


609


its ray to be as much two things and two
forms' of one undivided substance, as God
and His Word, as the Father and the Son.

CHAP. XIV. — THE NATURAL INVISIBILITY OF THK
FATHER, AND THE VISIBILITY OF THE SON
WITNESSED IN MANY PASSAGES OF THE OLD
TESTAMENT. ARGUMENTS OF THEIR DIS-
TINCTNESS, THUS SUPPLIED.

Moreover, there comes to our aid, when we
insist upon the Father and the Son as being
Z7£'<?, that regulating principle which has de-
termined (jod to be invisible. When Moses
in Egypt desired to see the face of the Lord,
saying, "If therefore I have found grace in
Tny sight, manifest Thyself unto me, that I
may see Thee and know Thee," ^6"^^/ said,
" Tnou canst not see my face; for there shall
no man see me, and live: " ^ in other words,
he who sees me shall die. Now we find that
God has been seen by many persons, and yet
that no one who saw Him died (at the sight).
The truth is, they saw God according to the
faculties of men, but not in accordance with
the full glory of the Godhead. For the patri-
archs are said to have seen God (as Abraham
and Jacob), and the prophets (as, for instance
Isaiah and Ezekiel), and yet they did not die.
Either, then, they ought to have died, since
they had seen Him — for (the sentence runs),
*' No man shall see God, and live ; " or else,
if they saw God, and yet did not die, the Scrip-
ture is false in stating that God said, "If a
man see my face, he shall not live." Either
way, the Scripture misleads us, when it makes
God invisible, and when it produces Him
to our sight. Now, 'then, He must be a
different Being who was seen, because of one
who was seen it could not be predicated
that He is invisible. It will therefore follow,
that by Him who is invisible we must under-
stand the Father in the fulness of His majesty,
while we recognise the Son as visible by reason
of the dispensation of His derived existence; '^
even as it is not permitted us to contemplate
the sun, in the full amount of his substance
which is in the heavens, but we can only en-
dure with our eyes a ray, by reason of the
tempered condition of this portion which is
projected from him to the earth. Here some
one on the other side may be disposed to con-
tend that the Son is also invisible as being the
Word, and as being also the Spirit; ^ and,
while claiming one nature for the Father and
the Son, to affirm that the Father is rather
One and the Same Pcrso7i with the Son. But


' Species.

2 Ex. xxxiii. 13.

3 Ver. 20.

4 Pro modulo derivationis.

5 Spiritus here is the divine nature of Christ.

39


the Scripture, as we have said, maintains their
difference by the distinction it makes between
the Visible and the Invisible. They then go
on to argue to this effect, that if it was the
Son who then spake to Moses, He must mean
it of Himself that His face was visible to no
one, because He was Himself indeed the in-
visible Father in the name of the Son. And
by this means they will have it that the Visible
and tlie Invisible are one and the same, just
as the Father and the Son are the same; (and
this they maintain) because in a preceding pas-
sage, before He had refused (the sight of) His
face to Moses, the Scripture informs us that
"the Lord spake face to face with Moses,
even as a man speaketh unto his friend;"*
just as Jacob also says, " I have seen God face
to face." 7 Therefore the Visible and tlie Invis-
ible are one and the same; and both l)eing thus
the same, it follows that He is invisible as the
Father, and visible as the Son. As if the
Scripture, according to our exposition of it,
were inapplicable to the Son, when the Father
is set aside in His own invisibility. We de-
clare, however, that the Son also, considered in
Himself (as the Son), is invisible, in that He
is God, and the Word and Spirit of God; but
that He was visible before the days of His flesh,
in the way that He says to Aaron and Miriam,
" And if there shall be a prophet amongst you,
I will make myself known to him in a vision,
and will speak to him in a dream; not as with
Moses, with whom I shall speak mouth to
mouth, even apparently, that is to say, in truth,
and not enigmatically'' that is to say, in
image; ^ as the apostle also expresses it, " Now
we see through a glass, darkly (or enigmati-
cally), but then face to face." ' Since, there-
fore. He reserves to some future time His
presence and speech face to face with Moses
— a promise which was afterwards fulfilled in
the retirement of the mount (of transfigura-
tion), when as we read in the Gospel, " Moses
appeared talking with Jesus " '° — it is evident
that in early times it was always in a glass,
(as it were,) and an enigma, in vision and
dream, that God, I mean the Son of God, ap-
peared— to the prophets and the patriarchs,
as also to Moses indeed himself. And even
if the Lord did possibly " speak with him face
to face, yet it was not as man that he could
behold His face, unless indeed it was in a
glass, (as it were,) and by enigma. Besides,
if the Lord so spake with Moses, that Moses
actually discerned His face, eye to eye," how


6 Ex. xxxiii. ir.

7 Gen. xxxii. 30.

8 Num. xii. 6-8.

9 I Cor. xiii. 12.

»o Mark ix. 4 ; Matt. rvii. 3.

"Si forte.

12 Cominus sciret.


6io


AGAINST PRAXEAS.


[chap.


comes it to pass that immediately afterwards,
on the same occasion, he desires to see His
face,' which he ought not to have desired,
because he had already seen it ? And how,
in like manner, does the Lord also say that
His face cannot be seen, because He had
shown it, if indeed He really had, (as our
opponents suppose.) Or what is that face of
God, the sight of which is refused, if there
was one which was visible to man ? "I have
seen God," says Jacob, " face to face, and
my life is preserved." =* There ought to be
some other face which kills if it be only seen.
Well, then, was the Son visible? (Certainly
not, 3) although He was the face of God, ex-
cept only in vision and dream, and in a glass
and enigma, because the Word and Spirit (of
God) cannot be seen except in an imaginary
form. But, (they say,) He calls the invisible
Fnther His face. For who is the Father?
Must He not be the face of the Son, by reason
of that authority which He obtains as the be-
gotten of the Father? For is there not a
natural propriety in saying of some personage
greater (than yourself), That man is my face;
he gives me his countenance ? " My Father,"
says Christ, " is greater than I."* Therefore
the Father must be the face of the Son. For
what does the Scripture say? " The Spirit of
His person is Christ the Lord."s As there-
fore Christ is the Spirit of the Father's person,
there is good reason why, in virtue indeed of
the unity, the Spirit of Him to whose person
He belonged — that is to say, the Father — pro-
nounced Him to be His "face." Now this,
to be sure, is an astonishmg thing, that the
Father can be taken to be the face of the Son,
when He is His head; for " the head of Christ
is God."^

CHAP. XV. — NFAV TESTAMENT PASSAGES QUOTED.
THEY ATTEST THE SAME TRUTH OF THE SON's
VISII51LITY CONTRASTED WITH THE FATHER'S
INVISIBILITY.

If I fail in resolving this article (of our faith)
by passages which may admit of dispute ^ out
of the Old Testament, I will take out of the
New Testament a confirmation of our view,
that you may not straightway attribute to the
Father every possible (relation and condition)
which I ascribe to the Son. Behold, then, I

» Comp. ver. 13 with ver. 11 of Ex. xxxiii.

'Gen. xxii. 30.

3 Involved in the nunquitl.

4jo'in xiv. 28.

S iam. iv 20. 'rcrtiillian reads, "Spiritus persona; ^'w-v Christus
Dominus. ' This varies only in the pronoun from the Septuagint,
which runs, ITieDua trpocrioTrov ^\i.i>v XpiaTos Kiiptos. AccordinR
to our A. v., "the breath of our nostrils, the anointed of the
Lord" (or, " our anointed Lord"), allusion is made, in the de-
struction of Jerusalem by the Babylonians, to the capture of the
king — the last of David's' line, " as an anointed prince." Comp.
Jer. lii. 9.

61 Cor. xi. 1.

7 Quaestionibus.


find both in the Gospels and in the (writings
of the) apostles a visible and an invisible God
(revealed to us), under a manifest and per-
sonal distinction in the condition of both.
There is a certain emphatic saying by John:
"No man hath seen God at any time;"*
meaning, of course, at any previous time.
But he has indeed taken away all question of
time, by saying that God had never been seen.
The apostle confirms this statement; for,
speaking of God, he says, "Whom no man
hath seen, nor can see;"' because the man
indeed would die who should see Him.'° But
the very same apostles testify that they had
both seen and " handled" Christ." Now, if
Christ is Himself both the Father and the Son,
how can He be both the Visible and the In-
visible ? In order, however, to reconcile this
diversity between the Visible and the Invisi-
ble, will not some one on the other side argue
that the two statements are quite correct:
that He was visible indeed in the flesh, but
was invisible before His appeanmce in the
flesh; so that He who as the Father was in-
visible before the flesh, is the same as the Son
who was visible in the flesh ? If, however,
He is the same who was invisible before the
incarnation, how comes it that He was actu-
ally seen in ancient times before (coming in)
the flesh ? And by parity of reasoning, if He
is the same who was visible after (coming in)
the flesh, how happens it that He is now de-
clared to be invisible by the apostles ? Hinu,
I repeat, can all this be, unless it be that He is
one, who anciently was visible only in mystery
and enigma, and became more clearly visible
by His incarnation, even the Word who was
also made flesh; whilst He is another whom
no man has seen at any time, being none else
than the Father, even Him to whom the Word
belongs ? Let us, in short, examine who it is
whom the apostles saw. " That," says John,
" which we have seen with our eyes, which we
have looked upon, and our hands have handled,
of the Word of life." " Now the Word of life
became flesh, and was heard, and was seen,
and was handled, because He was flesh who,
before He came in the flesh, was the " Word in
the beginning with God " the Father,'^ and
not the Father with the Word. For althougii
the Word was God, yet was He with God, be-
cause He is God of God; and being joined to
the Father, is with the Father."* " And we
have seen His glory, the glory as of the only
begotten of the Father; " 's that is, of course.


8 John i. 18.

9 I Tim. vi. 16.
'"Ex. xxxiii. 20 ;
" 1 John i. I.

12 1 John i. 1.
»3 John i. 1, 2.
'4 Quia cum I'atre


Deut. V. 26 ; Judg. xiii. 22.


ipud Pa»rem.


JS John i. 14.


CHAP. XVI.]


AGAINST PRAXEAS.


6i


{the glory) of the Son, even Him who was

visible, and was glorified by the invisible
Father. And therefore, inasmuch as he had
said that the Word of God was God, in order
that he might give no help to tlie presumption
of the adversary, (which pretended) that he
had seen the Father Himself a7id in order to
draw a distinction between the invisible Father
and the visible Son, he makes the additional
assertion, ex abundanfi as it were: '* No man
hath seen God at any time." ' What God
does iie mean ? The Word ? But he has al-
ready said: '''' Hhn we have seen and heard,
and our hands have handled the Word of life."
Well, (I must again ask,) what God does he
mean ? It is of course the Father, with whom
was the Word, tiie only begotten Son, who is
in the bosom of the Father, and has Himself
declared Him.^ He was both heard and seen,
and, that He might not be supposed to be a
phantom, was actually handled. Him, too,
did Paul behold; but yet he saw not the
Father. " Have I not," he says, " seen Jesus
Christ our Lord!'' ^ Moreover, he expressly
called Christ God, saying: " Of whom are the
fathers, and of whom as concerning the flesh
Christ came, who is over all, God blessed for
ever."'* He shows us also that the Son of
God, which is the Word of God, is visible, be-
cause He who became flesh was called Christ.
Of the Father, however, he says to Timothy:
*' Whom none among men hath seen, nor in-
deed can see;" and he accumulates the de-
scription in still ampler terms: "Who only
hath immortality, and dwelleth in the light
which no man can approach unto."s It was
of Him, too, that he had said in a previous
passage: "Now unto the King eternal, im-
mortal, invisible, to the only God;"*^ so that
we might apply even the contrary qualities
to the Son Himself — mortality, accessibility
— of whom the apostle testifies that " He died
according to the Scriptures," ^ and that " He
was seen by himself last of all," ^ — by means,
of course, of the light which was accessible,
although it was not without imperilling his
sight ttiat he experienced that light. ^ A like
danger to which also befell Peter, and John,
and James, (who confronted not the same
light) without risking the loss of their reason
and mind; and if they, who were unable to
endure the glory of the Son,'° had only seen
the Father, they must have died then and


1 1 John iv. 12.
«John i. i8.

3 I Cor. ix. I.

4 Rom. ix. 5.

5 I Tim. vi. 16.

6 1 Tim. i. 17.

7 1 Cor. XV. 3.
8Ver. 8.

9 Acts xxii. 11.
10 Matt. xvii. 6; Mark ix. 6.


there: " For no man shall see God, and
live."" This being the case, it is evident
that He was always seen from the beginning,
who became visible in the end; and that He,
(on the contrary,) was not seen in the end who
had never been visible from the beginning;
and that accordingly there are two — the Visi-
ble and the Invisible. It was the Son, there-
fore, who was always seen, and the Son who
always conversed with men, and the Son who
has always worked by the authority and will
of the Father; because "the Son can do
nothing of Himself, but what He seeth the
Father do"" — "do" that is, in His mind
and thought. '3 For the Father acts by mind
and thought; whilst the Son, who is in the
Father's mind and thought,"'* gives effect and
form to what He sees. Thus all things were
made by the Son, and without Him was not
anything made.'^

CHAP. XVI. — EARLY MANIFESTATIONS OF THE
SON OF GOD, AS RECORDED IN THE OLD TES-
TAMENT ; REHEARSALS OF HIS SUBSEQUENT
INCARNATION.

But you must not suppose that only the
works which relate to the (creation of the)
world were made by the Son, but also whatso-
ever since that time has been done by God.
For "the Father who loveth the Son, and
hath given all things into His hand," '* loves
Him indeed from the beginning, and from
the very first has handed all things over to
Him. Whence it is written, " From the be-
ginning the Word was with God, and the
Word was God; " '^ to whom " is given by the
Father all power in heaven and on earth." '*
" The Father judgeth no man, but hath com-
mitted all judgment to the Son " "^ — from the
very beginning even. For when He speaks
of all power and all judgment, and says that
all tuings were made by Him, and all things
have been delivered into His hand. He allows
no exception (in respect) of time, because
they would not be all things unless they were
the things of all time. It is the Son, therefore,
who has been from the beginning administer-
ing judgment, throwing down the haughty
tower, and dividing the tongues, punishing
the whole world by the violence of waters, /
raining upon Sodom and Gomorrah fire and /
brimstone, as the Lord from the Lord. For


II Ex. xxxiii. 20.
1= John V. 19.
13 In SPnsu.

MThe reading is, "in Patris sensu ;" another reading substi-
tutes " smu" for " sensu ;" q.d. " the Father's bosom."
»5johni. 3.

16 John iii. 35. TertuUian reads the last clause (according to
Oehler), " in smu ejus," q. d. " to Him who is in His bosom."

17 John i. 1.

18 Matt, xxviii. 18.

19 John V. 22.


6l 2


AGAINST PRAXEAS.


[chap. XVII.


He it was who at all times came down to hold
converse with men, from Adam on to the
patriarchs and the prophets, in vision, in
dream, in mirror, in dark saying; ever from
the beginning laying the foundation of the
course of His dispensatiotis, which He meant
to follow out to the very last. Thus was He
ever learning even as God to converse with
men upon earth, being no other than the
Word which was to be made flesh. But He
was thus learning (or rehearsing), in order to
level for us the way of faith, that we might
the more readily believe that the Son of God
had come down into the world, if we knew
that in times past also something similar had
been done.' For as it was on our account
and for our learning that these events are de-
scribed in the Scriptures, so for our sakes also
were they done — (even otirs^ I say), " upon
whom the ends of the world are come.''^" In
this way it was that even then He knew full
well what human feelings and affections were,
intending as He always did to take upon Him
man's actual component substances, body and
soul, making inquiry of Adam (as if He were
ignorant), 3 "Where art thou, Adam?"-* —
repenting that He had made man, as if He
had lacked foresight ;s tempting Abraham,
as if ignorant of what was in man; offended
with persons, and then reconciled to them;
and whatever other (weaknesses and imper-
fections) the heretics lay hold of (in their as-
sumptions) as unworthy of God, in order to
discredit the Creator, not considering that
these circinnstances are suitable enough for
the Son, who was one day to experience even
human sufferings — hunger and thirst, and
tears, and actual birth and real death, and in
respect of such a dispensation "made by the
Father a little less than the angels." "^ But
the heretics, you may be sure, will not allow
tiiat those things are suitable even to the Son of
(• )d, which you are imputing to the very Father
Himself, when you pretend ' that He made
Himself less (than the angels) on our account;
whereas the Scripture informs us that He who
was made less was so affected by another, and
not Himself by Himself. What, again, if He
was One who was "crowned with glory and
honour," and He Another by whom He was
so crowned,* — the Son, in fact, by the Father?
Moreover, how comes it to pass, that the Al-
mighty Invisible God, " whom no man hath
seen nor can see; He who dwelleth in light
unapproachable;"' "He who dwelleth not

^ See OUT A nii'-AlarctOM, p. 112, note 10. Kdin.
^Coinp. I Cor. x. 11.

3 See the treatise, Against Marcion. ii. 25, supra,
A Gen. iii. 9.

5 Gen. vi.6.

6 Ps. viii. 6.

7 Quasi.
sPs. viii. 6.


in temples made with hands; " '° " from before
whose sight the earth trembles, and the moun-
tains melt like wax; " " who holdeth the whole
world in His hand " like a nest; " " "whose
throne is heaven, and earth His footstool;"*^
in whom is every place, but Himself is in no
place; who is the utmost bound of the universe;
— how happens it, I say, that He (who, though)
the Most High, should yet have walked in
paradise towards the cool of the evening, in
quest of Adam; and should have shut up the
ark after Noah had entered it; and at Abra-
ham's tent should have refreshed Himself
under an oak; and have called to Moses out
of the burning bush; and have appeared as
" the fourth " in the furnace of the Babylonian
monarch (although He is there called the Son
of man), — unless all these events had hap-
pened as an image, as a mirror, as an enigma
(of the future incarnation) ? Surely even
these things could not have been believed
even of the Son of God, unless they had been
given us in the Scriptures; possibly also they
could not have been believed of the Father^
even if they had been given in the Scriptures,
since these men bring Him down into Mary's
womb, and set Him before Pilate's judgment-
seat, and bury Him in the sepulchre of Joseph.
Hence, therefore, their error becomes mani-
fest; for, being ignorant that the entire order
of the divine administration has from the very
first had its course through the agency of the
Son, they believe that the Father Himself wrs
actually seen, and held converse with men.
and worked, and was athirst, and suffered
hunger (in spite of the prophet who says:
"The everlasting God, the Lord^ the Cnator
of the ends of the earth,, shall never thirst at all,
nor be hungry;"''* much more, shall neither
die at any time, nor be buried !), and there-
fore that it was uniformly one God, even the
Father, who at all times did Himself the
things which were really done by Him. through
the agency of the Son.

CHAP. XVII. — SUNDRY AUGUST TITLES, DESCRIP-
TIVE OF DEITY, APPLIED TO THE SON, NOT, AS
PRAXEAS WOULD HAVE IT, ONLY TO THE
FATHER.

They more readily supposed that the
Father acted in the Son's name, than that the
Son acted in the P'ather's; although the Lord
says Himself, " I am come in my Father's
name;" '^ and even to the Father He declares,
" I have manifested Thy name unto these


9 1 Tim. yi. 16.
»o .Acts xvii. 24.
" Joel ii. 10; Ps.
" Isa. X. 14.
'3 Isa. Ixvi. I.
Misa. xl. 28.
•S John V, 43.


zcvu. 5.


CHAP. XVIIl.]


AGAINST PRAXEAS.


613


men;"' whilst the Scripture likewise says,
*' Blessed is He that cometh in the name of
the Lord,"' that is to say, the Son in the
Father's name. And as for the Father's names,
God Almighty, the Most High, the Lord of
hosts, the King of Israel, the " One that is,"
we say (for so much do the Scriptures teach
us) that they belonged suitably to the Son also,
and that the Son came under these designa-
tions, and has always acted in them, and has
thus manifested them in Himself to men.
*'A11 things," says He, "which the Father
hath are mine."^ Then why not His names
also ? When, therefore, you read of Almighty
God, and the Most High, and the God of
hosts, and the King of Israel the " One that
is," consider whether the Son also be not in-
dicated by these designations, who in His own
right is God Almighty, in that He is the
"Word of Almighty God, and has received
power over all; is the Most High, in that He
is "exalted at the right hand of God," as
Peter declares in the Acts;'* is the Lord of
hosts, because all things are by the Father
made subject to Him; is the King of Israel,
because to Him has especially been committed
the destiny of that nation; and is likewise
*' the One that is," because there are many
who are called Sons, but are not. As to the
point maintained by them, that the name of
Christ belongs also to the Father, they shall
hear (what I have to say) in the proper place.
Meanwhile, let this be my immediate answer
to the argument which they adduce from the
Revelation of John: " I am the Lord which is,
and which was, and which is to come, the Al-
mighty; " 5 and from all other passages which
in their opinion make the designation of Al-
mighty God unsuitable to the Son. As if,
indeed, He which is to comevftve not almighty;
whereas even the Son of the Almighty is as
much almighty as the Son of God is God.

CHAP. XVIII. — THE DESIGNATION OF THE ONE
GOD IN THE PROPHETIC SCRIPTURES. IN-
TENDED AS A PROTEST AGAINST HEATHEN
IDOLATRY, IT DOES NOT PRECLUDE THE COR-
RELATIVE IDEA OF THE SON OF GOD. THE
SON IS IN THE FATHER.

But what hinders them from readily per-
ceiving this community of the Father's titles
in the Son, is the statement of Scripture,
whenever it determines God to be but One;
as if the selfsame Scripture had not also set
forth Two both as God and Lord, as we have
shown above.* Their argument is: Since we


I John xvii. 6.
3 Ps. cxviii. 26.

3 John xvi. 15.

4 Acts ii. 22.

5 Rev. i. 8.


find Two and One, therefore Both are One
and the Same, both Father and Son. Now
the Scripture is not in danger of requiring the
aid of any one's argument, lest it should seem
to be self-contradictory. It has a method of
its own, both when it sets forth one only God,
and also when it shows that there are Two,
Father and Son; and is consistent with itself.
It is clear that the Son is mentioned by it.
For, without any detriment to the Son, it is
quite possible for it to have rightly deter-
mined that God is only One, to whom the Son
belongs; since He who has a Son ceases not
on that account to exist, — Himself being One
only, that is, on His own account, whenever
He is named without the Son. And He is
named without the Son whensoever He is de-
fined as the principle (of Deity)in the charac-
ter of "its first Person," which had to be
mentioned beforef the name of the Son; be-
cause it is the Father who is acknowledged in
the first place, and after the Father the Son
is named. Therefore "there is one God,"
the Father, "and without Him there is none
else." 7 And when He Himself makes this
declaration. He denies not the Son, but says
that there is no other God; and the Son is
not different from the Father. Indeed, if you
only look carefully at the contexts which foL
low such statements as this, you will find that
they nearly always have distinct reference to
the makers of idols and the worshippers
thereof, with a view to the multitude of false
gods being expelled by the unity of the God-
head, which nevertheless has a Son; and
inasmuch as this Son is undivided and insep-
arable from the Father, so is He to be
reckoned as being in the Father, even when
He is not named. The fact is, if He had
named Him expressly. He would have separ-
ated Him, saying in so many words: " Beside
me there is none else, except my Son." In
short He would have made His Son actually
another, after excepting Him from others.
Suppose the sun to say, " I am the Sun, and
there is none other besides me, except my
ray," would you not have remarked how use-
less was such a statement, as if the ray were
not itself reckoned in the sun ? He says, then,
that there is no God besides Himself in re-
spect of the idolatry both of the Gentiles as
well as of Israel; nay, even on account of our
heretics also, who fabricate idols with their
words, just as the heathen do with their hands;
that is to say, they make another God and
another Christ. When, therefore, He attested
His own unity, the Father took care of the
Son's interests, that Christ should not be sup-


6 See above ch, xiii. p. 607.

7 Isa. xlv. 5.


6i4


AGAINST PRAXEAS.


[chap. XIX,


posed to have come from another God, but
from Him who had already said, " I am God,
and there is none other beside me," ' who
shows us that He is the only God, but in
company with His Son, with whom " He
stretcheth out the heavens alone." '

CHAP. XIX. THE SON IN UNION WITH THE

FATHER IN THE CREATION OF ALL THINGS.
THIS UNION OF THE TWO IN CO-OPERATION IS
NOT OPPOSED TO THE TRUE UNITY OF GOD.
IT IS OPPOSED ONLY TO PRAXEAS' IDENTIFI-
CATION THEORY.

But this very declaration of His they will
hastily pervert into an argument of His single-
ness. "I have," says He, "stretched out
the heaven alone." Undoubtedly alone as
regards all other powers; and He thus gives a
premonitory evidence against the conjectures
of the heretics, who maintain that the world
was constructed by various angels and powers,
who also make the Creator Himself to have
been either an angel or some subordinate
agent sent to form external things, such as
the constituent parts of the world, but who was
at the same time ignorant of the divine purpose.
If, now, it is in this sense that He stretches
out the heavens alone, how is it that these
heretics assume their position so perversely,
as to render inadmissible the singleness of
that Wisdom which says, '* When He prepared
the heaven, I was present with Him ? "^ —
even though the apostle asks, "Who hath
known the mind of the Lord, or who hath
been His counsellor? " * meaning, of course,
to except that wisdom which was present with
Him. 5 In Him, at any rate, ahd with Him,
did (Wisdom) construct the universe. He not
being ignorant of what she was making.
" Except Wisdom," however, is a phrase of
the same sense exactly as " except the Son,"
who is Christ, " the Wisdom and Power of
God,"^ according to the apostle, who only
knows the mind of the Father. " For who
knoweth the things that be in God, except the
Spirit which is in Him?"^ Not, observe,
without Him. There was therefore One who
caused God to be not alone, except " alone "
from all other gods. But (if we are to follow
the heretics), the Gospel itself will have to be
rejected, because it tells us that all things
were made by God through the Word, without
whom nothing was made. ^ And if I am not
mistaken, there is also another passage in


I Isa. xlv. 5, i8, xliv. 6.
' Isa. xliv. 24.

3 Prov. viii. "27.

4 Rom. xi. 34.

5 Prov. viii. 30.

6 1 Cor. i. 34.

7 I Cor. ii. II.

8 John i. 3.


which it is written: " By the Word of the Lord
were the heavens made, and all the hosts of
them by His Spirit."' Now this Word, the
Power of God and the Wisdom of God, must
be the very Son of God. So that, if (He did)
all things by the Son, He must have stretched
out the heavens by the Son, and so not have
stretched them out alone, except in the sense
in which He is " alone " (and apart) from all
other gods. Accordingly He says, concern-
ing the Son, immediately afterwards: "Who
else is it that frustrateth the tokens of the
liars, and maketh diviners mad, turning wise
men backward, and making their knowledge
foolish, and confirming the words '° of His
Son?"" — as, for instance, when He said,
" This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased; hear ye Him." " By thus attaching
the Son to Himself, He becomes His own
interpreter in what sense He stretched out the
heavens alone, meaning alo7ie with His Son^
even as He is one with His Son. The utter-
ance, therefore, will be in like manner the
Son's, " I have stretched out the heavens
alone," '3 because by the JVord were the hea-
vens established. "* Inasmuch, then, as the
heaven was prepared when Wisdom was
present in the Word, and since all things were
made by the Word, it is quite correct to say
that even the Son stretched out the heaven
alone, because He alone ministered to the
Father's work. It must also be He who says,
" I am the First, and to all futurity I AM." '^
The Word, no doubt, was before all things.
"In the beginning was the Word;" '^ and in
that beginning He was sent forth "^ by the
Father. The Father, however, has no be-
ginning, as proceeding from none; nor can
He be seen, since He was not begotten. He
who has always been alone could never have
had order or rank. Therefore, if they have
determined that the Father and the Son must
be regarded as one and the same, for the ex-
press purpose of vindicating the unity of God,
that unity of His is preserved intact; for He
is one, and yet He has a Son, who is equally
with Himself comprehended in the same
Scriptures. Since they are unwilling to allow
that the Son is a distinct jPerson, second from
the Father, lest, being thus second. He should
cause two Gods to be spoken of, we have
shown above '^ that Two are actually described
in Scripture as God and Lord. And to pre-


9 Ps. xxxiii. 6.
'o Isa. xliv. 25.

" On this reading, see our Anti-Marcion, p. 207, note 9. Edin.
•2 Matt. iii. 17.
'3 Isa. xliv. 24.
'4 Ps. xxxiii. 6.
'5 Isa. xli. 4 (Sept.)
'6 John i. I.
'7Prolatus.
»8 See ch. xiii. p. 107.


XXI.]


AGAINST PRAXEAS.


615


vent their being offended at this fact, we give
a reason why they are not said to be two Gods
and two Lords, but that they are two as
Father and Son; and this not by severance of
their substance, but from the dispensation
wherein we declare the Son to be undivided
and inseparable from the Father, — distinct in
- degree, not in state. And although, when
named apart. He is called God, He does not
thereby constitute two Gods, but one; and that
from the very circumstance that He is entitled
to be called God, from His union with the
Father.

CHAP. XX. THE SCRIPTURES RELIED ON BY

PRAXEAS TO SUPPORT HIS HERESY BUT FEW.
THEY ARE MENTIONED BY TERTULLIAN.

But I must take some further pains to rebut
their arguments, when they make selections
from the Scriptures in support of their opin-
ion, and refuse to consider the other points,
which obviously maintain the rule of faith
without any infraction of the unity of the
Godhead, and with the full admission ' of the
Monarchy. For as in the Old Testament
Scriptures they lay hold of nothing else than,
" I am God, and beside me there is no
God;"=' so in the Gospel they simply keep in
view the Lord's answer to Philip, " I and my
Father are one;" 3 and, " He that hath seen
me hath seen the Father; and I am in the
Father, and the Father in me."^ They
would have the entire revelation of both Tes-
taments yield to these three passages, where-
as the only proper course is to understand the
few statements in the light of the many. But
in their contention they only act on the prin-
ciple of all heretics. For, inasmuch as only
a few testimonies are to be found (making for
them) in the general mass, they pertinaciously
set off the few against the many, and assume
the later against the earlier. The rule,
however, which has been from the beginning
established for every case, gives its prescription
against the later assumptions^ as indeed it also
does against the fewer.

CHAP. XXI. IN THIS AND THE FOUR FOLLOWING

CHAPTERS IT IS SHEWN, BY A MINUTE ANALY-
SIS OF ST. John's gospel, that the father

AND son are constantly SPOKEN OF AS DIS-
TINCT persons.

Consider, therefore, how many passages
present their prescriptive authority to you in
this very Gospel before this inquiry of Philip,
and previous to any discussion on your part.


» Sonitu.
8 Isa. xJv. 5.

3 John X. 30.

4 John xiv. 9, 10.


And first of all there comes at once to hand
the preamble of John to his Gospel, which
shows us what He previously was who had to
become flesh. " In the beginning was the
Word, and the Word was with God, and the
Word was God. He was in the beginning
with God: all things were made by Him, and
without Him was nothing made."5 Now,
since these words may not be taken otherwise
than as they are written, there is without
doubt shown to be One who was from the be-
ginning, and also One with whom He always
was: one the Word of God, the other God
(although the Word is also God, but God re-
garded as the Son of God, not as the Father);
One through whom were all things. Another
by whom were all things. But in what sense
we call Him Afwther we have already often
described. In that we called Him Another,
we must needs imply that He is not identical
— not identical indeed, yet not as if separate;
Other by dispensation, not by division. He,
therefore, who became flesh was not the very
same as He from whom the Word came.
*' His glory was beheld — the glory as of the
only-begotten of the Father;"^ not, (ob-
serve,) as of the Father. He "declared"
(what was in) "the bosom of the Father
alone;" 7 the Father did not divulge the secrets
of His own bosom. For this is preceded by
another statement: " No man hath seen God
at any time." ^ Then, again, when He is
designated by John (the Baptist) as "the
Lamb of God,"' He is not described as Him-
self the same with Him of whom He is the
beloved Son. He is, no doubt, ever the Son
of God, but yet not He Himself of whom He
is the Son. This (divine relationship) Na-
thanael at once recognised in Him,*° even as
Peter did on another occasion: " Thou art the
Son of God."" And He affirmed Himself
that they were quite right in their convictions;
for He answered Nathanael: " Because I said,
I saw thee under the fig-tree, therefore dost
thou believe?"" And in the same manner
He pronounced Peter to be "blessed," inas-
much as " flesh and blood had not revealed it
to him " — that he had perceived the Father —
" but the Father which is in heaven." '^ By
asserting all this. He determined the distinc-
tion which is between the two Persons: that
is, the Son then on earth, whom Peter had
confessed to be the Son of God; and the


5 John i. 1-3.

6 John i. 14.

7Unius sinum Patris. Another reading makes:
(unus) declared," etc. See Jobni. i8.

8 John i. 18, first clause.

9 John i. 29.
10 John i. 49.

" Matt. XVI. 16.
'2 John i. 50.
»3Matt. .\vi. 17.


He alone


6i6


AGAINST PRAXEAS.


[chap. XXI.


Father in heaven, who had revealed to Peter
the discovery which he had made, that Christ
was the Son of God. When He entered the
temple, He called it '* His Father's house," '
speaking as the Son. In His address to Nico-
demus He says: *' So God loved the world,
that He gave His only-begotten Son, that
whosoever believeth in Him should not perish,
but have everlasting life."" And again:
*' For God sent not His Son into the world to
condemn the world, but that the world through
Him might be saved. He that believeth on
Him is not condemned; but he that believeth
not is condemned already, because he hath
not believed in the name of the only-begotten
Son of God."^ Moreover, when John (the
Baptist) was asked what he happened to hicnv
of Jesus, he said: *'The Father loveth the
Son, and hath given all things into His hand.
He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting
life; and he that believeth not the Son shall
not see life, but the wrath of God abideth on
him."-* Whom, indeed, did He reveal to
the woman of Samaria? Was it not '*the
Messias which is called Christ?" ^ And so
He showed, of course, that He was not the
Father, but the Son; and elsewhere He is ex-
pressly called " the Christ, the Son of God," ^
and not the Father. He says, therefore, " My
meat is to do the will of Him that sent me,
and to finish His work;"' whilst to the Jews
He remarks respecting the cure of the impo-
tent man, " My Father worketh hitherto, and
I work." ^ " My Father and I" — these are
the Son's words. And it was on this very ac-
count that " the Jews sought the more intently
to kill Him, not only because He' broke the
Sabbath, but also because He said that God
was His Father, thus making Himself equal
with God. Then indeed did He answer and
say unto them. The Son can do nothing of
Himself, but what He seeth the Father do; for
what things soever He doeth these also doeth
the Son likewise. For the Father loveth the
Son, and showeth Him all things that He Him-
self doeth; and He will also show Him greater
works than these, that ye may marvel. For
as the Father raiseth up the dead and quick-
eneth them, even so the Son also quiokeneth
whom He will. For the Father judgeth no
man, but hath committed all judgment unto
the Son, that all men should honour the Son,
even as they honour the Father. He that
honoureth not the Son, honoureth not the


Father, who hath sent the Son. Verily,
verily, I say unto you. He that heareth my
words, and believeth on Him that sent me,
hath everlasting life, and shall not come into
condemnation, but is passed from death unto
life. Verily I say unto you, that the hour is
coming, when the dead shall hear the voice
of the Son of God; and when they have heard
it, they shall live. For as the Father hath
eternal life in Himself, so also hath He given
to the Son to have eternal life in Himself; and
He hath given Him authority to execute
judgment also, because He is the Son of
man" 9 — that is, according to the flesh, even
as He is also the Son of God through His
Spirit.'" Afterwards He goes on to say:
" But I have greater witness than that of John;
for the works which the Father hath given me
to finish — those very works bear witness of
me that the Father hath sent me. And the
Father Himself, which hnth sent me, hath also
borne witness of me." " But He at once adds,
"Ye have neither heard His voice at any
time, nor seen His shape;"" thus affirm-
ing that in former times it was not the
Father, but the Son, who used to be seen and
heard. Then He says at last: *' I am come
in my Father's name, and ye have not received
me." '3 It was therefore always the Son (of
whom we read) under the designation of the
Almighty and Most High God, and King, and
Lord. To those also who inquired '"what
they should do to work the works of God,*' ^*
He answered, " This is the work of God, that
ye believe on Him whom He hath sent." 's
He also declares Himself to be " the bread
which the Father sent from heaven;"'*^ and
adds, that " all that the Father gave Him
should come to Him, and that He Himself
would not reject them„'7 because He had come
down from heaven not to do His own will, but
the will of the Father; and that the will of the
Father was that every one who saw the Son,
and believed on Him, should obtain the life
(everlasting,) and the resurrection at the last
day. No man indeed was able to come to
Him, except the Father attracted him;
whereas every one who had heard and learnt
of the Father came to Him." '^ He goes on
then expressly to say, " Not that any man
hath seen the Father;"'' thus showing us that
it was through the Word of the Father that


3jc


John U. i6.
John id. i6.
John iii. 17, 18.

4 John ill. 35, 36.

5 John iv. 25.

6 John XX. 31.

7 John iv. 34.

8 John V. 17.


9 John V. 19-^7.
10 1. e. His divine nature.
II John V. 36, 37.
"Ver. 37.
13 Ver. 43.
M John vi. 29.
13 Ver. 30.

16 Ver. 32.

17 The expression is in the neuter collective form in the original.

18 John vi. 37-45.

19 Ver. 46.


CHAP. XXII.]


AGAINST PRAXEAS.


617


men were instructed and taught. Then, when
many departed from Him,' and He turned
to the apostles with the inquiry whether *' they
also would go away," " what was Simon
Peter's answer? "To whom shall we go?
Thou hast the words of eternal life, and we
believe that Thou art the Christ." ^ (Tell
me now, did they believe) Him to be the
Father, or the Christ of the Father?

CHAP. XXII. SUNDRY PASSAGES OF ST. JOHN

QUOTED, TO SHOW THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN
THE FATHER AND THE SON. EVEN PRAXEAS'

CLASSIC TEXT 1 AND MY FATHER ARE ONE —

SHOWN TO BE AGAINST HIM.

Again, whose doctrine does He announce,
at which all were astonished ? ^ Was it His
own or the Father's ? So, when they were in
doubt among themselves whether He were
the Christ (not as being the Father, of course,
but as the Son), He says to them "You are
not ignorant whence I am; and I am not come
of myself, but He that sent me is true, whom
ye know not; but I know Him, because I am
from Him." 5 He did not say. Because I
myself am He; and, I have sent mine own
self: but His words are, " He hath sent me."
When, likewise, the Pharisees sent men to
apprehend Him, He says: " Yet a little while
am I with you, and (then) I go unto Him that
sent me."^ When, however. He declares
that He is not alone, and uses these words,
" but I and the Father that sent me,"^ does
He not show that there are Two — Two, and
yet inseparable ? Indeed, this was the sum
and substance of what He was teaching them,
that they were inseparably Two; since, after
citing the law when it affirms the truth of two
men's testimony,^ He adds at once: "I am
one who am bearing witness of myself; and
the Father (is another,) who hath sent me,
and beareth witness of me."^ Now, if He
were one — being at once both the Son and the
Father — He certainly would not have quoted
the sanction of the law, which requires not
the testimony of one, but of two. Like-
wise, when they asked Him where His Father
was,'° He answered them, that they had
known neither Himself nor the Father; and
in this answer He plainly told them of Two^
whom they were ignorant of. Granted that
"if they had known Him, they would have
known the Father also," " this certainly does


X Ver. 66.
aVer. 67.

3 Ver. 68.

4 See ]ohn\i\. passim.
5Ver."28, 29.

6 Ver. 33.

7 John viii. 16.

8 Ver. 17.

9 Ver. 18.
10 Ver. 10.


not imply that He was Himself both Father
and Son; but that, by reason of the insepar-
ability of the Two, it was impossible for one
of them to be either acknowledged or un-
known without the other. ^' He that sent
me," says He, " is true; and I am telling the
world those things which I have _^heard of
Him." " And the Scripture narrative goes
on to explain in an exoteric manner, that
" they understood not that He spake to them
concerning the Father," '^ although they
ought certainly to have known that the
Father's words were uttered in the Son, be-
cause they read in Jeremiah, "And the Lord
said to me. Behold, I have put my words in
thy mouth;" ^* and again in Isaiah, "The
Lord hath given to me the tongue of learning
that I should understand when to speak a
word in season. " 's In accordance with which,
Christ Himself says: " Then shall ye know
that I am He and that I am saying nothing of
my own self; but that, as my Father hath
taught me, so I speak, because He that sent
me is with me." '^ This also amounts to a
proof that they were Two, (although) undi-
vided. Likewise, when upbraiding the Jews
in His discussion with them, because they
wished to kill Him, He said, " I speak that
whi^h I have seen with my Father, and ye do
that which ye have seen with your father;" '^
" but now ye seek to kill me, a man that hath
told you the truth which I have heard of
God;"'^ and again, "If God were your
Father, ye would love me, for I proceeded
forth and came from God " '^ (still they are
not hereby separated, although He declares
that He proceeded forth from the Father
Some persons indeed seize the opportunity
afforded them in these words to propound their
heresy of His separation; but His coming out
from God is like the ray's procession from the
sTin, and the river's from the fountain, and
tbe tree's from the seed); "I have not a
devil, but I honour my Father;" =° again, " If
I honour myself, my honour is nothing: it is
my Father that honoureth me, of whom ye
say, that He is your God: yet ye have not
known Him, but I know Him; and if I should
say, I know Him not, I shall be a liar like
unto you; but I know Him, and keep His
saying."'* But when He goes on to say,
" Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my


11 Ver. 19.

12 John viii. 26.
»3 Ver. 27.

M Jer. i. 9.
15 Isa. 1. -J.
i^ John viii. 28,

17 Ver. 38.

18 Ver. 40.

19 Ver. 4a.
=°Ver. 4^-

"' 'ohn vi'i. - •.


6i8


AGAINST PRAXEAS.


[chap. XXIII.


day; and he saw it, and was glad,"' He cer-
tainly proves that it was not the Father that
appeared to Abraham, but the Son. In like
manner He declares, in the case of the man
born blind, " that He must do the works of
the Father which had sent Him; " ' and after
He had given the man sight, He said to him,
"Dost thou believe in the Son of God?"
Then, upon the man's inquiring who He was.
He proceeded to reveal Himself to him as
that Son of God whom He had announced to
him as the right object of his faith. ^ In a
later passage He declares that He is known
by the Father, and the Father by Him;^ add-
ing that He was so wholly loved by the Father,
that He was laying down His life, because He
had received this commandment from the
Father. 5 When He was asked by the Jews if
He were the very Christ^ (meaning, of
course, the Christ of God; for to this day the
Jews expect not the Father Himself, but the
Christ of God, it being nowhere said that the
Father will come as the Christ), He said to
them, *' I am telling you, and yet ye do not
believe: the works which I am doing, in my
Father's name, they actually bear witness of
me." "> Witness of what ? Of that very thing,
to be sure, of which they were making in-
quiry— whether He were the Christ of God.
Then, again, concerning His sheep, and (the
assurance) that no man should pluck them
out of His hand,^ He says, *' My Father,
which gave them to me, is greater than all;"'
adding immediately, " I am and my Father
are one."''° Here, then, they take their
stand, too infatuated, nay, too blind, to see
in the first place that there is in this passage
an intimation of Two Beings — "/ and my
Father " then that there is a plural predicate,
'^are," inapplicable to one person only; and
lastly, that (the predicate terminates in an ab-
stract, not a personal noun) — "we are one
thing'' Unum, not "one person" Unus. For
if He had said "one Person," He might have
rendered some assistance to their opinion.
Unus^ no doubt, indicates the singular num-
ber; but (here we have a case where) " Two "
are still the subject in the masculine gender.
He accordingly says Unum, a neuter term,
which does not imply singularity of number,
but unity of essence, likeness, conjunction, af-
fection on the Father's part, who loves the Son,
and submission on the Son's, who obeys the


J Ver. 56.

2 John ix. 4.

3 Vers. 35-38.

4 John X. 15.
sVers. 15, 17, 18.

6 Ver. 24.

7 Ver. 25.

8 Vers. 26-28.

9 Ver. 29.
10 Ver. 30.


Father's will. When He says, "I and my
Father are one " in essence — Unum — He shows
that there are Two, whom He puts on an
equality and unites in one. He therefore
adds to this very statement, that He " had
showed them many works from the Father,"
for none of which did He deserve to be
stoned." And to prevent their thinking Him
deserving of this fate, as if He had claimed
to be considered as God Himself, that is, the
Father, by having said, " I and my Father
are One," representing Himself as the
Father's divine Son, and not as God Himself,
He says, " If it is written in your law, I said,
Ye are gods; and if the Scripture cannot be
broken, say ye of Him whom the Father hath
sanctified and sent into the world, that He
blasphemeth, because He said, I am the Son
of God ? If I do not the works of my Father,
believe me not; but if I do, even if ye will
not believe me, still believe the works; and
know that I am in the Father, and the Father
in me." " It must therefore be by the works
that the Father is in the Son, and the Son in
the Father; and so it is by the works that we
understand that the Father is one with the Son.
All along did He therefore strenuously aim at
this conclusion, that while they were of one
power and essence, they should still be believed
to be Two; for otherwise, unless they were be-
lieved to be Two, the Son could not possibly
be believed to have any existence at all.

CHAP. XXIII. — MORE PASSAGES FROM THE SAME
GOSPEL IN PROOF OF THE SAME PORTION OF
THE CATHOLIC FAITH. PRAXEAS' TAUNT OF
WORSHIPPING TWO GODS REPUDIATED.

Again, when Martha in a later passage
acknowledged Him to be the Son of God,''
she no more made a mistake than Peter'* and
Nathanael '5 had; and yet, even if she had
made a mistake, she would at once have learnt
the truth: for, behold, when about to raise
her brother from the dead, the Lord looked
up to heaven, and, addressing the Father,
said — as the Son, of course: " Father, I thank
Thee that Thou always hearest me; it is be-
cause of these crowds that are standing by
that I have spoken to Thee, that they may be-
lieve that Thou hast sent- me." '^ But in the
trouble of His soul, (on a later occasion,) He
said: "What shall I say? Father, save me
from this hour: but for this cause is it that I
am come to this hour; only, O Father, do
Thou glorify Thy name " '^ — in which He


"John X. 32.
'2 Vers. 34-38.
'3 John xi. 27.
MMatt. xvi. 16.
'5 John i. 49.
»6john xi. 41, 42.
'7 John xii. 27, 28.


CHAP. XXIII.]


AGAINST PRAXEAS.


619


spake as the Son. (At another time) He said:
"I am come in my Father's name."' Ac-
cordingly, the Son's voice was indeed alone
sufficient, (when addressed) to the Father.
But, behold, with an cibundance (of evi-
dence)^ the Father from heaven replies, for
the purpose of testifying to the Son: "This
is my beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased; hear ye Him."^ So, again, in that
asseveration^ " I have both glorified, and will
glorify again," '* how many Persons do you
discover, obstinate Praxeas ? Are there not
as many as there are voices ? You have the
Son on earth, you have the Father in heaven.
Now this is not a separation; it is nothing but
the divine dispensation. We know, however,
that God is in the bottomless depths, and
exists everywhere; but then it is by power
and authority. We are also sure that the Son,
being indivisible from Him, is everywhere
with Him. Nevertheless, in the Economy or
Dispensatio7i itself, the Father willed that the
Son should be regarded s as on earth, and
Himself in heaven; whither the Son also Him-
self looked up, and prayed, and made suppli-
cation of the Father; whither also He taught
us to raise ourselves, and pray, " Our Father,
which art in heaven," etc.,^ — although, in-
deed, He is everywhere present. T\\\% heaven
the Father willed to be His own throne; while
He made the Son to be "a little lower than
the angels," ^ by sending Him down to the
earth, but meaning at the same time to "crown
Him with glory and honour," ^ even by tak-
ing Him back to heaven. This He now made
good to Him when He said: "I have both
glorified TJiee, and will glorify Thee again''
The Son offers His request from earth, the
Father gives His promise from heaven.
Why, then, do you make liars of both the
Father and the Son ? If either the Father
spake from heaven to the Son when He Him-
self was the Son on earth, or the Son prayed
to the Father when He was Himself the Son
in heaven, how happens it that the Son made
a request of His own very self, by asking it
of the Father, since the Son was the Father ?
Or, on the other hand, how is it that the
Father made a promise to Himself, by making
it to the Son, since the Father was the Son ?
Were we even to maintain that they are two
separate gods, as you are so fond of throwing
out against us, it would be a more tolerable
assertion than the maintenance of so versa-


1 John V. 43.

2 Or, " by way of excess."

3 Matt. xvii. 5.

4 John xii. 28.

5 Or, held (haberi).

6 Matt. vi. 9.

7 Ps. viii. 5.

8 Same ver.


tile and changeful a God as yours ! Therefore
it was that in the passage before us the Lord
declared to the people present: " Not on my
own account has this voice addressed me, but
for your sakes,"' that these likewise may
believe both in the Father and in the Son,
severally, in their own names and persons
and positions. " Then again, Jesus exclaims,
and says. He that believeth on me, believeth
not on me, but on Him that sent me;"'° be-
cause it is through the Son that men believe
in the Father, while the Father also is the
authority whence springs belief in the Son.
" And he that seeth me, seeth Him that sent
me."" How so? Even because, (as He
afterwards declares,) " I have not spoken
from myself, but the Father which sent me:
He hath given me a commandment what I
should say, and what I should speak." '- For
" the Lord God hath given me the tongue of
the learned, that I should know when I ought
to speak " '^ the word which I actually speak.
" Even as the Father hath said unto me, so
do I speak." "^ Now, in what way these
things, were said to Him, the evangelist and
beloved disciple John knew better than
Praxeas; and therefore he adds concerning
his own meaning: " Now before the feast of
the passover, Jesus knew that the Father had
given all things into His hands, and that He
had come from God, and was going to
God." '5 Praxeas, however, would have it
that it was the Father who proceeded forth
from Himself, and had returned to Himself;
so that what the devil put into the heart of
Judas was the betrayal, not of the Son, but of
the Father Himself. But for the matter of
that, things have not turned out well either
for the devil or the heretic; because, even in
the Son's case, the treason which the devil
wrought against Him contributed nothing to
his advantage. It was, then, the Son of God,
who was in the Son of man, that was betrayed,
as the Scripture says aftenvards: "Now is
the Son of man glorified, and God is glorified
in Him." '* Who is here meant by " God ? "
Certainly not the Father, but the Word of the
Father, who was in the Son of man — that is
in the flesh, in which Jesus had been already
glorified by the divine power and word. "And
God," says He, " shall also glorify Him in
Himself;" '^ that is to say, the Father shall
glorify the Son, because He has Him within
Himself; and even though prostrated to the


9 John xii. 30.
'o John xii. 44.
. Ver. 45:.
John xn. 49.
1. 4.
14 John xu. 50.
'S John xiii, i, 3.

16 Ver. 31.

17 Ver. 32.


"jo
13 Is;


620


AGAINST PRAXEAS.


[chap. XXIV.


earth, and put to death, He would soon glo-
rify Him by His resurrection, and making
Him conqueror over death.

CHAP. XXIV. — ON ST. PHILIP's CONVERSATION
WITH CHRIST. HE THAT HATH SEEN ME,
HATH SEEN THE FATHER. THIS TEXT EX-
PLAINED IN AN ANTI-PRAXEAN SENSE.

But there were some who even then did not
understand. P'or Thomas, who was so long
incredulous, said: "Lord, we know not
vvhit'ier Thou goest; and how can we know
the way? Jesus saith unto him, I am the way,
the truth, and the life: no man cometh unto
the Father, but by me. If ye had known me,
ye would have known the Father also: but
henceforth ye know Him, and have seen
Him."' And now we come to Philip, who,
roused with the expectation of seeing the
P'ather, and not understanding in what sense
he was to take "seeing the Father," says:
"Show us the Father, and it suflficeth us." =
Then the Lord answered him: " Have I been
so long time with you, and yet hast thou not
known me, Philip ?"3 Now whom does He
say that they ought to have known ? — for this
is the sole point of discussion. Was it as
the Father that they ought to have known
Him, or as the Son ? If it was as the Father,
Praxeas must tell us how Christ, who had been
so long time with them, could have possibly
ever been (I will not say understood, but
even) supposed to have been the Father. He
is clearly defined to us in all Scriptures — in
the Old Testament as the Christ of God, in
the New Testament as the Son of God. In
this character was He anciently predicted, in
this was He also declared even by Christ Him-
self; nay, by the very Father also, who openly
confesses Him from heaven as His Son, and
as His Son glorifies Him. "This is my be-
loved Son;" " I have glorified Him, and I will
glorify Him." In this character, too, was He
believed on by His disciples, and rejected by
the Jews. It was, moreover, in this character
that He wished to be accepted by them when-
ever He named the Father, and gave prefer-
ence to the Father, and honoured the Father.
This, then, being the case, it was not the
Father whom, after His lengthened inter-
course with them, they were ignorant of, but it
was the Son; and accordingly the Lord, while
upbraiding Philip for not knowing Himself who
was the object of their ignorance, wished
Himself to be acknowledged indeed as that
Being whom He had reproached them for be-
ing ignorant of after so long a time — in a
word, as the Son. And now it may be seen

'John xiv. 5-7.
«Ver. 8.
3 Ver. 9.


in what sense it was said, " He that hath seen
me hath seen the Father,"* — even in the
same in which it was said in a previous pas-
sage, " I and my Father are one." s Where-
fore ? Because "I came fcrtii from the
Father, and am come itito the world'' ^ and,
" I am the way: no man cometh unto the
Father, but by me;"^ and, "No man can
come to me, except the Father draw him;"^
and, "All things are delivered unto me by
I the Father;" 9 and, "As the Father quick-
I eneth (the dead), so also doth the Son;" '°
I and again, " If ye had known me, ye would
j have known the Father also."" For in all
these passages He had shown Himself to be
the Father's Commissioner," through whose
agency even the Father could be seen in His
works, and heard in His words, and recog-
nised in the Son's administration of the
Father's words and deeds. The Father in-
deed was invisible, as Philip had learnt in the
law, and ought at the moment to have re-
membered: "No man shall see God, and
live." '3 So he is reproved for desiring to see
the Father, as if He were a visible Being, and
is taught that He only becomes visible in the
Son from His mighty works, and not in the
manifestation of His person. If, indeed, He
meant the Father to be understood as the
same with the Son, by saying, " He who seeth
me seeth the Father," how is it that He adds
immediately afterwards, " Believest thou not
that I am in the Father, and the Father in
me ?" '4 He ought rather to have said: " Be-
lievest thou not that I am the Father ?" With
what view else did He so emphatically dwell
on this point, if it were not to clear up that
which He wished men to understand — namely,
that He was the Son ? And then, again, by
saying, " Believest thou not that I am in the
Father, and the Father in me," 's He laid the
greater stress on His question on this very
account, that He should not, because He had
said, " He that hath seen me, hath seen the
Father," be supposed to be the Father; be-
cause He had never wished Himself to be so
regarded, having always professed Himself to
be the Son, and to have come from the Father.
And then He also set the conjunction of the
two Persons in the clearest light, in order that
no wish might be entertained of seeing the
Father as if He were separately visible, and


4 John xiv. 9,

5 John X. 30.

6 John xvi. 28.

7 John xiv. 6.

8 John vi. 44.

9 Matt. xi. 27.
Jtojohn V. 21.
*' John xiv. 7.

12 Vicarium.

13 Ex. xxxiii. 20.
'4 John xiv. 10.
iS John xiv. 11,


CHAI'. XXVI.j


AGAINST PRAXEAS.


621


that the Son might be regarded as the repre-
sentative of the Father. And yet He omitted
not to explain how the Father was in tiie Son,
and the Son in the Father. "The words,"
says He, "which I speak unto you, are not
mine,"' because indeed they were the
Father's words; " but the Father that dwell-
eth in me. He doeth the works."' It is
therefore by. His mighty works, and by the
words of Flis doctrine, that the Father who
dwells in tne Son makes Himself visible —
even by those words and works whereby He
abides in Him, and also by Him in whom He
abides; the special properties of Both the
Persons being apparent from tliis very circum-
stance, that He says, " I am in the Father,
and the Father is in me." ^ Accordingly He
adds: "Believe — " What? That I am the
Fcither ? I do not find that it is so written, but
rather, "that I am in the Father, and the
Father in me; or else believe me for my
works' sake;"'* meaning those works by which
the Father manifested Himself to be in the
Son, not indeed to the sight of man, but to
his intelligence.

CHAP. XXV. THE PARACLETE, OR HOLY GHOST.

HE IS DISTINCT FROM THE FATHER AND THE
SON AS TO THEIR PERSONAL EXISTENCE. ONE
AND INSEPARABLE FROM THEM AS TO THEIR
DIVINE NATURE. OTHER QUOTATIONS OUT

OF ST. John's gospel.

What follows Philip's question, and the
Lord's whole treatment of it, to the end of
John's Gospel, continues to furnish us with
statements of the same kind, distinguishing
the Father and the Son, with the properties of
each. Then there is the Paraclete or Co?n-
forter, also, which He promises to pray for to
the Father, and to send from heaven after He
had ascended to the Father. He is called
"another Comforter," indeed; s but in what
way He is another we have already shown. ^
" He shall receive of mine," says Christ,^
just as Christ Himself received of the
Father's. Thus the connection of the Father
in the Son, and of the Son in the Paraclete,
produces three coherent Persons, who are yet
distinct One from Another. These Three are
one^ essence, not one Person,^ as it is said,
" I and my Father are One," '° in respect of
unity of substance, not singularity of num-
ber. Run through the whole Gospel, and you
will find that He whom you believe to be the


I John xiv, 10.
-2 Same ver.

3 Same ver.

4 Ver. II.
Sjohn xiv. 16.

6 See above ch. xiii.

7 John xvi. 14.

8 Unum. [On this famous passage see Elucidation III.]

9 Unus.

10 John X. 30.


Father (described as acting for the Father,
althougn you, for your part, forsooth, sup-
pose tnat " the Father, l;eing the husband-
man," " must surely have been on earth) is
once more recognised by the Son as in heaven,
when, "lifting up His eyes thereto,"" He
commended His disciples to the safe-keeping
of the Father. '3 We have, moreover, in that
other Gospel a clear revelation, i.e. 0/ the
Soft's distinction from the father, "My God,
why hast Thou forsaken me? " '* and again,
(in the third Gospel,) " Father, into Tny
hands I commend my spirit." '5 But even if
(we had not these passages, we meet with
satisfactory evidence) after His resurrection
and glorious victory over death. Now that
all the restraint of His humiliation is taken
away. He might, if possible, have shown Him-
self as the Father to so faithful a woman (as
Mary Magdalene) when she approached to
touch Him, out of love, not from ciiriosity,
nor with Thomas' incredulity. But not so;
Jesus saith unto her, "Touch me not, for I
am not yet ascended to my Father; but go to
my brethren " (and even in this He proves
Himself to be the Son; for if He had been
the Father, He would have called them His
children, (instead of His brethren), "and say
unto them, I ascend unto my Father and your
Father, and to my God and your God."'*
Noiv, does this mean, I ascerid as the Father to
the Father, and as God to God ? Or as the
Son to the Father, and as the Word to God ?
Wherefore also does this Gospel, at its very
termination, intimate that these things were
ever written, if it be not, to use its own words,
"that ye might believe that Jesus Christ is
the Son of God ? " '^ Whenever, therefore,
you take any of the statements of this Gospel,
and apply them to demonstrate the identity
of the Father and the Son, supposing that
they serve your views therein, you are con-
tending against the definite purpose of t'le
Gospel. For these things certainly are not
written that you may believe that Jesus Christ
is. the Father, but the Son.'^

CHAP. XXVI. — A BRIEF REFERENCE TO THE GOS-
PELS OF ST. MATTHKW AND ST. LUKE. THEIR
AGREEMENT WITH ST. JOHN, IN RESPECT TO
THE DISTINCT PERSONALITY OF THE FATHER
AND THE SON.

In addition to Philip's conversation, and


"John XV. I.
12 John xvii. i.
'3 John xvii. ii,
M Matt, xxyii. 46.
•5 Luke xxiii. 46.

16 John XX. 17.

17 John XX. 31.

»8 TA curious anecdote is given by Carlyle in his Life 0/ Fred-
erick rBook XX. cap. 6), touching the text of " the Three Wit-
nesses. Gottsched satisfied the king that it was not in the
Vienna MS. save in an interpolation of the margin " in Melanch-
thon's hand.''' Luther's Version lacks this te.\t.]


622


AGAINST PRAXEAS.


[chap. XXVI.


the Lord's reply to it, the reader will observe
that we have run through John's Gospel to
shcnv that many other passages of a clear pur-
port, both before and after that chapter, are
only in strict accord with that single and
prominent statement, which must be interpre-
ted agreeably to all other places, rather than
in opposition to them, and indeed to its own
inherent and natural sense. I will not liere
largely use tiie support of the other Gospels,
waich confirm our belief by the Lord's nativity:
it is sufficient to remark that He who had
to be born of a virgin is announced in ex-
press terms by the angel himself as the
Son of God: "The Spirit of God shall
come upon thee, and the power of the High-
est shall overshadow thee; therefore also
the Holy Tiling that shall be born of thee
shall be called the Sm of God."' On this
passage even they will wish to raise a cavil;
but truth will prevail. Of course, they say,
the Son of God is God, and the power of the
highest is the Most High. And they do
not hesitate to insinuate =" what, if it had been
true, would have been written. Whom was
he 3 so afraid of as not plainly to declare,
**God shall come upon thee, and the Highest
shall overshadow thee ?" Now, by saying
*' the Spirit of God " (although the Spirit of
God is God,) and by not directly naming God,
he wished that portion * of the whole Godhead
to be understood, which was about to retire
into the designation of "the Son," The
Spirit of God in this passage must be the
same as the Word. For just as, when John
says, "The Word was made flesh," s, we
understand the Spirit also in the mention of
the Word: so here, too, we acknowledge the
Word likewise in the name of the Spirit. For
both the Spirit is the substance of the Word,
and the Word is the operation of the Spirit,
and the Two are One (and the same).^ Now
John must mean One when he speaks of Him
as " having been made flesh," and the angel
Another when he announces Him as " about
to be born," if the Spirit is not the Word, and
the Word the Spirit. For just as the Word
of God is not actually He whose Word He is,
so also the Spirit (although He is called God)
is not actually He whose Spirit He is said to
be. Nothing which belongs to something else


» Luke i. 35.
» Inicere.

3 i.e., the angel of the Annunciation.

4 On this not strictly defensible ternn of Tertullian, see Bp.
Bull's Defence of the Nicene Creed, book ii. ch. vii. sec. 5, Trans-
lation, pp. 199, 200.

5 John 1. i^.

'^"The selfsame Person is understood under the appellation
both of Spirit and Word, with this difference only, that He is
called ' the Spirit of God,' so far as He is a Divine Person, . . .
and ' the Word,' so far as He is the Spirit in operation, proceeding
with sound and vocal utterance from God to set the universe in
order."— Bp. Bi'll, Def. Nic, Creed, p. 535, Translation.


is actually the very same thing as that to
which it belongs. Clearly, when anything
proceeds from a personal subject, ^ and so
belongs to him, since it comes from him, it
may possibly be such in quality exactly as the
personal subject himself is from whom it pro-
ceeds, and to whom it belongs. And thus the
Spirit is God, and the Word is God, because
proceeding from God, but yet is not actually
the very same as He from whom' He proceeds.
Now that which is God of God, although He
is an actually existing thing,^ yet He cannot
be God Himself 9 (exclusively), but so far
God as He is of the same substance as God
Himself, and as being an actually existing
thing, and as a portion of the Whole. Much
more will " the power of the Highest" not be
the Highest Himself, because It is not an
actually existing thing, as being Spirit — in the
same way as the wisdom (of God) and the
providence (of God) is not God: these attri-
butes are not substances, but the accidents of
the particular substance. Power is inciden-
tal to the Spirit, but cannot itself be the
Spirit. These things, therefore, whatsoever
they are — (I mean) the Spirit of God, and the
Word and the Power — having been conferred
on the Virgin, that which is born of her is the
Son of God. This He Himself, in those other
Gospels also, testifies Himself to have been
from His very boyhood: " Wist ye not," says
He, " that I must be about my Father's busi-
ness ? " '" Satan likewise knew Him to be this
in his temptations: " Since Thou ^rt the Son
of God.'* " This, accordingly, the devils also
acknowledge Him to be: "we know Thee,
who Thou art, the Holy Son of God.'' " His
^'"Father" He Himself adores. '^ When ac-
knowledged by Peter as the " Christ (the Son)
of God," '^ He does not deny tlie relatiofi.
He exults in spirit when He says to the
Father, " I thank Thee, O Father, because
Thou hast hid these things from the wise and
prudent." '5 He, moreover, affirms also that
to no man is the Father known, but to His
Sonj'^ and promises that, as the Son of the
Father, He will confess those who confess
Him, and deny those who deny Him, before
His Father. '7 He also introduces a parable
of the mission to the vineyard of the Son (not
the Father), who was sent after so many ser-
vants,*^ and slain by the husbandmen, and


7 Ex ipso.

8 Substantiva res.

9 Ipse Deus : i.e., God so wholly as to exclude by identity every
other person.

'° Luke ii. 49.

*i Matt. iv. 3, 6.

'2 Mark i. 24 ; Matt. viii. 29.

13 Matt. xi. 25, 36 ; Luke x. 21 ; John xi. 41.

14 Matt. xvi. 17.
'S Matt. xi. 25.

»6 Matt. xi. 27 ; Luke x. 22.

17 Matt, x, 32, 33. 18 Matt. xxi. 33-41.


CHAP. XXVII.]


AGAINST PRAXEAS.


623


avenged by the Father. He is also ignorant 1
of the last day and hour, which is known to '
the Father only.' He awards the kingdom
to His disciples, as He says it had been ap-
pointed to Himself by the Father.' He has
powerxto ask, if He will, legions of angels
from the Fatner for His help.^ He exclaims
that God had forsaken Him.* He com-
mends His spirit into the hands of the
Father.s After His resurrection He prom-
ises in a pledge to His disciples that He will
send them the promise of His Father;^ and
lastly. He commands them to baptize into
the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost,
not into a unipersonal God.^ And indeed it
is not once only, but three times, that we are
immersed into the Three Persons, at each
several mention of Their names.

CHAP. XXVII. — THE DISTINCTION OF THE FATHER
AND THE SON, THUS ESTABLISHED, HE NOW
PROVES THE DISTINCTION OF THE TWO NAT-
URES, WHICH WERE, WITHOUT CONFUSION,
UNITED IN THE PERSON OF THE SON. THE
SUBTERFUGES OF PRAXEAS THUS EXPOSED.

But why should I linger over matters which
are so evident, when I ought to be attacking
points on which they seek to obscure the
plainest proof ? For, confuted on all sides on
the distinction between the Father and the
Son, which we maintain without destroying
their inseparable union — as (by the examples)
of the sun and the ray, and the fountain and
the river — yet, by help of (their conceit) an
indivisible number, (with issues) of two and
three, they endeavour to interpret this distinc-
tion in a way which shall nevertheless tally
with their own opinions: so that, all in one
Person, they distinguish two. Father and Son,
understanding the Son to be flesh, that is
man, that is Jesus; and the Father to be spirit,
that is God, that is Christ. Thus they, while
contending that the Father and the Son are
one and the same, do in fact begin by divid-
ing them rather than uniting them. For if
Jesus is one, and Christ is another, then the
Son will be different from the Father, because
the Son is Jesus, and the Father is Christ.
Such a monarchy as this they learnt, I suppose,
in the school of Valentinus, making two —
Jesus and Christ. But this conception of
theirs has been, in fact, already confuted in
what we have previously advanced, because
the Word of God or the Spirit of God is also


1 Matt. xxiv. 36.

2 Luke xxii. 29.

3 Matt. xxvi. 53.

4 Matt, xxvii. 46.

5 Luke xxiii. 46.

6 Luke xxiv. 49.

7 Non in unura.


called the power of the Highest, whom they
make the Father; whereas these relations*
are not themselves the same as He whose re-
lations they are said to be, but they proceed
from Him and appertain to Him. However,
another refutation awaits them on this point of
their heresy. See, say they, it was announced
by the angel: "Therefore that Holy Tning
which shall be born of thee shall be called the
Son of God." 9 Tnerefore. (they argue,) as
it was the flesh that was born, it must be the
flssh that is the Son of God. Nay, (1 answer,)
this is spoken concerning the Spirit of God.
For it was certainly of the Holy Spirit that
the virgin conceived; and that which He con-
ceived, she brought forth. That, therefore,
had to be born wnich was conceived and was
to be brought forth; that is to say, the Spirit,
whose " name should be called Emmanuel
which, being interpreted, is, God with us."'°
Besides, the flesh is not God, so that it could
not have been said concerning it, " That Holy
Thing shall be called the Son of God," but
only that Divine Being who was born in the
flesh, of whom the psalm also says, " Since
God became man in the midst of it, and es-
tablished it by the will of the Father," " Now
what Divine Person was born in it ? The
Word, and the Spirit which became incarnate
with the Word by the will of the Father. The
W^ord, therefore, is incarnate; and this must
be the point of our inquiry: How the Word
became flesh, — whether it was by having been
transfigured, as it were, in the flesh, or by
having really clothed Himself in flesh. Cer-
tainly it was by a real clothing of Himself in
flesh. For the rest, we must needs believe
God to be unchangeable, and incapable of
form, as being eternal. But transfiguration
is the destruction of that which previously ex-
isted. For whatsoever is transfigured into
some other thing ceases to be that which it
had been, and begins to be that which it pre-
viously was not. God, however, neither ceases
to be what He was, nor can He be any other
thing than what He is. The Word is God,
and " the Word of the Lord remaineth for
ever," — even by holding on unchangeably in
His own proper form. Now, if He admits
not of being transfigured, it must follow that
He be understood in this sense to have be-
come flesh, when He comes to be in the flesh,
and is manifested, and is seen, and is handled
by means of the flesh; since all the other
points likewise require to be thus understood.
For if the Word became flesh by a transfigura-
tion and change of substance, it follows at


sipsse.

9 Luke i. 35.
10 Matt. i. 23.
" His version of Ps. Ixxxvii. 5.


624


AGAINST PRAXEAS.


[chap. XXVIII.


once that Jesus must be a substance com-
pounded of' two substances — of flesh and
spirit, — a kind of mixture, like electrum, com-
posed of gold and silver; and it begins to be
neither gold (that is to say, spirit) nor silver
(that is to say, flesh), — the one being changed
by the other, and a third substance produced.
Jesus, therefore, cannot at this rate be God,
for He has ceased to be the Word, which was
made flesh; nor can He be Man incarnate,
for He is not properly flesh, and it was flesh
which the Word became. Being compounded,
therefore, of both, He actually is neither; He
\ is rather some third substance, very different
from eithe". But the truth is, we find that
He is expressly set forth as both God and
Man; the very psalm which we have quoted
intimating (of the flesh), that *' God became
Man in the midst of it, He therefore es-
tablished it by the will of the Father," — cer-
tainly in all respects as the Son of God and
the Son of Man, being God and Man, differing
no doubt according to each substance in its
own especial property, inasmuch as the Word
is nothing else but God, and the flesh nothing
else but Man.vy Thus does the apostle also
teach respecting His two substances, saying,
" who was made of the seed of David; "= in
which words He will be Man and Son of Man.
** Who was declared to be the Son of God, ac-
cording to the Spirit; "3 in which words He
will be God, and the Word — the Son of God.
f We see plainly the twofold state, which is not
confounded, but conjoined in One Person —
Jesus, God and Man. Concerning Christ, in-
deed, I defer what I have to say.-* (I remark
here), that the property of each nature is so
wiioUy preserved, that the Spirit s on the one
hand did all things in Jesus suitable to Itself,
such as miracles, and mighty deeds, and won-
ders; and the Flesh, on the other hand, ex-
hibited the affections which belong to it. It
was hungry under the devil's temptation,
thirsty with the Samaritan woman, wept over
Lazarus, was troubled even unto death, and
at last actually died. If, however, it was only
a tertium quid, some composite essence formed
out of the Two substances, like the electrutn
(which we have mentioned), there would be
no distinct proofs apparent of either nature.
But by a transfer of functions, the Spirit
would have done things to be done by the
Flesh, and the Flesh such as are effected by
the Spirit; or else such things as are suited
neither to the Flesh nor to the Spirit, but
confusedly of some third character. Nay


'Ex.

2 Rom. i. 3.

3Ver. 4.

4 See next chapter.

5 i.e., Christ's divine nature.


more, on this supposition, either the Word
underwent death, or the flesh did not die, if
so be the Word was converted into flesh; be-
cause either the flesh was immortal, or the
Word was mortal. Forasmuch, however, as
the two substances acted distinctly, each in
its own character, there necessarily accrued
to them severally their own operations, and
their own issues. Learn then, together with
Nicodemus, that " that which is born in the
flesh is flesh, and that which is born of the
Spirit is Spirit."* Neither the flesh becomes
Spirit, nor the Spirit flesh. In one Persmt^
they no doubt are well able to be co-existent. J
Of them Jesus consists — Man. of the flesh; of
the Spirit, God — and the angel designated
Him as "the Son of God,"^ in respect of
that nature, in which He was Spirit, reserving
for the flesh the appellation "Son of Man.""
In like manner, again, the apostle calls Him-^
"the Mediator between God and Men^" *^
and so affirmed His participation of both sub- /
stances. Now, to end the matter, will you, -
who interpret the Son of God to be flesh, be
so good as as to show us what the Son of Man
is? Will He then, I want to know, be the
Spirit ? But you insist upon it that the Father
Himself is the Spirit, on the ground that
" God is a Spirit," just as if we did not read
also that there is " the Spirit of God; " in the
same manner as we find that as "the Word
was God," so also there is " the Word of God."


CHAP. XXVIII. CHRIST NOT THE FATHER, AS

PRAXEAS SAID. THE INCONSISTENCY OF THIS
OPINION, NO LESS THAN ITS ABSURDITY, EX-
POSED. THE TRUE DOCTRINE OF JESUS
CHRIST ACCORDING TO ST. PAUL, WHO AGREES
WITH OTHER SACRED WRITERS.

And SO, most foolish heretic, you make
Christ to be the Father, without once consider-
ing the actual force of this name, if indeed
Christ is a name, and not rather a surname,
or designation; for it signifies " Anointed. "^
But Anointed is no more a proper name than
Clothed or Shod; it is only an accessory to a
name. Suppose now that by some means
Jesus were also called Vestitus {Clof/iec!), as
He is actually called Christ from the mystery
of His anointing, would you in like manner
say that Jesus was the Son of God, and at the
same time suppose that Vestitus was the
Father? Now then, concerning Christ, if
Christ is the Father, the Father is an Anointed
One, and receives the unction of course from
another. Else if it is from Himself that He re-


6 John iii. 6.

7 Luke i. JJ5.

8 I Tim, h. 5.


CHAP. XXIX.]


AGAINST PRAXEAS.


625


ceives it, then you must prove it to us. But
we learn no such fact from the Acts of the
Apostles in that ejaculation of the Church to
God, "Of a truth, Lord, against Thy Holy
Child Jesus, whom Thou hast anointed, both
Herod and Pontius Pilate with the Gentiles
and the people of Israel were gathered to-
gether."' These then testified both that
Jesus was the Son of God, and that being the
Son, He was anointed by the Father. Christ
therefore must be the same as Jesus who was
anointed by the Father, and not the Father,
who anointed the Son. To the same effect
are the words of Peter: " Let all the house of
Israel know assuredly that God hath made that
same Jesus, whom ye have crucified, both
Lord and Christ," that is, Anomted.^ John,
moreover, brands that man as "a liar" who
" denieth that Jesus is the Christ; " whilst on
the other hand he declares that " every one is
born of God who believeth that Jesus is the
Christ." 3 Wherefore he also exhorts us to
believe in the name of His {the Father' s^^ Son
Jesus Christ, that " our fellowship may be
with the Father, and with His Son Jesus
Christ."^ Paul, in like manner, ever5rwhere
speaks of "God the Father, and our Lord
Jesus Christ." When writing to the Romans,
he gives thanks to God through our ' Lord
Jesus Christ.s To the Galatians he declares
himself to be " an apostle not of men, neither
by man, but through Jesus Christ and God
the Father."^ You possess indeed all his
writings, which testify plainly to the same
effect, and set forth Two— God the Father,
and our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the
Father. (They also testify) that Jesus is
Himself the Christ, and under one or the other
designation the Son of God. For precisely
by the same right as both names belong to
the same Person, even the Son of God, does
either name alone without the other belong
to the same Person. Consequently, whether
it be the name Jesus which occurs alone,
Christ is also understood, because Jesus is the
Anointed One; or if the name Christ is the
only one given, then Jesus is identified with
Him, because the Anointed One is Jesus.
Now, of these two names Jesus Christy the
former is the proper one, which was given to
Him by the angel; and the latter is only an
adjunct, predicable of Him from His anoint-
ing,— thus suggesting the proviso that Christ
must be the Son, not the Father. How blind,
to be sure, is the man who fails to perceive


I Acts iv. 27.
~ Acts ii. ^6.

3 See I John ii. 22, iv. 2, 3, and

4 I John i. 3.

5 Rom. i. 8.
6Gal. i. I.

40


that by the name of Christ some other God is
implied, if he ascribes to the Father this name
of Christ ! Yox if Christ is God the Father,
when He says, " I ascend unto my Father
and your Father, and to my God and your
God,"' He of course shows plainly enough
that there is above Himself another Father
and another God. If, again, the Father is
Christ, He must be some other Being who
" strengtheneth the thunder, and createth
the wind, and declareth unto men His
Christ."^ And if "the kings of the earth
stood up, and the rulers were gathered to-
gether against the Lord and against His
Christ,"' that Lord must be another Being,
against whose Christ were gathered together
the kings and the rulers. And if, to quote
another passage, " Thus saith the Lord to my
Lord Christ," '° the Lord who speaks to the
Father of Christ must be a distinct Being.
Moreover, when the apostle in his epistle
prays, " That the God of our Lord Jesus
Christ may give unto you the spirit of wisdom
and of knowledge," " He must be other (than
Christ), who is the God of Jesus Christ, the
bestower of spiritual gifts. And once for all,
that we may not wander through every pas-
sage. He "who raised up Christ from the
dead, and is also to raise up our mortal
bodies," " must certainly be, as the quickener,
different from the dead Father,'^ or even from
the quickened Father, if Christ who died is
the Father.

CHAP. XXIX. — IT WAS CHRIST THAT DIED. THE
FATHER IS INCAPABLE OF SUFFERING EITHER
SOLELY OR WITH ANOTHER. BLASPHEMOUS
CONCLUSIONS SPRING FROM PRAXEAS' PREM-
ISES.

Silence ! Silence on such blasphemy. Let
us be content with saying that Christ died,
the Son of the Father; antl let this suffice, be-
cause the Scriptures have told us so much.
For even the apostle, to his declaration — which
he makes not without feeling the weight of it
— that " Christ died," immediately adds, " ac-
cording to the Scriptures,"'* in order that he
may alleviate the harshness of the statement
by the authority of the Scriptures, and so re-
move offence from the reader. Now, although
when two substances are alleged to be in
Christ — namely, the divine and the human —


7 John XX. 17.

8 Amos iv. 13, Sept.

9 Ps. ii. 2.

»oHere Tertullian reads r^ Xpivtu ixov Kvpiw, instead of Kvpw,
*' to Cyrus," in Isa. xlv. i.

" Eph. i. 17.

'2 Rom. viii. ii.

13 From this deduction of the doctrine of Praxeas, that the
Father must have suffered on the cross, his opponents called him
and his followers Patripassians.

»4 I Cor. XV. 3.


626


AGAINST PRAXEAS.


[chap. XXX.


it plainly follows that the divine nature is im-
mortal, and that which is human is mortal, it
is manifest in what sense he declares " Christ
died " — even in the sense in which He was
flesh and Man and the Son of Man, not as be
ing the Spirit and the Word and the Son of
God. In short, since he says that it was
Christ (that is, the Anointed One) that died,
he shows us that that which died was the na-
ture which was anointed; in a word, the flesh.
Very well, say you; since we on our side affirm
our doctrine in precisely the same terms which
you use on your side respecting the Son, we
are not guilty of blasphemy against the Lord
God, for we do not maintain that He died
after the divine nature, but only after the hu-
man. Nay, but you do blaspheme; because
you allege not only that the Father died, but
that He died the death of the cross. For
** cursed are they which are hanged on a
tree," ' — a curse which, after the law, is com-
patible to the Son (inasmuch as *' Christ has
been made a curse for us,"' but certainly
not the Father); since, however, you convert
Christ into the Father, you are chargeable
with blasphemy against the Father. But when
we assert that Christ was crucified, we do not
malign Him with a curse; we only re-affirm ^
the curse pronounced by the law: *• nor indeed
did the apostle utter blasphemy when he said
the same thing as we.s Besides, as there is
no blasphemy in predicating of the subject
that which is fairly applicable to it; so, on the
other hand, it is blasphemy when that is al-
leged concerning the subject which is unsuita-
ble to it. On this principle, too, the Father
was not associated in suffering with the Son.
The heretics^ indeed, fearing to incur direct
blasphemy against the Father, hope to dimin-
ish it by this expedient: they grant us so far
that the Father and the Son are Two; adding
that, since it is the Son indeed who suffers, the
Father is only His fellow-sufferer.* But how
absurd are they even in this conceit! For what
is the meaning of " fellow-suffering," but the
endurance of suffering along with another?
Now if the Father is incapable of suffering, He
is incapable of suffering in company with an-
other; otherwise, if He can suffer with another.
He is of course capable of suffering. You, in
fact, yield Him nothing by this subterfuge
of your fears. You are afraid to say that He
is capable of suffering whom you make to be
capable of fellow-suffering. Then, again, the


I Gal. iii. 13.

aSame ver.

3Referimus: or, " recite and record."

4 Deut. xxi. 23.

5 Gal. iii. 13.

6 [This passage convinces Lardner that Praxeas was not a Patri-
passian. Credit. Vol. VIII. p. 607.]


Father is as incapable of fellow-suffering as
the Son even is of suffering under the condi-
tions of His existence as God. Well, but how
could the Son suffer, if the Father did not
suffer with Him ? My answer is, The Father
is separate from the Son, though not from
Hiin as God. For even if a river be soiled
with mire and mud, alhough it flows from the
fountain identical in nature with it, and is not
separated from the fountain, yet the injury
which affects the stream reaches not to the
fountain; and although it is the water of the
fountain which suffers down the stream, still,
since it is not affected at the fountain, but
only in the river, the fountain suffers nothing,
but only the river which issues from the foun-
tain. So likewise the Spirit of God,^ what-
ever suffering it might be capable of in the
Son, yet, inasmuch as it could not suffer in the
Father, the fountain of the Godhead, but only
in the Son, it evidently could not have suffered,^
as the Father. But it is enough for me that
the Spirit of God suffered nothing as the
Spirit of God,9 since all that It suffered It
suffered in the Son. It was quite another
matter for the Father to suffer with the Son in
the flesh. This likewise has been treated by
us. Nor will any one deny this, since even
we are ourselves unable to suffer for God, un-
less the Spirit of God be in us, who also utters
by our instrumentality '° whatever pertains to
our own conduct and suffering; not, however,
that He Himself suffers in our suffering, onjy
He bestows on us the power and capacity of
suffering.

CHAP. XXX. — HOW THE SON WAS FORSAKEN BY
THE FATHER UPON THE CROSS. THE TRUE
MEANING THEREOF FATAL TO PRAXEAS. SO
TOO, THE RESURRECTION OF CHRIST, HIS AS-
CENSION, SESSION AT THE FATHER'S RIGHT
HAND, AND MISSION OF THE HOLY GHOST.

However, if you persist in pushing your
views further, I shall find means of answering
you with greater stringency, and of meeting
you with the exclamation of the Lord Him-
self, so as to challenge you with the question.
What is your inquiry and reasoning about that?
You have Him exclaiming in the midst of His
passion: " My God, my God, why hast Thou
forsaken me ? " " Either, then, the Son suf-
fered, being " forsaken " by the Father, and
the Father consequently suffered nothing, in-
asmuch as He forsook the Son; or else, if it
was the Father who suffered, then to what


7 That is, the divine nature in general in this place.

8 That which was open to it to suffer in the Son.

9 Suo nomine.
1° De nobis.

" Matt, .xxvii. 46.


POSTSCRIPT.


627


God was it that He addressed His cry ? But
this was the voice of flesh and soul, that is to
say, of man— not of the Word and Spirit, that
is to say, not of God; and it was uttered so as
to prove the impassibihty of God, who ** for-
sook " His Son, so far as He handed over
His human substance to the suffering of death.
This verity the apostle also perceived, when
he writes to this effect: " If the Father spared
not His own Son."' This did Isaiah before
him likewise perceive, when he declared:
*'And the Lord hath delivered Him up for
our offences."^ In this manner He *' for-
sook " Him, in tiot sparing Him; " forsook "
Him, in delivering Him up. In all other re-
spects the Father did not forsake the Son, for
it was into His Father's hands that the Son
commended His spirit. ^ Indeed, after so
commending it. He instantly died; and as the
Spirit '' remained with the flesh, the flesh cannot
undergo the full extent of death, i.e.^ in corrup-
tion a?id decay. For the Son, therefore, to die,
amounted to His being forsaken by the Father.
The Son, then, both dies and rises again, ac-
cording to the Scriptures.^ It is the Son,
too, who ascends to the heights of heaven,*^
and also descends to the inner parts of the
earth.7 *'He sitteth at the Father's right
hand " ^ — not the Father at His own. He is
seen by Stephen, at his martyrdom by stoning,
still sitting at the right hand of God,' where
He will continue to sit, until the Father shall
make His enemies His footstool. '° He will
come again on the clouds of heaven, just as
He appeared when He ascended into heaven."
Meanwhile He has received from the Father
the promised gift, and has shed it forth, even
the Holy Spirit— the Third Name in the God-
head, and the Third Degree of the Divine
Majesty; the Declarer of the One Monarchy
oj[ Godj but at the same time the Interpreter
of the Economy, to every one who hears and
receives the words of the new prophecy;"
and *'the Leader into all truth," '^ such as is

1 Rom. viii. -12.

2 This is the'^sense rather than the words of Isa. liii. s, 6.

3 Luke xxiii. ^6.

* i.e., the divine nature.

5 I Cor. XV. 3, 4.

6 John iii. 13.

7 Eph. iv. p.

8 Mark xvi. 19 ; Rev. iii. ai.

9 Acts vii. 55.
•° Ps. ex. I.


in the Father, and the Son, and the Holy
Ghost, according to the mystery of the doc-
trine of Christ.

CHAP. XXXI. — RETROGRADE CHARACTER OF THE
HERESY OF PRAXEAS. THE DOCTRINE OF THE
BLESSED TRINITY CONSTITUTES THE GREAT
DIFFERENCE BETWEEN JUDAISM AND CHRIS-
TIANITY.

But, (this doctrine of yours bears a likeness)
to the Jewish faith, of which this is the sub-
stance— so to believe in One God as to refuse
to reckon the Son besides Him, and after the
Son the Spirit. Now, what difference would
there be between us and them, if there were
not this distinction which you are for break-
ing down ? What need would there be of the
gospel, which is the substance of the New
Covenant, laying down (as it does) that the
Law and the Prophets lasted until John the
Baptist, if thenceforward the Father, the Son,
and the Spirit are not both believed in as
Three, and as making One Only God ? God
was pleased to renew His covenant with man
in such a way as that His Unity might be be-
lieved in, after a new manner, through the
Son and the Spirit, in order that God might
now be known openly, '* in His proper Names
and Persons, who in ancient times was not
plainly understood, though declared through
the Son and the Spirit. Away, then, with 's
those ** Antichrists who deny the Father and
the Son." For they deny the Father, when
they say that He is the same as the Son ; and they
deny the Son, when they suppose Him to be
the same as the Father, by assigning to Them
things which are not Theirs, and taking away
from Them things which are Theirs. But "who-
soever shall confess that (Jesus) Christ is the
Son of God " (not the Father), '*^God dwelleth
in him, and he in God. " '^ We believe not
the testimony of God in which He testifies to
us of His Son. ** He that hath not the Son,
hath not life. " '^ And that man has not the
Son, who believes Him to be any other than
the Son.


" Acts i. II ; Luke xxi. 37.

12 Tertulhan was now a [[pronounced] Men

»3 John xvi. 13.

M Coram.

IS Viderint.

'6 I John iv. 15.

»7 I John v. 12.


POSTSCRIPT.

The learned Dr. Holmes, the translator of the Second volume of the Edinburgh series,

to which our arrangement has given another position, furnished it with a Preface as follows:

"This volume contains all Tertullian*s/^/<?/«/V^/ works (placed in his second volume by


628 ELUCIDATIONS.


Oehler, whose text we have followed), with the exception of the long treatise Against
Marciofi^ which has already formed a volume of this series, and the Adversus JudcBos^ which,
not to increase the bulk of the present volume, appears among the Miscellaneous Tracts.

" For the scanty facts connected with our author's life, and for some general remarks on
the importance and style of his writings, the reader is referred to the Introduction of my
translation of the Five Books agaifist Marcion.

" The treatises which comprise this volume will be found replete with the vigorous thought
and terse expression which always characterize Tertullian.

" Brief synopses are prefixed to the several treatises, and headings are supplied to the
chapters: these, with occasional notes on difficult passages and obscure allusions, will, it is
hoped, afford sufficient aid for an intelligent perusal of these ancient writings, which cannot
fail to be interesting alike to the theologian and the general reader, — full as they are of rev-
erence for revealed truth, and at the same time of independence of judgment, adorned with
admirable variety and fulness of knowledge, genial humour, and cultivated imagination."


Dr. Holmes further adorned this same volume with a dedication to a valued friend, in the
following words:

''The night Rev. Father in God, W. I. Trower, D.D., late Lord Bishop of Gibraltar, and

formerly Bishop of Glasgow afid Galway:

My dear Lord, In one of our conversations last summer, you were kind enough to
express an interest in this publication, and to favour me with some valuable hints on my own
share in it. It gives me therefore great pleasure to inscribe your honoured name on the first
page of this volume.

I avail myself of this public opportunity of endorsing, on my own account, the high
opinion which has long been entertained of your excellent volumes on The Epistles and The
Gospels.

Recalling to mind, as I often do, our pleasant days at Pennycross and Mannamead, I re-
main, my dear Lord, very faithfully yours, Peter Holmes."

Mannamead, March lo, 1870.


ELUCIDATIONS.


(Sundry doctrinal statements of Tertullian. See p. 601 {et seqq.), supra.)

I am glad for many reasons that Dr. Holmes appends the following from Bishop Kaye's
Account of the Writings of Tertullian:

** On the doctrine of the blessed Trinity, in order to explain his meaning Tertullian borrows
illustrations from natural objects. The three Persons of the Trinity stand to each other in
the relation of the root, the shrub, and the fruit; of the fountain, the river, and the cut from
the river; of the sun, the ray, and the terminating point of the ray. For these illustrations he
professes himself indebted to the Revelations of the Paraclete. In later times, divines
have occasionally resorted to similar illustrations for the purpose of familiarizing the doctrine
of the Trinity to the mind; nor can any danger arise from the proceeding, so long as we


ELUCIDATIONS. 629


recollect that they are illustrations, not arguments — that we must not draw conclusions from
them, or think that whatever may be truly predicated of the illustrations, may be predicated
with equal truth of that which it was designed to illustrate."

" ' Notwithstanding, however, the intimate union which subsists between the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, we must be careful,' says Tertullian, ' to distinguish between their
Persons.' In his representations of this distinction he sometimes uses expressions which in
after times, when controversy had introduced greater precision of language, were studiously
avoided by the orthodox. Thus he calls the Father the whole substance — the Son a deriva-
tion from or portion of the whole."'

*' After showing that Tertullian's opinions were generally coincident with the orthodox belief
of the Christian Church on the great subject of the Trinity in Unity, Bp. Kaye goes on to
say: * We are far from meaning to assert that expressions may not occasionally be found
which are capable of a different interpretation, and which were carefully avoided by the
orthodox writers of later times, when the controversies respecting the Trinity had introduced
greater precision of language. Pamelius thought it necessary to put the reader on his
guard against certain of these expressions; and Semler has noticed, with a sort of ill-natured
industry (we call it ill-natured industry, because the true mode of ascertaining a writer's
opinions is, not to fix upon particular expressions, but to take the general tenor of his lan-
guage), every passage in the Tract against Praxeas in which there is any appearance of con-
tradiction, or which will bear a construction favourable to the Arian tenets. Bp. Bull also,
who conceives the language of Tertullian to be explicit and correct on the subject of the
pre-existence and the consubstantiality, admits that he occasionally uses expressions at vari-
ance with the co-eternity of Christ. For instance, in the Tract against Hermogenes,' we
find a passage in which it is expressly asserted that there was a time when the Son was not.
•Perhaps, however, a reference to the peculiar tenets of Hermogenes will enable us to account
for this assertion. That heretic affirmed that matter was eternal, and argued thus: * God
was always God, and always Lord; but the word Lord implies the existence of something
over which He was Lord. Unless, therefore, we suppose the eternity of something distinct
from God, it is not true that He was always Lord.' Tertullian boldly answered, that God
was not always Lord; and that in Scripture we do not find Him called Lord until the work
of creation was completed. In like manner, he contended that the titles of Judge and Father
imply the existence of sin, and of a Son. As, therefore, there was a time when neither sin
nor the Son existed, the titles of Judge and Father were not at that time applicable to God.
Tertullian could scarcely mean to affirm (in direct opposition to his own statements in the
Tract against Praxeas) that there was ever a time when the Uyo^, or Ratio, or Sermo Internus
did not exist. But with respect to Wisdom and the Son (Sophia and Filius) the case is dif-
ferent. Tertullian assigns to both a beginning of existence: Sophia was created or formed
in order to devise the plan of the universe; and the Son was begotten in order to carry that
plan into effect. Bp. Bull appears to have given an accurate representation of the matter,
when he says that, according to our author, the Reason and Spirit of God, being the sub-
stance of the Word and Son, were co-eternal with God; but that the titles of Word and Son
were not strictly applicable until the former had been emitted to arrange, and the latter
begotten to execute, the work of creation. Without, therefore, attempting to explain,
much less to defend, all Tertullian's expressions and reasonings, we are disposed to
acquiesce in the statement given by Bp. Bull of his opinions {Defefice of the Nicetie
Creed, sec. iii. ch. x. (p. 545 of the Oxford translation)): ' From all this it is clear
how rashly, as usual, Petavius has pronounced that, ^^ so far as relates to the eternity

« Kaye, pp. 504-596.

2Ch. iii. compared with ch. xviii.


630 ELUCIDATIONS.


of the Wordf it is manifest that Tertullian did twt by any means acknowledge it.'' ' To
myself, indeed, and as I suppose to my reader also, after the many clear testimonies which
I have adduced, the very opposite is manifest, unless indeed Petavius played on the term,
the Word, which I will not suppose. For Tertullian does indeed teach that the Son of God
was made and was called the Word ( Verbum or Sermo) from some definite beginning, i.e.
at the time when He went out from God the Father with the voice, *Let there be light' in
order to arrange the universe. But, for all that, that he really believed that the very
hypostasis which is called the Word and Son of God is eternal, I have, I think, abun-
dantly demonstrated." (The whole of Bp. Bull's remark is worth considering; it occurs
in the translation just referred to, pp. 508-545.) — (Pp. 521-525.)

" In speaking also of the Holy Ghost, Tertullian occasionally uses terms of a very
ambiguous and equivocal character. He says, for instance {Adversus Fraxean, c. xii.),
that in Gen. i. 26, God addressed the Son, His Word (the Second Person in the Trinity), and
the Spirit in the Word (the Third Person of the Trinity). Here the distinct personality of
the Spirit is expressly asserted; although it is difficult to reconcile Tertullian's words,
' Spiritus in Sermone,' with the assertion. It is, however, certain both from the general
tenor of the Tract against Praxeas, and from many passages in his other writings (for
instance. Ad Martyres, iii.), that the distinct personality of the Holy Ghost formed an
article of Tertullian's creed. The occasional ambiguity of his language respecting the
Holy Ghost is perhaps in part to be traced to the variety of senses in which the term ''Spiritus*
is used. It is applied generally to God, for 'God is a Spirit' {Adv. Marcionem, ii. 9); and
for the same reason to the Son, who is frequently called ' the Spirit of God,' and * the Spirit
of the Creator* (Z?<? Oratione, i. ; Adv. Praxean, xiv., xxvi.; Adv. Marciofiem^w. 8; Apolog.
xxiii. ; Adv. Marciofiem, iii. 6, iv. 33). Bp. Bull likewise {Defence of the Nicene Creed, i.
2), following Grotius, has shown that the word ' Spiritus ' is employed by the fathers to
express the divine nature in Christ." — (Pp. 525, 526.)

II.

(The bishop of Rome, cap. i. p. 597.)

Probably Victor (a.d. 190), who is elsewhere called Victor/wz^i", as Oehler conjectures, by
a blunderer who tacked the inus to his name, because he was thinking of Zephyr/wwj, his
immediate successor. This Victor *' acknowledged the prophetic gifts of Montanus," and
kept up communion with the Phrygian churches that adopted them: but worse than that,
he now seems to have patronized the Patri-passion heresy, under the compulsion of Praxeas.
So Tertullian says, who certainly had no idea that the Bishop of Rome was the infallible
judge of controversies, when he recorded the facts of this strange history. Thus, we find
the very founder of *' Latin Christianity," accusing a contemporary Bishop of Rome of
heresy and the patronage of heresy, in two particulars. Our earliest acquaintance with
that See presents us with Polycarp's superior authority, at Rome itself, in maintaining
apostolic doctrine and suppressing heresy. ** He it was, who coming to Rome," says Irenaeus,^
" in the time of Anicetus, caused many to turn away from the aforesaid heretics (viz. Val-
entinus and Marcion) to the Church of God," proclaiming that he had received ^^txx's, ox\^ ?i\\di
sole truth from the Apostles.'* Anicetus was a pious prelate who never dreamed of asserting
a superior claim as the chief depositary of Apostolic orthodoxy, and whose beautiful example
in the Easter-questions discussed between Polycarp and himself, is another illustration of
the independence of the sister churches, at that period." Nor is it unworthy to be noted,
that the next event, in Western history, establishes a like principle against that other and

» Vol. I. p. 416, this Senes. 2 Vol. I. p. 5^9, this Series.


ELUCIDATIONS. 631


less worthy occupant of the Roman See, of whom we have spoken. Irenaeus rebukes
Victor for his dogmatism about Easter, and reproaches him with departing from the example
of his predecessors in the same See.' With Eleutherus he had previously remonstrated,
though mildly, for his toleration of heresy and his patronage of the raising schism of Mon-
tanus.^

III.
(These three are one, cap. xxv. p. 621. Also p. 606.)

Porson having spoken Pontifically upon the matter of the text of " the Three Witnesses,"
cadit gucEstto, locutus est Augur Apollo. It is of more importance that Bishop Kaye in his calm
wisdom, remarks as follows i^ " In my opinion, the passage in Tertullian, far from containing
an allusion to I. John v. 7, furnishes most decisive proof that he knew nothing of the verse."
After this, and the acquiescence of scholars generally, it would be presumption to say a
word on the question of quoting it as Scripture. In Textual Criticism it seems to be an
established canon that it has no place in the Greek Testament. I submit, however, that,
something remains to be said for it, on the ground of the old African Version used and quoted
by Tertullian and Cyprian; and I dare to say, that, while there would be no ground what-
ever for inserting it in our English Version, the question of striking it out is a widely dif-
ferent one. .It would be sacrilege, in my humble opinion, for reasons which will appear, in
the following remarks, upon our author.

It appears to me very clear that Tertullian is quoting I. John v. 7. in the passage now
under consideration: ** Qui tres unum sunt^ non unus, quomodo dictum est. Ego et Pater
unum sumus, etc.^^ Let me refer to a work containing a sufficient answer to Porson, on
this point of Tertullian's quotation, which it is easier to pass sub-silentio, than to refute. I
mean Forster's New Plea^ of which the full title is placed in the margin.* The whole work
is worth thoughtful study, but, I name it with reference to this important passage of our
author, exclusively. In connection with other considerations on which I have no right to
enlarge in this place, it satisfies me as to the primitive origin of the text in the Vulgate,
and hence of its right to stand in our English Vulgate until it can be shewn that the
Septuagint Version, quoted and honoured by our Lord, is free from similar readings, and
divergences from the Hebrew MSS.

Stated as a mere question as to the early African Church,s the various versions known
as the Itala^ and the right of the Latin and English Vulgates to remain as they are, the
whole question is a fresh one. Let me be pardoned for saying: (i) that I am not pleading
for it as a proof-text of the Trinity, having never once quoted it as such in a long ministry,
during which I have preached nearly a hundred Trinity-Sunday Sermons; (2) that I con-
sider it as practically Apocryphal, and hence as coming under St. Jerome's law, and being
useless to establish doctrine; and (3) that I feel no need of it, owing to the wealth of Scrip-
ture on the same subject, Tertullian, himself says that he cites "only a few out of many
texts — not pretending to bring up all the passages of Scripture. . . . having produced an
accumulation of witnesses in the fulness of their dignity and authority."

To those interested in the question let me commend the learned dissertation of Grabe
on the textual case, as it stood in his day.^ I value it chiefly because it proves that the Greek
Testament, elsewhere says, disjointedly , what is collected into I. John v. 7. It is, there-
fore, Holy Scripture in substance, if not in the letter. What seems to me important, how-

J Eusebius, B. V. cap. 24. Refer also to preceding note, and to Vol. I. p. 310, this Series.

2 Vol. II. pp. 3 and 4, this Series, also, Eusebius, B. V. Cap. iii. 3 p. 516.

4 " A New Plea for the Authenticity of the text of the Three Heavenly Witnesses : or, Porson's Letters to Travis eclectically ex-
amined, etc. etc. By the Rev. Charles Forster, etc." Cambridge, Deighton, Bell & Co., and London, Bell & Daldy, 1867.
SSee Milman, Hisi. Lat. Christ., 1. p. 29. 6 See Bull's Works, Vol. V., p. 381.


632


ELUCIDATIONS.


ever, is the balance it gives to the whole context, and the defective character of the grammar
and logic, if it be stricken out. In the Septuagint and the Latin Vulgate of the Old Testament
we have a precisely similar case. Refer to Psalm xiii., alike in the Latin and the Greek, as
compared with our English Version. *. Between the third and fourth verses, three whole
verses are interpolated: Shall we strike them out ? Of course, if certain critics are to prevail
over St. Paul, for he quotes them (Rom. iii. 10) with the formula: "As it is written."
Now, then, till we expurgate the English Version of the Epistle to the Romans, — or rather
the original of St. Paul himself, I employ Grabe's argument only to prove my point, which
is this, viz., that I. John v. 7 being Scripture, ought to be left untouched in the Versions
where it stands, although it be no part of the Greek Testament.

"Where it is Psalm XIV.


VIII.

SCORPIACE.

ANTIDOTE FOR THE SCORPION'S STING.
[TRANSLATED BY REV. S. THELWALL.J


CHAP. I.

The earth brings forth, as if by suppura-
tion, great evil from the diminutive scorpion.
The poisons are as many as are the kinds of
it, the disasters as many as are also the species
of it, the pains as many as are also the colours
of it. Nicander writes mi the subject of scor-
pions, and depicts them. And yet to smite
with the tail — ^which tail will be whatever is
prolonged from the hindmost part of the body,
and scourges — is the one movement which
they all use when making an assault. Where-
fore that succession of knots in the scorpion,
which in the inside is a thin poisoned veinlet,
rising up with a bow-like bound, draws tight
a barbed sting at the end, after the manner of
an engine for shooting missiles. From which
circumstance they also call after the scor-
pion, the warlike implement which, by its
being drawn back, gives an impetus to the
arrows. The point in their case is also a duct
of extreme minuteness, to inflict the wound;
and where it penetrates, it pours out poison.
The usual time of danger is the summer sea-
son: fierceness hoists the sail when the wind
is from the south and the south-west. Among
cures, certain substances supplied by nature
have very great efficacy; magic also puts on
some bandage; the art of healing counteracts
with lancet and cup. For some, making
haste, take also beforehand a protecting
draught; but sexual intercourse drains it oif,
and they are dry again. We have faith for a
defence, if we are not smitten with distrust
itself also, in immediately making the sign*
and adjuring,^ and besmearing the heel with


the beast. Finally, we often aid in this way even
the heathen, seeing we have been endowed by
God with that power which the apostle first
used when he despised the viper's bite.*
What, then, does this pen of yours offer, \iL
faith is safe by what it has of its own ? That
it may be safe by what it has of its own also
at other times, when it is subjected to scor-
pions of its own. These, too, have a trouble-
some littleness, and are of different sorts, and
are armed in one manner, and are stirred up
at a definite time, and that not another than
one of burning heat. This among Christians,
is a season of persecution. When, therefore,
faith is greatly agitated, and the Church burn-
ing, as represented by the bush,5 then the
Gnostics break out, then the Valentinians
creep forth, then all the opponents of martyr-
dom bubble up, being themselves also hot
to strike, penetrate, kill. For, because they
know that many are artless and also inexperi-
enced, and weak moreover, that a very great
number in truth are Christians who veer about
with the wind and conform to its moods, they
perceive that they are never to be approached
more than when fear has opened the entrances
to the soul, especially when some display of
ferocity has already arrayed with a crown the
faith of martyrs. Therefore, drawing along
the tail hitherto, they first of all apply it to.
the feelings, or whip with it as if on empty
space. Innocent persons undergo such suffer-
ing. So that you may suppose the speaker to
be a brother or a heathen of the better sort.


1 [Written about a.d. 205.]

2 Of the cross over the wounded part. [This translation is fre-
(juently weakened by useless interpolations ; some of these destroy-
ing the author's style, for nothing, I have put into footnotes or
dropped.]


3 I.e. adjuring the part, in the name of Jesus, and besmearing
the poisoned heel with the gore of the beast, when it has been
crushed to death. [So the translator; but the terse rhetoric of
the original is not so circumstantial, and refers, undoubtedly, to
the lingering influence of miracles, according to St. Mark, xvi.

'^•^ *

4 Acts xxvui, 3.

5 Ex. iii. 2.


634


SCORPIACE.


[chap. II,


A Sect troublesome to nobody so dealt with !
Then they pierce. Men are perishing with-
out a reason. For that they are perishing,

, and without a reason, is the first insertion.
Then they now strike mortally. But the un-
sophisticated souls ' know not what is written,
and what meaning it bears, where and when
and before whom we must confess, or ought,
save that this, to die for God, is, since He
preserves me, not even artlessness, but folly,
nay madness. If He kills me, how will it be
His duty to preserve me ? Once for all Christ
died for us, once for all He was slain that we
might not be slain. If He demands the like
from me in return, does He also look for sal-
vation from my death by violence ? Or does
God importune for the blood of men, especi-
ally if He refuses that of bulls and he-goats ? ="
Assuredly He had rather have the repentance

• than the death of the sinner.^ And how is
He eager for the death of those who are not
sinners ? Whom will not these, and perhaps
other subtle devices containing heretical poi-
sons, pierce either for doubt if not for de-
struction, or for irritation if not for death?
As for you, therefore, do you, if faith is on
the alert, smite on the spot the scorpion with
a curse, so far as you can, with your sandal,
and leave it dying in its own stupefaction?
But if it gluts the wound, it drives the poison
inwards, and makes it hasten into the bowels;
forthwith all the former senses become dull,
the blood of the mind freezes, the flesh
of the spirit pines away, loathing for the
Christian name is" accompanied by a sense
of sourness. Already the understanding
also seeks for itself a place where it may
throw up; and thus, once for all, the weak-
ness with which it has been smitten breathes
out wounded faith either in heresy or in
heathenism. And now the present state
of matters is such, that we are in the midst
of an intense heat, the very dog-star of per-
secution,— a state originating doubtless with
the dog-headed one himself.-^ Of some
Christians the fire, of others the sword, of
others the beasts, have made trial; others are
hungering in prison for the martyrdoms of
which they have had a taste in the meantime
by being subjected to clubs and claws s be-
sides. We ourselves, having been appointed
for pursuit, are like hares being hemmed in
from a distance; and heretics go about accord-
ing to their wont. Therefore the state of the
times has prompted me to prepare by my pen,
in opposition to the little beasts which trouble


I The opponents of martyrdoms are meant. — Tr.
2Ps. 1. 13.
3Ez<ak. xxxiii. 11.

4 i.e. the devil.— Tr.

5 An instrument of torture, so called. — Tr.


our sect, our antidote against poison, that I •
may thereby effect cures. You who read will
at the same time drink. Nor is the draught
bitter. If the utterances of the Lord are
sweeter than honey and the honeycombs,* the
juices are from that source. If the promise
of God flows with milk and honey,^ the in-
gredients which go to make that draught have
the smack of this. " But woe to them who
turn sweet into bitter, and light into dark-
ness."^ For, in like manner, they also who
oppose martyrdoms, representing salvation to
be destruction, transmute sweet into bitter, as
well as light into darkness; and thus, by pre-
ferring this very wretched life to that most
blessed one, they put bitter for sweet, as well
as darkness for light.

CHAP. II.

But not yet about the good to be got from
martyrdom must we learn, without our having
first heard 3bo\it the duty of suffering it; nor
must we learn the usefulness of it, before we
have heard about the necessity for it. The
(question of the) divine warrant goes first —
whether God has willed and also commanded
ought of the kind, so that they who assert
that it is not good are not plied with argu-
ments for thinking it profitable save when they
have been subdued. » It is proper that here-
tics be driven '° to duty, not enticed. Obsti-
nacy must be conquered, not coaxed. And,
certainly, that will be pronounced beforehand
quite good enough, which will be shown to
have been instituted and also enjoined by
God. Let the Gospels wait a little, while I
set forth their root the Law, while I ascertain
the will of God from those writings from which
I recall to mind Himself also: "/am," says
He, *'God, thy God, who have brought thee
out of the land of Egypt. Thou shalt have
no other gods besides me. Thou shalt not
make unto thee a likeness of those things
which are in heaven, and which are in the
earth beneath, and which are in the sea under
the earth. Thou shalt not worship them, nor
serve them. For I am the Lord thy God." "
Likewise in the same book of Exodus: "Ye
yourselves have seen that I have talked with
you from heaven. Ye shall not make unto
you gods of silver, neither shall ye make unto
you gods of gold." " To the following effect
also, in Deuteromy: " Hear, O Israel; The
Lord thy God is one: and thou shalt love the


6 Ps. xix. 10.

7 Ex. iii. 17.

8 Isa. V. 20.

9 By those in favour of its having been divinely enjoined,
'o By ar)(ument, of course. — Tr.

«« Ex. XX. a.

*» Ex. XX. 22, 23.


SCORPIACE.


635


Lord thy God with all thy heart and all thy
might, and with all thy soul."' And again:
" Neither do thou forget the Lord thy God,
who brought thee forth from the land of
Egypt, out of the house of bondage. Thou
shalt fear the Lord thy God, and serve Him
only, and cleave to Him, and swear by His
name. Ye shall not go after strange gods,
and the gods of the nations which are round
about you, because the Lord thy God is also
a jealous God among you, and lest His anger
should be kindled against thee, and destroy
thee from off the face of the earth,"' But
setting before them blessings and curses, He
also says: " Blessings shall be yours, if ye
obey the commandments of the Lord your
God, whatsoever I command you this day,
and do not wander from the way which I have
commanded you, to go and serve other gods
whom ye know not."^ And as to rooting
them out in every way: " Ye shall utterly de-
stroy all the places wherein the nations, which
ye shall possess by inheritance, served their
gods, upon mountains and hills, and under
shady trees. Ye shall overthrow all their al-
tars, ye shall overturn and break in pieces
their pillars, and cut down their groves, and
burn with fire the graven images of the gods
themselves, and destroy the names of them
out of that place."'* He further urges, when
they (the Israelites) had entered the land
of promise, and driven out its nations:
*' Take heed to thy self, that thou do not fol-
low them after they be driven out from before
thee, that thou do not inquire after their gods,
saying. As the nations serve their gods, so. let
me do likewise." 5 But also says He: "If
there arise among you a prophet himself, or
a dreamer of dreams, and giveth thee a sign
or a wonder, and it come to pass, and he say.
Let us go and serve other gods, whom ye know
not, do not hearken to the words of that pro-
phet or dreamer, for the Lord your God prov-
eth you, to know whether ye fear God with all
your heart and with all your soul. After the
Lord your God ye shall go, and fear Him, and
keep His commandments, and obey His voice,
and serve Him, and cleave unto Him. But
that prophet or dreamer shall die; for he has
spoken to turn thee away from the Lord thy
God."^ But also in another section. ^ "If,
however, thy brother, the son of thy father or
of thy mother, or thy son, or thy daughter,
or the wife of thy bosom, or thy friend who
is as thine own soul, solicit thee, saying se-


1 Deut. vi. 4.

2 Deut. vi. 12.

3 Deut. xi. 27.
4Devt. xii. 2, 3.
SDeut. xii. 30.

6 Deut. xiii. i.

7 Of course our division of the Scripture by chapter and verse
did not exist in the days of Tertullian. — Tr.


cretly, Let us go and serve other gods, which
thou knowest not, nor did thy fathers, of the
gods of the nations which are round about
thee, very nigh unto thee or far off from thee,
do not consent to go with him, and do not
hearken to him. Thine eye shall not spare
him, neither shalt thou pity, neither shalt thou
preserve him; thou shall certainly inform
upon him. Thine hand shall be first upon
him to kill him, and afterwards the hand of thy
people; and ye shall stone him, and he shall
die, seeing he has sought to turn thee away
from the Lord thy God."^ He adds likewise
concerning cities, that if it appeared that one
of these had, through the advice of unrighte-
ous men, passed over to other gods, all its
inhabitants should be slain, and everything
belonging to it become accursed, and all the
spoil of it be gathered together into all its
places of egress, and be, even with all the
people, burned with fire in all its streets in
the sight of the Lord God; and, says He, " it
shall not be for dwelling in for ever: it shall
not be built again any more, and there shall
cleave to thy hands nought of its accursed
plunder, that the Lord may turn from the
fierceness of His anger." ' He has, from
His abhorrence of idols, framed a series of
curses too: " Cursed be the man who maketh
a graven or a molten image, an abomination,
the work of the hands of the craftsman, and
putteth it in a secret place." '° But in Leviti-
cus He says: "Go not ye after idols, nor
make to yourselves molten gods: I am the
Lord your God."" And in other passages:
"The children of Israel are my household
servants; these are they whom I led forth from
the land of Egypt: " I am the Lord your God.
Ye shall not make you idols fashioned by the
hand, neither rear you up a graven image.
Nor shall ye set up a remarkable stone in
your land (to worship it) : I am the Lord your
God." '3 These words indeed were first
spoken by the Lord by the lips of Moses, be-
ing applicable certainly to whomsoever the
Lord God of Israel may lead forth in like
manner from the Egypt of a most superstitious
world, and from the abode of human slavery.
But from the mouth of every prophet in suc-
cession, sound forth also utterances of the
same God, augmenting the same law of His
by a renewal of the same commands, and in
the first place announcing no other duty in so
special a manner as the being on guard against
all making and worshipping of idols; as when


8 Deut. xjii. 6.

9 Deut. xiii. 16.
'9 Deut. xxvii. 15.
»i Rev. xix. 4:

12 The words in the Septua^nt are:_ on. «/ioI 01 vIoIt 'Io-po>jA
oiKfrai eicriV, naiSe^ fiov oiroi tiatv ov« i^iiyayoy e*t 7^* Aiyvirrov.
'3 Lev. XXV. 55, xxvi. i.


636


SCORPIACE.


[chap. IV.


by the mouth of David He says: " The gods
of the nations are silver and gold: they have
eyes, and see not; they have ears, and hear
not; they have a nose, and smell not; a mouth,
and they speak not; hands, and they handle
not; feet and they walk not. Like to them
shall be they who make them, and trust in
them."'

CHAP. III.

Nor should I think it needful to discuss
whether God pursues a worthy course in for-
bidding His own name and honour to be given
over to a lie, or does so in not consenting that
such as He has plucked from the maze of
false religion should return again to Egypt,
or does so in not suffering to depart from
Him them whom He has chosen for Himself.
Thus that, too, will not require to be treated
by us, whether He has wished to be kept the
rule which He has chosen to appoint, and
whether He justly avenges the abandonment
of the rule which He has wished to be kept;
since He would have appointed it to no pur-
pose if He had not wished it kept, and would
have to no purpose wished it kept if He had
been unwilling to uphold it. My next step,
indeed, is to put to the test these appoint-
ments of God in opposition to false religions,
the completely vanquished as well as also the
punished, since on these will depend the entire
argument for martyrdoms. Moses was apart
with God on the mountain, when the people,
not brooking his absence, which was so need-
ful, seek to make gods for themselves, which,
for his own part, he will prefer to destroy. ="
Aaron is importuned, and commands that the
earrings of their women be brought together,
that they may be thrown into the fire. For
the people were about to lose, as a judgment
upon themselves, the true ornaments for the
ears, the words of God. The wise fire makes
for them the molten likeness of a calf, re-
proaching them with having the heart where
they have their treasure also, — in Egypt, to
wit, which clothed with sacredness, among the
other animals, a certain ox likewise. There-
fore the slaughter of three thousand by their
nearest relatives, because they had displeased
their so very near relative God, solemnly
marked both the commencement and the de-
serts of the trespass. Israel having, as we are
told in Numbers, 3 turned aside at Sethim, the
people go to the daughters of Moab to gratify
their lust: they are allured to the idols, so
that they committed whoredom with the spirit
also: finally, they eat of their defiled sacrifices;


^ Ps. cxxxv. 15, cxv. 4.
a Ex. xxxii.
3 Num. XXV. I.


then they both worship the gods of the nation,
and are admitted to the rites of Beelphegor.
For this lapse, too, into idolatry, sister to
adultery, it took the slaughter of twenty-three
thousand by the swords of their countrymen
to appease the divine anger. After the death
of Joshua the son of Nave they forsake the
God of their fathers, and serve idols, Baalim
and Ashtaroth;-* and the Lord in anger de-
livered them up to the hands of spoilers, and
they continued to be spoiled by them, and to
be sold to their adversaries, and could not at
all stand before their enemies. Whitherso-
ever they went forth. His hand was upon them
for evil, and they were greatly distressed.
And after this God sets judges [critas), the
same as our censors, over them. But not
even these did they continue steadfastly to
obey. So soon as one of the judges died,
they proceeded to transgress more than their
fathers had done by going after the gods of
others, and serving and worshipping them.
Therefore the Lord was angry. "Since, in-
deed," He says, "this nation have trans-
gressed my covenant which I established with
their fathers, and have not hearkened to my
voice, I also will give no heed to remove from
before them a man of the nations which Joshua
left at his death." s And thus, throughout
almost all the annals of the judges and of the
kings who succeeded them, while the strength
of the surrounding nations was preserved. He
meted wrath out to Israel by war and captivity
and a foreign yoke, as often as they turned
aside from Him, especially to idolatry.

CHAP. IV.

If, therefore, it is evident that from the
beginning this kind of worship has both been
forbidden — witness the commands so numer-
ous and weighty — and that it has never been
engaged in without punishment following, as
examples so numerous and impressive show,
and that no offence is counted by God so
presumptuous as a trespass of this sort, we
ought further to perceive the purport of both
the divine threatenings and their fulfilments,
which was even then commended not only by
the not calling in question, but also by the
enduring of martyrdoms, for which certainly
He had given occasion by forbidding idola-
try. For otherwise martyrdoms would not
take place. And certainly He had supplied,
as a warrant for these, His own authority,
willing those events to come to pass for the
occurrence of which He hnd given occasion.
At present (it is important), Uir we are getting
severely stung concerning the will of God,


4 Judg. li. 8-13.

5 Judg. ii. 20, 21.


CHAI'. v.]


SCORPIACE.


^2>7


and the scorpion repeats the prick, denying
the existence of this will, finding fault with it,
so that he either insinuates that there is an-
other god, such that this is not his will, or
none the less overthrows ours, seeing such is
his will, or altogether denies ihis will of God, if
he cannot deny Himself. But, for our part, con-
tending elsewhere about God, and about all the
rest of the body of heretical teaching, we now
draw before us definite lines ' for one form of
encounter, maintaining that this will, such as
to have given occasion for martyrdoms, is that
of not another god than the God of Israel, on
the ground of the commandments relating to
an always forbidden, as well as of the judg-
ments upon a punished, idolatry. For if the
keeping of a command involves the suffering
of violence, this will be, so to speak, a com-
mand about keeping the command, requiring
me to suffer that through which I shall be able
to keep the command, violence namely, what-
ever of it threatens me when on my guard
against idolatry. And certainly (in the case
supposed) the Author of the command extorts
compliance with it. He could not, therefore,
have been unwilling that those events should
come to pass by means of which the compli-
ance will be manifest. The injunction is given
me not to make mention of any other god,
not even by speaking, — as little by the tongue
as by the hand, — to fashion a god, and not to
worship or in any way show reverence to an-
other than Him only who thus commands me,
whom I am both bid fear that I may not be
forsaken by Him, and love with my whole
being, that I may die for Him. Serving as a
soldier under this oath, I am challenged by
the enemy. If I surrender to them, I am as
they are. In maintaining this oath, I fight
furiously in battle, am wounded, hewn in
pieces, slain. Who wished this fatal issue to
his soldier, but he who sealed him by such an
oath?

CHAP. V.

You have therefore the will of my God.
We have cured this prick. Let us give good
heed to another thrust touching the character
of His will. It would be tedious to show that
my God is good, — a truth with which the Mar-
cionites have now been made acquainted by
us. Meanwhile it is enough that He is called
God for its being necessary that He should
be believed to be good. For if any one make
the supposition that God is evil, he will not be
able to take his stand on both the constituents
thereof: he will be bound either to afifirm that
he whom he has thought to be evil is not God,

I An allusion to what occurred in the games, there being lines to
mark the space within which the contests were to be waged. — Tr.


or that he whom he has proclaimed to be God

is good. Good, therefore, will be the will also
of him who, unless he is good, will not be
God. The goodness of the thing itself also
which God has willed — of martyrdom, I mean
— will show this, because only one who is good
has willed what is good. I stoutly maintain
that martyrdom is good, as required by the
God by whom likewise idolatry is forbidden
and punished. For martyrdom strives against
and opposes idolatry. But to strive against
and oppose evil cannot be ought but good.
Not as if I denied that there is a rivalry in
evil things with one another, as well as in good
also; but this ground for it requires a different
state of matters. For martyrdom contends
with idolatry, not from some malice which
they share, but from its own kindness; for it
delivers from idolatry. Who will not proclaim
that to be good which delivers from idolatry ?
What else is the opposition between idolatry .
and martyrdom, than that between life and*^
death ? Life will be counted to be martyr-
dom as much as idolatry to be death. He
who will call life an evil, has death to speak
of as a good. This frowardness also apper-
tains to men, — to discard what is wholesome,
to accept what is baleful, to avoid all danger-
ous cures, or, in short, to be eager to die rather
than to be healed. For they are many who
flee from the aid of physic also, many in folly,
many from fear and false modesty. And the
healing art has manifestly an apparent cruelty,
by reason of the lancet, and of the burning
iron, and of the great heat of the mustard; yet
to be cut and burned, and pulled and bitten,
is not on that account an evil, for it occasions
helpful pains; nor will it be refused merely
because it afflicts, but because it afflicts inevi-
tably will it be applied. The good accruing is
the apology for the frightfulness of the work.
In short, that man who is howling and groan-
ing and bellowing in the hands of a physician
will presently load the same hands with a fee,
and proclaim that they are the best operators,
and no longer affirm that they are cruel.
Thus martyrdoms also rage furiously, but for
salvation. God also will be at liberty to heal
for everlasting life by means of fires and
swords, and all that is painful. But you will
admire the physician at least even in that re-
spect, that for the most part he employs like
properties in the cures to counteract the prop-
erties of the diseases, when he aids, as it were,
the wrong way, succouring by means of those
things to which the affliction is owing. For
he both checks heat by heat, by laying on a
greater load; and subdues inflammation by
leaving thirst unappeased, by tormenting
rather; and contracts the superabundance of


638


SCORPIACE.


[chap. VI.


bile by every bitter little draught, and stops
hemorrhage by opening a veinlet in addition.
Bu^ you will think that God must be found
fault with, and that for being jealous, if He
has chosen to contend with a disease and to
do good by imitating the malady, to destroy
death by death, to dissipate killing by killing,
to dispel tortures by tortures, to disperse^
punishments by punishments, to bestow life
by withdrawing it, to aid the flesh by injuring
it, to preserve the soul by snatching it away.
The wrongheadedness, as you deem it to be,
is reasonableness; what you count cruelty is
kindness. Thus, seeing God by brief (suffer-
ings) effects cures for eternity, extol your
God for your prosperity; you have fallen into
His hands, but have happily fallen. He also
fell into your sicknesses. Man always first
provides employment for the physician; in
short, he has brought upon himself the dan-
ger of death. He had received from his own
Lord, as from a physician, the salutary enough
rule to live according to the law, that he should
eat of all indeed (that the garden produced)
mid should refrain from only one little tree
which in the meantime the Physician Himself
knew as a perilous one. He gave ear to him
whom he preferred, and broke through self-
restraint. He ate what was forbidden, and,
surfeited by the trespass, suffered indigestion
tending to death; he certainly richly deserving
to lose his life altogether who wished to do so.
But the inflamed tumour due to the trespass
having been endured until in due time the
medicine might be mixed, the Lord gradually
prepared the means of healing — all the rules
of faith, they also bearing a resemblance to
(the causes of) the ailment, seeing they annul
the word of death by the word of life, and
diminish the trespass-listening by a listening
of allegiance. Thus, even when that Physi-
cian commands one to die. He drives out the
lethargy of death. Why does man show re-
luctance to suffer now from a cure, what he
was not reluctant then to suffer from a dis-
order? Does he dislike being killed for sal-
vation, who did not dislike being killed for
destruction ? — Will he feel squeamish with
reference to the counter poison, who gaped
for the poison ?

CHAP. VI.

But if, for the contest's sake, God had ap-
pointed martrydoms for us, that thereby we
might make trial with our opponent, in order
that He may now keep bruising him by whom
man chose to be bruised, here too generosity
rather than harshness in God holds sway.
For He wished to make man, now plucked

» Literally, " disperse in vapour." — Tr.


from the devil's throat by faith, trample upon
him likewise by courage, that he might not
merely have escaped from, but also completely
vanquished, his enemy. He who had called
to salvation has been pleased to summon to
glory also, that they who were rejoicing in
consequence of their deliverance may be in
transports when they are crowned likewise.
With what good-will the world celebrates
those games, the combative festivals and
superstitious contests of the Greeks, involving
forms both of worship and of pleasure, has
now become clear in Africa also. As yet
cities, by sending their congratulations sever-
ally, annoy Carthage, which was presented
with the Pythian game after the racecourse
had attained to an old age. Thus, by the
world ^ it has been believed to be a most
proper mode of testing proficiency in studies,
to put in competition the forms of skill, to
elicit the existing condition of bodies and of
voices, the reward being the informer, the
public exhibition the judge, and pleasure the
decision. Where there are mere contests,
there are some wounds: fists make reel, heels
kick like butting rams, boxing-gloves mangle,
whips leave gashes. Yet there will be no
one reproaching the superintendent of the
contest for exposing men to outrage. Suits
for injuries lie outside the racecourse. But
to the extent that those persons deal in dis-
coloration, and gore, and swellings, he will
design for them crowns, doubtless, and glory,
and a present, political privileges, contribu-
tions by the citizens, images, statues, and —
of such sort as the world can give — an eter-
nity of fame, a resurrection by being kept in
remembrance. The pugilist himself does not
complain of feeling pain, for he wishes it;
the crown closes the wounds, the palm hides
the blood: he is excited more by victory than
by injury. Will you count this man hurt
whom you see happy ? But not even the
vanquished himself will reproach the super-
intendent of the contest for his misfortune.
Shall it be unbecoming in God to bring forth
kinds of skill and rules of His own into pub-
lic view, into this open ground of the world,
to be seen by men, and angels, and all
powers ? — to test flesh and spirit as to sted-
fastness and endurance ? — to give to this one
the palm, to this one distinction, to that one
the privilege of citizenship, to that one
pay ? — to reject some also, and after punishing
to remove them with disgrace ? You dictate
to God, forsooth, the times, or the ways, or
the places in which to institute a trial con-
cerning His own troop (of competitors) as if
it were not proper for the Judge to pronounce


» Literally, "age." — Tr.


CHAP. VII.]


SCORPIACE.


639


\


the preliminary decision also. Well now, if
He had put forth faith to suffer martyrdoms
not for the contest's sake, but for its own
benefit, ought it not to have had some store
of hope, for the increase of which it might
restrain desire of its own, and check its wish,
in order that it might strive to mount up, see-
ing they also who discharge earthly functions
are eager for promotion? Or how will there
be many mansions in our Father's house, if
not to accord with a diversity of deserts ?
How will one star also differ from another star
in glory, unless in virtue of disparity in their
rays ?' But further, if, on that account, some
increase of brightness also was appropriate to
loftiness of faith, that gain ought to have
-been of some such sort as would cost great
effort, poignant suffering, torture, death. But
consider the requital, when flesh and life are
paid away — than which in man there is
nought more precious, the one from the hand
of God, the other from His breath — that the
very things are paid away in obtaining the
benefit of which the benefit consists; that the
very things are expended which may be ac-
quired; that the same things are the price
which are also the commodities. God had
foreseen also other weaknesses incident to
the condition of man, — the stratagems of the
enemy, the deceptive aspects of the creatures,
the snares of the world; that faith, even after
baptism, would be endangered; that the most,
after attaining unto salvation, would be lost
again, through soiUng the wedding-dress,
through failing to provide oil for their torch-
lets — would be such as would have to be
sought for over mountains and woodlands,
and carried back upon the shoulders. He
therefore appointed as second supplies of
comfort, and the last means of succour, the
fight of martyrdom and the baptism — there-
after free from danger — of blood. And con-
cerning the happiness of the man who has
partaken of these, David says: *' Blessed are
they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose
sins are covered. Blessed is the man to
whom the Lord will not impute sin.''^* For,
strictly speaking, there cannot any longer be
reckoned ought against the martyrs, by whom
in the baptism (of blood) life itself is laid
down. Thus, *' love covers the multitude of
sins;" 3 and loving God, to wit, with all its
strength (by which in the endurance of mar-
tyrdom it maintains the fight), with all its
life* (which it lays down for God), it makes
of man a martyr. Shall you call these cures,
counsels, methods of judging, spectacles.


1 1 Cor. XV. 41. •

2 Ps. xxxii. I ; Rom. iv. 7, etc.

3 I Pet. iv. 8.

4 Matt. xxii. 37.


(illustrations of) even the barbarity of God ?
Does God covet man's blood ? And yet I
might venture to affirm that He does, i( man
also covets the kingdom of heaven, if man
covets a sure salvation, if man also covets a
second new birth. The exchange is displeas-
ing to no one, which can plead, in justifica-
tion of itself, that either benefit or injury is
shared by the parties making it.

CHAP. vii.

If the scorpion, swinging his tail in the air,
still reproach us with having a murderer for our
God, I shall shudder at the altogether foul
breath of blasphemy which comes stinking from
his heretical mouth; but I will embrace even
such a God, with assurance derived from rea-
son, by which reason even He Himself has,
in the person of His own Wisdom, by the lips
of Solomon, proclaimed Himself to be more
than a murderer: Wisdom {Sophia), says He
has slain her own children. s Sophia is Wis-
dom. She has certainly slain them wisely if
only into life, and reasonably if only into
glory. Of murder by a parent, oh the clever
form ! Oh the dexterity of crime ! Oh the
proof of cruelty, which has slain for this rea-
son, that he whom it may have slain may not
die ! And therefore what follows ? Wisdom
is praised in hymns, in the places of egress;
for the death of martyrs also is praised in
song. Wisdom behaves with firmness in the
streets, for with good results does she murder
her own sons.^ Nay, on the top of the walls
she speaks with assurance, when indeed, ac-
cording to Esaias, this one calls out, " I am
God's;" and this one shouts, " In the name
of Jacob;" and another writes, " In the name
of Israel." 7 O good mother! I myself also
wish to be put among the number of her sons,
that I may be slain by her; I wish to be slain,
that I may become a son. But does she
merely murder her sons, or also torture them?
For I hear God also, in another passage, say,
" I will burn them as gold is burned, and will
try them as silver is tried." ^ Certainly by
the means of torture which fires and punish-
ments supply, by the testing martyrdoms of
faith. The apostle also knows what kind of
God he has ascribed to us, when he writes:
" If God spared not His own Son, but gave
Him up for us, how did He not with Him also
give us all things?"' You see how divine
Wisdom has murdered even her own proper,


5 Prov. ix. 2 : " She hath killed her beasts. 'J The correspond-
ing words in the Septuagint arc i<r^a(t to. «avT^? Bv/jLara. Augus-
tine, in his Df Civ. Dei, xvi. 20, explains the victims (tfvfiaTa) to
be Martyr urn victim as. — Tk.

6 Prov. i. 20, a I ; see the Septuagint version.

7 Isa. xliv. S-.
sZech. xiii. 9.
9 Rom. viii. 33


640


SCORPIACE.


[chap. VIII.


first-born and only Son, who is certainly about
to live, nay, to bring back the others also into
life. I can say with the Wisdom of God; It !
is Christ who gave Himself up for our offen- 1
ces.* Already has Wisdom butchered herself!
also. The character of words depends not on |
the sound only, but on the meaning also, and
they must be heard not merely by ears, but
also by minds. He who does not understand,
believes God to be cruel; although for him also
who does not understand, an announcement
has been made to restrain his harshness in
understanding otheru-ise tha7i aright. " For
who, ' ' says the apostle^''' has known the mind of
the Lord ? or who has been His counsellor, to
teach Him ? or who has pointed out to Him
the way of understanding ?"= But, indeed,
the world has held it lawful for Diana of the
Scythians, or Mercury of the Gauls, or Saturn
of the Africans, to be appeased by human
sacrifices; and in Latium to this day Jupiter
has human blood given him to taste in the
midst of the city; and no one makes it a mat-
ter of discussion, or imagines that it does not
occur for some reason, or that it occurs by the
will of his God, without having value. If our
God, too, to have a sacrifice of His own, had
required martyrdoms for Himself, who would
have reproached Him for the deadly religion,
and the mournful ceremonies, and the altar-
pyre, and the undertaker-priest, and not
rather have counted happy the man whom
God should have devoured ?

CHAP. VIII.

We keep therefore the one position, and,
in respect of this question only, summon to
an encounter, whether martyrdoms have been
commanded by God, that you may believe
that they have been commanded by reason,
if you know that they have been commanded
by Him, because God will not command ought
without reason. Since the death of His own
saints is precious is His sight, as David
sings, 3 it is not, I think, that one which falls
to the lot of men generally, and is a debt due
by all (rather is that one even disgraceful on
account of the trespass, and the desert of con-
demnation to which it is to be traced)^ but that
other which is met in this very work — in bear-
ing witness for religion, and maintaining the
fight of confession in behalf of righteousness
and the sacrament. As saith Esaias, " See
how the righteous man perisheth, and no one
layeth it to heart; and righteous men are
taken away, and no one considereth it: for
from before the face of unrighteousness the


» Rom. iv. 25.
3 Rom. xi, 34.
3 Pa. cxvi. 15.


righteous man perisheth, and he shall have
honour at his burial." *• Here, too, you have
both an announcement of martrydoms, and of
the recompense they bring. From the begin-
ning, indeed, righteousness suffers violence.
Forthwith, as soon as God has begun to be
worshipped, religion has got ill-will for her
portion. He who had pleased God is slain,
and that by his brother. Beginning with kin-
dred blood, in order that it might the more
easily go in quest of that of strangers, ungod-
liness made the object of its pursuit, finally,
that not only of righteous persons, but even
of prophets also. David is persecuted; Elias
put to flight; Jeremias stoned; Esaias cut
asunder; Zacharias butchered between the
altar and the temple, imparting to the hard
stones lasting marks of his blood. s That
person himself, at the close of the law and the
prophets, and called not a prophet, but a
messenger, is, suffering an ignominious death,
beheaded to reward a dancing-girl. And cer-
tainly they who were wont to be led by the
Spirit of God used to be guided by Himself
to martyrdoms; so that they had even already
to endure what they had also proclaimed as
requiring to be borne. Wherefore the brother-
hood of the three also, when the dedication
of the royal image was the occasion of the
citizens being pressed to offer worship, knew
well what faith, which alone in them had not
been taken captive, required, — namely, that
they must resist idolatry to the death. ^ For
they remembered also the words of Jeremias
writing to those over whom that captivity was
impending: "And now ye shall see borne
upon (men's) shoulders the gods of the Baby-
lonians, of gold and silver and wood, causing
fear to the Gentiles. Beware, therefore, that
ye also do not be altogether like the foreigners,
and be seized with fear while ye behold
crowds worshipping those gods before and
behind, but say in your mind. Our duty is to
worship Thee, O Lord."^ Therefore, hav-
ing got confidence from God, they said, when
with strength of mind they set at defiance the
king's threats against the disobedient: " There
is no necessity for our making answer to this
command of yours. For our God whom we
worship is able to deliver us from the furnace
of fire and from your hands; and then it will
be made plain to you that we shall neither
serve your idol, nor worship your golden
image which you have set up."^ O martyr-
dom even without suffering perfect! Enough
did they suffer ! enough were they burned,

4 Isa. Ivii. I.

5 Matt. xiv. 3.

6 Dan. iii. 12. *

7 Baruch vi, 3.

8 Dan. iii. 16.


CHAP. IX.]


SCORPIACE.


641


whom on this account God shielded, that it
might not seem that they had given a false
representation of His power. For forthwith,
certainly, would the lions, with their pent-up
and wonted savageness, have devoured I^aniel
also, a worshipper of none but God, and
therefore accused and demanded by the Chal-
deans, if it had been right that the worthy
anticipation of Darius concerning God should
have proved delusive. For the rest, every
preacher of God, and every worshipper also,
such as, having been summoned to the service
of idolatry, had refused compliance, ought to
have suffered, agreeably to the tenor of that
argument too, by which the truth ought to
have been recommended both to those who
were then living and to those following in
succession, — (namely), that the suffering of
its defenders themselves bespeak trust for it,
because nobody would have been willing to
be slain but one possessing the truth. Such
commands as well as instances, remounting to
earliest times, show that believers are under
obligation to suffer martyrdom.

CHAP. IX.

It remains for us, lest ancient times may
perhaps have had the sacrament^ (exclus-
ively) their own, to review the modern
Christian system, as though, being also from
God, it might be different from what pre-
ceded^ and- besides, therefore, opposed there-
to in its code of rules likewise, so that its
Wisdom knows not to murder her own sons !
Evidently, in the case of Christ both the di-
vine nature and the will and the sect are differ-
ent y>'^w a7iy previously kno^an ! He will have
commanded either no martyrdoms at all, or
those which must be understood in a sense
different from the ordinary, being such a per-
son as to urge no one to a risk of this kind,
as to promise no reward to them who suffer
for Him, because He does not wish them to
suffer; and therefore does He say, when set-
ting forth His chief commands, " Blessed are
they who are persecuted for righteousness'
sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.""
The following statement, indeed, applies first
to all without restriction, then specially to the
apostles themselves : *' Blessed shall ye be when
men shall revile you, and persecute you, and
shall say all manner of evil against you, for my
sake. Rejoice and be exceeding glad, since
very great is your reward in heaven; for so
used their fathers to do even to the prophets."
So that He likewise foretold their having to
be themselves also slain, after the example


1 TertuUian means martyrdom.

2 Matt. V. 10 ; Luke vi. 23,

41


of the prophets. Though, even if He had
appointed all this persecution in case He
were obeyed for those only who were then
apostles, assuredly through them along wit.i
the entire sacrament, with the shoot of the
name, with the layer of the Holy Spirit, the
rule about enduring persecution also would
have had respect to us too, as to disciples by
inheritance, and, (as it were,) bushes from the
apostolic seed. For even thus again does He
address words of guidance to the apostles:
" Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the
midst of wolves;" and, " Beware of men, for
they will deliver you up to the councils, and
they will scourge you in their synagogues;
and ye shall be brought before governors and
kings for my sake, for a testimony against
them and the Gentiles," etc.^ Now when He
adds, " But the brother will deliver up the
brother to death, and the father the child;
and the children shall rise up against their
parents, and cause them to be put to death,"
He has clearly announced with reference to
the others, (that they would be subjected to)
this form of unrighteous conduct, which
we do not find exemplified in the case of the
apostles. For none of them had experience
of a father or a brother as a betrayer, which
very many of us have. Then He returns to
the apostles: "And ye shall be hated of all
men for my name's sake." How much more
shall we, for whom there exists the necessity
of being delivered up by parents too ! Thus,
by allotting this very betrayal, now to the
apostles, now to all. He pours out the same
destruction upon all the possessors of the
name, on whom the name, along with the con-
dition that it be an object of hatred, will rest.
But he who will endure on to the end — this
man will be saved. By enduring what but
persecution, — betrayal, — death? For to en-
dure to the end is nought else than to suffer
the end. And therefore there immediate-
ly follow, " The disciple is not above his
master, nor the servant above his own lord;"
because, seeing the Master and Lord Him-
self was stedfast in suffering persecution,
betrayal and death, much more will it be the
duty of His servants and disciples to bear the
same, that they may not seem as if superior
to Him, or to have got an immunity from the
assaults of unrighteousness, since this itself
should be glory enough for them, to be con-
formed to the sufferings of their Lord and
Master; and, preparing them for the endur-
ance of these. He reminds them that they
must not fear such persons as kill the body
only, but are not able to destroy the soul, but
that they must dedicate fear to Him rather


3 Matt. X. 16.


642


SCORPIACE.


[chap. X.


who has such power that He can kill both
body and soul, and destroy them in hell.
Who, pray, are these slayers of the body only,
but the governors and kings aforesaid — men,
I ween ? Who is the ruler of the soul also, but
God only ? Who is this but the threatener of
fires hereafter^ He without whose will not
even one of two sparrows falls to the ground;
that is, not even one of the two substances of
man, flesh or spirit, because the number of our
hairs also has been recorded before Him ?
Fear ye not, therefore. When He adds,
*' Ye are of more value than many sparrows,"
He makes promise that we shall not in vain —
that is, not without profit — fall to the ground
if we choose to be killed by men rather than
by God. " Whosoever therefore will confess
in me before men, in him will I confess also
before my Father who is in heaven;^ and
whosoever shall deny me before men, him will
I deny also before my Father who is in
heaven." Clear, as I think, are the terms
used in announcing, and the way to explain,
the confession as well as the denial, although
the mode of putting them is different. He
who confesses himself a Christian, beareth
witness that he is Christ's; he who is Christ's
must be in Christ. If he is in Christ, he cer-
tainly confesses in Christ, when he confesses
himself a Christian. For he cannot be this
without being in Christ. Besides, by confess-
ing in Christ he confesses Christ too: since,
by virtue of being a Christian, he is in Christ,
while Christ Himself also is in him. For if
you have made mention of day, you have also
held out to view the element of light which
gives us day, although you may not have
made mention of light. Thus, albeit He has
not expressly said, " He who will confess me,"
(yet) the conduct involved in daily confession
is not different from what is meant in our
Lord's declaration. For he who confesses
himself to be what he is, that is, a Christian,
confesses that likewise by which he is it, that
is, Christ. Therefore he who has denied that
he is a Christian, has denied in Christ, by de-
nying that he is in Christ while he denies that
he is a Christian; and, on the other hand, by
denying that Christ is in him, while He de-
nies that he is in Christ, he will deny Christ
too. Thus both he who will deny in Christ,
will deny Christ, and he who will confess in
Christ will confess Christ. It would have been
enough, therefore, though our Lord had made
an announcement about confessing merely.
For, from His mode of presenting confession,
it might be decided beforehand with reference


'The words in the Greek, though correctly rendered in our
authorized version, are, when translated literally, what Tertullian
represents them to be. — Tr.


to its Opposite too — denial, that is — that de-
nial is repaid by the Lord with denial, just as
confession is with confession. And therefore,
since in the mould in which the confession
has been cast the state of (the case with refer-
ence to) denial also may be perceived, it is
evident that to another manner of denial be-
longs what the Lord has announced concern-
ing it, in terms different from those in which
He speaks of confession, when He says,
" Who will deny me," not " Who will deny in
me." For He had foreseen that this form of
violence also would, for the most part, im-
mediately follow when any one had been
forced to renounce the Christian name, — that
he who had denied that he was a Christian
would be compelled to deny Christ Himself
too by blaspheming Him. As not long ago,
alas, we shuddered at the struggle waged in
this way by some with their entire faith, which
had had favourable omens. Therefore it will
be to no purpose to say, " Though I shall
deny that I am a Christian, I shall not be
denied by Christ, for I have not denied Him-
self." For even so much will be inferred
from that denial, by which, seeing he denies
Christ in him by denying that he is a Chris-
tian, he has denied Christ Himself also. But
there is more, because He threatens likewise
shame with shame (in return): "Whosoever
shall be ashamed of me before men, of him
will I also be ashamed before my Father who
is in heaven." For He was aware that denial
is produced even most of all by shame, that
the state of the mind appears in the forehead,
and that the wound of shame precedes that in
the body.

CHAP. X.

But as to those who think that not here, that
is, not within this environment of earth, nor
during this period of existence, nor before
men possessing this nature shared by us all, has
confession been appointed to be made, what
a supposition is theirs, being at variance with
the whole order of things of which we have
experienoe in these lands, and in this life,
and under human authorities! Doubtless,
when the souls have departed from their
bodies, and begun to be put upon trial in the
several stories of the heavens, with reference
to the engagement (under which they have
come to Jesus), and to be questioned about
those hidden mysteries of the heretics, they
must then confess before the real powers and
the real men, — the Teleti,' to wit, and the


a The perfect.
3The spell-resisting.
4 The steadfast.


CHAP. X.]


SCORPIACE.


643


For, say they^ even the Demiurge himself did
not uniformly approve of the men of our
world, whom he counted as a drop of a
bucket,' and the dust of the threshing-floor,
and spittle and locusts, and put on a level
even with brute beasts. Clearly, it is so writ-
ten. Yet not therefore must we understand
that there is, besides us, another kind of man,
which — for it is evidently iJius (in the case
proposed) — has been able to assume without
invalidating a comparison betivecn the t7uo kinds,
both the characteristics of the race and a
unique property. For even if the life was
tainted, so that condemned to contempt it
might be likened to objects held in contempt,
the nature was not forthwith taken away, so
that there might be supposed to be another
under its name. Rather is the nature pre-
served, though the life blushes; nor does
Christ know other men than those with refer-
ence to whom He says, " Whom do men say
that I am ? " == And, "As ye would that men
should do to you, do ye likewise so to
them. ' ' 3 Consider whether He may not have
preserved a race such that He is looking for a
testimony to Himself from them, as well as
consisting of those on whom He enjoins the
interchange of righteous dealing. But if I
should urgently demand that those heavenly
men be described to me, Aratus will sketch
more easily Perseus and Cepheus, and Erigo-
ne, and Ariadne, among the constellations.
But who prevented the Lord from clearly
prescribing that confession by men likewise
has to be made where He plainly announced
that His own would be; so that the statement
might have run thus : ' ' Whosoever shall confess
in me before men in heaven, I also will con-
fess in him before my Father who is in hea-
ven ? " He ought to have saved me from this
mistake about confession on earth, which He
would not have wished me to take part in, if
He had commanded one in heaven; for I
knew no other men but the inhabitants of the
earth, man himself even not having up to that
time been observed in heaven. Besides,
what is the credibility of. the things (alleged),
that, being after death raised to heavenly
places, I should be put to the test there,
whither I would not be translated without be-
ing already tested, that I should there be tried
in reference to a command where I could not
come, but to find admittance ? Heaven lies
open to the Christian before the way to it
does; because there is no way to heaven, but
to him to whom heaven lies open; and he who
reaches it will enter. What powers, keeping


I Isa. xl. 1 5.

■ Matt. xvi. 13.

3 Matt. vii. 12 and Luke vi. 31.


guard at the gate, do I hear you affirm to e.xist
in accordance with Roman superstition, with
a certain Carnus, Forculus, and Limentinus?
What powers do you set in order at the rail-
ings ? If you have ever read in David, "Lift
up your gates, ye princes, and let the ever-
lasting gates be lifted up; and the King of
glory shall enter in;" * if you have also heard
from Amos, " Who buildeth up to the heavens
his way of ascent, and is such as to pour forth
his abundance (of waters) over the earth;" s
know that both that way of ascent was there-
after levelled with the ground, by the foot-
steps of the Lord, and an entrance thereafter
opened up by the might of Christ, and that
no delay or inquest will meet Christians on
the threshold, since they have there to be not
discriminated from one another, but owned,
and not put to the question, but received in.
For though you think heaven still shut, re-
member that the Lord left here to Peter and
through him to the Church, the keys of it,
which every one who has been here put to the
question, and also made confession, will carry
with him. But the devil stoutly affirms that
we must confess there, to persuade us that we
must deny here. I shall send before me fine
documents, to be sure,^ I shall carry with me
excellent keys, the fear of them who kill the
body only, but do nought against the soul: I
shall be graced by the neglect of this com-
mand: I shall stand with credit in heavenly
places, who could not stand in earthly: I shall
hold out against the greater powers, who
yielded to the lesser: I shall deserve to be at
length let in, though now shut out. It read-
ily occurs to one to remark further, " If it is
in heaven that men must confess, it is here
too that they must deny." For where the
one is, there both are. For contraries always
go together. There will need to be carried
on in heaven persecution even, which is the
occasion of confession or denial. Why, then,
do you refrain, O most presumptuous heretic,
from transporting to the world above the
whole series of means proper to the intimida-
tion of Christians, and especially to put there
the very hatred for the name, where Christ
rules at the right hand of the Father ? Will
you pl£mtther-eJ3-Otksyjaagogues_Qf the Jews—
fountains of persecution — before which the
apostles endured the scourge, and heathen
assemblages with their own circus, forsooth,
where they readily join in the cry. Death to
the third race ? ^ But ye are bound to pro-


4Ps. xxiv. 7.

5 Amos ix. 6. 1

6 In support of my cause.

7 More literally, '* How long shall we suffer the third race ! "
The Christians are meant ; the first race being the heathen, and
the second the Jews. — Tr.


644


SCORPIACE.


[chap. XI.


duce in the same place both our brothers,
fathers, children, mothers-in-law, daughters-
in-law and those of our household, through
whose agency the betrayal has been appointed ;
likewise kings, governors, and armed authori-
ties, before whom the matter at issue must be
contested. Assuredly there will be in heaven
a prison also, destitute of the sun's rays or
full of light unthankfully, and fetters of the
zones perhaps, and, for a rack-horse, the axis
itself which whirls the heaimis round. Then,
if a Christian is to be stoned, hail-storms will
be near; if burned, thunderbolts are at hand;
if butchered, the armed Orion will exercise
his function; if put an end to by beasts, the
north will send forth the bears, the Zodiac the
bulls and the lions. He who will endure these
assaults to the end, the same shall be saved.
Will there be then, in heaven, both an end,
and suffering, a killing, and the first con-
fession? And where will be the flesh re-
quisite for all this ? Where the body which
alone has to be killed by men? Unerring
reason has commanded us to set forth these
things in even a playful manner; nor will any
one thrust out the bar consisting in this objec-
tion (we have offered), so as not. to be com-
pelled to transfer the whole array of means
proper to persecution, all the powerful instru-
mentality which has been provided for deal-
ing with this matter, to the place where he
has put the court before which confession
should be made. Since confession is elicited
by persecution, and persecution ended in con-
fession, there cannot but be at the same time,
in attendance upon these, the instrumentality
which determines both the entrance and 'the
exit, that is, the beginning and the end. But
both hatred for the name will be here, perse-
cution breaks out here, betrayal brings men
forth here, examination uses force here, tor-
ture rages here, and confession or denial com-
pletes this whole course of procedure on the
earth. Therefore, if the other things are
here, confession also is not elsewhere; if con-
fession is elsewhere, the other things also are
not here. Certainly the other things are not
elsewhere; therefore neither is confession in
heaven. Or, if they will have it that the
manner in which the heavenly examination
and confession take place is different, it will
certainly be also incumbent on them to devise
a mode of procedure of their own of a very dif-
ferent kind, and opposed to that method which
is indicated in the Scriptures. And we may
be able to say. Let them consider (whether
what they imagine to exist does so), if so be
that this course of procedure, proper to exam-
ination and confession on earth — a course
which has persecution as the source in which


it originates, and which pleads dissension in
the state — is preserved to its own faith, if so
be that we must believe just as is also written,
and understand just as is spoken. Here I
endure the entire course (in question), the
Lord Himself not appointing a different
quarter of the world for my doitig so. For
what does He add after finishing with con-
fession and denial ? "Think not that I am
come to send peace on earth, but a sword," —
undoubtedly on the earth. " For I am come
to set a man at variance against his father,
and the daughter against her mother, and the
mother-in-law against her daughter-in-law.
And a man's foes shall be they of his own
household."' For so is it brought to pass,
that the brother delivers up the brother to
death, and the father the son: and the chil-
dren rise up against the parents, and cause
them to die. And he who endureth to the
end let that man be saved. =" So that 'this
whole course of procedure characteristic of
the Lord's sword, which has been sent not to
heaven, but to earth, makes confession also to
be there, which by enduring to the end is to
issue in the suffering of death.

CHAP. XI.

In the same manner, therefore, we maintain
that the other announcements too refer to the
condition of martyrdom. *' He," says Jesus,
"who will value his own life also more than
me, is not worthy of me," ^ — that is, he who
will rather live by denying, than die by con-
fessing, me; and "he who findeth his life
shall lose it; but he who loseth it for my sake
shall find it.""* Therefore indeed he finds
it, who, in winning life, denies; but he who
thinks that he wins it by denying, will lose it
in hell. On the other hand, he who, through
confessing, is killed, will lose it for the present,
but is also about to find it unto everlasting
life. In fine, governors themselves, when
they urge men to deny, say, " Save your life; "
and, " Do not lose your life." How would
Christ speak, but in accordance with the treat-
ment to which the Christian would be sub-
jected ? But when He forbids thinking about
what answer to make at a judgment-seat,^ He
is preparing His own servants/^r what awaited
them, He gives the assurance that the Holy
Spirit will answer by them; and when He wishes
a brother to be visited in prison,*^ He is com-
manding that those about to confess be the
object of solicitude; and He is soothing their


» Matt. X. 34.

2 Matt. X. 21.

3 Luke xiv. 26

4 Matt. X. 39.

5 Matt. X. 19.

(> Matt. XXV. 36.


CHAP. XII. J


SCORPIACE.


645


sufferings when He asserts that God will
avenge His own elect.' In the parable also
of the withering of the word' after the green
blade had sprung up, He is drawing a picture
with reference to the burning heat of persecu-
tions. If these announcements are not un-
derstood as they are made, without doubt they
signify something else than the sound indi-
cates; and there will be one thing in the
words, another in their meanings, as is the
case with allegories, with parables, with rid-
dles. Whatever wind of reasoning, therefore,
these scorpions may catch (in their sails), with
whatever subtlety they may attack, there is
now one line of defence i^ an appeal will be
made to the facts themselves, whether they
occur as the Scriptures represent that they
would; since another thing will then be meant
in the Scriptures if that very one (which seems
to be so) is not found in actual facts. For
what is written, must needs come to pass.
Besides, what is written will then come to
pass, if something different does not. But,
lo ! we are both regarded as persons to be
hated by all men for the sake of the name, as
it is written; and are delivered up by our
nearest of kin also, as it is written; and are
brought before magistrates, and examined,
and tortured, and make confession, and are
ruthlessly killed, as it is written. So the Lord
ordained. If He ordained these events other-
wise, why do they not come to pass otherwise
than He ordained them, that is, as He or-
dained them ? And yet they do not come to
pass otherwise than He ordained. Therefore,
as they come to pass, so He ordained; and
as He ordained, so they come to pass. For
neither would they have been permitted to
occur otherwise than He ordained, nor for
His part would He have ordained otherwise
than He would wish them to occur. Thus
these passages of Scripture will not mean
ought else than we recognise in actual facts;
or if those events are not yet taking place
which are announced, how are those taking
place which have not been . announced ? For
these events which are taking place have not
been announced, if those which are announced
are different, and not these which are taking
place. Well now, seeing the very occurrences
are met with in actual life which are believed
to have been expressed with a different mean-
ing in words, what would happen if they were
found to have come to pass in a different
manner thmi had bee?i revealed? But this will
be the waywardness of faith, not to believe
what has been demonstrated, to assume the


1 Luke xviii. 7.

2 Matt. xiii. 3.

3 See note i, cap. iv. p. 637, supra.


truth of what has not been demonstrated.
And to this waywardness I will offer the fol-
lowing objection also, that if these events,
which occur as is written, will not be the very
ones which are announced, those too (which
are meant) ought not to occur as is written,
that they themselves also may not, after the
example of these others, be in danger of ex-
clusion, since there is one thing in the words
and another in the facts; and there remains
that even the events which have been an-
nounced are not seen when they occur, if they
are announced otherwise than they have to
occur. And how will those be believed (to
have come to pass), which will not have been
announced as they come to pass ? Thus here-
tics, by not believing what is announced as it
has been shown to have taken place, believe
what has not been even announced.

CHAP. XII.

Who, now, should know better the marrow
of the Scriptures than the school of Christ it-
self ? — the persons whom the Lord both chose
for Himself as scholars, certainly to be fully
instructed in all points, and appointed to us
for masters to instruct us in all points. To
whom would He have rather made known the
veiled import of His own language, than to
him to whom He disclosed the likeness of His
own glory — to Peter, John, and James, and
afterwards to Paul, to whom He granted par-
ticipation in (the joys of) paradise too, prior
to his martyrdom? Or do they also write
differently from what they think — teachers
using deceit, not truth ? Addressing the Chris-
tians of Pontus, Peter, at all events, says,
" How great indeed is the glory, if ye suffer
patiently, without being punished as evil-
doers ! For this is a lovely feature,' <7«^/ even
hereunto were ye called, since Christ also
suffered for us, leaving you Himself as an ex-
ample, that ye should follow His own steps." *
And again: " Beloved, be not alarmed by the
fiery trial which is taking place among you, as
though some strange thing happened unto
you. For, inasmuch as ye are partakers of
Christ's sufferings, do ye rejoice; that, when
His glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad
also with exceeding joy. If ye are reproached
for the name of Christ, happy are ye; because
glory and tlie Spirit of God rest upon you:
if only none of you suffer as a murderer, or
as a thief, or as an evil-doer, or as a busybody
in other men's matters; yet (if any man suffer)
as a Christian, let him not be ashamed, but
let him glorify God on this behalf." s John,


4 I Pet. ii. 20.
5 1 Pet. iv. 13.


646


SCORPIACE.


[chap. XIII.


in fact, exhorts us to lay down our lives even
for our brethren,' affirming that there is no
fear in love: "For perfect love casteth out
fear, since fear has punishment; and he who
fears is not perfect in love."'' What fear
would it be better to understand (as here
meant), than that which gives rise to denial ?
What love does he assert to be perfect, but
that which puts fear to flight, and gives cour-
age to confess ? What penalty will he appoint
as the punishment of fear, but that which he
who denies is about to pay, who has to be
slain, body and soul, in hell ? And if he
teaches that we must die for the brethren, how
much more for the Lord, — he being sufficiently
prepared, by his own Revelation too, forgiv-
ing such advice ! For indeed the Spirit had
sent the injunction to the angel of the church
in Smyrna : " Behold, the devil shall cast
some of you into prison, that ye may be tried
ten days. Be thou faithful unto death, and I
will give thee a crown of life." ^ Also to the
angel of the church in Pergamus (mention was
made) of Antipas, * the very faithful martyr,
who was slain where Satan dwelleth. Also to
the angel of the church in Philadelphia s (it
was signified) that he who had not denied the
name of the Lord was delivered from the last
trial. Then to every conqueror the Spirit
promises now the tree of life, and exemption
from the second death ; now the hidden manna,
with the stone of glistening whiteness, and the
name unknown ( to every man save him that
receiveth it) ; now power to rule with a rod of
iron, and the brightness of the morning star;
now the being clothed in white raiment, and
not having the name blotted out of the book
of life, and being made in the temple of God
a pillar with the inscription on it of the name
of God and of the Lord, and of the heavenly
Jerusalem; now a sitting with the Lord on His
throne, — which once was persistently refused
to the sons of Zebedee. ^ Who, pray, are
these so blessed conquerors, but martyrs in
the strict sense of the word ? For indeed
theirs are the victories whose also are the
fights; theirs, however, are the fights whose
also is the blood. But the souls of the martyrs
both peacefully rest in the meantime under
the altar, ^ and support their patience by the
assured hope of revenge; and, clothed in their
robes, wear the dazzling halo of brightness,
until others also may fully share in their glory.
For yet again a countless throng are revealed,
clothed in white and distinguished by palms

' I John iii. 16.
2 1 John iv. 18.
3 Rev. ii. 10.
4Rev. ii. 13.
5 Rev. iii. 10.
* Matt. XX. 20-23.
7 Rev. vi. 9.


of victory, celebrating their triumph doubtless
over Antichrist, since one of the elders says,
" These are they who come out of that great
tribulation, and have washed their robes, and
made them white in the blood of the Lamb. " ^
For the flesh is the clothing of the soul. The
uncleanness, indeed, is washed away by bap-
tism, but the stains are changed into dazzling
whiteness by martyrdom. For Esaias also
promises, that out of red and scarlet there
will come forth the whiteness of snow ^md
wool. 9 When great Babylon likewise is rep-
resented as drunk with the blood of the
saints, '° doubtless the supplies needful for her
drunkenness are furnished by the cups of mar-
tyrdoms; and what suffering the fear of mar-
tyrdoms will entail, is in like manner shown.
For among all the castaways, nay, taking pre-
cedence of them all, are the fearful. "But
the fearful, " says John — and then come the
others — "will have their part in the lake of
fire and brimstone."" Thus fear, which, as
stated in his epistle, love drives out, has pun-
ishment.

CHAP. XIII.

But how Paul, an apostle, from being a per-
secutor, who first of all shed the blood of the
church, though afterwards he exchanged the
sword for the pen, and turned the dagger into a
plough, being_/fr.y/ a ravening wolf of Benjamin,
then himself supplying food as did Jacob," —
how he, (I say,) speaks in favour of martyr-
doms, now to be chosen by himself also, when,
rejoicing over the Thessalonians, he says, " So
that we glory in you in the churches of God,
for your, patience and faith in all your perse-
cutions and tribulations, in which ye endure a
manifestation of the righteous judgment of
God, that ye may be accounted worthy of His
kingdom, for which ye also suffer ! "'^ As also
in his Epistle to the Romans: " And not only
so, but we glory in tribulations also, being sure
that tribulation worketh patience, and patience
experience, and experience hope; and hope
maketh not ashamed." ''^ And again: "And
if children, then heirs, heirs indeed of God,
and joint-heirs with Christ: if so be that we
suffer with Him, that we may be also glorified
together. For 1 reckon that the sufferings of
this time are not worthy to be compared with
the glory which shall be revealed in us."^5
And therefore he afterward says: "Who shall
separate us from the love of God ? Shall


8 Rev. vii. 14.

9 Isa. i. 18.

10 Rev. xvii. 6.

" Rev. xxi. 8.

12 Gen. XXV. 34, xxvii. 25.

'3 2 Thess. 1. 4.

14 Rom. V. 3.

»5 Rom. viii. 17.


CHAP. XIV.]


SCORPIACE.


647


tribulation, or distress, or famine, or naked-
ness, or peril, or sword? (As it is written:
For Thy sake we are killed all the day long;
we have been counted as sheep for the slaugh-
ter.) Nay, in all these things we are more
than conquerors, through Him who loved us.
For we are persuaded, that neither death, nor
life, nor power, nor height, nor depth, nor any
other creature, shall be able to separate us
from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus
our Lord."^ But further, in recounting his
own sufferings to the Corinthians, he certainly
decided that suffering must be borne: *' In
labours, (he says,) more abundant, in prisons
very frequent, in deaths oft. Of the Jews
five times received I forty stripes, save one;
thrice was I beaten with rods; once was I
stoned," = and the rest. And if these severi-
ties will seem to be more grievous than mar-
tyrdoms, yet once more he says: " Therefore
I take pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches,
in necessities, in persecutions, in distresses
for Christ's sake."^ He also says, in verses
occurring in a previous part of the epistle:
"■ Our condition is such, that we are troubled
on every side, yet not distressed; and are in
need, but not in utter want; since we are har-
assed by persecutions, but not forsaken; it
is such that we are cast down, but not de-
stroyed; always bearing about in our body the
dying of Christ."'* "But though," says he,
"our outward man perisheth" — the flesh
doubtless, by the violence of persecutions —
" yet the inward man is renewed day by day "
— the soul, doubtless, by hope in the promises.
" For our light affliction, which is but for a
moment, worketh for us a far more exceeding
and eternal weight of glgry; while we look not
at the things which are seen, but at the things
which are not seen. For the things which are
seen are temporal" — he is speaking of trou-
bles; " but the things which are not seen are
eternal" — he is promising rewards. But
writing in bonds to the Thessalonians, s he
certainly affirmed that they were blessed,
since to them it had been given not only to
believe on Christ, but also to suffer for His
sake. "Having," says he, "the same con-
flict which ye both saw in me, and now hear
to be in me."^ " For though I am offered
upon the sacrifice, I joy and rejoice with you
all; in like manner do ye also joy and rejoice
with me." You see what he decides the bhss
of martyrdom to be, in honour of which he is
providing a festival of mutual joy. When at
length he had come to be very near the at-


1 Rom. viii. 35.

2 2 Cor. xi. 23.

3 2 Cor. xii. 10.

4 2 Cor. iv. 8.

5 Should be Philippians :

6 Phil. ii. 17.


i.e. Phil. i. 29, 30.


tainment of his desire, greatly rejoicing in
what he saw before him, he writes in these
terms to Timothy: " For I am already being
offered, and the time of my departure is at
hand. I have fought the good fight, I have
finished my course, I have kept the faith;
there is laid up for me the crown which the
Lord will give me on that day"' — doubtless
of his suffering. Admonition enough did he
for his part also give in preceding passages:
" It is a faithful saying: For if we are dead
with Christ, we shall also live with Him; if
we suffer, we shall also reign with Him; if we
deny Him, He also will deny us; if we believe
not, yet He is faithful: He cannot deny Him-
self." ^ "Be not thou, therefore, ashamed
of the testimony of our Lord, nor of me His
prisoner; "9 for he had said before: "For
God hath not given us the spirit of fear, but
of power, and of love, and of a sound mind." "•
For we suffer with power from love toward
God, and with a sound mind, when we suffer
for our blamelessness. But further, if He
anywhere enjoins endurance, for what more
than for sufferings is He providing it ? If any-
where He tears men away from idolatry, what
more than martryrdoms takes the lead, in
tearing them away to its injury ?

CHAP. XIV.

No doubt the apostle admonishes the Ro-
mans " to be subject to all power, because
there is no power but of God, and because
(the ruler) does not carry the sword without
reason, and is the servant of God, nay also,
says he, a revenger to execute wrath upon
him that doeth evil. For he had also previ-
ously spoken thus: "For rulers are not a
terror to a good work, but to an evil. Wilt
thou then not be afraid of the power ? Do
that which is good, and thou shalt have praise
of it. Therefore he is a minister of God to
thee for good. But if thou do that which is
evil, be afraid." Thus he bids you be sub-
ject to the powers, not on an opportunity oc-
curring for his avoiding martyrdom, but when
he is making an appeal in behalf of a good
life, under the view also of their being as it
were assistants bestowed upon righteousness,
as it were handmaids of the divine court of
justice, which even here pronounces sentence
beforehand upon the guilty. Then he goes
on also to show how he wishes you to be sub-
ject to the powers, bidding you pay " tribute
to whom tribute is due, custom to whom cus-
tom," " that is, the things which are Caesar's


7 2 Tim. iv. 6.

82 Tim ii. 11.

9 2 Tim. i. 8.
'02 Tim. i. 7.
II Rom. xiii. x.


12 Rom. xiii. 6.


648


SCORPIACE.


[chap.


to Caesar, and the things which are God's to
God;' but man is the property of God alone.
Peter, = no doubt, had likewise said that the
king indeed must be honoured, yet so that the
king be honoured 07ily when he keeps to his
own sphere, when he is far from assuming-
divine honours; because both father and
mother will be loved along with God, not put
on an equality with Him. Besides, one will
not be permitted to love even life more than
God.

CHAP. XV.

Now, then, the epistles of the apostles also
are well known. And do we^ (you say), in
all respects guileless souls and doves merely,
love to go astray ? I should think from eager-
ness to live. But let it be so, that meaning
departs from their epistles. And yet, that
the apostles endured such sufferings, we know:
the teaching is clear. This only I perceive
in running through the Acts. I am not at all
on the search. The prisons there, and the
bonds, and the scourges, and the big stones,
and the swords, and the onsets by the Jews,
and the assemblies of the heathen, and the in-
dictments by tribunes, and the hearing of
causes by kings, and the judgment-seats of
pro-consuls and the name of Caesar, do not
need an interpreter. That Peter is struck, ^
that Stephen is overwhelmed by stofies,^ that
James is slain s as is a victim at the altar,
that Paul is beheaded has been written in their
own blood. And if a heretic wishes his con-
fidence to rest upon a public record, the ar-
chives of the empire will speak, as would the
stones of Jerusalem. We read the lives of
the Caesars: At Rome Nero was the first who
stained with blood the rising faith. Then is
Peter girt by another,'^ when he is made fast
to the cross. Then does Paul obtain a birth
suited to Roman citizenship, when in Rome


»Matt. xxii. 21.
3i Pet. ii. 13.

3 It has been thought that the allusion is to the breaking of the
legs of the crucified to hasten their death, not to the beating to
which the apostles were subjected by the Jewish council : Acts v.
40.— Tr.

4 Acts vii, 59.

5 James the brother of our Lord, not the James mentioned Acts
xii. 2.

6 John xxi. 18.


he springs to life again ennobled by martyr-
dom. Wherever I read of these occurrencer
so soon as I do so, I learn to suffer; nor does
it signify to me which I follow as teachers of
martyrdom, whether the declarations or the
deaths of the apostles, save that in their deaths
I recall their declarations also. For they
would not have suffered ought of a kind they
had not previously known they had to suffer.
When Agabus, making use of corresponding
action too, had foretold that bonds awaited
Paul, the disciples, weeping and entreating
that he would not venture upon going to Jeru-
salem, entreated in vain.^ As for him, hav-
ing a mind to illustrate what he had always
taught, he says, " Why weep ye, and grieve
my heart ? But for my part, I could wish not
only to suffer bonds, but also to die at Jerusa-
lem, for the name of my Lord Jesus Christ."
And so they yielded by saying, " Let the will
of the Lord be done;" feeling sure, doubt-
less, that sufferings are included in the will of
God. For they had tried to keep him back
with ttie intention not of dissuading, but to
show love for him; as yearning for (the pres-
ervation of) the apostle, not as counselling
against martyrdom. And if even then a Pro-
dicus or Valentinus stood by, suggesting that
one must not confess on the earth before
men, and must do so the less in truth, that
God may not ("seem to) thirst for blood, and
Christ for a repayment of suffering, as though
He besought it with the view of obtaining sal-
vation by it for Himself also, he would have
immediately heard from the servant of God
what the devil had from the Lord: " Get thee
behind me, Satan; thou art an offence unto
me. It is written, ,Thou shalt worship the
Lord thy God, and Him only shalt thou
serve. "^ But even now it will be right that
he hear it, seeing that, long after, he has
poured forth these poisons, which not even
thus are to injure readily any of the weak
ones, if any one in faith will drink, before
being hurt, or even immediately after, this
draught of ours.


7 Acts xxi. II.

8 Matt. xvi. 23 and iv. 10, — a mixing up of two passages of
Scripture.


»-


IX.


APPENDIX.


AGAINST ALL HERESIES.

[TRANSLATED BY THE REV. S. THELWALL.]


CHAP. I. — EARLIEST HERETICS:' SIMON MAGUS,
MENANDER, SATURNINUS, BASILIDES, NICO-
LAUS. [the work BEGINS AS A FRAGMENT.]

Of which heretics I will (to pass by a good
deal) summarize some few particulars. For
of Judaism's heretics I am silent — Dositheus
the Samaritan, I mean, who was the first who
had the hardihood to repudiate the prophets,
on the ground that they had not spoken under
inspiration of the Holy Spirit. Of the Sad-
ducees I am silent, who, springing from the
root of this error, had the hardihood to adjoin
to this heresy the denial likewise of the resur-
rection of the flesh. ^ The Pharisees I pre-
termit, who were " divided " from the Jews
by their superimposing of certain additaments
to the law, which fact likewise made them
worthy of receivmg this very name;"* and,
together with them, the Herodians likewise,
who said that Herod was Christ. To those I
betake myself who have chosen to make the
gospel the starting-point of their heresies.

Of these the first of all is Simon Magus,
who in the Acts of the Apostles earned a con-
dign and just sentence from the Apostle
Peter.5 He had the hardihood to call himself
the. Supreme Virtue,* that is, the Supreme
God; and moreover, (to assert) that the uni-
verse ^ had been originated by his angels; that
he had descended in quest of an erring dae-

1 LOn p. 14, this volume, see nearly all that need be said, of this
spurious treatise. I add a few references to Routh, Opuscula, Vol.
I. p. 160 etc.. His honouring it with a place in his work must be
my apology for not relegating it to the collection of spurious
Tertulltana, sub Jine.'\

2 [Routh says he inadvertently changed his title to read Advs.
Hcereticos^ but that it is better after all, in view of the opening
sentence.]

3 See Acts xxiii. 8, and the references there.

4 Pharisees = Separatists.

5 See Acts viii. 9-2<(.

6 1 use Virtue in this and similar cases in its Miltonic sense.
7Mundum.


mon,« which was Wisdom; that, in a phantas-
mal semblance of God, he had not suffered
among the Jews, but was as if he had suffered. »

After him Menander, his disciple (likewise
a magician '°), saying the same as Simon.
Whatever Simon had affirmed himself to be,
this did Menander equally affirm himself to be,
asserting that none could possibly have salva-
tion without being baptized in his name.

Afterwards, again, followed Saturninus: he,
too, affirming that the innascible " Virtue,
that is God, abides in the highest regions, and
that those regions are infinite, and in the re-
gions immediately above us; but that angels
far removed from Him made the lower world;"
and that, because light from above had flashed
refulgently in the lower regions, the angels
had carefully tried to form man after the sim-
ilitude of that light; that man lay crawling on
the surface of the earth; that this light and
this higher virtue was, thanks to mercy, the
salvable spark in man, while all the rest of
him perishes; '3 that Christ had not existed in
a bodily substance, and had endured a quasi-
passion in a phantasmal shape merely; that a
resurrection of the flesh there will by no means
be.

Afterwards broke out the heretic Basilides.
He affirms that there is a supreme Deity, by
name Abraxas, ^ by whom was created Mind,
which in Greek he calls Nwc; that thence
sprang the Word; that of Him issued Provi-
dence, Virtue,'5 and Wisdom; that out of


8 Or, " intelligence."

9 Or, " but had undergone a quasi-passion^
lo Magus.

" Innascibilem ;" but Fr. Junius' conjecture, "innosdbilem,"
is agreeable to the Greek " dy^worro?."

'2 Mundum.

'3 The text here is partially conjectural, and if correct, clumsy.
For the sense, see de A nima, c. xxiii. ad init.

M Or, Abraxes, or Abrasax. iS Or, Power.


550


AGAINST ALL HERESIES.


[chap. II.


these subsequently were made Principalities,
Powers,' and Angels; that there ensued in-
finite issues and processions of angels; that
by these angels 365 heavens were formed, and
the world, =* in honour of Abraxas, whose
name, if computed, has in itself this number.
Now, among the last of the angels, those who
made this world, = he places the God of the
Jews latest, that is, the God of the Law and
of the Prophets, whom he denies to be a God,
but affirms to be an angel. To him, he says,
was allotted the seed of Abraham, and accord-
ingly he it was who transferred the sons of
Israel from the land of Egypt into the land of
Canaan; affirming him to be turbulent above
the other angels, and accordingly given to the
frequent arousing of seditions and wars, yes,
and the shedding of human blood. Christ,
moreover, he affirms to have been sent, not
by this maker of the world, 3 but by the above-
named Abraxas; and to have come in a
phantasm, and been destitute of the substance
of flesh: that it was not He who suffered
among the Jews, but that Simon -* was cruci-
fied in His stead: whence, again, there must
be no believing on him who was crucified, lest
one confess to having believed on Simon.
Maityrdoms, he says, are not to be endured.
The resurrection of the flesh he strenuously
impugns, affirming that salvation has not been
promised to bodies.

A brother heretic ^ emerged in Nicolaus.
He was one of the seven deacons who were
appointed in the Acts of the Apostles.^ He
affirms that Darkness was seized with a con-
cupiscence— and, indeed, a foul and obscene
one — after Light: out of this permixture it is
a shame to say what fetid and unclean (com-
binations arose). The rest (of his tenets),
too, are obscene. For he tells of certain
^ons, sons of turpitude, and of conjunctions
of execrable and obscene embraces and per-
mixtures,7 and certain yet baser outcomes of
these. He teaches that there were born,
moreover, daemons, and gods, and spirits
seven, and other things sufficiently sacrilegious
alike and foul, which we blush to recount, and
at once pass them by. Enough it is for us that
this heresy of the Nicolaitans has been con-
demned by the Apocalypse of the Lord with
the weightiest authority attaching to a sen-
tence, in saying " Because this thou boldest,
thou hatest the doctrine of the Nicolaitans,
which I too hate."®


I Potestates.
^Mundum.
3 Mundum.

4 i.e. probably "Simon the Cyrenian." See Matt, xxvii. 33;
Mark xv. 21 ; Luke xxiii. 26.

5 Alter haireticus. But Fr. Junius suggests " aliter."

6 See Acts vi. 1-6. [But the identity is doubtful.]

7 So Oebler gives in his text. But his suggestion, given in a


CHAP. II. OPHITES, CAINITES, SETHITES.

To these are added those heretics likewise
who are called Ophites:^ for they magnify
the serpent to such a degree, that they prefer
him even to Christ Himself; for it was he,
they say, who gave us the origin of the knowll
edge of good and of evil.- His power and
majesty (they say) Moses perceiving, set up
the brazen serpent; and whoever gazed upon
him obtained health." Christ Himself (they
say further) in His gospel imitates Moses'
serpent's sacred power, in saying: "And as
Moses upreared the serpent in the desert, so
It behoveth the Son of man to be upreared." "
Him they introduce to bless their eucharistic
(elements). '3 Now the whole parade and
doctrine of this error flowed from the follow-
ing source. They say that from the supreme
primary ^on whom men speak of^* there ema-
nated several other inferior ^ons. To all
these, however, there opposed himself an
^on who name is laldabaoth.^^ He had been
conceived by the permixture of a second ^on
with inferior ^:ons; and afterwards, when
he '^ had been desirous of forcing his way into
the higher regions, had been disabled by the
permixture of the gravity of matter with him-
self to arrive at the higher regions; had been
left in the midst, and had extended himself to
his full dimensions, and thus had made the
sky. '7 laldabaoth, however, had descended
lower, and had made him seven sons, and
had shut from their view the upper regions by
self-distension, in order that, since (these)
angels could not know what was above, '^ they
might think him the sole God. These in-
ferior Virtues and angels, therefore, had made
man; and, because he had been originated
by weaker and mediocre powers, he lay crawl-
ing, worm-like. That ^:on, however, out of
which laldaboath had proceeded, moved to
the heart with envy, had injected into man as
he lay a certain spark; excited whereby, he
was through prudence to grow wise, and be
able to understand the things above. So, again,
the laldaboath aforesaid, turning indignant,
had emitted out of himself the Virtue and
similitude of the serpent; and this had been


note, is perhaps preferable: "and of execrable embraces and
permixtures, and obscene conjunctions."

8 See Rev. ii. 6.

9 Or, " Serpentarians," from 6</»is. a serpent.
'o See Gen. iii. 1-7.

" See Num. xxi. 4-9.

'=John iii. i^.

13 Eucharistia (neut. pi ) = e{r;^apto-T«:a (Fr. Junius in Oehler) ;
perhaps the place tn whtch they celebrate the eucharist "

M I hese words are intended to give the force of the " illo " of
the original.

'5 Roberston (Ch. Hist i. p. 39, note 2, ed. 2. 1858) seems to
take this word to mean " Son of Darkness or Chaos."

? " Seque" Oehler reads here, which appears bad enough Latin*
unless his se after " extendisse " is an error.

'7 Or, "heaven."

18 Or, " what the upper regions were."


CHAP. III. J


AGAINST ALL HERESIES.


651


the Virtue in paradise — that is, this had been
the ser petit — whom Eve had believed as if he
had been God the Son.' He' plucked, say
they, from the fruit of the tree, and thus con-
ferred on mankind the knowledge of things
good and evil.^ Christ, moreover, existed
not in substance of flesh: salvation of the flesh
is not to be hoped for at all.

Moreover, also, there has broken out an-
other heresy also, which is called that of the
Cainites.^ And the reason is, that they mag-
nify Cain as if he had been conceived of some
potent Virtue which operated in him; for Abel
had been procreated after being conceived
of an inferior Virtue, and accordingly had
been found inferior. They who assert this
likewise defend the traitor Judas, telling us
that he is admirable and great, because of the
advantages he is vaunted to have conferred
on mankind; for some of them think that
thanksgiving is to be rendered to Judas on
this account: viz., Judas, they say, observing
that Christ wished to subvert the truth, be-
trayed Him, in order that there might be no
possibility of truth's being subverted. And
others thus dispute against them, and say:
Because the powers of this world s were un-
willing that Christ should suffer, lest through
His death salvation should be prepared for
mankind, he, consulting for the salvation of
mankind, betrayed Christ, in order that there
might be no possibility at all of the salvation
being impeded, which inas being impeded
through the Virtues which were opposing
Christ's passion; and thus, through the pas-
sion of Christ, there might be no possibility
of the salvation of mankind being retarded.

But, again, the heresy has started forth
which is called that of the Sethites. ^ The
doctrine of this perversity is as follows. Two
human beings were formed by the angels —
Cain and Abel. On their account arose great
contentions and discords among the angels;
for this reason, that Virtue which was above
all the Virtues — which they style the Mother —
when they said^ that Abel had been slain,
willed this Seth of theirs to be conceived and
born in place of Abel, in order that those
angels might be escheated who had created
those two former human beings, while this
pure seed rises and is born. For they say
that there had been iniquitous permixtures of
two angels and human beings; for which reason
that Virtue which (as we have said) they style


1 Filio Deo.

2 Or, " she ;" but perhaps the text is preferable.

3 See Gen. lii. 1-7.

4 See de Bapt. c. i,
SMundi.

6 Or, Sethoites.

7 " Dicerent ;" but Routh (I think) has conjectured " disceret'
" when she learned^'' etc., which is very simple and apt.


the Mother brought on the deluge even, for
the purpose of vengeance, in order that that
seed of permixture might be swept away, and
this only seed which was pure be kept entire.
But (in vain): for they who had originated
those of the former seed sent into the ark
(secretly and stealthily, and unknown to that
Mother-Virtue), together with those ** eight
souls," ^ the seed likewise of Ham, in order
that the seed of evil should not perish, but
should, together with the rest, be preserved,
and after the deluge be restored to the earth,
and, by example of the rest, should grow up
and diffuse itself, and fill and occupy the
whole orb.' Of Christ, moreover, their senti-
ments are such that they call Him merely
Seth, and say that He was instead of the
actual Seth.

CxxAP. III. CARPOCRATES, CERINTHUS, EBION.

Carpocrates, futhermore, introduced the
following sect. He affirms that there is one
Virtue, the chief among the upper (regions):
that out of this were produced angels and
Virtues, which, being far distant from the
upper Virtues, created this world '° in the
lower regions: that Christ was not born of the
Virgin Mary, but was generated — a mere
human being — of the seed of Joseph, superior
(they admit) above all others in the practice
of righteousness and in integrity of life; that
He suffered among the Jews; and that His
soul alone was received in heaven as having
been more firm and hardy than all others:
whence he would infer, retaining only the
salvation of souls, that there are no resurrec-
tions of the body.

After him brake out the heretic Cerinthus,
teaching similarly. For he, too, says that the
world '° was originated by those angels; " and
sets forth Christ as born of the seed of Joseph,
contending that He was merely human, with-
out divinity; affirming also that the Law was
given by angels;" representing the God of
the Jews as not the Lord, but an angel.

His successor was Ebion, '^ not agreeing
with" Cerinthus in every point; in that he
affirms the world '^ to have been made by
God, not by angels; and because it s written,
"No disciple above his master, nor servant
above his lord, " '* sets forth likewise the law


8 See 1 Pet. iii. 20.

9 Cf. Gen. ix. i, 2, 7, 19.
»o Mundum.

" " Ab iliis " is perhaps an error for " ab angelis," by absorp-
tion of the first syllable. So Routh had conjectured before niic.

12 " ^<^ angelis :" an erroneous notion, which professed probably
to derive support from John i. 17, Acts vii. 53, Gal. iii. 19, where,
however, the Greek prepositions should be carefully noted, and
ought in no case to be rendered by " ab."

^■?.Al. Hebion.

"4 See Matt. x. 24 ; Luke vi. 40 ; John xiii. 16.


652


AGAINST ALL HERESIES.


[chap. IV


as bindingj' of course for the purpose of ex-
cluding the gospel and vindicating Judaism.

CHAP. IV. VALENTINUS, PTOLEMY AND SECUN-

DUS, HERACLEON.

Valentinus the heretic, moreover, intro-
duced many fables. These I will retrench
and briefly summarize. For he introduces
the Pleroma and the thirty JEons. These
^ons, moreover, he explains in the way of
syzygies, that is, conjugal unions " of some
kind. For among the first, ^ he says, were
Depth* and Silence; of these proceeded Mind
and Truth; out of whom burst the Word and
Life; from whom, again, were created Mans
and the Church. But (these are not all); for
of these last also proceeded twelve ^ons;
from Speech, ^ moreover, and Life proceeded
other ten ^ons: such is the Triacontad of
^:ons, which is made up in the Pleroma of an
ogdoad, a decad, and a duodecad. The
thirtieth ^on, moreover, willed to see the
great Bythus; and, to see him, had the
hardihood to ascend into the upper regions;
and not being capable of seeing his mag-
nitude, desponded, ' and almost suffered dis-
solution, had not some one, — he whom he
calls Horos, to wit, — sent to invigorate him,
strengthened him by pronouncing the word
"lao."^ This yEon, moreover, which was
thus reduced to despondency, he calls Acha-
moth, (and says) that he was seized with
certain regretful passions, and out of his pas-
sions gave birth to material essences. ' For


' i.e., as Rig.'s quotation from Jerome's Indiculus (in Oehler)
shows, " because in so far as, Christ observed it."

2 Conjugationes. Cowper uses our word " conjugation " in this
sense in one of his humorous pieces. [" Pairing-time."] The
" syzygies " consisted of one male and one female ^^on each.

3 Oehler separates " in primis ;" but perhaps they ought to be
united—" inprimis," or " imprimis " — and taken as = " primo ab
initio."

4 Bythus.

5 Hominem.

6" Sermone*" he said " Verbum " before.

7ln defectione fuisse.

8Cf. nciv. Valcnt. cc. x. xiv. [^Routh says that this lAO (see
note 8) is wanting in the older editions. It was borrowed from
the Adv. I'alentin. to eke out a defect.]

9 Such appears to be the meaning of this sentence as Oehler
gives it. pjut the text is here corrupt ; and it seems plain there
must either be something lost relating to this " Achamoth," or else
some capital error in the reading, or, thirdly, some gross and unac-
countable confusion in the writer : for the sentence as it stands is
wholly irreconcilable with what follows. It evidently makes " Ach-
amoth " identical with " the thirtieth ^on " above-named; and
yet, without introducing any fresh subject, the writer goes on to
state that this despondent (Eon, who " conceived and bare," was
itself the offspring of despondency, and made an infirm world out
of the infirm materials which " Achamoth " supplied it with. Now
it is apparent from other sources— as, for instance, from Tert. adv.
Valentin, above referred to — that the "thirtieth JV.on " was sup-
posed lohe female, Sof>hia (Wisdom) by name, and that she was
said tohe. the parent ol " Achamoth," or" Enthymesis " (see ad?'.
Valentin, cc. ix. x. xi. xiv. xxv.), while " Achamoth " herself ap-
pears by some accounts to be also called <caT<o 2o(^i'a. The name
"Achamoth" itself, which TertuUian (adv. Valentin, c. xiv. ad
if/it.) calls an " uninterpretable name,' is believed to be a repre-
sentation of a Hebrew word meaning " wisdom ;" and hence, poss-
ibly, some of the confusion may have arisen, — from a promiscuous
use, namely, of the titles "Achamoth" and "Sophia." More-
over, it would appear that some words lower down as to the pro-
duction by "Achamoth" of " Demiurgus," must have dropped
out. Unless these two omissions be supplied, the passage is


he was panic-stricken, he says, and terror-
stricken, and overcome with sadness; and
of these passions he conceived and bare.
Hence he made the heaven, and the earth,
and the sea, and whatever is in them: for
which cause all things made by him are in-
firm, and frail, and capable of falling, and
mortal, inasmuch as he himself was conceived
and produced from despondency. He, how-
ever, originated this world '° out of those ma-
terial essences which Achamoth, by his panic,
or terror, or sadness, or sweat, had supplied.
For of his panic, he says, was made darkness;
of his fear and ignorance, the spirits of wicked-
ness and malignity; of his sadness and tears,
the humidities of founts, the material essence
of floods and sea. Christ, moreover, was sent
by that First-Father who is Bythus. He,
moreover, was not in the substance of our
flesh; but, bringing down from heaven some
spiritual body or other, passed through the
Virgin Mary as water through a pipe, neither
receiving nor borrowing aught thence. The
resurrection of our present flesh he denies,
but (maintains that) of some sister-flesh."
Of the Law and the prophets some parts he
approves, some he disapproves; that is, he
disapproves all in reprobating some. A Gos-
pel of his own he likewise has, beside these
of ours.

After him arose the heretics Ptolemy and
Secundus, who agree throughout with Valen-
tinus, differing only in the following point:
viz., whereas Valentinus had feigned but
thirty ^Eons, they have added several more;
for they first added four, and subsequently
four more. And Valentine's assertion, that
it was the thirtieth ^on which strayed out
from the Pleroma, (r.s falling into despon-
dency,) they deny; for the one which de-
sponded on account of disappointed yearning
to see the First-Father was not of the original
triacontad, they say.

There arose, besides, Heracleon, a broth-
er "-heretic, whose sentiments pair with Val-
entine's; but, by some novelty of terminology,
he is desirous of seeming to differ in sentiment.
For he introduces the notion that there existed
first what he terms (a Monad) ;'3 and then
out of that Monad (arose) two, and then the


wholly unintelligible. Can the fact that the Hebrew word which
" Achamoth " represents \sa./em./>l. in any way explain this con-
fused medley, or help to reconcile conflicting accounts ? The avot
and (caTw 2o4)ia seem to pomt in some degree to some such solution
of some of the existing difficulties. " lao," again, is a word which
has caused much perplexity. Can it possibly be connected with
iao^ai, " to heal ? [See note 8.]

loMundum.

" Oehler's suggestion is to vary the pointing so as to give this
sense : " The resurrection of this flesh he denies. But of a sister-
Law and prophets," etc. But this seems even more harsh than
the other.

12" Alter," i.e., perhaps another <?/ /A«^ same class.

13 It seems almost necessary to supply some word here ; and as
" Monade " follows, it seemed simple to supply " Monada."


CHAP. VI.]


AGAINST ALL HERESIES.


653


rest of the ^ons. Then he introduces the
whole system of Valentine.

CHAP. V. MARCUS AND COLARBASUS.

After these there were not wanting a Mar-
cus and a Colarbasus, composing a novel
heresy out of the Greek alphabet. For they
afifirm that without those letters truth cannot
be found; nay more, that in those letters the
whole plenitude and perfection of truth is
comprised; for this was why Christ said, " I
am the Alpha and the Omega.'" In fact,
they say that Jesus Christ descended,' that is,
that the dove came down on Jesus; ^ and, since
the dove is styled by the Greek name KepiGrepd
— (^eri'stera), it has in itself this number
DCCCI.'* These men run through their a,
^, X, <i>, Y, T — through the whole alphabet, in-
deed, up to A and B — and compute ogdoads
and decads. So we may grant it useless and
idle to recount all their trifles. What, how-
ever, must be allowed not merely vain, but
likewise dangerous, is this: they feign a second
God, beside the Creator; they affirm that
Christ was not in the substance of flesh; they
say there is to be no resurrection of the flesh.

CHAP. VI. CERDO, MARCION, LUCAN, APELLES.

To this is added one Cerdo. He introduces
two first causes, s that is, two Gods — one
good, the other cruel :^ the good being the
superior; the latter, the cruel one, being the
creator of the world. ^ He repudiates the
prophecies and the Law; renounces God the
Creator; maintains that Christ who came was
the Son of the superior God; affirms that He
was not in the substance of flesh; states Him
to have been only in a phantasmal shape, to
have not really suffered, but undergone a quasi-
passion, and not to have been born of a vir-
gin, nay, really not to have been born at all.
A resurrection of the soul merely does he ap-


1 See Rev. i. 7, xxi. 6, xxii. i3.

2 Denique Jesum Christum descendisse. So Oehler, who does
not notice any conjectural emendation, or various reading, of the
words. H correct, his reading would refer to the views of a two-
fold Jesus Christ — a real and a phantasmal one — held by docetic
Gnostics, or to such views as Valentine's, in whose system, so far
as it is ascertainable from the confused and discrepant accounts of
it, there would appear to have been one ^on called Christ, anoth-
er called Jesus, and a human person called Jesus and Christ,
with whom the true Jesus associated Hirnself. Some such jumble
of ideas the two heretics now under review would seem to have
held, if Oehler's be the true reading. But the difficulties are some-
what lessened if we accept the very simple emendation which nat-
urally suggests itself, and which, I see, Semler has proposed and
Routh inclines to receive, " in Jesum Christum descendisse," i. e.
" that Christ descended on Jesus."

3 See Matt. iii. 13-17 ; Mark i. g-ii ; Luke iii. 21-22 ; John i. 29
-34.

4 Habere secum numerum DCCCI. So (Oehler, after Jos. Scal-
iger. who, however, seems to have read" secum /tunc numerum,"
for the ordinary reading, " habere secundum numerum," which
would mean, " represents, in the way 0/ numerical value,

CCCI."

5 Initia duo.

6 Saevum.

7 Mundi.


prove, denying that of the body. The Gospel
of Luke alone, and that not entire, does he
receive. Of the Apostle Paul he takes neither
all the epistles, nor in their integrity. The
Acts of the Apostles and the Apocalypse he
rejects as false.

After him emerged a disciple of his, one
Marcion by name, a native of Pontus,* son
of a bishop, excommunicated because of a
rape committed on a certain virgin.' He,
starting from the fact that it is saKl, ** Every
good tree beareth good fruit, but an evil
evil,"'° attempted to approve the heresy of
Cerdo; so that his assertions are identical with
those of the former heretic before him.

After him arose one Lucan by name, a fol-
lower and disciple of Marcion. He, too, wad-
ing through the same kinds of blasphemy,
teaches the same as Marcion and Cerdo had
taught.

Close on their heels follows Apelles, a dis-
ciple of Marcion, who after lapsing, into his
own carnality," was severed from Marcion.
He introduces one God in the infinite upper
regions, and states that He made many powers
and angels; beside Him, withal, another Vir-
tue, which he affirms to be called Lord, but
represents as an angel. By him he will have
it appear that the world" was originated in
imitation of a superior world. *3 With this
lo7ver world he mingled throughout (a princi-
ple of) repentance, because he had not made
it so perfectly as that superior world had been
originated. The Law and the prophets he
repudiates. Christ he neither, like Marcion,
affirms to have been in a phantasmal shape,
nor yet in substance of a true body, as the
Gospel teaches; but says, because He de-
scended from the upper regions, that in the
course of His descent He wove together for
Himself a starry and airy'* flesh; and, in His
resurrection, restored, in the course of His
ascent, to the several individual elements
whatever had been borrowed in His descent:
and thus — the several parts of His body dis-
persed— He reinstated in heaven His spirit
only. This man denies the resurrection of
the flesh. He uses, too, one only apostle;
but that is Marcion's, that is, a mutilated
one. He teaches the salvation of souls alone.


8 '* Ponticus genere," lit. " a Pontic by race" which of course
may not necessarily, like our native, imply actual birth in Pontus.
[Note—" son of a bishop :" an index of early date, though not
necessarily Ante-Nicene. A mere forgery of later origin would
have omitted it.]

9 Rig., with whom Oehler agrees, reminds us that neither in
the de Preescr. nor in the adv. Marc, nor, apparently, in Irenaeus,
is any such statement brought forward.

i°See Matt. vii. 17,

" See de Preescr, c. xxx., and comp. with it what is said of Mar-
cion above.

12 Mundum.

13 Mundi.

14 " Aeream," i.e., composed of the air, the lower air, or atrao»>
phere ; not " aetheream," of the u/>per air, or ether.


654


AGAINST ALL HERESIES.


[chap. vm.


He has, besides, private but extraordinary-
lections of his own, which he calls " Manifes-
tations,"' of one Philumene,^' a girl whom
he follows as a prophetess. He has, besides,
his own books, which he has entitled books of
Syllogisms, in which he seeks to prove that
whatever Moses has written about God is not
true, but is false.

CHAP. VII. — TATIAN, CATAPHRYGIANS, CATA-
PROCLANS, CAT.^iSCHINETANS.

To all these heretics is added one Tatian,
a brother-heretic. This man was Justin
Martyr's disciple. After Justin's death he
began to cherish different opinions from his.
For he wholly savours of Valentinus; adding
this, that Adam cannot even attain salvation:
as if, when the branches become salvable,^
the root were not!

Other heretics swell the list who are called
Cataphrygians, but their teaching is not uni-
form. For there are (of them) soT7ie who are
called Cataproclans;^ there are others w4io
are termed Cataeschinetans.s These have a
blasphemy common, and a blasphemy not
common, but peculiar and special. The com-
mon blasphemy lies in their saying that the
Holy Spirit was in the apostles indeed, the
Paraclete was not; and in their saying that
the Paraclete has spoken in Montanus more
things than Christ brought forward into (the
compass of) the Gospel, and not merely more,
but likewise better and greater. But the
particular one they who follow ^schines have;
this, namely, whereby they add this, that they
affirm Christ to be Himself Son and Father.


CHAP. VIII. BLASTUS, TWO THEODOTI, PRAXEAS.

In addition to all these, there is likewise
Blastus, who would latently introduce Juda-
ism. For he says the passover is not to be
kept otherwise than according to the law of
Moses, on the fourteenth of the month. But
who would fail to see that evangelical grace
is escheated if he recalls Christ to the Law?


> Phaneroseis. Oehler refers to de Preescr. c. xxx. q. v.

^<l>i\ovixivri, "loved one."

3Salvi. Perhaps if it be questionable whether this word may
be so rendered in a correct I^tinist, it may be lawful to render it
so in so incorrect a one as our present author.

4 i.e. followers of Proclus.

5 I.e. followers of ./tschines. So this writer takes " Cataphry-
ges " to mean followers of the Phrygians."


Add to these Theodotus the Byzantine, who,
after being apprehended for Christ's Name,
and apostatizing,^ ceased not to blaspheme
against Christ. For he introduced a doctrine
by which to affirm that Christ was merely a
human being, but deny His deity; teaching
that He was born of the Holy Spirit indeed of
a virgin, but was a solitary and bare human
being,^ with no pre-eminence above the rest
(of mankind), but only that of righteousness.

After him brake out a second heretical
Theodotus, who again himself introduced a
sister-sect, and says that the human being
Christ Himself^ was merely conceived alike,
and born, of the Holy Spirit and the Virgin
Mary, but that He was inferior to Melchizedek ;
because it is said of Christ, "Thou art a
priest unto eternity, after the order of Mel-
chizedek."' For that Melchizedek, he says,
was a heavenly Virtue of pre-eminent grace;
in that Christ acts for human beings, being
made their Deprecator and Advocate: Mel-
chizedek does so'° for heavenly angels and
Virtues. For to such a degree, he says, is he
better than Christ, that he is cnrdrup (father-
less), a/iir/Top (motherless), ayevealoyrrro^ (without
genealogy), of whom neither the beginning
nor the end has been comprehended, nor can
be comprehended."

But after all these, again, one Praxeas
introduced a heresy which Victorinus" was
careful to corroborate. He asserts that Jesus
Christ is God the Father Almighty. Him he
contends to have been crucified, and suffered,
and died; beside which, with a profane and
sacrilegious temerity, he maintains the prop-
osition that He is Himself sitting at His own
right hand. '3


^Negavit. See tie Idol. c. xxiii. note i.

7 Hominem solitarium atque nudum. The words seem to
mean^ destitute of anything jw/^rhuman.

8Et ipsMw hommem Christum tantummodo. I rather incline
to read, as in the preceding sentence, " et ipj^ ." "and himself
affirms Christ to have been merely human, conceived alike," etc.
9 See Ps. ex. 4, and the references there.

10 The Latin here is very careless, unless, with Routh, we sug-
gest "et" for "eo," and render: "and that what Christ does,"
etc., "Melchizedek does," etc
" See Heb. vii. 1-3.

12 Who he is, no one knows. Oehler (following the lead of
Fabricius on Philaster, cap. 40(jp. 102) believes the name to be a
mistake for Victor, a bishop of Rome, who (see Adv. Prax. c. i.)
had held the episcopate when Praxeas was there. His successor
was Zephyrinus ; and it is an ingenious conjecture of Oehler, that
these two names, the one written as a correction of the other, may

have been confused : thus, yeohvrinus \ • *"*^ '^"^ °^ ^^^ ^*°
may have made Victorinus.

'3 The form and order of the words here used are certainly re-
markably similar to the expressions and order of the " Apostles'
Creed."


TERTULLIAN


PART THIRD.


«


I


I.
ON REPENTANCE.-

[TRANSLATED BY THE REV. S. THELWALL.]


CHAP. I. OF HEATHEN REPENTANCE.

Repentance, men understand, so far as
nature is able, to be an emotion of tlie mind
arising from disgust = at some previously
cherished \vorsQ sentiment: that kind of men /
mean wiiich even we ourselves were in days
gone by — blind, without the Lord's light.
From the reason of repentance, however, they
are just as far as they are from the Author of
reason Himself. Reasofi^ in fact, is a thing
of God, inasmuch as there is nothing which
God the Maker of all has not provided, dis-
posed, ordained by reason — nothing which He
has not willed should be handled and under-
stood by reason. All, therefore, who are
ignorant of God, must necessarily be ignorant
also of a thing which is His, because no
treasure-house ^ at all is accessible to stran-
gers. And thus, voyaging all the universal
course of life without the rudder of reason,
they know not how to shun the hurricane
which is impending over the world.-* More-
over, how irrationally they behave in the
practice of repentance, it will be enough
briefly to show just by this one fact, that they
exercise it even in the case of their good deeds.
They repent of good faith, of love, of simple-
heartedness, of patience, of mercy, just in
proportion as any deed prompted by these feel-
ings has fallen on thankless soil. They exe-
crate their own selves for having done good;
and that species chiefly of repentance which
is applied to the best works they fix in their
heart, making it their care to remember never
again to do a good turn. On repentance for
evil deeds, on the contrary, they lay lighter


1 [We pass from the polemical class of our author's writings to
those of a practical and ethical character. This treatise on Peni-
tence is the product of our authoi's best days, and may be dated
A. D. 192.]

2 " Oflensa sententiae pejoris ;" or possibly, " the miscarriage
of some," etc.

3 Thesaurus.

4Saeculo. [Erasmus doubted the genuineness of this treatise,
partly because of the comparative purity of its style. See Kaye, p.
42.]

42


Stress. In short, they make this same (virtue)
a means of sinning more readily than a means
of right-doing.

chap. II. — TRUE repentance A THING DIVINE,
ORIGINATED BY GOD, AND SUBJECT TO HIS
LAWS.

But if they acted as men who had any part
in God, and thereby in reason also, they
would first weigh well the importance of re-
pentance, and would never apply it in such a
way as to make it a ground for cofivicting
themselves of perverse self-amendment. In
short, they would regulate the limit of their
repentance, because they would reach (a limit)
in sinning too — by fearing God, I mean. But
where there is no fear, in like manner there is
no amendment; where there is no amend-
ment, repentance is of necessity vain, for it
lacks the fruit for which God sowed it; that
is, man's salvation. For God — after so many
and so great sins of human temerity, begun
by the first of the race, Adam, after the con-
demnation of man, together with the dowry of
the world, s after his ejection from paradise
and subjection to death — when He had hasted
back to His own mercy, did from that time
onward inaugurate repentance in His own
self, by rescinding the sentence of His first
wrath, engaging to grant pardon to His own
work and image. '^ And so He gathered to-
gether a people for Himself, and fostered
them with many liberal distributions of His
bounty, and, after so often finding them most
ungrateful, ever exhorted them to repentance
and sent out the voices of the universal com-
pany of the prophets to prophesy. By and
by, promising freely the grace which in the
last times He was intending to pour as a flood
of light on the universal world ' through His


5 Saeculi dote. With which he had been endowed. Comp. Gen
28, Ps. viii. 4-8.

6 i.e., man.

7 Orbi.


658


ON REPENTANCE.


[chap. III.


Spirit, He bade the baptism of repentance
lead the way, with the view of first prepar-
ing,' by means of the sign and seal of repen-
tance, them whom He was calling, through
grace, to (inherit) the promise surely made to
Abraham. John holds not his peace, saying,
" Enter upon repentance, for now shall sal-
vation approach the nations " = — the Lord,
that is, bringing salvation according to God's
promise. To Him John, as His harbinger,
directed the repentance (which he preached),
whose province was the purging of men's
minds, that whatever defilement inveterate error
had imparted, whatever contamination in the
heart of man ignorance had engendered, that
repentance should sweep and scrape away, and
cast out of doors, and thus prepare the home
of the heart, by making it clean, for the Holy
Spirit, who was about to supervene, that He
might with pleasure introduce Himself there-
into, together with His celestial blessings.
Of these blessings the title is briefly one — the
salvation of man — the abolition of former sins
being the preliminary step. This 3 is the
(final) cause of repentance, this her work, in
taking in hand the business of divine mercy.
What is profitable to man does service to
God. The rule of repentance, however, which
we learn when we know the Lord, retains
a definite form, — viz., that no violent hands
so to speak, be ever laid on good deeds
or thoughts.* For God, never giving His
sanction to the reprobation of good deeds,
inasmuch as they are His own (of which,
being the author. He must necessarily be the
defender too), is in like manner the acceptor
of them, and if the acceptor, likewise the re-
warder. Let, then, the ingratitude of men
see to it,s if it attaches repentance even to
good works; let their gratitude see to it too,
if the desire of earning it be the incentive to
well-doing: earthly and mortal are they each.
For how small is your gain if you do good to
a grateful man! or your loss if to an ungrate-
ful! K goodCi^^di has God as its debtor, just
as an evil has too; for a judge is a rewarder of
every cause. Well, since, God as Judge pre-
sides over the exacting and maintaining^ of
justice, which to Him is most d6ar; and since
it is with an eye to justice that He appoints
all the sum of His discipline, is there room
for doubting that, just as in all our acts uni-
versally, so also in the case of repentance,
justice must be rendered to God ? — which
duty can indeed only be fulfilled on the con-


' Componeret.

aComp. Matt. iii. i. 2 ; Mark i. 4 ; Luke iii. 4-6.

3 i.e., man's salvation.

4 See the latter part of c. i.

5 Viderit.

6 Or, " defending."


dition that repentance be brought to bear 07ily
on sins. Further, no deed but an evil one
deserves to be called siti, nor aoes any one
err by well-doing. But if he does not err,
why does he invade (the province of) repen-
tance, the private ground of such as do err?
Why does he impose on his. goodness a duty
proper to wickedness ? Thus it comes to pass
that, when a thing is called into play where it
ought not, there, where it ought, it is neglec-
ted.

CHAP. III. SINS MAY BE DIVIDED INTO CORPO-
REAL AND SPIRITUAL. BOTH EQUALLY SUB-
JECT, IF NOT TO HUMAN, YET TO DIVINE IN-
VESTIGATION AND PUNISHMENT. 7

What things, then, they be for which repen-
tance seems just and due— that is, what things
are to be set down under the head of siri —
the occasion indeed demands that I should
note • down ; but (to do so) may seem to be
unnecessary. For when the Lord is known,
our spirit, having been " looked back upon" ^
by its own Author, emerges unbidden into the
knowledge of the truth; and being admitted
to (an acquaintance with) the divine precepts,
is by them forthwith instructed that "that
from which God bids us abstain is to be ac-
counted sin:'' inasmuch as, since it is gener-
ally agreed that God is some great essence of
good, of course nothing but evil would be
displeasing to good; in that, between things
mutually contrary, friendship there is none.
Still it will not be irksome briefly to touch
upon the fact' that, of sins, some are carnal,
that is, corporeal; some spiritual. For since
man is composed of this combination of a
two-fold substance, the sources of his sins are
no other than the sources of his composition.
But it is not the fact that body and spirit are
two things that constitute the sins mutually
different — otherwise they are on this account
rather equal, because the two make up 07ie —
lest any make the distinction between their
si7is proportionate to the difference between
their substances, so as to esteem the one
lighter, or else heavier, than the other: if it
be true, (as it is,) that both flesh and spirit are
creatures of God; one wrought by His hand,
one consummated by His afflatus. Since,
then, they equally pertain to the Lord, which-
ever of them sins equally off etuis the Lord. Is
it for you to distinguish the acts of the flesh
and the spirit, whose communion and conjunc-
tion in life, in death, and in resurrection, are


7 [Without reference to Luther'.s theory of justification, we mus^
all adop!. this as the test of " a standing or falling church," viz,
" How does it deal with sin and the sinner."]

8 Luke xxii. 61.

9 Or, " briefly to lay down the rule."


A


CHAP. IV.]


ON REPENTANCE.


659


so intimate, that "at that time"' they are
equally raised up either for life or else for judg-
ment; because, to wit, they have equally either
sinned or lived innocently ? This we would
(once for all) premise, in order that we may
understand that no less necessity for repent-
ance is incumbent on either part of man, if in
anything it have sinned, than on both. The
guilt of both is common; common, too, is the
Judge — God to wit; common, therefore, is
withal the healing medicine of repentance.
The source whence sins are named " spirit-
ual " and " corporeal " is the fact that every
sin is matter either of act or else of thought:
so that what is in deed is "corporeal," be-
cause a deed^ like a body, is capable of being
seen and touched; what is in the jnind is
*' spiritual," because spirit is neither seen nor
handled: by which consideration is shown that
sins not of deed only, but of 7vill too, are to
be shunned, and by repentance purged. For
if human finitude "" judges only sins of deed, be-
cause it is not equal to (piercing) the lurking-
places of the 7mll, let us not on that account
make light of crimes of the will in God's sight.
God is all-sufficient. Nothing from whence
any sin whatsoever proceeds is remote from
His sight; because He is neither ignorant, nor
does He omit to decree it to judgment. He
is no dissembler of, nor double-dealer with,^
His own clear-sightedness. What (shall we
say of the fact) that will is the origin of deed?
For if any sins are imputed to chance, or to
necessity, or to ignorance, let them see to
themselves: if these be excepted, there is no
sinning save by will. Since, then, will is the
origin of deed, is it not so much the rather
amenable to penalty as it is first in guilt?
Nor, if some difficulty interferes with its full
accomplishment, is it even in that case exon-
erated; for it is itself imputed to itself: nor,
having done the work which lay in its own
power, will it be excusable by reason of that
miscarriage of its accomplishment. In fact,
how does the Lord demonstrate Himself as
adding a superstructure to the Law, except by
interdicting sins of the will as well (as other
sins); while He defines not only the man who
had actually invaded another's wedlock to be
an adulterer, but likewise him who had con-
taminated (a woman) by the concupiscence of
his gaze?'^ Accordingly it is dangerous
enough for the mind to set before itself what
it is forbidden to perform, and rashly through
the will to perfect its execution. And since
the power of this will is such that, even with-


1 i.e., in the judgment-day. Compare the phrase " that day
and that hour " in Scripture.

2 Mediocritas.

3 Prsevaricatorem : comp. ad Ux.h. ii. c. ii. adinit.

4 Matt. V. 27, 28 ; comp. de Idol. ii.


out fully sating its self-gratification, it stands
for a deed; as a deed, therefore, it shall be
punished. It is utterly vain to say, " I willed,
but yet I did not." Rather you ought to
carry the thing through, because you will; or
else not to will, because you do not carry it
through. But, by the confession of your
consciousness, you pronounce your own con-
demnation. For if you eagerly desired a
good thing, you would have been anxious to
carry it through; in like manner, as you do
not carry an adl thing through, you ought
not to have eagerly desired it. Wherever you
take your stand, you are fast bound by guilt;
because you have either willed evil, or else
have noX. fulfilled good.

CHAP. IV. REPENTANCE APPLICABLE TO ALL

THE KINDS OF SIN. TO BE PRACTISED NOT
ONLY, NOR CHIEFLY, FOR THE GOOD IT BRINGS,
BUT BECAUSE GOD COMMANDS IT.

To all sins, then, committed whether by
flesh or spirit, whether by deed or will, the
same God who has destined penalty by means
of judgment, has withal engaged to grant
pardon by means of repentance, saying to the
people, " Repent thee, and I will save
thee;" 5 and again, "I live, saith the Lord,
and I will (have) repentance rather than
death. "^ Repentance, then, is " life," since
it is preferred to " death." That repentance,
O sinner, like myself (nay, rather, less than
myself, for pre-eminence in sins I acknowl-
edge to be mine 7), do you so hasten to, so
embrace, as a shipwrecked man the protec-
tion^ of some plank. This will draw you
forth when sunk in the waves of sins, and will
bear you forward into the port of the divine
clemency. Seize the opportunity of unexpected
felicity: that you, who sometime were in God's
sight nothing but "a drop of a bucket,"'
and "dust of the threshing-floor,"" and
" a potter's vessel," " may thenceforward be-
come that " tree which is sown beside" the
waters, is perennial in leaves, bears fruit at
its own time," '^ and shall not see fire," '* nor
" axe." '5 Having found " the truth," '* re-
pent of errors; repent of having loved what
God loves not: even we ourselves do not per-
mit our slave-lads not to hate the things which


5 Comp. Ezek. xviii. 50, 32.

^ The substance of this is found in Ezek. xxxiii. xi.

7 Compare 1 Tim. i. 16.

8 Comp. c. xii. sub /in. [Ut naufragus alicuius tabula: fidem ;
this expression soon passed into Theological technology, and as
" the plank after shipwreck " is universally known.]

9 Isa. xl. 15.

'° Dan. ii. 35 • Matt. iii. 12.
I' Ps. ii. 9 ; Rev. ii. 27
" Penes.

13 Ps. i. 3 ; Jer. xvii. 8. Compare Luke xxiii. 31.

14 Ter. xvii. 8 ; Matt. iii. lo.

15 Matt. iii. 10.

16 John xiv. 6.


fe6o


ON REPENTANCE.


[chap. v.


are offensive to us; for the principle of volun-
tary obedience* consists in similarity of
minds.

To reckon up the good of repentance, the
subject-matter is copious, and therefore should
be committed to great eloquence. Let us,
however, in proportion to our narrow abilities,
inculcate one point, — that what God enjoins
is good and best. I hold it audacity to dis-
pute about the "good " of a divine precept;
for, indeed, it is not the fact that it is good
which binds us to obey, but the fact that God
has enjoined it. To exact the rendering of
obedience the majesty of divine power has the
prior' right; the authority of Him who com-
mands is prior to the utility of him who serves.
"Is it good to repent, or no ? " Why do you
ponder ? God enjoins; nay, He not merely en-
joins, but likewise exhorts. He invites by
(offering) reward — salvation, to wit; even by
an oath, saying"! live,"^ He desires that
credence may be given Him. Oh blessed we,
for whose sake God swears ! Oh most miser-
able, if we believe not the Lord even when He
swears ! What, therefore, God so highly com-
mends, what He even (after human fashion)
attests on oath, we are bound of course to ap-
proach, and to guard with the utmost serious-
ness; that, abiding permanently in (the faith
of) the solemn pledge* of divine grace, we
may be able also to persevere in like manner
in its fruits and its benefit.


CHAP. v. — SIN NEVER TO BE RETURNED TO AF-
TER REPENTANCE.**

For what I say is this, that the repentance
which, being shown us and commanded us
through God's grace, recalls us to grace ^ with
the Lord, when once learned and undertaken
by us ought never afterward to be cancelled
by repetition of sin. No pretext of ignorance
now remains to plead on your behalf; in that,
after acknowledging the Lord, and accepting
His precepts ^ — in short, after eligaging in re-
pentance of (past) sins — you again betake your-
self to sins. Thus, in as far as you are re-
moved from ignorance, in so far are you ce-
mented 9 to contumacy. For if the ground on
which you had repented of having sinned was

' Obsequii.

2 Or, " paramount."

3 See ref. i on the preceding page. The phrase is " As 1 live "
in the English version.

4 " Asseveratione :" apparently a play on the word, as com-
pared with " perse verare, which follows.

5 Or, "enjoyment.'"

6 [The formidable doctrine of I. John iii. 9, v. 18, etc. mus', ex-
cuse our author for his severe adherence to this principle of puri-
fying the heart from habitual sm. But, the church refused to
press it against St. Matt, xviii. 22. In our own self-indulgent day,
we are more prone, I fear, to presumption than to over strictness.
The Roman casuists make attrition suffice, and so turn absolution
into a mere sponge, and an encouragement to perpetual sinning
and formal confession.]

7 i.e., favour.

8 Which is solemnly done in baptism. 9 Adglutinaris.


that you had begun to fear the Lord, why have
you preferred to rescind what you did for fear's
sake, except because you have ceased to fear ?
For there is no other thing but contumacy
which subverts fear. Since there is no excep-
tion which defends from liability to penalty
even such as are ignorant of the Lord — because
ignorance of God, openly as He is set before
men, and comprehensible as He is even on the
score of His heavenly benefits, is not possible '°
— how perilous is it for Him to be despised
when known? Now, that man does despise
Him, who, after attaining by His help to an
understanding of things good and evil, offers
an affront to his own understanding — that is,
to God's gift — by resuming what he under-
stands ought to be shunned, and what he has
already shunned: he rejects the Giver in aban-
doning the gift; he denies the Benefactor in
not honouring the benefit. How can he be
pleasing to Him, whose gift is displeasing
to himself ? Thus he is shown to be not only
contumacious toward the Lord, but likewise
ungrateful. Besides, that man commits no
light sin against the Lord, who, after he had
by repentance renounced His rival the devil,
and had under this appellation subjected him
to the Lord, again upraises him by his own
return (to the enemy), and makes himself a
ground of exultation to him; so that the Evil
One, with his prey recovered, rejoices anew
against the Lord. Does he not — what is peril-
ous even to say, but must be put forward with
a view to edification — place the devil before
the Lord ? For he seems to have made the
comparison who has known each; and to have
judicially pronounced him to be the better
whose (servant) he has preferred again to be.
Thus he who, through repentance for sins,
had begun to make satisfaction to the Lord,
will, through another, repentance of his re-
pentance, make satisfaction to the devil, and
will be the more hateful to God in proportion
as he will be the more acceptable to His rival.
But some say that " God is satisfied if He be
looked up to with the heart and the mind,
even if this be not done in outward act, and
that thus they sin without damage to their fear
and their faith:" that is, that they violate
wedlock without damage to their chastity;
they mingle poison for their parent without
damage to their filial duty ! Thus, then, they
will themselves withal be thrust down into hell
without damage to their pardon, while they
sin without damage to their fear ! Here is a
primary example of perversity: they sin, be-
cause they fear ! " I suppose, if they feared


'oActs xiv. 15-17: "licet" here may = "lawful," "permiss-
ible," " excusable. '

" " Timent," not " metuunt," " Metus " is the word TertuUian
has been using above for religious, reverential fear.


CHAP. VI.]


ON REPENTANCE.


66 1


not, they would not sin! Let him, therefore,
who would not have God offended not revere
Him at all, if fear' is the plea for offending !
But these dispositions have been wont to
sprout from the seed of hypocrites, whose
friendship with the devil is indivisible, whose
repentance never faithful.

CHAP. VI. BAPTISM NOT TO BE PRESUMPTOUSLY

RECEIVED. IT REQUIRES PRECEDING REPEN-
TANCE, MANIFESTED BY AMENDMENT OF LIFE.

Whatever, then, our poor ability has at-
tempted to suggest with reference to laying
hold of repentance once for all, and perpetu-
ally retaining it, does indeed bear upon all
who are given up to the Lord, as being all
competitors for salvation in earning the favour
of God; but is chiefly urgent in the case of
those young novices who are only just begin-
ning to bedew ^ their ears with divine dis-
courses, and who, as whelps in yet early in-
fancy,and with eyes not yet perfect, creep about
uncertainly, and say indeed that they renounce
their former deed, and assume (the profession
of) repentance, but neglect to complete it.^
For the very end of desiring importunes them
to desire somewhat of their former deeds; just
as fruits, when they are already beginning to
turn into the sourness or bitterness of age, do
yet still in some part flatter -^ their own loveli-
ness. Moreover, a presumptuous confidence
in baptism introduces all kind of vicious delay
and tergiversation with regard to repentance;
for, feeling sure of undoubted pardon of their
sins, men meanwhile steal the intervening time,
and make it for themselves into a holiday-
time ^ for sinning, rather than a time for
learning not to sin.. Further, how inconsis-
tent is it to expect pardon of sins (to be granted)
to a repentance which they have not fulfilled !
This is to hold out your hand for merchan-
dise, but not produce the price. For repent-
ance is the price at which the Lord has deter-
mined to award pardon: He proposes the
redemption^ of release from penalty at this
compensating exchange of repentance. If,
then, sellers first examine the coin with which
they make their bargains, to see whether it be
cut, or scraped, or adulterated, ^ we believe
likewise that the Lord, when about to make
us the grant of so costly merchandise, even
of eternal life, first institutes a probation of
our repentance. " But meanwhile let us defer


I Timor.
2Deut. xxxij. 2.

3 i.e., by baptism.

4 Adulantur.

5 " Commeatus," a military word = " furlough," hence " holi-
day-time."

6 i.e., repurchase.

7 Adulter i see de Idol. c. i.


the reality of our repentance: it will then, I
suppose, be clear that we are amended when we
are absolved."^ By no means; (but our amend-
ment should be manifested) while, pardon be-
ing in abeyance, there is still a prospect of pen-
alty; while M^/^w/V^-w/ does not yet merit — so far
as merit we can — his liberation; while God is
threatening, not while He is forgiving. For
what slave, after his position has been changed
by reception of freedom, charges himself with
his (past) thefts and desertions? What sol-
dier, after his discharge, makes satisfaction
for his (former) brands ? A sinner is bound
to bemoan himself before receiving pardon,
because the time of repentance is coincident
with that of peril and of fear. Not that I deny
that the divine benefit — the putting away of
sins, I mean — is in every way sure to such as
are on the point of entering the (baptismal)
water; but what we have to labour for is, that
it may be granted us to attain that blessing.
For who will grant to you, a man of so faith-
less repentance, one single sprinkling of any
water whatever ? To approach it by stealth,
indeed, and to get the minister appointed over
this business misled by your asseverations, is
easy; but God takes foresight for His own
treasure, and suffers not the unworthy to steal
a march upon it. What, in fact, does He
say? "Nothing hid which shall not be re-
vealed."» Draw whatever (veil of) darkness
you please over your deeds, '* God is light." '°
But some think as if God were under a necessity
of bestowing even on the unworthy, what He
has engaged (to give); and they turn His lib-
erality into slavery. But if it is of fiecessity
that God grants us the symbol of death," then
He does so uminllifigly . But who permits a
gift to be permanently retained which he has
granted unwillingly? For do not many after-
ward fall out of (grace) ? is not this gift taken
away from many ? These, no doubt, are they
who do steal a march upon (the treasure), who,
after approaching to the faith of repentance,
set up on the sands a house doomed to ruin.
Let no one, then, flatter himself on the ground
of being assigned to the " recruit-classes " of
learners, as if on that account he have a li-
cence even now to sin. As soon as you
"know the Lord,"" you should fear Him;
as soon as you have gazed on Him, you should
reverence Him. But what difference does
your "knowing" Him make, while you rest
in the same practises as in days bygone, when
you knew Him not? What, moreover, is it


8 i.e.. in baptism

9 Luke viii. 17.
'" I John i. 5.

" Symbolum mortis indulget. Comp. Rom. vi. 3, 4, 8 ; Col. ii.
12, 20.
12 Jer. xxxi. (LXX. xxxviii.) 34 ; Heb. viii. n.


662


ON REPENTANCE.


[chap. \ II.


which distinguishes you from a perfected'
servant of God ? Is there one Christ for the
baptized, another for the learners? Have
they some different hope or reward? some
different dread of judgment? some different
necessity for repentance? That baptismal
washing is a sealing of faith, which faith is be-
gun and is commended by the faith of re-
pentance. We are not washed in order that
we may cease sinning, but because we have
ceased, since in heart we have been bathed =*
already. For the first baptism of a learner
is this^ a perfect fear;^ thenceforward, in so
far as you have understanding of the Lord,
faith is sound, the conscience having once for
all embraced repentance. Otherwise, if it is
(only) after the baptismal w^ttvs that we cease
sinning, it is of necessity ^ not oi free-ivill^ that
we put on innocence. Who, then, is pre-
eminent in goodness ? he who is not alloived,
or he whom // displeases^ to be evil ? he who is
bidden^ or he whose pleasure it is, to be free
from crime ? Let us, then, neither keep our
hands from theft unless the hardness of bars
withstand us, nor refrain our eyes from the
concupiscence of fornication unless we be
withdrawn by guardians of our persons, if no
one who has surrendered himself to the Lord
is to cease sinning unless he be bound thereto
by baptism. But if any entertain this senti-
ment, I know not whether he, after baptism,
do not feel more sadness to think that he has
ceased irom sinning, than gladness that he hath
escaped from it. And so it is becoming that
learners desire baptism, but do not hastily re-
ceive it: for he who desires it, honours it; he
who hastily receives it, disdains it: in the one
appears modesty, in the other arrogance; the
former satisfies, the latter neglects it; the
former covets to merit it, but the latter
promises it to himself as a due return; the
former takes, the latter usurps it. Whom
would you judge worthier, except one who
is more amended ? whom more amended,
except one who is more timid, and on that
account has fulfilled the duty of true re-
pentance ? for he has feared to continue
still in sin, lest he should not merit the
reception of baptism. But the hasty receiver,
inasmuch as he promised it himself (as his
due), being forsooth secure (of obtaining it),
could not fear: thus he fulfilled not repentance
either, because he lacked the instrumental
agent of repentance, that is, fear.'* Hasty
reception is the portion of irreverence; it in-
flates the seeker, it despises the Giver. And
thus it sometimes deceives, s for it promises


to itself the gift before it be due; whereby
He who is to furnish the gift is ever offended.

CHAP. VII. OF REPENTANCE, IN THE CASE OF

SUCH AS HAVE LAPSED AFTER BAPTISM.

So long, Lord Christ, may the blessing of
learning or hearing concerning the discipline
of repentance be granted to Thy servants, as
is likewise behoves them, while learners,^
not to sin; in other words, may they there-
after know nothing of repentance, a?id require
nothing of it. It is irksome to append men-
tion of a secofid — nay, in that case, the last —
hope; 7 lest, by treating of a remedial repent-
ing yet in reserve, we seem to be pointing to
a yet further space for sinning. Far be it that
any one so interpret our meaning, as if, be-
cause there is an opening for repenting, there
were even now, on that account, an opening
for sinning; and as if the redundance of celes-
tial clemency constituted a licence for human
temerity. Let no one be less good because
God is more so, by repeating his sin as often
as he is forgiven. Otherwise be sure he will
find an end of escaping, when he shall not
find one of sinning. We have escaped once:
thus far and no farther let us commit ourselves
to perils, even if we seem likely to escape
a second time.^ Men in general, after es-
caping shipwreck, thenceforward declare di-
vorce with ship and sea; and hy c her is hifig the
memory of the danger, honour the benefit
conferred by God, — their deliverance, namely.
I praise their fear, I love their reverence; they
are unwilling a second time to be a burden to
the divine mercy; they fear to seem to trample
on the benefit which they have attained; they
shun, with a solicitude which at all events is
good, to make trial a second time of that
which they have once learned to fear. Thus
the limit of their temerity is the evidence of
their fear. Moreover, man's fear' is an
honour to God. But however, that most
stubborn foe (of ours) never gives his malice
leisure; indeed, he is then most savage when
he fully feels that a man is freed from his
clutches; he then flames fiercest while he is
fast becoming extinguished. Grieve and
groan he must of necessity over the fact that,
by the grant of pardon, so many works of
death'" in man have been overthrown, so
many marks of the condemnation which for-


1 i.e., in baptism.

2 Sec John xiii. lo and Matt, xxiii. 36.

3 Metus integer.

4 Metus.


5 Or, " disappoints," i.e., the hasty recipient himself.
6 i.e., be/oreh&yt\s,m.

7 [Elucidation I. See infra, this chapter, sulijlne.']

8 [When our author wrote to the Martyrs, (see cap. i.) he was
less disposed to such remorseless discipline : and perhaps we have
here an element of his subsequent system, one which led him to
accept the discipline of Montanism, On this general subject, we
shall find enough when we come to Cyprian and Novatian.]

9 Timor.

'o" Mortis opera," or " deadly works :" cf. de Idol. c. iv. (mid.),
" perdition of blood," and the note there.


CHAP, vni.]


ON REPENTANCE.


663


merly was his own erased. He grieves that
that sinner, (now) Christ's servant, is destined
to judge him and his angels.' And so he
observes, assaults, besieges him, in the hope
that he may be able in some way either to
strike his eyes with carnal concupiscence, or
else to entangle his mind with worldly entice-
ments, or else to subvert his faith by fear of
earthly power, or else to wrest him from the
sure way by perverse traditions: he is never
deficient in stumbling-blocks nor in tempta-
tions. These poisons of his, therefore, God
foreseeing, although the gate of forgiveness has
been shut and fastened up with the bar of
baptism, has permitted // still to stand some-
what open,* In the vestibule He has stationed
the second repentance for opening to such as
knock: but now 07ice for all, because now for
the second time;^ but never more because
the last time it had been in vain. For is not
even this once enough ? You have what you
now deserved not, for you had lost what you
had received. If the Lord's indulgence grants
you the means of restoring what you had lost,
be thankful for the benefit renewed, not to
say amplified; for resloring is a greater thing
than giving, inasmuch as having lost is more
miserable than never having received at all.
However, if any do incur the debt of a second
repentance, his spirit is not to be forthwith cut
down and undermined by despair. Let it by
all means be irksome to si7i again, but let not
to repent again be irksome: irksome to imperil
one's self again, but not to be again set free.
Let none be ashamed. Repeated sickness
must have repeated medicine. You will show
your gratitude to the Lord by not refusing
what the Lord offers you. You have offended,
but can still be reconciled. You have One
whom you may satisfy, and Him willing.'*

CHAP. VIII. EXAMPLES FROM SCRIPTURE TO

PROVE THE lord's WILLINGNESS TO PARDON.

This if you doubt, unravel s the meaning
of " what the Spirit saith to the churches."*
He imputes to the Ephesians "forsaken
love; "7 reproaches the Thyatirenes with
"fornication," and "eating of things sacri-
ficed to idols; "^ accuses the Sardians of
" works not full; " ' censures the Pergamenes
for teaching perverse things;'" upbraids the
Laodiceans for trusting to their riches;" and


1 1 Cor. vi. 3.

2 Or, " has permitted somewhat still to stand open.

3 [See cap. vii. su/>ra.'\

4 To accept the satisfaction.

5 Evolve : perhaps simply = " read."

6 Rev. ii. 7, II, 17, 29, lii. 6, 13, 21.

7 Rev. ii. 4.

8 Rev. ii. 20.
9Rev. iii. 2.

10 Rev. ii. 14, 15.

11 Rev. iii. 17.


yet gives them all general monitions to re-
pentance— under comminations, it is true; but
He would not utter comminations to one un-
repentant if He did not forgive the repentant.
The matter were doubtful if He had not withal
elsewhere demonstrated this profusion of His
clemency. Saith He not," " He who hath
fallen shall rise again, and he who hath been
averted shall be ^^/rverted ? " He it is, in-
deed, who "would have mercy rather than
sacrifices." '3 The heavens, and the angels
who are there, are glad at a man's repent-
ance.'* Ho ! you sinner, be of good cheer !
you see where it is that there is joy at your
return. What meaning for us have those
themes of the Lord's parables? Is not the
fact that a woman has lost a drachma, and
seeks it and finds it, and invites her female
friends to share her joy, an example of a re-
stored sinner ? 's There strays, withal, one
little ewe of the shepherd's; but the flock was
not more dear than the one: that one is earn-
estly sought; the one is longed for instead of
all; and at length she is found, and is borne
back on the shoulders of the shepherd him-
self; for much had she toiled"^ in straying. *'
That most gentle father, likewise, I will not
pass over in silence, who calls his prodigal
son home, and willingly receives him repentant
after his indigence, slays his best fatted calf,
and graces his joy with a banquet.'^ Why not ?
He had found the son whom he had lost; he
had felt him to be all the dearer of whom he
had fnade a gain. Who is that father to be
understood by us to be? God, surely: no
one is so truly a Father; '' no one so rich in
paternal love. He, then, will receive you.
His own son,^ back, even if you have squan-
dered what you had received from Him, even
if you return naked — just because you have
returned; and will joy more over your return
than over the sobriety of the other; " but otily
if you heartily repent — if you compare your
own hunger with the plenty of your Father's
"hired servants" — if you leave behind you
the swine, that unclean herd — if you again
seek your Father, offended though He be,
saying, " I have sinned, nor am worthy any
longer to be called Thine." Confession of
sins lightens, as much as dissimulation aggra-
vates them; for confession is counselled by


" Jer. viii. 4 (m LXX.) appears to be the passage meant. The
Eng. Ver. is very different.

'3Hos. vi. 6; Matt. ix. 13. The words in Hosea in the LXX.
are, hi6ri eXtov tfe'Aw f) Ovaiav (al. ko-I oil Ovviav).

M Luke XV. 7, lo.

'5 Luke XV. 8-IO.

'6 Or, "suffered."

'7 Luke XV. 3-7.

'8I,uke XV. 11-32.

'9Cf. Matt, xxiii. 9; and Eph. iii. 14, 15, in the Greek.

30 Publicly enrolled as such in baptism • for TertuUian here is
speaking solely of the " second repentance.

2' See Luke xv. 29-32.


664


ON REPENTANCE.


[chap. X.


(a desire to make) satisfaction, dissin>ulation
by contumacy.

CHAP, IX. CONCERNING THE OUTWARD MANI-
FESTATIONS BY WHICH THIS SECOND REPENT-
ANCE IS TO BE ACCOMPANIED.

The narrower, then, the sphere of action of
this second and only (remaining) repentance,
the more laborious is its probation; in order
that it may not be exhibited in the conscience
alone, but may likewise be carried out in some
(external) act. This act, which is more usu-
ally expressed and commonly spoken of under
a Greek name, is k^ofioUyrjoig,^ whereby we
confess our sins to the Lord, not indeed as if
He were ignorant of them, but inasmuch as
by confession satisfaction is settled,'' of con-
fession repentance is born; by repentance God
is appeased. And thus exomologesis is a dis-
cipline for man's prostration and humiliation,
enjoining a demeanor calculated to move
mercy. With regard also to the very dress
and food, it commands (the penitent) to lie in
sackcloth and ashes, to cover his body in
mourning,^ to lay his spirit low in sorrows, to
exchange for severe treatment the sins which
he has committed ; moreover, to know no food
and drink but such as is plain, — not for the
stomach's sake, to wit, but the soul's; for the
most part, however, to feed prayers on fast-
ings, to groan, to weep and make outcries*
unto the Lord your^ God; to bow before the
feet of the presbyters, and kneel to God's
dear ones; to enjoin on all the brethren to be
ambassadors to bear his ^ deprecatory suppli-
cation (before God). All this exomologesis
(does), that it may enhance repentance; may
honour God by its fear of the (incurred) dan-
ger; may, by itself pronouncing against the
sinner, stand in the stead of God's indigna-
tion, and by temporal mortification (I will not
say frustrate, but) expunge eternal punish-
ments. Therefore, while it abases the man,
it raises him; while it covers him with squalor,
it renders him more clean; while it accuses, it
^jccuses; while it condemns, it absolves. The
less quarter you give yourself, the more (be-
lieve me) will God give you.

CHAP. X. — OF men's SHRINKING FROM THIS SEC-
OND REPENTANCE AND EXOMOLOGESIS, AND
OF THE UNREASONABLENESS OF SUCH SHRINK-
ING.

Yet most men either shun this work, as


» Utter confession.

2 For the meaning of " satisfaction," see Hooker Eccl. Pol. vi,
5, where several references to the present treatise occur. [Eluci-
dation II.]

3 Sordibus.

4Cf. Ps. xxii. I (in LXX. xxii. 3), xxxviii. 8 (in the LXX.
zxxvii. 9). Cf. Heb. v. 7.

S TertuUian changes here to the second person, unless Oehler's
*' tuum" be a misprint for " suum."


being a public exposure ^ of themselves, or
else defer it from day to day. I presume (as
being) more mindful of modesty than of sal-
vation; just like men who, having contracted
some malady in the more private parts of the
body, avoid the privity of physicians, and so
perish with their own bashfulness. It is in-
tolerable, forsooth, to modesty to make satis-
faction to the offended Lord ! to be restored
to its forfeited^ salvation! Truly you are
honourable in your modesty; bearing an open
forehead for sinning, but an abashed one for
deprecating ! I give no place to bashfulness
when I am a gainer by its loss; when itself in
some sort exhorts the man, saying, " Respect
not me; it is better that I perish through '
you, I. e. than you through f?ie." At all events,
the time when (if ever) its danger is serious,
is when it is a butt for jeering speech in the
presence of insulters, where one man raises
himself on his neighbour's ruin, where there
is upward clambering over the prostrate. But
among brethren and fellow-servants, where
there is common hope, fear,'° joy, grief,
suffering, because there is a common Spirit
from a common Lord and Father, why do you
think these brothers to be anything other than
yourself ? Why flee from the partners of your
own mischances, as from such as will deris-
ively cheer them ? The body cannot feel
gladness at the trouble of any one member,"
it must necessarily join with one consent in
the grief, and in labouring for the remedy.
In a company of two" is the church; '^ but
the church is Christ.'* When, then, you cast
yourself at the brethren's knees, you are
handling Christ, you are entreating Christ.
In like manner, when they shed tears over you,
it is Christ who suffers, Christ who prays the
Father for mercy. What a son 's asks is ever
easily obtained. Grand indeed is the reward
of modesty, which the concealment of our
fault promises us ! to wit, if we do hide some-
what from the knowledge of man, shall we
equally conceal it from God ? Are the judg-
ment of men and the knowledge of God so
put upon a par ? Is it better to be damned in
secret than absolved in public? But you say,
" It is a miserable thing thus to come to exo-
mologesis:" yes, for evil does bring to misery;
but where repentance is to be made, the mis-
ery ceases, because it is turned into something


tuum" above should be


6 "Suae," which looks as if the
suum." [St. James, V. 16.]

7 [Elucidation III.]

8 Prodactae.

9 Per. But " per," according to Oehler, is used by TertuUian
s = " propter" — on your account, for your sake.

»o Metus.

" 1 Cor. xii. 26.

" In uno et altero.

»3See Matt, xviii. 20.

*4i.e. as being His body.

»3 Or, " the Son." Corap. John xi. 41, 42.


CHAP. XII.]


ON REPENTANCE.


665


salutary. Miserable it is to be cut, and cauter-
ized, and racked with the pungency of some
(medicinal) powder: still, the things which heal
by unpleasant means do, by the benefit of the
cure, excuse their own offensiveness, and
make present injyry bearable for the sake'
of the advantage to supervene.

CHAP. XI. — FURTHER STRICTURES ON THE SAME
SUBJECT.

What if, besides the shame which they make
the most account of, i?ie7i dread likewise the
bodily inconveniences; in that, unwashen,
sordidly attired, estranged from gladness,
they must spend their time in the roughness
of sackcloth, and the horridness of ashes, and
the sunkenness of face caused by fasting ? Is
it then becoming for us to supplicate for our
sins in scarlet and purple? Hasten hither
with the pin for parting the hair, and the
powder for polishing the teeth, and some
forked implement of steel or brass for clean-
ing the nails. Whatever of false brilliance,
whatever of feigned redness, is to be had^ let
him diligently apply it to his lips or cheeks.
Let him furthermore seek out baths of more
genial temperature in some gardened or sea-
side retreat; let him enlarge his expenses; let
him carefully seek the rarest delicacy of
fatted fowls; let him refine his old wine: and
when any shall ask him, *' On whom are you
lavishing all this?" let him say, "I have
sinned against God, and am in peril of etern-
ally perishing: and so now I am drooping,
and wasting and torturing myself, that I may
reconcile God to myself, whom by sinning I
have offended." Why, they who go about
canvassing for the obtaining of civil office,
feel it neither degrading nor irksome to strug-
gle, in behalf of such their desires, with
annoyances to soul and body; and not annoy-
ances merely, but likewise contumelies of all
kinds. What meannesses of dress do they
not affect ? what houses do they not beset with
early and late visits ? — bowing whenever they
meet any high personage, frequenting no ban-
quets, associating in no entertainments, but
voluntarily exiled from the felicity of freedom
and festivity: and all that for the sake of the
fleeting joy of a single year ! Do we hesitate,
when eternity is at stake, to endure what the
competitor for consulship or praetorship puts
up with ? ' and shall we be tardy in offering
to the offended Lord a self-chastisement in
food and raiment, which ^ Gentiles lay upon
themselves when they have offended no one
at all ? Such are they of whom Scripture


* Or, " by the grace,
od securium vi
)uae," neut. pi


2 Quod securium virgarumque petitio sustiaet.


makes mention: ** Woe to them who bind
their own sins as it were with a long rope." *

CHAP. XII. — FIN.\L CONSIDERATIONS TO INDUCE
TO EXOMOLOGESIS.

If you shrink back from exomologesis^ con-
sider in your heart the hell,5 which exomolo-
gesisviWX extinguish for you; and imagine first
the magnitude of the penalty, that you may
not hesitate about the adoption of the remedy.
What do we esteem that treasure-house of
eternal fire to be, when small vent-holes^ of
it rouse such blasts of flames that neighbour-
ing cities either are already no more, or are
in daily expectation of the same fate ? The
haughtiest 7 mountains start asunder in the
birth-throes of their inly-gendered fire; and —
which proves to us the perpetuity of the judg-
ment— though they start asunder, though they
be devoured, yet come they never to an end.
Who will not account these occasional punish-
ments inflicted on the mountains as examples
of the judgment which menaces the impeni-
tent ? Who will not agree that such sparks
are but some few missiles and sportive darts
of some inestimably vast centre of fire ?
Therefore, since you know that after the first
bulwarks of the Lord's baptism^ there still
remains for you, in exomologesis a second re-
serve of aid against hell, why do you desert
your own salvation ? Why are you tardy to
approach what you know heals you ? Even
dumb irrational animals recognise in their
time of need the medicines which have been
divinely assigned them. The stag, transfixed
by the arrow, knows that, to force out the
steel, and its inextricable lingerings, he must
heal himself with dittany. The swallow, if
she blinds her young, knows how to give them
eyes again by means of her own swallow-
wort. ^ Shall the sinner, knowing that exomo-
logesis has been instituted by the Lord for his
restoration, pass that by which restored the
Babylonian king '° to his realms ? Long time
had he offered to the Lord his repentance,
working out his exomologesis by a seven years'
squalor, with his nails wildly growing after
the eagle's fashion, and his unkempt hair
wearing the shagginess of a lion. Hard hand-
ling ! Him whom men were shuddering at,
God was receiving back. But, on the other
hand, the Egyptian emperor — who, after pur-


4 Isa. V. 18 (comp. the LXX.).

5 Gehennam. Comp. ad Ux. ii. c. vi. ad fin.

6 Fumariola, i. e. the craters of volcanoes.

7 Superbissimi : perhaps a play on the word, which is connected
with " super" and " superus, ' as " haughty" with *' high."

8 For Tertullian's distinction between "the Lord's baptism" and
" John's" see de Bapt. x.

9 Or "celandine," which is perhaps only another form of
^* chelidonia" C CAeh'dom'a major" Linn.).
10 Dan. iv. 25 sqq. See de Pa. xiii.


666


ELUCIDATIONS.


suing the once afflicted people of God, long
denied to their Lord, rushed into the battle '
- — did, after so many warning plagues, perish
in the parted sea, (which was permitted to be
passable to " the People " alone,) by the back-
ward roll of the waves:' for repentance and
her handmaid ^ exomologesis he had cast away.
Why should I add more touching these two

» ProelJum.

3 Ex. xiv. 15-31.

3 '* Ministerium," the abstract for the concrete : so " servitia "
= slaves.

4 See c. iv. [ Tabula was the word in cap. iv. but here it be-
comes planca^ and planca post nau/ragiutn is the theological
formula, ever since, among Western theologians.]


planks * (as it were) of human salvation, car-
ing more for the business of the pen^ than
the duty of my conscience ? For, sinner as I
am of every dye,^ and born for nothing save
repentance, I cannot easily be silent about
that concerning which also the very head and
fount of the human race, and of human of-
fence, Adam, restored by exomologesis to his
own paradise,' is not silent.


5 See de Bapt. xii. sub init.

6 Lit. "of all brands.'''' Comp. c. vi.: " Does the soldier . . .
make satisfaction for his brands.

7 Cf. Gen. iii. 24 with Luke xxiii. 43, 2 Cor. xii. 4, aud Rev. ii.
7. [Elucidation IV.]


ELUCIDATIONS.


I.

(Such as have lapsed, cap. vii., p. 660,)

The pentitential system of the Primitive days, referred to in our author, began to be
changed when less public confessions were authorized, on account of the scandals which
publicity generated. Changes were as follows:

1 . A grave presbyter was appointed to receive and examine voluntary penitents as the
Penitentiary of a diocese, and to suspend or reconcile them with due solemnities — circa
A.D. 250.

2. This plan also became encumbered with difficulties and was abolished in the East,
circa a, d. 400.

3. A discipline similar to that of the Anglican Church (which is but loosely maintained
therein) succeeded, under St. Chrysostom; who frequently maintains the sufficiency of con-
fession according to St. Matt. vi. 6. A Galilean author' says — " this is the period regarded
by historians as the most brilliant in Church history. At the close of the fourth century,
in the great churches of the Orient, sixty thousafui Christiatis received the Eucharistic com-
munion, in one day, iti both kinds, with no other than their private confessions to Almighty
God. The scandalous evil-liver alone was repelled from the Eucharistic Table." This
continued till circa a.d. 700.

4. Particular, but voluntary confessions were now made in the East and West, but with
widely various acceptance under local systems of discipline. The absolutions were precatory:
"may God absolve Thee." This lasted, even in the West, till the compulsory system of
the Lateran Council, a.d. 12 15.

5. Since this date, so far as the West is concerned, the whole system of corrupt casuistry
^nd enforced confession adopted in the West has utterly destroyed the Primitive doctrine
and discipline as to sin and its remedy wherever it prevails. In the East, private confession
exists in a system wholly different and one which maintains the Primitive Theology and the
Scriptural principle, (i) It is voluntary; (2.) it is free from the corrupt system of the
casuists; (3) it distinguishes between Ecclesiastical Absolution and that of Him who alone
*'seeth in secret;" (4) it admits no compromise with attritioti, but exacts the contrite heart


Le Confesseur, par L'Abb^


p. 15, Brussels x866.


ELUCIDATIONS. 667


and the firm resolve to go and sin no more, and (5) finally, it employs a most guarded and
Evangelical formula of remission, of which see Elucidation IV.

II.

(The last hope, cap. vii. p. 662.)

How absolutely the Lateran Council has overthrown the Primitive discipline is here
made manifest. The spirit of the latter is expressed by our author in language which almost
prompts to despair. It makes sin "exceeding sinful" and even Ecclesiastical forgiveness
the reverse of easy. The Lateran System of enforced Confession makes sin easy and res-
toration to a sinless state equally so: a perpetual resort to the confessor being the only con-
dition for evil living, and a chronic state of pardon and peace. But, let the Greek Church be
heard in this matter, rather than an Anglican Catholic. I refer to Macarius, Bishop of
Vinnitza and Rector of the Theological Academy of St. Petersburg, as follows: * '*It is
requisite (for the effective reception of Absolution) at least according to the teaching of the
Orthodox Church of the Orient, that the following conditions be observed: (i) Contrition
for sins, is in the very nature of Penitence, indispensable; (2), consequently, there must
be a firm resolution to reform the life; (3) also, faith in Christ and hope in his mercy, with
(4) auricular confession before the priest." He allows that this latter condition was not
primitive^ but was a maternal co7icession to penitents of later date: this, however, is voluntary,
and of a widely different form from that of the Latin, as will appear below in Elucidation
IV.

Now, he contrasts with this the system of Rome, and condemns it, on overwhelming
considerations, i. It makes penances compensations'" or ** satisfaction," offered for sins to
divine Justice, this (he says) " is in contradiction with the Christian doctrine of justification,
the Scripture teaching one full and entire satisfaction for the sins of the whole human race,
once for all presented by our Lord Jesus Christ. This doctrine is equally in conflict with
the entire teaching of the Primitive Church."

2. It introduces a false system of indulgences^ as the consequence of its false premisses.

3. He demonstrates the insufficiency of attrition^ which respects the fear of punishment,
and not sin itself. But the Council of Trent affirms the sufficiency of attrition, and per-
mits the confessor to absolve the attrite. Needless to say, the masses accept this wide gate
and broad way to salvation rather than the strait gate and narrow way of hating sin and re-
forming the life, in obedience to the Gospel.

III.

(Among brethren, cap. x., p. 662.)

A controversial writer has lately complained that Bp. Kaye speaks of the public confes-
sion treated of by our author in this work, and adds — " Tertullian nowhere used the word
public. " The answer is that he speaks of the discipline of Exomologesis, which was, in its
own nature, as public as preaching. A Galilean writer, less inclined to Jesuitism in the
use of words, says frankly: " When one studies this question, with the documents before his
eyes, it is impossible not to confess that the Primitive discipline of the Church exhibits not
a vestige of the auricular confession afterwards introduced." See Irenaeus, ^d^. Hares.
Vol. I. p. 335, this Series. The Lii. of the canons called Apostolical, reflects a very simple
view of the matter, in these words: *' If any Bishop or Presbyter will not receive one who
tur7is from his sins, but casts him out, let him be deposed: for he grieves Christ, who said,
There shall be joy in heaven over one sinner that repenteth." The ascetic spirit of our
author seems at war with that of this Canon.


Theol. Dogmai.Orthodoxe, pp. 529-541 > etc. = Couc. Trident. Sess. xiv. cap.


668 ELUCIDATIONS.


IV.
(Exomologesis, cap. xii., p. 663.)

To this day, in the Oriental Churches, the examination of the presbyter who hears the
voluntary confession of penitents, is often very primitive in its forms and confined to general
inquiries under the Decalogue. The Casuistry of (Dens and Liguori) the Western Schemata
Practica has not defiled our Eastern brethren to any great extent.

In the office ' ('A/coAov^m ruv e^ofw?Mvyov/iivuv) we have a simple and beautiful form of prayer
and supplication in which the following is the formula of Absolution: " My Spiritual
child, who hast confessed to my humility, I, unworthy and a sinner, have not the pmuer to
forgive sins on Earth; God only can: and through that Divine voice which came to the
Apostles, after the Resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ, saying — ' Whosesoever sins, etc.,'
we, therein confiding, say — Whatsoever thou hast confessed to my extreme humility,
and whatsoever thou hast ojjiitted to say^ either through ignorance or forgetfulness, God for-
give thee in this present world and in that which is to come."

The plural {We therein confiding) is significant and a token of Primitive doctrine: i.e.
of confession before the whole Church, (II. Cor. ii. 10.): and note the precatory form —
"God forgive thee." The perilous form Ego te absolvo is not Catholic: it dates from the
thirteenth century and is used in the West only. It is not wholly dropped from the An-
glican Office, but has been omitted from the American Prayer-Book.


^ The Great Euchologion, p. 220, Venice, 1851.


II.
ON BAPTISM.

[TRANSLATED BY THE REV. S. THELWALL.]


CHAP. I. — INTRODUCTION. ORIGIN OF THE
TREATISE.

Happy is our' sacrament of water, in
that, by washing away the sins of our early
blindness, we are set free atid admitted into
eternal life ! A treatise on this matter will
not be superfluous; instructing not only such
as are just becoming formed (in the faith), but
them who, content with having simply be-
lieved, without full examination of the
grounds =" of the traditions, carry (in mind),
through ignorance, an untried though prob-
able faith. The consequence is, that a viper
of the Cainite heresy, lately conversant in this
quarter, has carried away a great number with
her most venomous doctrine, making it her
first aim to destroy baptism. Which is quite
in accordance with nature; for vipers and asps
and basilisks themselves generally do affect
arid and waterless places. But we, little
fishes, after the example of our IXGYS^ Jesus
Christ, are born in water, nor have we safety
in any other way than by permanently abiding
in water; so that most monstrous creature,
who had no right to teach even sound doc-
trine,^ knew full well how to kill the little
fishes, by taking them away from the water !

CHAP. II. THE VERY SIMPLICITY OF GOD's MEANS

OF WORKING, A STUMBLING-BLOCK TO THE
CARNAL MIND.

Well, but how great is the force of pervers-
ity for so shaking the faith or entirely pre-
venting its reception, that it impugns it on
the very principles of which the faith con-


li. e. Christian (Oehler).

2 Rationibus.

3 This curious allusion it is impossible, perhaps, to render in our
language. The word IXeY2 (ikhthus) in Greek means " a fish;''
and it was used as a name for our Lord Jesus, because the initials
of the words 'iTjaoii? Xpto-rb? ©eoO Yibs 2<«jt^p (i.e. Jesus Christ
the Son of God, the Saviour), make up that word. Oehler with
these remarks, gives abundant references on the point. [Dr. AUix
suspects Montanism here, but see Kaye, p. 43, and Lardner,
Credit. II. p. 335. We may date it circa a, d. 193.]

4As being a woman. See i Tim. ii. 11, 12.


sists ! There is absolutely nothing which
makes men's minds more obdurate than the
simplicity of the divine works which are vis-
ible in the act^ when compared with the
grandeur which is promised thereto in the
effect; so that from the very fact, that with so
great simplicity, without pomp, without any
considerable novelty of preparation, finally,
without expense, a man is dipped in water,
and amid the utterance of some few words, is
sprinkled, and then rises again, not much (or
not at all) the cleaner, the consequent attain-
ment of eternity 5 is esteemed the more in-
credible. I am a deceiver if, on the contrary,
it is not from their circumstance, and prepar-
ation, and expense, that idols' solemnities or
mysteries get their credit and authority built
up. Oh, miserable incredulity, which quite
deniest to God His own properties, simplicity
and power ! What then ? Is it not wonderful,
too, that death should be washed away by
bathing? But it is the more to be believed if
the wonderfulness be the reason why it is not
believed. For what does it behove divine
works to be in their quality, except that they
be above all wonder?* We also ourselves
wonder, but it is because we believe. Incre-
dulity, on the other hand, wonders, but does
mt believe: for the simple acts it wonders at,
as if they were vain; the grand results^ as if
they were impossible. And grant that it be
just as you think,^ sufficient to meet each
point is the divine declaration which has fore-
run: "The foolish things of the world hath
God elected to confound its wisdom;"' and,
'* The things very difficult with men are easy
with God. "9 For if God is wise and power-
ful (which even they who pass Him by do not
deny), it is with good reason that He lays the
material causes of His own operation in the


5 Consecutio actemitatis.

^•Admirationem.

7 i.e. that the simple be vain, and the grand impoosible.

*i Cor. i. 2_7, not quite exactly quoted.

9 Luke xviii. 27, again inexact.


670


ON BAPTISM.


[CHAI*. IV


contraries of wisdom and of power, that is, in '
foolishness and impossibility; since every
virtue receives its cause from those things by
which it is called forth.

CHAP. III. WATER CHOSEN AS A VEHICLE OF

DIVINE OPERATION AND WHEREFORE. ITS
PROMINENCE FIRST OF ALL IN CREATION.

Mindful of this declaration as of a conclu-
sive prescript, we nevertheless /r^r^<?^/^ treat
the question^ " Yio\i foolish and impossible it is
to be formed anew by water. In what re-
spect, pray, has this material substance
merited an office of so high dignity?" The
authority, I suppose, of the liquid element has
to be examined.' This,=' however, is found in
abundance, and that from the very beginning.
For water is one of those things which, before
all the furnishing of the world, were quies-
cent with God in a yet unshapen^ state.
" In the first beginning," saith Scripture^
*'God made the heaven and the earth. But
the earth was invisible, and unorganized,'*
and darkness was over the abyss; and the
Spirit of the Lord was hovering s over the
waters."^ The first thing, O man, which you
have to venerate, is the age of the, waters in
that their substance is ancient; the second,
their dignity, in that they were the seat of the
Divine Spirit, more pleasing to Him, no doubt,
than all the other then existing elements.
For the darkness was total thus far, shapeless,
without the ornament of stars; and the abyss
gloomy; and the earth unfurnished; and the
heaven unwrought: water ^ alone — always a
perfect, gladsome, simple material substance,
pure in itself — supplied a worthy vehicle to
God. What of the fact that waters were in
some way the regulating powers by which the
disposition of the world thenceforward was
constituted by God ? For the suspension of
the celestial firmament in the midst He
caused by "dividing the waters;"^ the sus-
pension of " the dry land " He accomplished
by " separating the waters." After the world
had been hereupon set in order through its
elements, when inhabitants were given it,
"the waters" were the first to receive the
precept "to bring forth living creatures."'
Water was the first to produce that which had
life, that it might be no wonder in baptism if
waters know how to give life.'° For was not
the work of fashioning man himself also

* Compare the Jews' question, Matt. xxi. 23.
» Its authority.

3 Impohta.

4 Incomposita.

5 Ferebatur.

6 Gen. i. i, 2, and comp. the LXX.

7 Liquor.

8 Gen. i. 6, 7,8.

9 Animas.
'° Animare.


achieved with the aid of waters? Suitable
material is found in the earth, yet not apt for
the purpose unless it be moist and juicy;
which (earth) "the waters," separated the
fourth day before into their own place, temper
with their remaining moisture to a clayey con-
sistency. If, from that time onward, I go
forward in recounting universally, or at more
length, the evidences of the "authority " of
this element which' I can adduce to show how
great is its power or its grace; how many
ingenious devices, how many functions, how
useful an instrumentality, it affords the world,
I fear I may seem to have collected rather the
praises of water than the reasons of baptism;
although I should thereby teach all the more
fully, that it is not to be doubted that God
has made the material substance which He
has disposed throughout all His products "
and works, obey Him also in His own peculiar
sacraments; that th^ 7?iate rial substance vih'xch.
governs terrestrial life acts as agent likewise
in the celestial.

CHAP. IV. THE PRIMEVAL HOVERING OF THE ,

SPIRIT OF GOD OVER THE WATERS TYPICAL OF
BAPTISM. THE UNIVERSAL ELEMENT OF

WATER THUS MADE A CHANNEL OF SANCTIFI-
CATION. RESEMBLANCE BETWEEN THE OUT-
WARD SIGN AND THE INWARD GRACE.

But it will suffice to have thus called at tlie
outset those points in which withal is recog-
nised that primary principle of baptism, —
which was even then fore-noted by the very
attitude assumed for a type of baptism, — that
the Spirit of God, who hovered over (the
waters) from the beginning, would continue
to hnger over the waters of the baptized."
But a holy thing, of course, hovered over a
holy; or else, from that which hovered over
that which 7vas hovered over borrowed a holi-
ness, since it is necessary that in every case
an underlying material substance should catch
the quality of that which overhangs it, most
of all a corporeal of a spiritual, adapted (as
the spiritual is) through the subtleness of its
substance, both for penetrating and insinuat-
ing. Thus the nature of the waters, sanctified
by the Holy One, itself conceived withal the
power of sanctifying. Let no one say, " Why
then, are we, pray, baptized with the very
waters which then existed in the first begin-
ning?" Not with those waters, of course,
except in so far as the genus indeed is one,
but the species very many. But what is an
attribute to the genus reappears '^ likewise in
the species. And accordingly it makes no


" Rebus.
i^Intinctorun
»3 Redundat.


CHAP, v.]


ON BAPTISM.


671


difference whether a man be washed in a sea
or a pool, a stream or a fount, a lake or a
trough; ' nor is there any distinction between
those whom John baptized in the Jordan and
those whom Peter baptized in the Tiber, un-
less withal the eunuch whom Philip baptized
in the midst of his journeys with chance
water, derived (therefrom) more or less of
salvation tha7i others:^ All waters, therefore,
in virtue of the pristine privilege of their ori-
gin, do, after invocation of God, attain the
sacramental power of sanctification; for the
Spirit immediately supervenes from the hea-
vens, and rests over the waters, sanctifying
them from Himself; and being thus sancti-
fied, they imbibe at the same time the power
of sanctifying. Albeit the similitude may be
admitted to be suitable to the simple act;
that, since we are defiled by sins, as it were
by dirt, we should be washed from those
stains in waters. But as sins do not show
themselves in owr flesh (inasmuch as no one
carries on his skin the spot of idolatry, or
fornication, or fraud), so persons of that kind
are foul in the spirit, which is the author
of the sin; for the spirit is lord, the flesh
servant. Yet they each mutually share the
guilt: the spirit, on the ground of command;
the flesh, of subservience. Therefore, after
the waters have been in a manner endued with
medicinal virtue ^ through the intervention of
the angel, '^ the spirit is corporeally washed in
the waters, and the flesh is in the same spirit-
ually cleansed.

CHAP. V. — USE MADE OF WATER BY THE HEATH-
EN. TYPE OF THE ANGEL AT THE POOL OF
BETHSAIDA.S

*'Well, but the nations, who are strangers
to all understanding of spiritual powers,
ascribe to their idols the imbuing of waters
with the self-same efficacy." (So they do)
but they cheat themselves with waters which
are widowed.^ For washing is the channel
through which they are initiated into some
sacred rites — of some notorious Isis or Mith-
ras. The gods themselves likewise they hon-
our by washings. Moreover, by carrying
water around, and sprinkling it, they every-
where expiate 7 country-seats, houses, tem-
ples, and whole cities: at all events, at the
Apollinarian and Eleusinian games they are
baptized; and they presume that the effect
of their doing that is their regeneration and


I the remission of the penalties due to their
I perjuries. Among the ancients, again, who-
j ever had defiled himself with murder, was
, wont to go in quest of purifying waters.
Therefore, if the mere nature of water, in that
it is the appropriate material for washing
away, leads men to flatter themselves with a
belief in omens of purification, how much
more truly will waters render that service
through the authority of God, by whom all
their nature has been constituted ! If men
think that water is endued with a medicinal
virtue by religion, what religion is more ef-
fectual than that of the living God ? Which
fact being acknowledged, we recognise here
also the zeal of the devil rivalling the things of
God,^ while we find him, too, practising baptism
in his subjects. What similarity is there ? The
unclean cleanses! the ruiner sets free ! the
damned absolves ! He will, forsooth, destroy
his own work, by washing away the sins which
himself inspires ! These (remarks) have been
set down by way of testimony against such as
reject the faith; if they put no trust in the
things of God, the spurious imitations of
which, in the case of God's rival, they do
trust in. Are there not other cases too, in
which, without any sacrament, unclean spirits
brood on waters, in spurious imitation of that
brooding 9 of the Divine Spirit in the ver}-
beginning? Witness all shady founts, and
all unfrequented brooks, and the ponds in
the baths, and the conduits " in private
houses, or the cisterns and wells which are said
to have the property of "spiriting away,""
through the power, that is, of a hurtful spirit.
Men whom waters have drowned " or af-
fected with madness or with fear, they call
nymph-caught, '3 or " lymphatic," or " hydro-
phobic." Why have we adduced these in-
stances ? Lest any think it too hard/t?/- belief
that a holy angel of God should grant his
presence to waters, to temper them to man's
salvation; while the evil angel holds frequent
profane commerce with the selfsame element
to man's ruin. If it seems a novelty for an
angel to be present in waters, an example of
what was to come to pass has forerun. An
angel, by his intervention, was wont to stir
the pool at Bethsaida.'* They who were com-
plaining of ill-health used to watch for him;
for whoever had been the first to descend into
them, after his washing, ceased to complain.
This figure of corporeal healing sang of a


lAlveo.

2 Acts viii. 26-40.

3 Medicatis.

4 See c. vi. ad init., and c. v. ad fin.

5 Bethesda, Eng. Ver.

6i. e.,as Oehler rightly explains, "larking the Holy Spirit's
presence and virtue."
7 Or, " purify."


8 [Diabolus Dei S'mius.)
9Gestationenn.
'o Euripi.
" Rapere.
" Necavcrunt.

•3" Nympholeptos," restored by Oehler, = to^fi^oAiyfrrovt.
'4 So Tertullian reads, and some copies, but not' the best, of the
j New Testament in the place referred to, John v. 1-9. [And note
I TertuUian's textual testimony as to thb Scripture.]


672


ON BAPTISM.


[chap. VIII.


spiritual healing, according to the rule by
which things carnal are always antecedent '
as figurative of things spiritual. And thus,
when the grace of God advanced to higher de-
grees among men,' an accession of efficacy
was granted to the waters and to the angel.
They who^ were wont to remedy bodily de-
fects,* now heal the spirit; they who used to
work temporal salvation, s now renew eternal;
they who did set free but once in the year,
now save peoples in a body*^ daily, death be-
ing done away through ablution of sins. The
guilt being removed, of course the penalty
is removed too. Thus man will be restored
for God to His " likeness," who in days by-
gone had been conformed \.o " the image " of
God; (the "image" is counted (to be) in his
fortn: the "likeness" in his eternity:) for he
receives again that Spirit of God which he had
then first received from His afflatus, but had
afterward lost through sin.

CHAP. VI.— THE ANGEL THE FORERUNNER OF
THE HOLY SPIRIT. MEANING CONTAINED IN
THE BAPTISMAL FORMULA.

Not that in "> the waters we obtain the Holy
Spirit; but in the water, under (the witness
of) the angel, we are cleansed, and prepared
for the Holy Spirit. In this case also a type
has preceded; for thus was John beforehand
the Lord's forerunner, " preparing His
ways." ° "^'
ness'

straight " '° for the Holy Spirit, who is about
to come upon us, by the washing away of
sins, which faith, sealed in (the name of) the
Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit, ob-
tains. For if "in the mouth of \hrtG. witnesses
every word shall stand:"" — while, through
the benediction, we have the same (three) as
witnesses of our faith whom we have as sure-
ties " of our salvation too — how much more
does the number of the divine names suffice
for the assurance of our hope likewise ! More-
over, after the pledging both of the attestation
of faith and the promise '^ of salvation under
" three witnesses," there is added, of neces-
sity, mention of the Church; '-♦ inasmuch as,
wherever there are three, (that is, the Father,


^ Thus, too, does the angel, the wit-
of baptism, " make the paths


the Son, and the Holy Spirit,) there is the
Church, which is a body of three. ^s

CHAP. VII. OF THE UNCTION.

After this, when we have issued from the
font, '^ we are thoroughly anointed with a
blessed unction, — (a practice derived) from
the old discipline, wherein on entering the
priesthood, 7fien were wont to be anointed
with oil from a horn, ever since Aaron was
anointed by Moses. '^ Whence Aaron is called
"Christ,"'^ from the "chrism," which is
" the unction; " which, when made spiritual,
furnished an appropriate name to the Lord,
because He was "anointed" with the Spirit
by God the Father; as 7vritten in the Acts:
" For truly they were gathered together in
this city '^ against Thy Holy Son whom Thou
hast anointed." ^ Thus, too, in our ca'se, the
unction runs carnally, {i.e. on the body,) but
profits spiritually; in the same way as the act
of baptism itself too is carnal, in that we are
plunged in water, but the ^^r/ spiritual, in
that we are freed from sins.

CHAP. VIII. OF THE IMPOSITION OF HANDS.

TYPES OF THE DELUGE AND THE DOVE.

In the next place the hand is laid on us,
invoking and inviting the Holy Spirit through
benediction." Shall it be granted possible
for human ingenuity to summon a spirit into
water, and, by the application of hands from
above, to animate their union into one body "
with another spirit of so clear sound; =3 and
shall it not be possible for God, in the case
of His own organ,"^ to produce, by means of
" holy hands," "^ a sublime spiritual modula-
tion ? But this, as well as the former, is de-
rived from the old sacramental rite in which
Jacob blessed his grandsons, born of Joseph,
Ephrem=^ and Manasses; with his hands laid
on them and interchanged, and indeed so
transversely slanted one over the other, that,
by delineating Christ, they even portended
the future benediction into Christ.^ Then,


» Compare i Cor. xv. 46.

2 John i. x6, 17.

3 Qui : i. e. probably " angeli qui."

4 Vitia.

5 Or, " health "— salutem.

6 Conservant populos.

/Compare c. viii., where Tertullian appears to regard the Holy
Spirit as given after the baptized had come up out of the waters
and received the " unction.'

8 Luke i. 76.

9 Arbiter. [Eccles. v. 6, and Acts xii. 15.]
10 Isa. xl. 3 ; Matt. iii. 3.

" Deut. XIX. 15 : Matt, xviii. 16 ; a Cor. xiii. i.
»=" Sponsores.

13 Sponsio.

14 Compare de Orat. c. ii. sub fin.


»5 Compare the de Orat. quoted above, and de Patten, xxi. ;
and see Matt, xviii. 20.

'6 Lavacro.

17 See Ex. xxix. 7 ; Lev. viii. 12 ; Ps. cxxxiii. 2.

iSi.e. " Anointed.'' Aaron, orat least the priest, is actually so
called in the LXX., in Lev. iv. 5, 16, 6 UpeOs o Xpta-ro? : as in the
Hebrew it is the word whence Messiah is derived which is used.

>9 Civitate.

» Acts iv. 27. " In this city" {iv ttj ttoAci ravTyj) is omitted in
the English version; and the name 'lijo-oOi', "Jesus," is omitted
by Tertullian. Compare Acts x. 38 and Lev. iv. 18 with Isa. Ixi. i
in the LXX.

21 [See Bunsen, Hipfiol. Vol. III. Sec xiii. p. 22.]

22 Concorporationem.

23 The reference is to certain hydraulic organs, which the editors
tell us are described by Vitruvius, ix. 9 and x. 13, and Pliny, H. N,
vii. 37.

24 I.e. Man. There may be an allusion to Eph. ii. 10, "We are
His workmanship," and to Ps. cl. 4.

25 Compare i Tim. ii. 8.
=6 i.e. Ephraim.

27 In Christum.


CHAP. X.]


ON BAPTISM.


673


over our cleansed and blessed bodies willingly
descends from the Father that Holiest Spirit.
Over the waters of baptism, recognising as it
were His primeval seat,' He reposes: (He
who) glided down on the Lord *' in the shape
of a dove,"' in order that the nature of the
Holy Spirit might be declared by means of
the creature (the emblem) of simplicity and
innocence, because even in her bodily structure
the dove is without literal ^ gall. And ac-
cordingly He says, "Be ye simple as
doves. "^ Even this is not without the sup-
porting evidence s of a preceding figure. For
just as, after the waters of the deluge, by
which the old iniquity was purged — after the
baptism, so to say, of the world — a dove was
the herald which announced to the earth the
assuagement* of celestial wrath, when she
had been sent her way out of the ark, and had
returned with the olive-branch, a sign which
even among the nations is the fore-token of
peace;'' so by the self-same law^ of heavenly
effect, to earth — that is, to our flesh » — as
it emerges from the font,'° after its old sins,
flies the dove of the Holy Spirit, bringing us
the peace of God, sent out from the heavens,
where is the Church, the typified ark." But
the world returned unto sin; in which point
baptism would ill be compared to the deluge.
And so it is destined to fire; just as the man
too is, who after baptism renews his sins:"
so that this also ought to be accepted as a
sign for our admonition.

CHAP. IX. — TYPES OF THE RED SEA, AND THE
WATER FROM THE ROCK.

How many, therefore, are the pleas ^' of
nature, how many the privileges of grace, how
many the solemnities of discipline, the figures,
the preparations, the prayers, which have or-
dained the sanctity of water ? First, indeed,
when the people, set unconditionally free,"*
escaped the violence of the Egyptian king by
crossing over through water ^ it was water that
extinguished 's the king himself, with his en-
tire forces.'* What figure more manifestly

1 See. c. iv. p. 668.

2 Matt. iii. 16 ; Luke iii. 22.

3 Ipso. The ancients held this.

4 Matt. X. i6. Tertullian has rendered dxtpouoi (unmixed) by
"simplices," i.e. without fold.

5 Argumento.

6 Pacem.

7 Paci.

8 Dispositione.

9 See de Orat. iv. ad init,
"i^' Lavacro.

" Compare de Idol. xxiv. ad Jin.

'2 [II. Pet. i. 9. Heb. X. 26,27,29. These awful texts are too
little felt by modem Christians. They are too often explained
away.]

'3 Patrocinia — " pleas in defence.^''

14" Libere expeditus, ' set free, and that without any conditions,
such as Pharaoh had from time to time tried to impose. See Ex
viii. 25, 28, x. 10, II, 24.

15 " Extinxit," as it doesyfr*",

'6 Ex. xiv. 27-30.

43


fulfilled in the sacrament of baptism ? The
nations are set free from the world •' by means
of water ^ to wit: and the devil, their old
tyrant, they leave quite behind, overwhelmed
in the water. Again, water is restored from
its defect of *' bitterness " to its native grace
of "sweetness" by the tree'* of Moses.
j That tree was Christ," restoring, to wit, of
Himself, the veins of sometime envenomed
and bitter nature into the all-salutary waters
of baptism. This is the water which flowed
continously down for the people from the
" accompanying rock; " for if Christ is " the
Rock," without doubt we see baptism blest
by the water in Christ. How mighty is the
grace of ivater^ in the sight of God and His
Christ, for the confirmation of baptism! Never
is Christ without 7£'«/^r.- if, that is. He is Him-
self baptized in water ;'^ inaugurates in ivater
the first rudimentary displays of His power,
when invited to the nuptials;" invites the
thirsty, when He makes a discourse, to His own
sempiternal water; " appproves,when teaching
concerniRg love, " among works of charity, ^
the cup of water offered to a poor (child) ;=^
recruits His strength at a well; *^ walks over
the water ;'^ willingly crosses the sea;"^ min-
isters water to His disciples. "^ Onward even
to the passion does the witness of baptism last:
while He is being surrendered to the cross,
7uatcr intervenes; witness Pilate's hands:'"
when He is wounded, forth from His side
bursts water; witness the soldier's lance!''

CHAP. X. — OF John's baptism.

We have spoken, so far as our moderate
ability permitted, of the generals which form
the groundwork of the sanctity*" of baptism.
I will now, equally to the best of my power,
proceed to the rest of its character, touching
certain minor questions.

The baptism announced by John formed
the subject, even at that time, of a question,
proposed by the Lord Himself indeed to the
Pharisees, whether that baptism were heav-
enly, or truly earthly: 33 about which they
were unable to give a consistent -'• answer,


'7 Seeculo.

18 See Ex. xv. 24, 25.

»9 " The Tree of Life," " the True Vine," etc.

20 Matt. iii. 13-17.

a« John ii. i-ii.

»John vii. 37, 38.

23 A^pe. See de Orat. c. 28, ad fin.

24 Dilectionis. See de Patien. c. xii.

25 Matt. X. 42.
-6 John iv. 6.

27 Matt. xiv. 25.

28 Mark iv. 36.

=9 John xiii. i-ia.

30 Niatt. xxvii. 24. Comp. de Orat. c. xiii.

31 John xix. 34. See c. xviii. sub fin.

32 Kelijfionem.

33 Matt. xxi. 25 ; Mark xi. 30 ; Luke xx. 4.

34 Constanter.


674


ON BAPTISM.


[chap. XII.


inasmuch as they understood not, because
they believed not. But wej with but as poor
a measure of understanding as of faith, arc
able to determine that that baptism was (iivitie
indeed, (yet in respect of the command, not
in respect of efficacy' too, in that we read
that John was sent by the Lord to perform this
duty,)" but human in its nature: for it con-
veyed nothing celestial, but it fore-ministered
to things celestial; being, to wit, appointed
over repenta?icCj which is in man's power.^
In fact, the doctors of the law and the Phari-
sees, who were unwilling to ** believe," did
not "repent" either.-* But if repentance is
a thing human, its baptism must necessarily be
of the same nature: else, if it had been celes-
tial, it would have given both the Holy Spirit
and remission of sins. But none either par-
dons sins or freely grants the Spirit save God
only.s Even the Lord Himself said that the
Spirit would not descend on any other condi-
tion, but that He should first ascend to the
Father.^ What the Lord was not yet con-
ferring, of course the servant could not fur-
nish. Accordingly, in the Acts of the Apos-
tles, we find that men who had " John's
baptism" had not received the Holy Spirit,
whom they knew not even by hearing. ^
That, then, was no celestial thing which fur-
nished no celestial (endowments): whereas
the very thing which was celestial in John —
the Spirit of prophecy — so completely failed,
after the transfer of the whole Spirit to the
Lord, that he presently sent to inquire whether
He whom he had himself preached, ^ whom
he had pointed out when coming to him, were
"HE. "9 And so "the baptism of repent-
ance "'° was dealt with" as if it were a
candidate for the remission and sanctification
shortly about to follow in Christ: for in that
John used to preach " baptism y<9r the remis-
sion of sins,"" the declaration was made with
reference to 2i future remission; if it be true,
(as it is,) that repentance is antecedent, re-
mission subsequent; and this is " preparing
the way." '3 But he who " prepares " does
not himself " perfect," but procures for an-
other to perfect. John himself professes that
the celestial things are not his, but Christ's,
by saying, " He who is from the earth speak-
eth concerning the earth; He who comes from

t Potestate.

2 See John i. 33.

1 1t is difficult to see how this statement is to be reconciled with
Acts V. 31. [i.e. under the universal illumination, John i. 9.]

4 Matt. iii. 7-12, xxi. 23, 31, 32.

5 Mark ii. 8 ; i Thess. iv. 8 ; 2 Cor. i. 21, 22, v. 5.

6 John xvi. 6, 7.

7 Acts xix. 1-7, [John vii. 39.]

8 Matt. iii. 11, 12 ; John i. 6-36.

9 Matt. xi. 2-6 ; Luke vii. 18-23. [He repeats this view.]
10 Acts xix. 4.

i» Agebatur.
"Marki. 4.
'3 Luke i. 76.


the reahns above is above all; " '* and again,
by saying that he " baptized in repentance
only, but that One would shortly -come who
would baptize in the Spirit and fire;"'^ — of
course because true and stable faith is bap-
tized with water ^ unto salvation; pretended
and weak faith is baptized with Jire^ unto
judgment.

CHAP. XI. ANSWER TO THE OBJECTION THAT

" THE LORD DID NOT BAPTIZE."

" But behold, " say some, " the Lord came,
and baptized not; for we read, ' And yet He
used not to baptize, but His disciples ! ' " '^
As if, in truth, John had preached that He
would baptize with His own hands ! Of
course, his words are not so to be understood,
but as simply spoken after an ordinary man-
ner; just as, for instance, we say, " The em-
peror set forth an edict," or, "The prefect
cudgelled him. " Pray does the emperor in
person set forth, or the prefect in person cud-
gel ? One whose ministers do a thing is
always said to do it. '^ So " He will baptize
you " will have to be understood as standing
for, " Through Him," or "(Into Him," "you
will be baptized." But let not (the fact) that
"He Himself baptized not" trouble any.
For into whom should He baptize ? Into re-
pentance? Of what use, then, do you make
His forerunner? Into remission of sins,
which He used to give by a word ? Into
Himself, whom by humility He was conceal-
ing ? Into the Holy Spirit, who had not yet
descended from the Father ? Into the Church,
which His apostles had not yet founded ? And
thus it was with the selfsame "baptism of
John " that His disciples used to baptize, as
ministers, with which John before had bap-
tized as forerunner. Let none think it was
with some other, because no other exists, ex-
cept that of Christ subsequently; which at
that time, of course, could not be given by
His disciples, inasmuch as the glory of the
Lord had not yet been fully attained,'^ nor
the efficacy of the font'' established through
the passion and the resurrection; because
neither can our death see dissolution except
by the Lord's passion, nor our life be restored
without His resurrection.

CHAP. XII. — OF THE NECESSITY OF BAPTISM TO
SALVATION.

When, however, the prescript is laid down
that "without baptism, salvation is attainable


'4 John iii. 30, 31, briefly quoted.

'5 Matt. iii. II, not quite exactly given.


'° John iv. 2.

17 For instances of this, compare Matt. viii. s with Luke vii. 3,
7 ; and Mark x. 35 with Matt, xx. 20,
'8 Of. I Pet. i. ii,adM-
»9 Lavacri.


CHAP. XIII.]


ON BAPTISM.


675


by none " (chiefly on the ground of that dec-
laration of the Lord, who says, " Unless one
be born of water, he hath not life"'), there
arise immediately scrupulous, nay rather
audacious, doubts on the part of some, ** how,
in acordance with that prescript, salvation is
attainable by the apostles, whom — Paul ex-
cepted— we do not find baptized in the Lord ?
Nay, since Paul is the only one of them who
has put on the garvic7it of Christ's baptism, ^
either the peril of all the others who lack the
water of Christ is prejudged, that the pre-
script may be maintained, or else the prescript
is rescinded if salvation has been ordained
even for the unbaptized." I have heard — the
Lord is my witness — doubts of that kind: that
none may imagine me so abandoned as to ex-
cogitate, unprovoked, in the licence of my pen,
ideas which would inspire others with scruple.
And now, as far as I shall be able, I will
reply to them who affirm "that the apostles
were unbaptized." For if they had undergone
the human baptism of John, and were longing
for that of the Lord, then since the Lord Him-
self had defined baptism to be 07ie; ^ (saying
to Peter, who was desirous'* of being thor-
oughly bathed, " He who hath once bathed
hath no necessity to wash a second time;"^
which, of course, He would not have said at
all to one 7iot baptized;) even here we have a
conspicuous ^ proof against those who, in
order to destroy the sacrament of water, de-
prive the apostles even of John's baptism.
Can it seem credible that " the way of the
Lord," that is, the baptism of John, had not
then been " prepared " in those persons who
were being destined to open the way of the
Lord throughout the whole world ? The Lord
Himself, though no " repentance " was due
from Him, was baptized: was baptism not
necessary for sinners ? As for the fact, then,
that " others were not baptized " — they, how-
ever, were not companions of Christ, but
enemies of the faith, doctors of the law and
Pharisees. From which fact is gathered an
additional suggestion, that, since the opposers
of the Lord reused to be baptized, they who
follo^ved the Lord were baptized, and were not
like-minded with their own rivals: especially
when, if there were any one to whom they
clave, the Lord had exalted John above him
(by the testimony) saying, " Among them who
are born of women there is none greater than
John the Baptist." ^


1 John iii. 5, not fully given.

2 See Gal. lii. 27.

3 See Eph. iv. 5.

4 " Volenti," which Oehler notes as a suggestion of Fr. Junius,
is adopted here in preference to Oehler's " nolenti.'*

5 John xiii. 9, 10.

6Exerta. Comp. c. xviii. sub init.: ad Ux. ii. c. i. sub fin.
7 Matt. xi. II. eyTjyepTat omitted.


Others make the suggestion (forced enough,
clearly) '* that the apostles then served the
turn of baptism when, in their little ship, they
were sprinkled and covered with the waves:
that Peter himself also was immersed enough
when he walked on the sea." * It is, however,
as I think, one thing to be sprinkled or inter-
cepted by the violence of the sea; another
thing to be baptized in obedience to the dis-
cipline of religion. But that little ship did
present a figure of the Church, in that she
is disquieted "in the sea," that is, in the
world,^ " by the waves," that is, by persecu-
tions and temptations; the Lord, through
patience, sleeping as it were, until, roused in
their last extremities by the prayers of the
saints, He checks the world," and restores
tranquillity to His own.

Now, whether they were baptized in any
manner whatever, or whether they continued
unbathed " to the end — so that even that say-
ing of the Lord touching the "one bath""
does, under the person of Peter, merely re-
gard us — still, to determine concerning the
salvation of the apostles is audacious enough,
because on them the prerogative even of first
choice,^3 and thereafter of undivided intimacy,
might be able to confer the compendious
grace of baptism, seeing they (I think) fol-
lowed Him who was wont to promise salvation
to every believer. " Thy faith," He would
say, "hath saved thee;"** and, "Thy sins
shall be remitted thee,"'^ on thy believing,
of course, albeit thou be not ir/ baptized. If
that '^ was wanting to the apostles, I know not
in the faith of what things it was, that, roused
by one word of the Lord, one left the toll-
booth behind for ever;'^ another deserted
father and ship, and the craft by which he
gained his living;'^ a third, who disdained his
father's obsequies," fulfilled, before he heard
it, that highest precept of the Lord, " He who
prefers father or mother to me, is not worthy
of me."**

CHAP. XIII. ANOTHER OBJECTION : ABRAHAM

PLEASED GOD WITHOUT BEING BAPTIZED.
ANSWER THERETO. OLD THINGS MUST GIVE
PLACE TO NEW, AND BAPTISM IS NOW A LAW.

Here, then, those miscreants'* provoke


8 Matt. viii. 24, xiv. 28, 29. [Our author seems to allow that
sprinkling is baptism, but not Christian baptism: aver>' curious
passage. Compare the foot-washing, John xiii. 8.]

9 Saeculo.
'° Saeculum.
" lUoti.

"Lavacrum. [John xiii. 9, 10, as above.]
«3i.e. of being the first to be chosen.
MLuke xviii. 42- Mark x. 52.

«5 " Remittentur • is Oehler's reading; " remittuntiir" others
read : but the Greek is in the perfect tense. See Mark ii. 5.

»6i. e. faith, or perhaps the " compendious grace of baptism."

'7 Matt. ix. 9.

'8 Matt. iv. 21, 22.

19 Luke ix. 59, 60 ; but it is not said there that the man did it.

30 Matt. X. 37. =■ i.e. probably the Cainites. See c. i.


676


ON BAPTISM.


[chap. XV.


questions. And so they say, *' Baptism is not
necessary for them to whom faith is sufficient;
for withal, Abraham pleased God by a sacra-
ment of no water, but of faith." But in
all cases it is the later things which have a
conclusive force, and the subsequmt which pre-
vail over the antecedent. Grant that, in days
gone by, there was salvation by means of bare
faith, before the passion and resurrection of
the Lord. But now that faith has been en-
larged, and is become a faith which believes
in His nativity, passion, and resurrection,
there has been an amplification added to the
sacrament,' viz., the sealing act of baptism;
the clothing, in some sense, of the faith which
before was bare, and which cannot exist now
without its proper law. For the laiv of bap-
tizing has been imposed^ and the formula pre-
scribed: "Go," He saith, "teach the na-
tions, baptizing them into the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Spirit."' The comparison with this law of
that definition, " Unless a man have been re-
born of water and Spirit, he shall not enter
into the kingdom of the heavens," ^ has tied
faith to the necessity of baptism. Accord-
ingly, all thereafter-* who became believers used
to be baptized. Then it was, too,s that Paul,
when he believed, was baptized; and this is
the meaning of the precept which the Lord
had given him when smitten with the plague
of loss of sight, saying, "Arise, and enter
Damascus; there shall be demonstrated to
thee what thou oughtest to do," to wit, —
be baptized, which was the only thing lacking
to him. That point excepted, he had suffi-
ciently learnt arid believed "the Nazarene " to
be " the Lord, the Son of God." "^

CHAP. XIV. — OF PAUL'S ASSERTION, THAT HE
HAD NOT BEEN SENT TO BAPTIZE.

But they roll back a7i objectiofi from that
apostle himself, in that he said, " For Christ
sent me not to baptize; " ^ as if by this argu-
ment baptism were done away ! For // so,
why did he baptize Gaius, and Crispus, and the
house of Stephanas?^ However, even if
Christ had not sent him to baptize, yet He
had given other apostles the precept to bap-
tize. But these words were written to the
Corinthians in regard of the circumstances of
that particular time; seeing that schisms and


1 i.e. the sacrament, or obligation of faith. See beginning of
chapter.

2 Matt, xxviii. 19 : " all " omitted.

3 John ii.. 5: "shall not " for '"cannot;" "kingdom of the
heavens"— an expression only occurring in Matthew— for " king-
dom of God."

4 i. e. from the time when the Lord gave the " law."
Si. e. not till after the " law'' had been made.

* See Acts ix. 1-31.
7 I Cor. i. 17.
^ I Cor. L 14, 16.


dissensions were agitated among them, while
one attributes everything to Paul, another to
Apollos.5 For which reason the " peace-
making"'" apostle, for fear he should seem
to claim all gifts for himself, says that he
had been sent " not to baptize, but to preach."
For preaching is the prior thing, baptizing the
posterior. Therefore the preaching came
first: but I think baptizing withal was lawful
to him to whom preaching was.

CHAP. XV. UNITY OF BAPTISM. REMARKS ON

HERETICAL AND JEWISH BAPTISM.

I know not whether any further point is
mooted to bring baptism into controversy.
Permit me to call to mind what I have omit-
ted above, lest I seem to break off the train
of impending thoughts in the middle. There
is to us one, and but one, baptism; as well
according to the Lord's gospel " as according
to the apostle's letters," inasmuch as he says,
" One God, and one baptism, and one church
in the heavens." '^ But it must be admitted
that the question, " What rules are to be ob-
served with regard to heretics ? " is worthy of
being treated. For it is to us'"'- that that as-
sertion 's refers. Heretics, however, have no
fellowship in our discipline, whom the mere
fact of their excommunication '^ testifies to
be outsiders. I am not bound to recognize
in them a thing which is enjoined on me, be-
cause they and we have not the same God,
nor one — that is, the j-^w^— Christ. And
therefore their baptism is not one with ours
either, because it is not the same; a baptism
which, since they have it not duly, doubtless
they have fwt at all; nor is that capable of
h^xwg comited vi\i\&i is not had.'''' Thus they
cannot receive it either, because they have if
not. But this point has already received a
fuller discussion from us in Greek. We en-
ter, then, the font^^ once: once are sins washed
away, because they ought never to be re-
peated. But the Jewish Israel bathes daily, '^
because he is daily being defiled: and, for fear
that defilement should be practised among us
also, therefore was the definition touching the
one bathing =° made. Happy water, which
<7«<:^ washes away; which does not mock sin-
ners (with vain hopes); which does not, by


9 1 Cor. i. II, 12, iii. 3, 4.
'° Matt. V. 9 ; referred to in de Patten, c. ii.
»« Oehler refers us to c. xii. above, " He who hath once bathed.'*
"i. e. the Epistle to the Ephesians especially.
'3 Eph. iv. 4, 5, 6, but very inexactly Quoted.
i4i. e. us Christians ; or, " Catholics,' as Oehler explains it.
»S i. e. touching the " one baptism."

«6 Ademptio communicationis. [See Bunsen, Hippol. III. p. 114,
Canon 46.J
>7 Comp. Eccles. i. 15.
'8 Lavacrum.

19 Compare de Orat. c. xiv.

20 In John xiii. lo, and Eph. ir. 5.


CHAP. XVIII.]


ON BAPTISM.


677


being infected with the repetition of impuri-
ties, again defile them whom it has washed !

CHAP. XVI. — OF THE SECOND BAPTISM — WITH
BLOOD.

We have indeed, likewise, a second font,'
(itself withal ofie with the former,^ of bloody to
wit; concerning which the Lord said, "I have
to be baptized with a baptism," " when He
had been baptized already. For He had
come '*by means of water and blood," ^ just
as John has written; that He might be bap-
tized by the water, glorified by the blood;
to make us^ in like manner, called by water,
chosen* by blood. These two baptisms He
sent out from the wound in His pierced
side, 5 in order that they who believed in His
blood might be bathed with the water; they
who had been bathed in the water might like-
wise drink the blood. ^ This is the baptism
which both stands in lieu of the fontal bath-
ing ^ when that has not been received, and
restores it when lost.

CHAP. XVII. — OF THE POWER OF CONFERRING
BAPTISM.

For concluding our brief subject,^ it re-
mains to put you in mind also of the due ob-
servance of giving and receiving baptism.
Of giving it, the chief priest ^ (who is the
bishop) has the right: in the next place, the
presbyters and deacons, yet not without the
bishop's authority, on account of the honour
of the Church, which being preserved, peace
is preserved. Beside these, even laymen have
the right; for what is equally received can be
equally given. Unless bishops, or priests, or
deacons, be on the spot, other disciples are
called i.e. to the work. The word of the Lord
ought not to be hidden by any: in like man-
ner,^ too, baptism, which is equally God's prop-
erty,'" can be administered by all. But how
much more is the rule" of reverence and
modesty incumbent on laymen — seeing that
thQS,e powers " belong to their superiors — lest
they assume to themselves the specific '^ func-
tion of the bishop ! Emulation of the epis-
copal office is the mother of schisms. The
most holy apostle has said, that '* all things


Lavacrum. [See Aquinas, Qucest.^vi. n.]
2 Luke xii. 50, not given in full.


3 1 John V. 6.
4>fat


fatt. XX. 16 ; Rev. xvii. 14.

5 John xix. 34. See c. ix. ad Jin.

6 See John vi. 53, etc.

7 Lavacrum. [The three baptisms: Jlumt'm's, Jiaminis, san-
guinis.\

8 Matenolam.

9 Summus sacerdos. Compare de Orat. xxviii., " nos . . . veri
sacerdotes,"-etc. : andde Ex. Cast. c. vii., " nonne et laid sacer-
dotes sumus ?"

10 Census.
" Disciplina.

"i.e. the powers of administering baptism and "sowing the
word." [i.e. " The Keys.
isDicatum.


Sroffiince, p. 643.]


are Icnifful, but not all expedient." »* Let it
suffice assuredly, in cases of necessity^ to avail
yourself (of that rule''), if at any time cir-
cumstance either of place, or of time, or. of
person compels you (so to do); for then the
stedfast courage of the succourer, when the
situation of the endangered one is urgent, is
exceptionally admissible; inasmuch as he will
be guilty of a human creature's loss if he shall
refrain from bestowing what he had free liberty
to bestow. But the woman of pertness,'* who
has usurped the power to teach, will of course
not give birth for herself likewise to a right
of baptizing, unless some new beast shall
arise '^ like the former; so that, just as the
one abolished baptism,'^ so some other should
in her own right confer it ! But if the writings
which wrongly go under Paul's name, claim
Thecla's example as a licence for women's
teaching and baptizing, let them know that, in
Asia, the presbyter who composed that writ-
ing,'9 as if he were augmenting Paul's fame
from his own store, after being convicted,
and confessing that he had done it from love
of Paul, was removed " from his office. For
how credible would it seem, that he who has not
permitted a woman " even to learn with over-
boldness, should give a female" the power of
teachifig and of baptizing! ** Let them be
silent," he says, "and at home consult their
own husbands." "3


CHAP. XVIII. OF THE PERSONS TO WHOM, AND

THE TIME WHEN, BAPTISM IS TO BE ADMINIS-
TERED.

But they whose office it is, know that bap-
tism is not rashly to be administered. ** Give
to every one who beggeth thee," "^ has a refer-
ence of its own, appertaining especially to
almsgiving. On the contrary, this precept is
rather to be looked at carefully: " Give not
the holy thing to the dogs, nor cast your pearls
before swine; " '^ and, " Lay not hands easily
on any; share not other men's sins.""* If
Philip so *' easily " baptized the chamberlain,
let us reflect that a manifest and conspicuous "^
evidence that the Lord deemed him worthy


M I Cor. X. 23, where ^01 in the received text seems interpolated.

'S Or, as OeHler explains it, of your power of baptizing, etc.

'6Quinti]la. See c. i.

'7 Evenerit. Perhaps Tertullian means literally— though that
sense of the word is very rare — " shall issue out of her," alluding
to his " pariet" above.

'8 Sec c. i. ad Jin.

"9 The allusion is to a spurious work entitled Acta Pattli et
Tkecltr. [Of which afterwards. But see Jones, on the Camtn, II.
p. 353, and I^rdner, Credibility, II. p. 305.]

30 Decessisse.

a' Mulieri.

*» Foeminae.

n I Cor. xiv. 34i 3^.

24 Luke vi. 30. [See note 4, p. 676.]

^5 Matt. vii. 6.

26 I Tim. V. 23 : \i.y\htv\ omitted, rax«*K rendered by " facile,"
and ikifit. by " ne. '

27 " Exertam," as in c. xii. : " probatio exerta," " a conspicuous
proof."


678


ON BAPTISM.


[CHAI'. XX.


had been interposed. ' The Spirit had en-
joined Philip to proceed to that road: the
eunuch himself, too, was not found idle, nor
as one who was suddenly seized with an
eager desire to be baptized; but, after going
up to the temple for prayer's sake, being in-
tently engaged on the divine Scripture, was
thus suitably discovered — to whom God had,
unasked, sent an apostle, which one, again,
the Spirit bade adjoin himself to the chamber-
lain's chariot. The Scripture which he was
reading'' falls in opportunely with his faith:
Philips being requested, is taken to sit beside
him; the Lord is pointed out; faith lingers
not; water needs no waiting for; the work is
completed, and the apostle snatched away.
"But Paul too was, in fact, ' speedily ' bap-
tized:" for Simon, 3 his host, speedily recog-
nized him to be "an appointed vessel of
election." God's approbation sends sure
premonitory"- tokens before it; every "peti-
tion"* may both deceive and be deceived.
And so, according to the circumstances and
disposition, and even age, of each individual,
the delay of baptism is preferable; principally,
however, in the case of little children. For
why is it necessary — if (baptism itself) is not
so necessary s — that the sponsors likewise
should be thrust into danger? Who both
themselves, by reason of mortality, may fail
to fulfil their promises, and may be disap-
pointed by the development of an evil dispo-
sition, /« those for whom they stood? The Lord
does indeed say, " Forbid them not to come
unto me."* Let them " come," then, while
they are growing up; let them " come " while
they are learning, while they are learning
whither to come;^ let them become Chris-
tians^ when they have become able to know
Christ. Why does the innocent period of life
hasten to the "remission of sins?" More
caution will be exercised in worldly ' matters:
so that one who is not trusted with earthly
substance is trusted with divine ! Let them
know how to " ask " for salvation, that you
may seem (at least) to have given "to him
that asketh." '° For no less cause must the


* Comp. Acts viii. 26-40.

2 Acts viii. 28, 30, 32, 33, and Tsa. liii. 7, 8, especially in LXX.
The quotation, as given in Acts, agrees nearly verbatim with the
Cod. Alex, there.

sTertullian seems to have confused the "Judas" with whom
Saul stayed (Acts ix. 11) with the "Simon" with whom St. Peter
stayed (Acts ix. 43) ; and it was Ananias, not Judas, to whom
he was pointed out as "an appointed vessel," and by whom he
was baptized. [So above, he seems to have confounded Philip, the
deacon, with Philip the apostle.]

4 See note 24, [where Luke vi. 30 is shown to be abused].

5 TertuUian has already allowed (in c. xvi) that baptism is not
indispensably necessary to salvation.

6 Matt. xix. 14 ; Mark x. 14 ; Luke xviii. 16.

7 Or, " whither they are coming."

8 i.e. in baptism.

9 Saecuiaribiis.

'"See beginninsr of chapter, [where Luke vi. 30, is shown to be
abused].


unwedded also be deferred — in whom the
ground of temptation is prepared, alike in such
as fiever were wedded " by means of their ma-
turity, and in the widou>ed by means of tjieir
freedom — until they either marry, or else be
more fully strengthened for continence. If
any understand the weighty import of bap-
tism, they will fear its reception more than its
delay: sound faith is secure of salvation.

CHAP. XIX. OF'THE TIMES MOST SUITABLE FOR

BAPTISM.

The Passover affords a more than usually
solemn day for baptism; when, withal, the
Lord's passion, in which we are l3aptized, was
completed. Nor will it be incongruous to
interpret figuratively the fact that, when the
Lord was about to celebrate the last Passover,
He said to the disciples who were sent to
make preparation, " Ye will meet a man bear-
ing water."" He points out the place for
celebrating the Passover by the sign of water.
After that, Pentecost is a most joyous space '^
for conferring baptisms;''* wherein, too, the
resurrection of the Lord was repeatedly
proved 's among the disciples, and the hope
of the advent of the Lord indirectly pointed
to, in that, at that time, when He had been
received back into the heavens, the angels '^
told the apostles that " He would so come, as
He had withal ascended into the heavens;" ''
at Pentecost, of course. But, moreover, when
Jeremiah says, "And I will gather them to-
gether from the extremities of the land in the
feast-day," he signifies the day of the Pass-
over and of Pentecost, which is properly a
"feast-day."'^ However, every day is the
Lord's; every hour, every time, is apt for
baptism: if there is a difference in the solem-
nity^ distinction there is none in the grace.

CHAP. XX. OF PREPARATION FOR, AND tON-

DUCT AFTER, THE RECEPTION OF BAPTISM.

They who are about to enter baptism ought
to pray with repeated prayers, fasts, and bend-
ings of the knee, and vigils all the night
through, and with the confession of all by-


»> Virginibus ; but he is speaking about men as well as women.
Comp. de Or at. c. xxii. [I need not point out the bearings of the
above chapter, nor do I desire to interpose any comments. The
Fvditor's interpolations, where purely gratuitous, I have even
stricken out, though I agree with them. See that work of gen-
ius, the Liberty 0/ Prophesying, by Jer. Taylor, sect, xviii. and
its candid admissions.]

«2 Mark xiv. 13, Luke xxii. 10, "a small earthen pitcher , of
water."

»3[He means the whole fifty days from the Pa.schal Feast till
Pentecost, including the latter. Bunsen flippol. III. 18.]

'4 I^vacris.

15 Frequentata, i.e. by His frequent appearance. See Acts i. 3,
5i' r]fi.epo)v TeaaapaKovra birrayonevo^ avToif .

16 Comp. Acts i. ID and Luke ix.30: in each place St. Luke
says, av8p€<; Svo : as also in xxiv. 4 of his Cospel.

'7 Acts i. 10, II ; but it is ovftaydf throughout in the Greek.
«8Jer. xxxi. 8, xxxviii. 8 in LXX., where ev ioprff <j>a<rtK is
fotmd, which is not in the Knglish ve-sion.


ELUCIDATION.


679


gone sins, that they may express the meamng
even of the baptism of John: "They were
baptized," saith (the Scripture), " confessing
their own sins."^ To us it is matter for
thankfulness if we do no7v publicly confess
our iniquities or our turpitudes: = for we do
at the same time both make satisfaction ^ for
our former sins, by mortification of our flesh
and spirit, and lay beforehand the foundation
of defences against the temptations which will
closely follow. '* Watch and pray," saith (the
Lord), " lest ye fall into temptation." -» And
the reason, I believe, why they auere tempted
was, that they fell asleep; so that they de-
serted the Lord when apprehended, and he
who continued to stand by Him, and used the
sword, even denied Him thrice: for withal
the word had gone before, that '* no one U7i-
tempted should attain the celestial king-
doms." ^ The Lord Himself forthwith after
baptism^ temptations surrounded, when in
forty days He had kept fast. " Then," some
one will say, " it becomes us^ too, rather to fast
after baptism." ^ Well, and who forbids you,
unless it be the necessity for joy, and the
thanksgiving for salvation ? But so far as I,
with my poor powers, understand, the Lord
figuratively retorted upon Israel the reproach
they had cast on the Lord.^ For the people,

1 Matt. iii. 6. [See the collection of Dr. Bunsen for the whole
primitive discipline to which TertuUian has reference, Hippol.
Vol. III. pp. 5-23, and 29.]

2 Perhaps TertuUian is referring to Prov. xxviii. 13. If we con-
fess now^ we shall be forgiven, and not put to shame at the judg-
ment day.

3 See de Or at. c. xxiii. adfin.^ and the note there.

4 Matt. xxvi. 41.

5 What passage is referred to is doubtful. The editors point
us to Luke xxii. 28, 29 ; but the reference is unsatisfactory.

6 Lavacrum.

7 Lavacro. Compare the beginning of the chapter.


after crossing the sea, and being carried about
in the desert during forty years, although they
were there nourished with divine supplies,
nevertheless were more mindful of their belly
and their gullet than of God. Thereupon the
Lord, driven apart into desert places after
baptism,' showed, by maintaining a fast of
forty days, that the man of God lives " not
by bread alone," but " by the word of
God;" '° and that temptations incident to ful-
ness or immoderation of appetite are shat-
tered by abstinence. Therefore, blessed ofies^
whom the grace of God awaits, when you as-
cend from that most sacred font" of your new
birth, and spread your hands" for the first
time in the house of your mother," together
with your brethren, ask from the Father, ask
from the Lord, that His own specialties of
grace ««</ distributions of gifts'^ may be sup-
plied you. *'Ask," saith He, ** and ye shall
receive." 's Well, you have asked, and have
received; you have knocked, and it has been
opened to you. Only, I pray that, when you
are asking, you be mindful likewise of Tertul-
lian the sinner.'*^


8 Viz. by their murmuring for bread (see Ex. xvi. 3, 7) ; and
again — nearly forty years after — in another place. See Num. xjti.

9 Aquam : just as St. Paul says the Israelites had been " 3a/-
tized " (or " baptized themselves'^) " into Moses in the cloud and
in the sea^ i Cor. x. 2.

10 Matt. iv. 1-4.

11 Lavacro.

12 In prayer: comp. de Orai. c. xiv.

13 i.e. the Church : comp. de Orat. c. a.

14 I Cor. xii. 4-12.

15 Matt. vii. 7 ; Luke xi. 9 : olTeiT*, itai So^<rcrai, vy.lv in both
places.

16 [The translator, though so learned and helpful, too often en-
cumbers the text with superfluous interpolations. .\s many of
these, while making the reading difficult, add nothing to the sense
yet destroy the terse, crabbed force of the original, I have occa-
sionally restored the spirit of a sentence, by removing them.l


ELUCIDATION.

The argument (p. 673, note 6,) is conclusive, but not clear. The disciples of John must
have been baptized by him, (Luke vii. 29, 30,) and " all the people," must have included
those whom Jesus called. But, this was not Christ's baptism: See Acts xix. 2, 5. Com-
pare note 8, p. 673. And see the American Editor's "Apollos."


»:


I


III.


ON PRAYER.


(BY THE REV. S. THELWALL.)


CHAP. I. — GENERAL INTRODUCTION.'

The Spirit of God, and the Word of God,
and the Reason of God — Word of Reason,
and Reason and Spirit of Word — Jesus Christ
our Lord, namely, who is both the one and
the other,^ — has determined for us, the dis-
ciples of the New Testament, a new form of
prayer; for in this particular also it was need-
ful that new wine should be laid up in new
skins, and a new breadth be sewn to a new
garment.3 Besides, whatever had been in
bygone days, has either been quite changed,
as circumcision; or else supplemented, as the
rest of the Law; or else fulfilled, as Prophecy;
or else perfected, as faith itself. For the new
grace of God has renewed all things from
carnal unto spiritual, by superinducing the
Gospel, the obliterator of the whole ancient
bygone system; in which our Lord Jesus
Christ has been approved as the Spirit of God,
and the Word of God, and the Reason of
God: the Spirit, by which He was mighty;
the Word, by which He taught; the Reason,
by which He came.^ So the prayer com-
posed by Christ has been composed of three
parts. In speech, s by which prayer is enun-
ciated, in spirit, by which alone it prevails,
even John had taught his disciples to pray,^


» [After the discipline of Repentance and of Baptism the
Laws of Christian Living come into view. Hence this is the logi-
cal place for this treatise. See the Prolegomena of Muratori and
learned annotations, in Routh, Opuscula I. p. 173, et sqq. We
may date it circa a. d. 192. For much of the Primitive Disci-
pline, concerning Prayer, see Bunsen, Hippol. III. pp. 88-91,
etc.]

2 Oehler's punctuation is followed here. The sentence is diffi-
cult, and has perplexed editors and commentators considerably.

3 Matt. ix. 16, 17 ; Mark ii. 21, 22 ; Luke v. 36, 37.

4 Routh suggests, " fortasse gud sensit" referring to the Adv.
Praxeam, c. 5.

5 Sermone.

6 This is Oehler's punctuation. The edition of Pamelius reads :
*' So the prayer composed by Christ was composed of three parts :
of the speech, by which it is enunciated ; of the spirit, by which
alone it prevails ; of the reason, by which it is taught." Rigaltius
and subsequent editors read, " of the reason, by which it is con-
ceived ;" but this last clause is lacking in the Mss., and Oehler's
reading appears, as he says, to " have healed the words." [Oeh-
ler's punctuation must stand ; but, the preceding sentence justifies
the interpolation of Rigaltius and heals more effectually.]


but all John's doings were laid as ground-
work for Christ, until, when " He had in-
creased" — just as the same John used to
fore-announce "that it was needful" that
" He should increase and himself decrease "^
— the whole work of the forerunner passed
over, together with his spirit itself, unto the
Lord. Therefore, after what form of words
John taught to pray is not extant, because
earthly things have given place to heavenly.
" He who is from the earth," says John,
" speaketh earthly things; and He who is
here from the heavens speaketh those things
which He hath seen."« And what is the
Lord Christ's — as this method of praying is —
that is mt heavenly ? And so, blessed brethrm,
let us consider His heavenly wisdom: first,
touching the precept of praying secretly,
whereby He exacted man's faith, that he
should be confident that the sight and hear-
ing of Almighty God are present beneath
roofs, and extend even into the secret place;
and required modesty in faith, that it should
offer its religious homage to Him alone, whom
it believed to see and to hear everywhere.
Further, since wisdom succeeded in the fol-
lowing precept, let it in like manner appertain
unto faith, and the modesty of faith, that we
think not that the Lord must be approached
with a train of words, who, we are certain,
takes unsolicited foresight for His own. And
yet that very brevity — and let this make for
the third grade of wisdom — is supported on
the substance of a great and blessed interpre-
tation, and is as diffuse in meaning as it is
compressed in words. For it has embraced
not only the special duties of prayer, be it
veneration of God or petition for man, but
almost every discourse of the Lord, every
record of His Discipline; so that, in fact, in
the Prayer is comprised an epitome of the
whole Gospel.


7 John iii. 30.


8 John iii. 31, 32.


682


ON PRAYER.


[chap. IV.


CHAP. II. THE FIRST CLAUSE.


The prayer begins with a testimony to God,
and with the reward of faith, when we say,
" Our Father who art in the heavens;" for
(in so saying), we £it once pray to God, and
commend faith, whose reward this appellation
is. It is written, " To them who believed on
Him He gave power to be called sons of
God." ' However, our Lord very frequently
proclaimed God as a Father to us; nay, even
gave a precept " that we call no one on earth
father, but the Father whom we have in the
heavens:' and so, in thus praying, we are
likewise obeying the precept. Happy they
who recognize their Father ! This is the re-
proach that is brought against Israel, to which
the Spirit attests heaven and earth, saying,
** I have begotten sons, and they have not
recognized me."^ Moreover, in saying
"Father," we also call Him "God." That
appellation is one both of filial duty and of
power. Again, in the Father the Son is in-
voked; "for I," saith He, "and the Father
are One."-* Nor is even our mother the
Church passed by, if, that is, in the Father
and the Son is recognized the mother, from
whom arises the name both of Father and of
Son. In one general term, then, or word,
we both honour God, together with His own,^
and are mindful of the precept, and set a
mark on such as have forgotten their Father.

CHAP. III. — THE SECOND CLAUSE.

The name of "God the Father" had been
published to none. Even Moses, who had
interrogated Him on that very point, had
heard a different name.^ To us it has been
revealed in the Son, for the Son is now the
Father's new name. "I am come," saith
He, "in the Father's name;"' and again,
"Father, glorify Thy name;"^ and more
openly, " I have manifested Thy name to
men." 9 That name^ therefore, we pray may
"be hallowed." Not that it is becoming for
men to wish God well, as if there were any
other "* by whom He may be wished well, or
as if He would suffer unless we do so wish.
Plainly, it is universally becoming for God
to be blessed" in every place and time, on ac-
count of the memory of His benefits ever due
from every man. But this petition also serves


» John i. 12.

3M{


latt. xxiii. 9.

3 Isa. i. 2.

4 John X. 30.

S^* i.e., together with the son and the Holy Spirit" (Oehler)
His Son and His church " (Dodgson).
^ Ex. iii. 13-16.

7 John V. 43.

8 John xii. 28.

9 John xvii. 6.

10 I.e., "any othcT godV
" Ps. ciii. 22.


the turn of a blessing. Otherwise, when is
the name of God not "holy," and "hal-
lowed" through Himself, seeing that of
Himself He sanctifies all others — He to whom
that surrounding circle of angels cease not to
say, "Holy, holy, holy?"" In like wise,
therefore, we too, candidates for angelhood,
if we succeed in deserving it, begin even here
on earth to learn by heart that strain here-
after to be raised unto God, and the function
of future glory. So far, for the glory of God.
On the other hand, for our own petition, when
we say, "Hallowed be Tliy name," we pray
this; that it may be hallowed in us who are
in Him, as well in all others for whom the
grace of God is still waiting; '^ that we may
obey this precept, too, in " praying for all," '*
even for our personal enemies. 's And there-
fore with suspended utterance, not saying,
"Hallowed be it /« us,'' we say, — "/« all.''

CHAP. IV. THE THIRD CLAUSE.

According to this model, '^ we subjoin,
" Thy will be done in the heavens and on the
earth; " '^ not that there is some power with-
standing'^ to prevent God's will being done,
and we pray for Him the successful achieve-
ment of His will; but we pray for His will to
be done in all. For, by figurative interpre-
tation of flesh and spirit, ive are " heaven "
and "earth;" albeit, even if it is to be un-
derstood simply, still the sense of the peti-
tion is the same, that in us God's will be
done on earth, to make it possible, namely,
for it to be done also in the heavens. What,
moreover, does God will, but that we should
walk according to His Discipline ? We make
petition, then, that He supply us with the
substance of His will, and the capacity to do
it, that we may be saved both in the heavens
and on earth; because the sum of His will is
the salvation of them whom He has adopted.
There is, too, that will of God which the Lord
accomplished in preaching, in working, in
enduring: for if He Himself proclaimed that
He did not His own, but the Father's will,
without doubt those things which He used
to do were the Father's will;'' unto which
things, as unto exemplars, we are now pro-
voked ;=° to preach, to work, to endure even


12 Isa. VI. 3 ; Rev. iv. 8.

13 Isa. XXX. 18,
M I Tim. ii. i.
•5 Matt. V. 44.

'6 Mr. Dodjfson renders, " next to this clause ;" but the "yjjr-
ma '' referred to seems, by what Tertullian proceeds to add, to
be what he had said above, " not that it becomes us to wish God
well," etc.

17 We learn from this and other places, that the comparative ad-
verb was wanting in some ancient yi»r/««/a? of the Lord's Prayer.
[See Ronth, Opusculn I. p. 178.]

'8 See note 3.

«9jolin vi "38.

«» For this use of the word " provoke," see Heb. x. 24, Eng. ver.


CHAP. VI I. J


ON PRAYER.


683


unto death. And we 7ieed the will of God, that
we may be able to fulfil these duties. Again,
in saying, " Thy will be done," we are even
wishing well to ourselves, in so far that there
is nothing of anl in the will of God; even
if, proportionably to each one's deserts, some-
what other' is imposed on us. So by this
expression we premonish our own selves unto
patience. The Lord also, when He had wished
to demonstrate to us, even in His own flesh,
the flesh's infirmity, by the reality of suffer-
ing, said, " Father, remove this Thy cup;"
and remembering Himself, adiied^ " save that
not my will, but Thine be done."= Him-
self was the Will and the Power of the Father:
and yet, for the demonstration of the patience
which was due. He gave Himself up to the
Father's Will.

CHAP. V. THE FOURTH CLAUSE.

**Thy kingdom come" has also reference
to that whereto " Thy will be done " refers —
iti us, that is. For when does God not reign,
in whose hand is the heart of all kings? 3
But whatever we wish for ourselves we augur
for Him, and to Him we attribute what fro7n
Him we expect. And so, if the mamfestatiofi
of the Lord's kingdom pertains unto the will
of God and unto our anxious expectation, how
do some pray for some protraction of the
age,'* when the kingdom of God, which we
pray may arrive, tends unto the consumma-
tion of the age ? ^ Our wish is, that our
reign be hastened, not our servitude pro-
tracted. Even if it had not been prescribed
in the Prayer that we should ask for the ad-
vent of the kingdom, we should, unbidden,
have sent forth that cry, hastening toward
the realization of our hope. The souls of the
martyrs beneath the altar ^ cry in jealousy
unto the Lord " How long, Lord, dost Thou
not avenge our blood on the inhabitants of
the earth ?" 7 for, of CQurse, their avenging
is regulated by^ the end of the age. Nay,
Lord, Thy kingdom come with all speed, —
the prayer of Christians the confusion of the
heathen,^ the exultation of angels, for the
sake of which we suffer, nay, rather, for the
sake of which we pray !


' [Something we might think other than good.]
- Luke xxii. 42.

3 Prov. xxi. I.

4 Or, " world," steculo.

5 Or, "world," sceculi. See Matt. xxiv. 3, especially in the
Greek. By " praying for some protraction in the age," Tertullian
appears to refer to some who used to pray that the end might be
deferred (Rigalt.).

6 altari.

7 Rev. vi. TO.

8 So Dodgson aptly renders " dirigitur a.

9 [See Ad Nationcs^ p. 128, sf '-ra.'}

10 This is a slight mistake of Tt-itullian. The words referred to,
" Seek ye first," etc., do not occur till the end of the chapter in
which the prayer is found, so that his pluperfect is out of place.


CHAP. VI. — THE FIFTH CLAUSE.

But how gracefully has the Divine Wisdom
arranged the order of the prayer; so that a/t^r
things heavenly— that is, after the " Name "
of God, the *' Will " of 4;od, and the ** King-
dom " of God— it should give earthly necessi-
ties also room for a petition ! For the Lord
had'° withal issued His edict, "Seek ye first
the kingdom, and then even the.se shall be
added: "" albeit we may rather understand,
'* Give us this day our daily bread," spiritually.
For Christ is our Bread; because Christ is
Life, and bread is life. ** I am," saith He,
"the Bread of Life;"" and, a little above,
" The Bread is the Word of the living God,
who came down from the heavens.'' '^ Then
we find, too, that His body is reckoned in
bread: "This is my body."'* And so, in
petitioning for " daily bread," we ask for per-
petuity in Christ, and indivisibility from His
body. But, because that word is admissible
in a carnal sense too, it cannot be so used
without the religious remembrance withal of
spiritual Discipline; for (the Lord) commands
that bread be prayed for, which is the only
food necessary for believers; for " all otiier
things the nations seek after." *s The like
lesson He both inculcates by examples, and
repeatedly handles in parables, when He says,
" Doth a father take away bread from his
children, and hand it to dogs?" '<* and again,
" Doth a father give his son a stone when he
asks for breads " ^^ For He thus shows what
it is that sons expect from their father. Nay,
even that nocturnal knocker knocked for
^^ bread.'' "^^ Moreover, He justly added,
" Give us this day,' seeing He had previously
said, "Take no careful thought about the
morrow, what ye are to eat. ' ' " To which
subject He also adapted the parable of the
man who pondered on an enlargement of his
barns for his forthcoming fruits, and on sea-
sons of prolonged security; but that very
night he dies.=°

CHAP. VH. — THE SIXTH CLAUSE.

It was suitable that, after contemplating
the liberality of God," we should likewise ad-
dress His clemency. For what will aliments ■»


[He must have been aware of this : he only gives lofn'c«l order to
the thought which existed in the divine mind. See note lo, p. 68a.l
" Matt, vi, 33.
= John vi. 35.


ohn vi.


33.


latt. XXVI.
>5 Matt, vi. 33.

'6 Tertullian seems to refer to Matt, xv, a6, Mark vii. vj.
•7 Matt. vii. 9; Luke xi. 11.
'''Luke xi. 5-9.

'0 Matt. VI. 34 and Luke xii. 29 seem to be referred to ; but the
same remark applies as in note 10 on the preceding page.
=° Luke xii. 16-20.

-' In the former petition, " (Jivr us this day our daily bread."
-2 Such as " " daily bread,"


684


ON PRAYER.


[chap. X.


profit us, if we are really consigfied to them,
as it were a bull destined for a victim ? ' The
Lord knew Himself to be the only guiltless
One, and so He teaches that we beg " to have
our debts remitted us." A petition for par-
don is a full confession; because he who begs
for pardon fully admits his guilt. Thus, too,
penitence is demonstrated acceptable to God,
who desires it rather than the death of the
sinner." Moreover, debt is, in the Scriptures,
a figure of guilt; because it is equally due to
the sentence of judgment, and is exacted by
it: nor does it evade the justice of exaction,
unless the exaction be remitted, just as the
lord remitted to that slave m the parable his
debt; 3 for hither does the scope of the whole
parable tend. For the fact withal, that the
same servant, after liberated by his lord, does
not equally spare his own debtor; and, being
on that account impeached before his lord,
V is made over to the tormentor to pay the ut-
A^ termost farthing — that is, every guilt, how-
^' ever small: corresponds with our profession
that " we also remit to our debtors; " indeed
^ / elsewhere, too, in conformity with this Form
^ of Prayer, He saith, " Remit, and it shall be
remitted you."^ And when Peter had put
the question whether remission were to be
granted to a brother seven times, *'Nay,"
saith He, "seventy-seven times; " s in order
to remould the Law for the better; because
in Genesis ve?igeance was assigned *' seven
times" in the case of Cain, but in that of
Lamech *' seventy-seven times." ^

CHAP. VIII. — THE SEVENTH OR FINAL CLAUSE.

For the completeness of so brief a prayer
He added — in order that we should supplicate
not touching the remitting merely, but touch-
ing the entire averting, of acts of guilt —
" Lead us not into temptation: " that is, suffer
us not to be led into it, by him (of course)
who tempts; but far be the thought that the
Lord should seem to tempt,' as if He either
were ignorant of the faith of any, or else were
eager to overthrow it. Infirmity ^ and malice '
are characteristics of the devil. For God had
commanded even Abraham to make a sacrifice
of his son, for the sake not of tempting, but
proving, his faith; in order through him to
make an example for that precept of His,
whereby He was, by and by, to enjoin that


1 That is, if we are just to be fed and fattened by them in dody,
as a bull which is destined for sacrifice is, and then, like him, slain
— handed over to death?

2 Ex. xviii. 23, 32, xxxiii. u.

3 Matt, xviii. 21-35.
Luke vi. 37.

5 Matt, xviii. 21-22.

6 Gen. iv. 15, 24.

7 See Jas. i. 13.

8 Implied in the one hypothesis— ignorance.

9 Implied in the other— wishing to overthrow faith.


he should hold no pledges of affection dearer
than God.'° He Himself, when tempted by
the devil, demonstrated who it is that presides
over and is the originator of temptation."
This passage He confirms by subsequent ones,
saying, " Pray that ye be not tempted; " " yet
they 7uere tempted, (as they showed) by de-
serting their Lord, because they had given
way rather to sleep than prayer. '^ The final
clause, therefore, is consonant, and inter-
prets the sense of '* Lead us not into tempta-
tion; " for this seme is, *' But convey us away
from the Evil One."

CHAP. IX. RECAPITULATION.'^

In summaries of so few words, how many
utterances of the prophets, the Gospels, the
apostles — how many discourses, examples,
parables of the Lord, are touched on ! How
many duties are simultaneously discharged I
The honour of God in the "Father;" the
testimony of faith in the " Name;" the offer-
ing of obedience in the "Will;" the com-
memoration of hope in the " Kingdom;" the
petition for life in the " Bread; " the full ac-
knowledgment of debts in the prayer for their
" Forgiveness; " the anxious dread of tempta-
tion in the request for "Protection." What
wonder? God alone could teach how he
wished Himself prayed to. The religious rite
of prayer therefore, ordained by Himself,
and animated, even at the moment when it
was issuing out of the Divine mouth, by His
own Spirit, ascends, by its own prerogative, into
heaven, commending to the Father what the
Son has taught.

CHAP. X. WE MAY SUPERADD PRAYERS OF OUR

OWN TO THE lord's PRAYER.

Since, however, the Lord, the Foreseer of
human necessities,'^ said separately, after de-
livering His Rule of Prayer, "Ask, and ye
shall receive; " '** and since there are petitions
which are made according to the circumstances
of each individual; our additional wants have
the right — after beginning with the legitimate
and customary prayers as a foundation, as it
were — of rearing an outer superstructure of
petitions, yet with remembrance of the Mas-
ter's precepts.


'oj e. no children even. The reference is apparently to Matt. x.
37 and Luke xiv. 26, with which may be compared Deut. xiii. 6-10
and xxxiii. 9. If Oehler's reading, which I have followed, be cor-
rect, the precept, which is not verbally given till ages after Abra-
ham, is made to have a retrospective force on him.

" See Matt. iv. 10 • Luke iv. 8.

'2 Luke xxii. 40; Matt. xxvi. 41 ; Mark xiv. 31.

'3 Routh refers us to Df liapt. c. 20, where Tertullian refers to
the same event. [Note also his reference to De /'u^a, cap. ii.1

'4 Here comes in the Codex .^mbrosianus, with the title, " Here
begins a treatise of Tertullian of divers necessary things ;" and
from it are taken the headings of the remaining chapters. (See
Oehler and Routh.)

IS See Matt. vi. 8. '^ Matt. vii. 7 ; Luke xi. 9.


CHAP. XV.]


ON PRAYER.


685


CHAP. XI. — WHEN PRAYING THE FATHER, YOU
ARE NOT TO BE ANGRY WITH A BROTHER.

That we may not be as far from the ears of
God as we are from His precepts,' the memory
of His precepts paves for our prayers a way
unto heaven; of which precepts the chief is,
that we go not up unto Ciod's altar' before
we compose whatever of discord or offence we
have contracted with our brethren. ^ For what
sort of deed is it to approach the peace of
God "* without peace .-' the remission of debts ^
while you retain them ? How will he appease
his Father who is angry with his brother^ when
from the beginning " all anger" is forbidden
us?^ For even Joseph, when dismissing his
brethren for the purpose of fetching their
father, said, " And be not angry in the way." '
He warned us^ to be sure, at that time (for
elsewhere our Discipline is called " the
Way"^), that when, set in "the way" of
prayer, we go not unto "the Father " with
anger. After that, the Lord, "amplifying
the Law, "9 openly adds the prohibitimi of
anger against a brother to that of murder. '°
Not even by an evil word does He permit it
to be vented." Ever if we must be angry, our
anger must not be maintained beyond sunset,
as the apostle admonishes." But how rash
is it either to pass a day without prayer, while
you refuse to make satisfaction to your brother;
or else, by perseverance in anger, to lose your
prayer ?

CHAP. XII. — WE MUST BE FREE LIKEWISE FROM
ALL MENTAL PERTURBATION.

Nor merely from anger, but altogether from
all perturbation of mind, ought the exercise
of prayer to be free, uttered from a spirit such
as the Spirit unto whom it is sent. For a de-
filed spirit cannot be acknowledged by a holy
Spirit,'^ nor a sad by a joyful,'* nor a fettered
by a tree. '5 No one grants reception to his
adversary: no one grants admittance except
to his compeer.

CHAP. XIII. — OF WASHING THE HANDS.

But what reason is there in going to prayer


I Oehler divides these two chapters as above. The generally
adopted division unites this sentence to the preceding chapter, and
begins the new chapter with, " The memory of His precepts ;' and
perhaps this is the preferable division.

■^altare. [Heb. xiii. 10.]

3 Matt. V. 22, 23.

4 Perhaps there may be an allusion to Phil iv. 6, 7.

5 See chap. vii. above, and compare Matt. vi. 14, 15.

'"j " Ab initio " probably refers to the book of Genesis, the init-
iinn, or beginning of Scripture, to which he is about to refer. But
see likewise Eph. iv. 31, Matt. v. 21, 22. [Gen. iv. 6, 7.]

7 Gen. xlv. 24 : so the LXX.

8 See Acts ix. 2, xix, 9, 23, in the Greek.

9 See Matt. V. 17.
10 Matt. v. 2-, 22.

" Matt. v. 21, 22 ; I Pet. iii. 9, etc.

12 Eph. iv. 26.

13 Eph. iv. 30.


with hands indeed washed, but the spirit foul?
— inasmuch as to our hands themselves spirit-
ual purities are necessar>', that they may be
"lifted up pure"'* from falsehood, from
murder, from cruelty, from poisonings,'^ from
idolatry, and all the other blemishes which,
conceived by the spirit, are effected by the
operation of the hands. These are the true
purities;'® not those which most are supersii-
tiously careful about, taking water at every
prayer, even when they are coming from a
bath of the whole body. When I was scru-
pulously making a thorough investigation of
this practice, and searching into the reason of
it, I ascertained it to be a commemorative act,
bearing on the surrender '' of our Lord. We,
however, pray to the Lord: we do not surretidcr
Him; nay, we ought even to set ourselves
in opposition to the example of His sur-
renderer, and not, on that account, wash our
hands. Unless any defilement contracted in
human intercourse be a conscientious cause
for washifig thefn, they are otherwise clean
enough, which together with our whole body
we once washed in Christ."*

CHAP. XIV. — APOSTROPHE.

Albeit Israel washed daily all his limbs over,
yet is he never clean. His hands, at all events,
are ever unclean, eternally dyed with the blood
of the prophets, and of the Lord Himself;
and on that account, as being hereditary cul-
prits from their privity to their fathers*
crimes," they do not dare even to raise them
unto the Lord,"^ for fear some Isaiah should
cry out,='3 for fear Christ should utterly shud-
der. We, however, not only raise, but even
expand them; and, taking our model from
the Lord's passion, =^ even in prayer we con-
fess '5 to Christ.

CHAP. XV. OF PUTTING OFF CLOAKS.

But since we have touched on one special
point of empty observance, ** it will not be irk-
some to set our brand likewise on the other
points against which the reproach of vanity
may deservedly be laid; if, that is, they are
observed without the authority of any precept


14 John xvii. 14 ; Rom. xiv. 17.

ISPs. li. 12.

»6i Tim. ii. 8.

'7 Or, " sorceries."

18 See Matt. xv. 10, 11, 17-ao, xxiii. as, 26.

>9 By Pilate. See Matt, xxvii. 24. [N. B. ^mca^t Ritmaiia.']

30 i.e. in baptism.

21 See Matt. xxi>i ji ; Luke xi. .*8.

" I do not know Tertullian's authority for this suteraent. Cer-
tainly Solomon (iiJ raise Jits hands (i Kings viii. 54J, and Da\-id
apparently his (see Ps. cxliii. 6, xxviii. 2, Ixii. ^, etc.). Compare,
too, Ex. xvii. II. 12. Hut probably he is speaking only of the Is-
rael of his own day. [Evidently.]

n Isa. i. 15.

24 i.e. from the expansion of the hands on the cross.

as Or. *' give praise."

a^i.e. the hand-washing.


686


ON PRAYER.


[chap. XVIII.


either of the Lord, or else of the apostles.
For matters of this kind belong not to religion,
but to superstition, being studied, and forced,
and of curious rather than rational ceremony; '
deserving of restraint, at all events, even on
t'lis ground, that they put us on a level with
Gentiles. = As, e.g., it is the custom of some
to make prayer with cloaks doffed, for so do
the nations approach their idols; which prac-
tice, of course, were its observance becomingj
the apostles, who teach concerning the garb
of prayer,3 would have comprehended in their
ifisi ructions, unless any think that is was in
prayer that Paul had left his cloak with Car-
pus ! * God, forsooth, would not hear cloaked
suppliants, who plainly heard the three saints
in the Babylonian king's furnace praying in
their trousers and turbans.s

CHAP. XVI. — OF SITTING AFTER PRAYER.

Again, for the custom which some have of
sitting when prayer is ended, I perceive no
reason, except that which children give.^ For
what if that Hermas,^ whose writing is gener-
ally inscribed with the title The Shepherd,
had, after finishing his prayer, not sat down
on his bed, but done some other thing: should
we maintain that also as a matter for observ-
ance? Of course not. Why, even as it is,
the sentence, "When I had prayed, and had
sat down on my bed," is simply put with a
view to the order of the narration, not as a
model of discipline. Else we shall have to pray
nowhere except where there is a bed ! Nay,
whoever sits in a chair or on a be?ich, will act
contrary to that writing. Further: inasmuch
as the nations do the like, in sitting down after
adoring their petty images; even on this ac-
count the practice deserves to be censured in
us, because it is observed in the worship of
idols. To this is further added the charge of
irreverence, — intelligible even to the nations
themselves, if they had any sense. If, on the
one hand, it is irreverent to sit under the eye,
and over against the eye, of him whom you
most of all revere and venerate; how much
more, on the other hand, is that deed most
irreligious under the eye of the living God,
while the angel of prayer is still standing by,^
unless we are upbraiding God that prayer has
wearied us !


» Or, " reasonable service." See Rom. xii. i.
"Or, " Gentile practices."

3 See I Cor. xi. 3-16.

4 2 Tim. iv. 13.

5 Dan. iii. 21, etc.

6 i.e. that they have seen it done ; for children imitate anything
and everything (Oehler).

7 [Vol. II. p. t8 (Vision V.h this Series. Also, lb. p. 57, note 2.
See Routh's quotation from Cotelerius, p. 180, in Volume before
noted.]

8 Routh and Oehler (after Rigaltius) refer us to Tob. xii. 12.
They also, with Dodgson, refer to Luke i. 11. Perhaps there may
be a reference to Rev. viii. 3, 4.


CHAP. XVII. — OF ELEVATED HANDS.

But we more commend our prayers to God
when we pray with modesty and humility,
with not even our hands too loftily elevated,
but elevated temperately and becomingly; and
not even our countenance over-boldly up-
lifted. For that publican who prayed with
humility and dejection not merely in his sup-
plication, but in his countenance too, went his
way "more justified" than the shameless
Pharisee.' The sounds of our voice, likewise,
should be subdued; else, if we are to be heard
for our noise, how large windpipes should we
need ! But God is the hearer not of the voice,
but of the heart, just as He is its inspector.
The demon of the Pythian oracle says:

"And I do understand the mute, and plainly hear the
speechless one."^°

Do the ears of God wait for sound ? How,
then, could Jonah's prayer find way out unto
heaven from the depth of the whale's belly,
through the entrails of so huge a beast; from
the very abysses, through so huge a mass of
sea ? What superior advantage will they who
pray too loudly gain, except that they annoy
their neighbours? Nay, by making their
petitions audible, what less error do they
commit than if they were to pray in public ? "

CHAP. XVIII. OF THE KISS OF PEACE.

Another custom has now become prevalent.
Such as are fasting withhold the kiss of peace,
which is the seal of prayer, after prayer made
with brethren. But when is peace more to
be concluded with brethren than when, at tht^
time of some religious observance," our
prayer ascends with more acceptability; that
they may themselves participate in our obser-
vance, and thereby be mollified for transact-
ing with their brother . touching their own
peace ? What prayer is complete if divorced
from the " holy kiss ? " '^ Whom does peace
impede when rendering service to his Lord ?
What kind of sacrifice is that from which men
depart without peace ? Whatever our prayer
be, it will not be better than the observance
of the precept by which we are bidden to con-
ceal our fasts;"* for fww, by abstinence from
the kiss, we are known to be fasting. But
even if there be some reason /(?r this practice,
still, lest you offend against this precept, you
may perhaps defer your " peace " fz/ Z^^?/;/^,
where it is not possible for your fast to be en-


9 Luke xviii. 9-14.
10 Herod, i. 47.

" Which is forbidden, Matt. vi. 5, 6.
i» Such as fasting.

13 See Rom. xvi. 16 ; i Cor. xvi. 20 ; 2 Cor. xiii. 12 : i Thess. v.
26 ; I Pet. V. 14. [The sexes apart.]
MMatt. vi. 16-18.


CHAT. XXII.]


ON PRAYER.


687


tirely kept secret. But wherever else you [that the apostle has not defined "virgins"
can conceal your observance, you ought to | by name, but " women,"' as ** to be veiled;"
remember the precept: thus you may satisfy I nor the sex generally, so as to say " females "
the requirements of Discipline abroad and \ but a c/ass o{ the sex, by saying "women/"
of custom at home. So, too, on the day of for if he had named the sex by saying ** fe-


the passover,' when the religious observance
of a fast is general, and as it were public, we
justly forego the kiss, caring nothing to con-
ceal anything which we do in common with all.

CHAP. XIX. — OF STATIONS.

Similarly, too, touching the days of Sta-
tions,= most think that they must not be
present at the sacrificial prayers, on the ground
that the Station must be dissolved by recep-
ti^^n of the Lord's Body. Does, then, the
Eucharist cancel a service devoted to God, or
bind it more to God ? Will not your Statiofi
be more solemn if you have withal stood at
God's altar 2^ When the Lord's Body has
been received and reserved,'* each point is
secured, both the participation of the sacrifice
and the discharge of duty. If the " Station "
has received its name from the example of
military life — for we withal are God's mili-
tary s — of course no gladness or sadness
chancing to the camp abolishes the '* stations ' '
of the soldiers: for gladness will carry out
discipline more willingly, sadness more care-
fully.

CHAP. XX. OF women's DRESS.

So far, however, as regards the dress of
women, the variety of observance compels us
— men of no consideration whatever — to treat,
presumptuously indeed, after the most holy
apostle,^ except in so far as it will not be
presumptuously if we treat the subject in ac-
cordance with the apostle. Touching modesty
of dress and ornamentation, indeed, the pre-
scription of Peter 7 likewise is plain, checking
as he does with the same mouth, because with
the same Spirit, as Paul, the glory of garments,
and the pride of gold, and the meretricious
elaboration of the hair.

CHAP. XXI. OF VIRGINS.

But that point which is promiscuously ob-
served throughout the churches, whether vir-
gins ought to be veiled or no, must be treated
of. For they who allow to virgins immunity
from head-covering, appear to rest on this;


by saying
males," he would have made his limit abso-
lute for every woman; but while he names one
class of the sex, he separates another class by
being silent. For, they say, he might either
have named "virgins" specially; or gener-
ally, by a compendious term, " females."


CHAP. XXII.


-ANSWER TO THE FOREGOING
GUMENTS.


AR.


» i.e. " Good Friday,' as it is now generally called.

2 The word Statio seems to have been used in more than one
sense in the ancient Church. A passage in the Shepherd of Her-
mas, referred to above (B. iii. Sim. 5), appears to make it =" fast,"

3 " Ara," not " altare."

4 For receiving at home apparently, when your station is over.

5 See 2 Tim. ii. i, etc. [See Hermas, Vol. 1., p. 33.]

6 See I Cor. xi. 1-16 ; i Tim. ii. 9, 10.
7 1 Pet. iii. 1-6.


They who make this concession' ought to
reflect on the nature of the word itself — what
is the meaning of "woman" from the very
first records of the sacred writings. Here
they find it to be the name of the se.x, not a
class of the sex: if, that is, God gave to Eve,
when she had not yet known a man, the sur-
name "woman" and "female""' — ("fe-
male," whereby the sex generally ; ' ' woman, ' '
whereby a class of the .sex, is marked)." So,
since at that time the as yet unwedded Eve
was called by the word " woman," that word
has been made common even to a virgin."
Nor is it wonderful that the apostle — guided,
of course, by the same Spirit by whom, as all
the divine Scripture, so that book Genesis,
was drawn up — has used the selfsame word in
writing "women," which, by the example of
Eve unwedded, is applicable too to a "vir-
gin." In fact, all the other passages are in
consonance herewith. For even by this very
fact, that he has not named " virgins " (as he
does in another place '^ where he is teaching
touching marrying), he sufficiently predicates
that his remark is made touching every woman,
and touching the whole sex; and that there is
no distinction made between a "virgin " and
any other ^ while he does not name her at all.
For he who elsewhere — namely, where the
difference requires — remembers to make the
distinction, (moreover, he makes it by desig-
nating each species by their appropriate
names,) wishes, where he makes tw distinc-
tion (while he does not name each), no differ-
ence to be understood. What of the fact
that in the Greek speech, in which the apostle
wrote his letters, it is usual to say, "women"
rather than "females;" that is, ywaAKo^


8 1 Cor. xi. 5.

9 As to the dfistinction between " women " and " virgins."

10 Gen. ii. 23. In the LXX. and in the Eng. ver. there is bat
the one word " woman."

" These words are regarded by Dr. Routh as spurious, and not
without reason. Mr. Dodgson likewise omits them, and referi to
de Virg. Vel, cc. 4 and 5.

»»In de Virg. kel. 5, Tertullian .speaks even more strongly:
" And so you have the name, I say not now common, but ^ro^fv
to a vii^gin ;a name which from the beginning a virgin received."

'3 1 Cor. vii. 34 et seq.


688


ON PRAYER.


[chap. XXII,


(gunaikas) rather than erjMa^ {theleias) ? There-
fore if that word,* which by interpretation
represents what "female" (femind) repre-
sents,' is frequently used mstead of the name
of the sex,3 he has, named the sex in saying
ywaiKa\ but in the sex even the virgin is em-
braced. But, withal, the declaration is plain:
''''Every woman," saith he, " praying and
prophesying with head uncovered,* dishon-
oureth her own head."s What is ''''every
woman, but wo7fiati of every age, of every
rank, of every condition ? By saying * ' every ' '
he excepts nought of womanhood, just as he
excepts nought of manhood either from 7wt
being covered; for just so he says, ''''Every
7nan." ^ As, then, in the masculine sex,
under the name of '* man " even the " youth "
is forbidden to be veiled; so, too, in the
feminine, under the name of " woman," even
the *' virgin " is bidden to be veiled. Equally
in each sex let the younger age follow the dis-
cipline of the elder; or else let the male
"virgins," 7 too, be veiled, if the female vir-
gins withal are not veiled, because they are not
mentioned by name. Let " man " and " youth"
be different, if " woman " and " virgin " are
different. For indeed it is " on account of the
angels" ^ that he saith women must be veiled,
because on account of "the daughters of
men " angels revolted from God.^ Who,
then, would contend that '"'' women'^ alofie —
that is,'° such as were already wedded and
had lost their virginity — were the objects of
angelic concupiscence, unless "virgins" are
incapable of excelling in beauty and finding
lovers ? Nay, let us see whether it were not
"virgins alofie whom they lusted after; since
Scriptures saith " the daughters of men; " "
inasmuch as it might have named ''''wives
of men," or " females," indifferently." Like-
wise, in that it saith, "And they took
them to themselves for wives," '3 it does so
on this ground, that, of course, such are
" received /(?r wives'' as are devoid of that
title. But it would have expressed itself
differently concerning such as were not thus


here


r. Dodgson appears to think that there is some transposition
and at first sight it may appear so. But when we look more


"sr „ .,

ind at first sight it may ap
closely, perhaps there is no need to make any difficulty : the stress
is rather on the words " by interpretation, which, of course, is
a different thing from " usage ," and by interpretation yvv^ ap-
pears to come nearer to " femina " than to *' mulier."

3 ^Acia.

4 Or, " unveiled."

5 I Cor. xi. 5.
6 1 Cor. xi. 4.

7 For a similar use of the word " virgin," see Rev. xiv. 4.
8 1 Cor. xi. 10.

9 See Gen. vi. 2 in the LXX., with the v. I. ed. Tisch. i860;
and compare TertuUian, de Idol. c. 9, and the note there Mr.
Dodgson refers, too, to de Virg. Vel. c. 7, where this curious sub-
ject is more fully entered into.

10 i.e. according to their definition, whom Tertullian is refuting.
''Gen. vi. 2.

12 i.e. If married women had been meant, either word, " ux-
ores " or ** ferainse,' could have been used indifferently.
'3 Gen. vi. 2. m i Cor. xi. 14.


devoid. And so (they who are named) are
devoid as much of ividoiuhood as of virgitiity.
So completely has Paul by naming the sex
generally, mingled "daughters" and species
together in the genus. Again, while he says
that "nature herself," ''• which has assigned
hair as a tegument and ornament to women,
" teaches that veiling is the duty of females, "
has not the same tegument and the same
honour of the head been assigned also to vir-
gins ? If " it is shameful " for a woman to be
shorn it is similarly so to a virgin too. From
them, then, to whom is assigned one and the
same law of the head,'5 one and the same
disciplitie ^^ of the head is exacted, — (which
extends) even unto those virgins whom their
childhood defends, '^ for from the first'^ a vir^
gin was named " female." This custom, '«>
in short, even Israel observes; but if Israel
did not observe it, our Law,=° amplified and
supplemented, would vindicate the addition
for itself; let it be excused for imposing the
veil on virgins also. Under our dispensation,
let that age which is ignorant of its sex ""^ re-
tain the privilege of simplicity. For both Eve
and Adam, when it befell them to be " wise, " =*
forthwith veiled what they had learnt to
know. ^3 At all events, with regard to those
in whom girlhood has changed (into maturity),
their age ought to remember its duties as to
nature, so also, to discipline; for they are
being transferred to the rank of " women "
both in their persons and in their functions.
No one is a "virgin" from the time when
she is capable of marriage; seeing that, in
her, age has by that time been wedded to its
own husband, that is, to time.=^ " But some
particular virgin has devoted herself to God.
From that very moment she both changes the
fashion of her hair, and converts all her garb
into that of a * woman.'" Let her, then,
maintain the character wholly, and perform the
whole function of a "virgin: " what she con-
ceals "s for the sake of God, let her cover quite
over.=^ It is our business to entrust to the
knowledge of God alone that which the grace
of God effects in us, lest we receive from man
the reward we hope for from God.'^ Why
do you denude before God ""^ what you cover


IS i.e. long hair

»6i.e. veiling.

»7 i.e. " exempts."

»8 i.e. from her creation.

'9 Of the universal veiling of women."

20 i e. as above, the Sermon on the Mount.

2' i.e. mere infancy.

"Gen. iii. 6.

23 Gen. ii. 27 (or in the LXX. iii. 1), and iii.

24 Routh refers us to de Virg. Vel. c, 11.
^S i.e. the redundance of her hair.
26 i.e. by a veil.

=7 i.e. says Oehler, " lest we postpone the eternal favour of God^
which we hope for, to the temporal veneration of men ; a risk
which those virgins seemed likelv
God, used to go veiled in public, bt

28 I.e. in church.


7, 10, II.


nporal

sly to run, who, when devoted to
}ut bareheaded in the church."


CHAP. XXV.]


ON PRAYER.


689


before men ? ' Will you be more modest in
public than in the church ? If your sdf-
devotimi is a grace of God, and you have re-
ceived it, "why do you boast," saith he, "as
if you have not received it?"= Why, by
your ostentation of yourself, do you judge
others? Is it that, by your boasting, you
invite others unto good? Nay, l)ut even you
yourself run the risk of losing, if you boast;
and you drive others unto the same perils !
What is assumed from love of boasting is
easily destroyed. Be veiled, virgin, if virgin
you are; for you ought to blush. If you are
a virgin, shrink from (the gaze of) many eyes.
Let no one wonder at your face; let no one
perceive your falsehood. 3 You do well in
falsely assuming the married character, if you
veil your head; nay, you do not seem to as-
sume it falsely^ for you are wedded to Christ:
to Him you have surrendered your body; act
as becomes your Husband's discipline. If
He, bids the brides of others to be veiled, His
own, of course, much more. " But each in-
dividual man * is not to think that the institu-
tion of his predecessor is to be overturned."
Many yield up their own judgment, and its
consistency, to the custom of others. Granted
that virgins be not ^<?;;2/<?//^^ to be veiled, at all
events such as voltmtarily are so should not be
prohibited; who, likewise, cannot deny them-
selves to be virgins,5 content, in the security
of a good conscience before God, to damage
their own fame.^ Touching such, however,
as are betrothed, I can with constancy " above
my small measure " ^ pronounce and attest
that they are to be veiled from that day forth
on which they shuddered at the first bodily
touch of a man by kiss and hand. For in
them everything has been forewedded: their
age, through maturity; their flesh, through
age; their spirit, through consciousness; their
modesty, through the experience of the kiss;
their hope, through expectation; their mind,
through volition. And Rebecca is example
enough for us, who, when her betrothed had
been pointed out, veiled herself for marriage
merely on recognition of him.^


' i.e. in public ; see note 27, supra.

- 1 Cor. iv. 7.

3i.e. as iMuratori, quoted by Oehler, says, your "pious" (?)
fraud in pretending to be married when you are a virgin ; because
" devoted " virgins used to dress and wear veils like married
women, as being regarded as " wedded to Christ."

4 i.e. each president of a church, or bishop,

;i.e. " are known to be such through the chastity of their man-
ner and life " (Oehler).

<> " By appearing in public as married women, while in heart
they are virgins " (Oehler).

7 Does Tertullian refer to 2 Cor. x. 13? or does " modulus "
mean, as Oehler thinks, " my rule ? " [It seems to me a very plain
reference to the text before mentioned, and to the Apostolic Canon
of not exceeding one's Mission.]

^ Gen. xxiv. 64, 65.

9 Eph. iv. 27.

'oi.e. abstaining from kneeling : kneeling being more "a pos-
ture of solicitude ' and of humility ; standings of " exultation."

44


CHAP. XXIII.— OF KNEELING.

In the mattter of kfueling also prayer is
subject to diversity of observance, through the
act of some few who absuin from kneeling
on the Sabbath; and since this dissension is
particularly on its trial before the churches,
the Lord will give His grace that the dissen-
tients may either yield, or else indulge their
opinion without offence to others. We, how-
ever (just as we have received), only on the
day of the Lord's Resurrection ought to guard
not only against kneeling, but every posture
and office of solicitude; deferring even our
businesses lest we give any j)lace to the devil.»
Similarly, too, in the period of Pentecost;
which period we distinguish by the same so-
lemnity of exultation.'" But who would hesi-
tate every day to prostrate himself before God,
at least in the first prayer with which we enter
on the daylight? At fasts, moreover, and
Stations, no prayer should be made without
kneeling, and the remaining customary marks
of humility; for (then) " we are not ov\\y pray-
ing, but deprecating, and making satisfaction
to God our Lord." Touching titnes of prayer
nothing at all has been prescribed, except
clearly "to pray at every time and every
place." '3

CHAP. XXIV. — OF PLACE FOR PRAYER.

But how " in every place," since we are pro-
hibited'* (from praying) in public? In every
place, he means, which opportunity or even
necessity, may have rendered suitable: for
that which was done by the apostles '« (who, in
gaol, in the audience of the prisoners, " began
praying and singing to God " ) is not con-
sidered to have been done contrary to the pre-
cept; nor yet that which was done by Paul,"*
who in the ship, in presence of all, "made
thanksgiving to God." ''

CHAP. XXV. — OF TIME FOR PRAYER.

Touching the time, however, the extrin-
sic'® observance of certain hours will not
be unprofitable — those common hours, I
mean, which mark the intervals of the day
— the third, the sixth, the ninth — which we


" i.e. at fasts and Stations

" For the meaning of
Hooker. Keel. Pol. vl. 5,

'3 Eph, vi. 18 ; I 'I'hess. v. 17 ; i Tim. ii. 8.

14 Matt. vi. 5, 6, which forbids praying in public.

«5 Paul and Silas (Acts xvi. 25).

«6 I have followed Muratori s readmg here.

'7 Mr. Hodgson renders "celebrated the Euchanst
rendering appears very doubtful. See Acts xxvii. 35.

'8 Mr. podgson supposes this word to mean " outward, ha con-
trasted with the inward, ' praying always.' " Oehler interprets,
"ex vita communi." But perhaps what Tertullian says lower
down in the chapter, " albeit thry stand simfity tt>ithoHt any pre-
cept enjoining their ofiserrance,'' may give us the true clue to
his meaning ; so that " extrinsecus " would = "extrinsic to any
direct injunction of our Lord or His apostles."


rSabbath = Sattird»y, xNt/r<t.]
satisfaction " as used by the Fatben, see


but that


690


ON PRAYER.


[CIIAI-. XXIX.


may find in the Scriptures to have been
more solemn than the rest. The first infusion
of the Holy Spirit into the congregated disci-
ples took place at " the third hour." * Peter,
on the day on which he experienced the vision
of Universal Communityj^* (exhibited) in that
small vessel, 3 had ascended into the more
lofty parts of the houscy for prayer's sake " at
the sixth hour."-* The same (apostle) was
going into the temple, with John, "at the
ninth hour"^ when he restored the paralytic
to his health. Albeit t\\ts,t practices stand sim-
ply without any precept for their observance,
still it may be granted a good thing to es-
tablish some definite presumption, which may
both add stringency to the admonition to
pray, and may, as it were by a law, tear us
out from our businesses unto such a duty;
so that — what we read to have been observed
by Daniel also,^ in accordance (of course)
with Israel's discipline — we pray at least not
less than thrice in the day, debtors as we are
to Three — Father, Son, and Holy Spirit: of
course, in addition to our regular prayers
which are due, without any admonition, on
the entrance of light and of night. But,
withal, it becomes believers not to take food,
and not to go to the bath, before interposing
a prayer; for the refreshments and nourish-
ments of the spirit are to be held prior to those
of the flesh, and things heavenly prior to things
earthly.

CHAP. XXVI. OF THE PARTING OF BRETHREN.

You will not dismiss a brother who has en-
tered your house without prayer. — " Have you
seen," says Scripture^ "a brother? you have
seen your Lord; " ' — especially " a stranger,"
lest perhaps he be "an angel." But again,
when received yourself by brethren, you will
not make^ earthly refreshments prior to
heavenly, for your faith will forthwith be
judged. Or else how will you — according to
the precept 9 — say, "Peace to this house ^'^
unless you exchange mutual peace with them
who are in the house ?


» Actsii. 1-4, 14, 15,

3 Communitatis omnis (Oehler). Mr. Dodgson renders, "of
every sort of common thing.". Perhaps, as Routh suggests, we
should read " omnium."

aVasculo. But in Acts it is, o-kcvos ti <o5 o9ovy\v ntyd\r)v
[Small is here comparatively used, with reference to Universality
of which it was the symbol.]

4 Acts X. 9.

5 Acts iii. 1: but the man is not said to have been *' paralytic,"
but " lame from his mother's womb."

6 Dan. vi. 10 ; comp. Ps. Iv. 17 (in the LXX. it is liv. 18).

7 I have ventured to turn the first part of the sentence into a
question. What "scripture" this may be, no one knows. [It
seems to me a clear reference to Matt. xxv. 38, amplified by tne
45th verse, in a way not unusual with our author.] I'erhaps, in
addition to the passages in Gen. xviii. and Heb. xiii. 2, to which
the editors naturally refer, Tertullian may allude to such passages
as Mark ix 37, Matt. xxv. 40, 45. [Christo in pauperibus.]

^ I have followed Routh's conjecture, " feceris for " fecerit,"
which Oehler does not even notice.
9 Luke X. 5.


CHAP. XXVII. — OF SUBJOINING A PSALM.

The more diligent in prayer are wont to
subjoin in their prayers the " Hallelujah," '°
and such kind of psalms, in the closes of
which the company respond. And, of course,
every institution is excellent which, for the
extolling and honouring of God, aims unitedly
to bring Him enriched prayer as a choice
victim."

CHAP. XXVIII. — OF THE SPIRITUAL VICTIM,
WHICH PRAYER IS.

For this is the spiritual victim " which has
abolished the pristine sacrifices. " To what
purpose," saith He, " (bring ye) me the mul-
titude of your sacrifices ? I am full of holo-
causts of rams, and I desire not the fat of
rams, and the blood of bulls and of goats.
For who hath required these from your
hands ?" *3 What, then, God has required
the Gospel teaches. "An hour will come,"
saith He, "when the true adorers shall adore
the Father in spirit and truth. For God is a
Spirit, and accordingly requires His adorers
to be such."*"* We are the true adorers and
the true priests, 's who, praying in spirit,'*^
sacrifice, in spirit, prayer, — a victim proper
and acceptable to God, which assuredly He
has required, which He has looked forward
to ^7 for Himself ! This victim, devoted from
the whole heart, fed pn faith, tended by truth,
entire in innocence, pure in chastity, gar-
landed with love,'^ we ought to escort with
the pomp'i> of good works, amid psalms and
hymns, unto God's altar, ^ to obtain for us
all things from God.

CHAP. XXIX. OF THE POWER OF PRAYER.

For what has God, who exacts it ever de-
nied" to prayer coming from "spirit and
truth ? ' ' How mighty specimens of its efficacy
do we read, and hear, and believe! Old-world
prayer, indeed, used to free from fires," and
from beasts,=3 and from famine;'^ and yet it
had not (then) received its form from Christ.
But how far more amply operative is Christian
prayer ! It does not station the angel of dew


10 Perhaps " the great Hallelujah," i.e. the last five psalms.
i» [The author seems to have in mind (Hos. xiv. 2) " the calves
of our lips."l
" I Pet. ii. 5.

»3lsa. i.ii. See the LXX.
14 John iv. 23, 24.

»S Sacerdotes ; comp. de Ex. Cast. c. 7.
161 Cor. xiv. 15 ; Eph. vi. 18.
«7 Or, " provided."

18" Agape," perhaps " the love-feast."
'9 Or, "procession."
20 Altare.
2« Routh would read, " What will God deny f"

22 Dan. iii.

23 Dan. vi.

24 1 Kings xviii. ; Jas. v. 17, 18.


' CHAP. XXIX.]


ON PRAYER.


691


in mid-fires,' nor muzzle lions, nor transfer
to the hungry the rustics' bread;' it has no
delegated grace to avert any sense of suffer-
ing; ^ but it supplies the suffering, and the
feeling, and the grieving, with endurance: it
amplifies grace by virtue, that faith may know
what she obtains from the Lord, understand-
ing what — for God's name's sake — she suffers.
But in days gone by, withal prayer used to call
down* plagues, scatter the armies of foes,
withhold the wholesome influences of the
showers. Now, however, the prayer of right-
eousness averts all God's anger, keeps bivouac
on behalf of personal enemies, makes suppli-
cation on behalf of persecutors. Is it wonder
if // knows how to extort the raitis of heaven s
— (prayer) which was (nice able to procure its
fires 2^ Prayer is alone that which van-
quishes ^ God. But Christ has willed that it
be operative for no evil: He had conferred on
it all its virtue in the cause of good. And so
it knows nothing save how to recall the souls
of the departed from the very path of death,
to transform the weak, to restore the" sick, to
purge the possessed, to open prison-bars, to
loose the bonds of the innocent. Likewise it


' i.e. " the angel who preserved in the furnace the three youths
besprinkled, as it were, with dewy shower " (Muratori, quoted by
Oehler). [Apocrypha, The Song, etc., verses 26, 27.]

2 2 Kings, iv. 42-44.

3 i.e. in brief, its miraculous operations, as they are called, are
■suspended in these ways.

4 Or, " inflict."

5 See Apolog. c. 5 (Oehler).

6 See 2 Kings i.

7 [A reference to Jacob's wrestling. Also, probably, to Matt,
xi. 12.]


washes away faults, repels temptations, ex-
tinguishes persecutions, consoles the faint-
spirited, cheers the high-spirited, escorts
travellers, appeases waves, makes robbers
stand aghast, nourishes the poor, governs the
rich, upraises the fallen, arrests the falling,
confirms the standing. Prayer is the wall of
faith: her arms and missiles* against the foe
who keeps watch over .us on all sides. And,
so never walk we unarmed. By day, be we
mindful of Station; by night, of vigil. Under
the arms of prayer guard we the standard of
our General; await we in prayer the angel's
trump." The angels, likewise, all pray;
every creature prays ; cattle and wild beasts
pray and bend their knees; and when they
issue from their layers and lairs, *° they look
up heavenward with no idle mouth, making
their breath vibrate " after their own manner.
Nay, the birds too, rising out of the nest, up-
raise themselves heavenward, and, instead of
hands, expand the cross of their wings, and
say somewhat to seem like prayer." What
more then, touching the office of prayer?
Even the Lord Himself prayed; to whom be
honour and virtue unto the ages of the ages !


8 Or, " her armour defensive and offensive."

9 I Cor. XV. 52 ; i Thess. iv. 16.
10 Or, " pens and dens."

" As if in prayer.

" [This beautiful passage should be supplemented by a similar
one from St. Bernard : " Nonne et aviculas levat, non onerat pen-
narum numerositas ipsa? Tolle eas, et reliquum corpus pondere
suo ferturad ima. Sic disciplinam Christi, sic suave jugum, sic
onus leve, quo deponimus, eo deprimimur ipsi : quia portat potius
quam portatur." Epistola, ccclxxxv. Bemardi Opp. Tom. i. p.
691. Ed. (Mabillon.) Gaume, Paris, 1839. Bearing the cro« up-
Ufts the Christian.]


i


IV.


AD MARTYRAS."


(TRANSLATED BY THE REV. S. THELWALL.)


CHAP. I.

Blessed Martyrs Designate, — Along with
the provision which our lady mother the Church
from her bountiful breasts, and each brother
out of his private means, makes for your
bodily wants in the prison, accept also from me
some contribution to your spiritual sustenance;
for it is not good that the fiegh be feasted and
the spirit starve: nay, if that which is weak be
carefully looked to, it is but right that that
which is still weaker should not be neglected.
Not that I am specially entitled to exhort you;
yet not only the trainers and overseers, but
even the unskilled, nay, all who choose, with-
out the slightest need for it, are wont to ani-
mate from afar by their cries the most ac-
complished gladiators, and from the mere
throng of onlookers useful suggestions have
sometimes come; first, then, O blessed, grieve
not the Holy Spirit,^ who has entered the
prison with you; for if He had not gone with
you there, you would not have been there this
day. Do you give all endeavour, therefore,
to retain Him; so let Him lead you thence to
your Lord. The prison, indeed, is the devil's
house as well, wherein he keeps his family.
But you have come within its walls for the
very purpose of trampling the wicked one
under foot in his chosen abode. You had al-
ready in pitched battle outside utterly over-
come him; let him have no reason, then, to
say to himself, " They are now in my do-
main; with vile hatreds I shall tempt them,
with defections or dissensions among them-
selves." Let him fly from your presence, and
skulk away into his own abysses, shrunken
and torpid, as though he were an outcharmed
or smoked-out snake. Give him not the suc-


1 Written in his early ministry, and strict orthodoxy, fit may
be dated circa A.n. 197, as external e.idence will shew.]

2 Eph. iv. 30. [Some differences had risen between these holy
sufferers, as to the personal merits of offenders who had ap-
pealed to them for their interest in restoring them to communion.]


cess in his own kingdom of setting you at
variance with each other, but let him find you
armed and fortified with concord; for peace
among you is battle with him. Some, not
able to find this peace in the Church, have
been used to seek it from the imprisoned mar-
tyrs.' And so you ought to have it dwelling
with you, and to cherish it, and to guard it,
that you may be able perhaps to bestow it
upon others.

CHAP. II.

Other things, hindrances equally of the
soul, may have accompanied you as far as the
prison gate, to which also your relatives may
have attended you. There and thenceforth
you were severed from the world; how much
more from the ordinary course of worldly life
and all its affairs ! Nor let this separation
from the world alarm you; for if we reflect
that the world is more really the prison, we
shall see that you have gone out of a prison
rather than into one. The world has the
greater darkness, blinding men's hearts. The
world imposes the more grievous fetters,
binding men's very souls. The world breathes
out the worst impurities — human lusts. 'I'he
world contains the larger number of criminals,
even the whole human race. Then, last of
all, it awaits the judgment, not of the pro-
consul, but of God. Wherefore, O blessed,
you may regard yourselves as having been
translated from a prison to, we may say, a
place of safety. It is full of darkness, but ye
yourselves are light; it has bonds, but God has
made you free. Unpleasant exhalations are
there, but ye are an odour of sweetness. Tiie


:i[He favours this resource as sanctioned by custom, and jrcntly
persuades them, by ajfreeing as to its propriety, to bestow peace
upon others. But, the foresight of those who objected was after-
wards justified, for in Cyprian's day this practice led to Krcater
evils, and he was obliged to discourage it (ep. xi.) in an epistle to
confessors.]


694


AD MARTYRAS.


[chap. IV,


judge is daily looked for, but ye shall judge
the judges themselves. Sadness may be there
for him who sighs for the world's enjoyments.
The Christian outside the prison has re-
nounced the world, but in the prison he has
renounced a prison too. It is of no conse-
quence where you are in the world — you who
are not of it. And if you have lost some of
life's sweets, it is the way of business to suffer
present loss, that after gains may be the
larger. Thus far I say nothing of the rewards
to which God invites the martyrs. Meanwhile
let us compare the life of the world and of the
prison, and see if the spirit does not gain
more in the prison than the flesh loses. Nay,
by the care of the Church and the love of the
brethren,' even the flesh does not lose there
what is for its good, while the spirit obtains
besides important advantages. You have no
occasion to look on strange gods, you do not
run against their images; you have no part
in heathen holidays, even by mere bodily
mingling in them; you are not annoyed by
the foul fumes of idolatrous solemnities; you
are not pained by the noise of the public shows,
nor by the atrocity or madness or immodesty
of their celebrants; your eyes do not fall on
stews and brothels; you are free from causes
of offence, from temptations, from unholy
reminiscences; you are free now from perse-
cution too. The prison does the same service
for the Christian which the desert did for the
prophet. Our Lord Himself spent much of
His time in seclusion, that He might have
greater liberty to pray, that He might be quit
of the world. It was in a mountain solitude,
too, He showed His glory to the disciples. Let
us drop the name of prison; let us call it a
place of retirement. Though the body is shut
in, though the flesh is confined, all things are
open to the spirit. In spirit, then, roam
abroad; in spirit walkabout, not setting be-
fore you shady paths or long colonnades, but
the way which leads to God. As often as in
spirit your footsteps are there, so often you
will not be in bonds. The leg does not feel
the chain when the mind is in the heavens.
The mind compasses the whole man about,
and whither it wills it carries him. But where
thy heart shall be, there shall be thy treasure. =*
Be there our heart, then, where we would have
our treasure.

CHAP. III.

Grant now, O blessed, that even to Chris-
tians the prison is unpleasant; yet we were
called to the warfare of the living God in our


I [Who ministered to their fellow-Christians in prison, for the
testimony of Jesus. What follows is a sad picture of social life
among heathens.]


very response to the sacramental words.
Well, no soldier comes out to the campaign
laden with luxuries, nor does he go to action
from his comfortable chamber, but from the
light and narrow tent, where every kind of
hardness, roughness and unpleasantness must
be put up with. Even in peace soldiers iniire
themselves to war by toils and inconveniences
— marching in arms, running over the plain,
working at the ditch, making the testudo, en-
gaging in many arduous labours. The sweat
of the brow is on everything, that bodies and
minds may not shrink at having to pass from
shade to sunshine, from sunshine to icy cold,
from the robe of peace to the coat of mail,
from silence to clamour, from quiet to tumult.
In like manner, O blessed ones, count what-
ever is hard in this lot of yours as a discipline
of your powers of mind and body. You are
about to pass through a noble struggle, in
which the living God acts the part of superin-
tendent, in which the Holy Ghost is your
trainer, in which the prize is an eternal crown
of angelic essence, citizenship in the heavens,
glory everlasting. Therefore your Master,
Jesus Christ, who has anointed you with His
Spirit, and led ]^ou forth to the arena, has
seen it good, before the day of conflict, to
take you from a condition more pleasant in
itself, and has imposed on you a harder treat-
ment, that your strength might be the greater.
For the athletes, too, are set apart to a more
stringent discipline, that they may have their
physical powers built up. They are kept
from luxury, from daintier meats, from more
pleasant drinks; they are pressed, racked,
worn out; the harder their labours in the pre-
paratory training, the stronger is the hope of
victory. *' And they," says the apostle,
" that they may obtain a corruptible crown." '
We, with the crown eternal in our eye, look
upon the prison as our training-ground, that
at the goal of final judgment we may be
brought forth well disciplined by many a trial;
since virtue is built up by hardships, as by
voluptuous indulgence it is overthrown.

CHAP. IV.

From the saying of our Lord we know that
the fl^sh is weak, the spirit willing.* Let us
not, withal, take delusive comfort from the
Lord's acknowledgment of the weakness of
the flesh. For precisely on this account He
first declared the spirit willing, that He might
show which of the two ought to be subject to
the other — that the flesh might yield obedience
to the spirit — the weaker to the stronger; the


2 Matt. vi. 21.

3 1 Cor. ix. 25.

4 Matt. xxvi. 41.


CHAP. VI.]


AD MARTYRAS.


695


former thus from the latter getting strength.
Let the spirit hold converse with the flesh
aliout the common salvation, thinking no
longer of the troubles of the prison, but of
the wrestle and conflict for which they are the
preparation. The flesli, perhaps, will dread
tae merciless sword, and the lofty cross, and
tiie rage of the wild beasts, and that punish-
ment of the flames, of all most terrible, and
all the skill of the executioner in torture.
But, on the other side, let the spirit set clearly
before both itself and the flesh, how these
things, though exceeding painful, have yet
been calmly endured by many, — and, have
even been eagerly desired for the sake of fame
and glory; and this not only in the case of
men, but of women too, that you, O holy
women, maybe worthy of your sex. It would
take me too long to enumerate one by one
the men who at their own self-impulse have
put an end to themselves. As to women,
there is a famous case at hand: the violated
Lucretia, in the presence of her kinsfolk,
plunged the knife into herself, that she might
have glory for her chastity. Mucins burned
his right hand on an altar, that this deed of
his might dwell in fame. The philosophers
have been out-stripped, — for instance Hera-
clitus, who, smeared with cowdung, burned
himself; and Empedocles, who leapt down into
the fires of ^tna; and Peregrinus,' who not
long ago threw himself on the funeral pile.
For women even have despised the flames.
Dido did so, lest, after the death of a husband
very dear to her, she should be compelled to
marry again; and so did the wife of Hasdru-
bal, who, Carthage being on fire, that she
might not behold her husband suppliant as
Scipio's feet, rushed with her children into
the conflagration, in which her native city was
destroyed. Regulus, a Roman general, who
had been taken prisoner by the Carthaginians,
declined to be exchanged for a large number
of Carthaginian captives, choosing rather to.be
given back to the enemy. He was crammed into
a sort of chest; and, everywhere pierced by nails
driven from the outside, he endured so many
crucifixions. Woman has voluntarily sought
the wild beasts, and even asps, those serpents
worse than bear or bull, which Cleopatra ap-
plied to herself, that she might not fall into
the hands of her enemy. But the fear of
death is not so great as the fear of torture.
And so the Athenian courtezan succumbed to
the executioner, when, subjected to torture
by the tyrant for having taken part in a con-
spiracy, still making no betrayal of her con-
federates, she at last bit off her tongue and
spat it in the tyrant's face, that he might be

I [He is said to have perished circa A.D. 170.]


convinced of the uselessness of his torments,
however long they should be continued.
Everybody knows what to this day is the great
Lacedaemonian solemnity — the diafiam-i^uattf or
scourging; in which sacred rite the Spartan
youths are beaten with scourges before the
altar, their parents and kinsmen standing by
and exhorting them to stand it bravely out.
For it will be always counted more honourable
and glorious that the soul rather than the
body has given itself to stripes. But if so
high a value is put on the earthly glory, won
by mental and bodily vigour, that men, for
the praise of their fellows, I may say, despise
the sword, the fire, the cross, the wild beasts,
the torture; these surely are but trifling suffer-
ings to obtain a celestial glory and a divine
reward. If the bit of glass is so precious,
what must the true pearl be worth ? Are we
not called on, then, most joyfully to lay out
as much for the true as others do for the false ?

CHAP. V.

I leave out of account now the motive of
glory. All these same cruel and painful con-
flicts, a mere vanity you find among men — in
fact, a sort of mental disease — as trampled
under foot. How many ease-lovers does the
conceit of arms give to the sword ? They
actually go down to meet the very wild beasts
in vain ambition; and they fancy themselves
more winsome from the bites and scars of the
contest. Some have soJd themselves to fires,
to run a certain distance in a burning tunic.
Others, with most enduring shoulders, have
walked about under the hunters' whips. The
Lord has given these things a place in the
world, O blessed, not without some reason:
for what reason, but noiu to animate us, and
on that day to confound us if we have feared
to suffer for the truth, that we might be saved,
what others out of vanity have eagerly sought
for to their ruin ?

CHAP. VI.

Passing, too, from examples of enduring
constancy having such an origin as this, let
us turn to a simple contemplation of man's
estate in its ordinary conditions, that mayhap
from things which happen to us whether we
will or no, and which we must set our minds
to bear, we may get instruction. How often,
then, have fires consumed the living ! How
often have wild beasts torn men in pieces, it
may be in their own forests, or it may be in
the heart of cities, when they have chanced to
escape from their dens ! How many have
fallen by the robber's sword ! How many have
suffered at the hands of enemies the death of
the cross, after having been tortured first, yes.


696


AD MARTYRAS.


[CHAI'. VI.


rnd treated with every sort of contumely !
One may even suffer in the cause of a man
what he hesitates to suffer in the cause of
God. In reference to this indeed, let the
present time ' bear testimony, when so many


' [After the defeat and suicide of Albinus, at Lyons, many
persons, some of Senatorial rank, were cruelly put to death.]


persons of rank have met with death in a
mere human being's cause, and that though
from their birth and dignities and bodily con-
dition and age such a fate seemed most un-
likely; either suffering at his hands if they have
taken part against him, or from his enemies
if they have been his partisans.


APPENDIX.

THE MARTYRDOM OF PHRFETUA AND FELICITAS.

(TRANSLATED BY THE REV. R. K. WALLIS, PH.D.)


Nobody will blame me for placing here the touching history of these Martyrs. It illus-
trates the period of history we are now considering, and sheds light on the preceding treatise.
I can hardly read it without tears, and it ought to make us love *'the noble army of mar-
tyrs." I think Tertullian was the editor of the story, not its author.' Felicitas is mentioned
by name in the De Anima: and the closing paragraph of this memoir is quite in his style.
To these words I need only add that Dr. Routh, who unfortunately decided not to re-edit
it, ascribes the first edition to Lucas Holstenius. He was Librarian of the Vatican and died
in 1 66 1. The rest may be learned from this Introductory Notice of the Translator:

Perpetua and P^elicitas suffered martyrdom in the reign of Septimius Severus, about
the year 202 a.d. TertulHan mentions Perpetua,' and a further clue to the date is given
in the allusion to the birth-day of " Geta the Caesar," the son of Septimius Severus. There
is therefore, good reason for rejecting the opinion held by some, that they suffered under
Valerian and Gallienus. Some think that they suffered at Tuburbium in Mauritania; but
the more general opinion is, that Carthage was the scene of their martyrdom.

The "Acta," detailing the sufferings of Perpetua and Felicitas, has been held by all critics
to be a genuine document of antiquity. But much difference exists as to who was the com-
piler. In the writing itself, Perpetua and Saturus are mentioned as having written certain
portions of it; and there is no reason to doubt the statement. Who the writer of the re-
maining portion was, is not known. Some have assigned the work to Tertullian; some
have maintained that, whoever the writer was, he was a Montanist, and some have tried to
show that both martyrs and narrator were Montanists.^ The narrator must have been a
contemporary; according to many critics, he was an eye-witness of the sufferings of tiie
martyrs. And he must have written the narrative shortly after the events.

Dean Milman says, " There appear strong indications that the acts of these African
martyrs are translated from the Greek; at least it is difficult otherwise to account for the
frequent untranslated Greek words and idioms in the text.-*

The Passion of Perpetua and Felicitas was edited by Petrus Possinus, Rome, 1663; by
Henr. Valesius, Paris, 1664; and the Bollandists. The best and latest edition is by Ruissart,
whose text is adopted in Gallandi's and Migne's collections of the Fathers.

I Cap. Iv. He calls her fortissima martyr, and she is one of only two or three contemporary sufferers whom he mentions by
name. ' [I" the Di- A nt'mn, cap. Iv. as see above.]

3 [Yet see the sermons of St. Augustine (if indeed his) on the Passion of these Saints. Sermon a8i and aSa, opp. Tom. v. pp.
1284-5.] * Hist. 0/ Christianity y vol. i. ch. viii.


THE PASSION OF THE HOLY MARTYRS PERPETUA AND

FELICrrAS.


PREFACE.'

If ancient illustrations of faith which both
testify to God's grace and tend to man's edi-
fication are collected in writing, so that by the
perusal of them, as if by the reproduction of
the facts, as well God may be honoured, as
man may be strengthened; why should not
new instances be also collected, that shajl be
equally suitable for both purposes, — if only
on the ground that these modern examples
will one day become ancient and available for
posterity, although in their present time they
are esteemed of less authority, by reason of
the presumed veneration for antiquity ? But
let men look to it, if they judge the power
of the Holy Spirit to be one, according to
the times and seasons; since some things of
later date must be esteemed of more account
as being nearer to the very last times, in ac-
cordance with the exuberance of grace mani-
fested to the final periods determined for the
world. For " in the last days, saith the Lord, I
will pour out of my Spirit upon all flesh; and
their sons and their daughters shall prophesy.
And upon my servants and my handmaidens
will I pour out of my Spirit; and your young
men shall see visions, and your old men shall
dream dreams."^ And tuus we — who both
acknowledge and reverence, even as we do the
prophecies, modern visions as equally prom-
ised to us, and consider the other powers of
the Holy Spirit as an agency of the Church
for which also He was sent, administering ail
gifts in all, even as the Lord distributed to
every one^ as well needfully collect them in
writing, as commemorate them in reading to
God's glory; that so no weakness or de-
spondency of faith may suppose that the divine
grace abode only among the ancients, whether
in respect of the condescension that raised

1 [Both Perpetua and Felicitas were evidently Montanistic in
character and impressions, but, the fact that they have never been
reputed other than Catholic, goes far to explain TertuUian's posi-
tion for years after he had withdrawn from communion with
the vacillating Victor.] . .

2 Joel ii. 28, 29. [The quotation here is a note of MonUnistJC
prepossessions in the writer.]

3 [Routh notes this as undoubted evidence of a Montanistic au-
thor. ReliquicB^ Vol. I. p. 455.]


up martyrs, or that gave revelations; since
God always carries into effect what He has
promised, for a testimony to unbelievers, to
believers for a benefit. And we therefore,
what we have heard and handled, declare also
to you, brethren and little children, that as
well you who were concerned in these matters
may be reminded of them again to the glory
of the Lord, as that you who know them by
report may have communion with the blessed
martyrs, and through them with the Lord
Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and honour,
for ever and ever/ Amen.

CHAP. I. — ARGUMENT. — WHEN THE SAINTS WERE
APPREHENDED, ST. PERPETUA SUCCESSFULLY
RESISTED HER FATHER'S PLEADING, WAS BAP-
TIZED WITH THE OTHERS, WAS THRUST INTO
A FILTHY DUNGEON. ANXIOUS ABOUT HER
INFANT, BY A VISION GRANTED TO HER, SHE
UNDERSTOOD THAT HER MARTYRDOM WOULD
TAKE PLACE VERY SHORTLY.

1. The young catechumens, Revocatus and
his fellow-servant Felicitas, Saturninus and
Secundulus, were apprehended. And among
them also was Vivia Perpetua, respectably
born, liberally educated, a married matron,
having a father and mother and two brothers,
one of whom, like herself, was a catechumen,
and a son an infant at the breast. She herself
was about twenty-two years t>f age. From this
point onward she shall herself narrate the
whole course of her martyrdom, as she left it
described by her own hand and with her own
mind.

2. *' While," says she, '*we were still with
the persecutors, and my father, for the sake
of his affection for me, was persisting in seek-
ing to turn me away, and to cast me down
from the faith, — ' Father,* said I, * do you see,
let us say, this vessel lying here to be a little
pitcher, or something else ? ' And he said, ' I
see it to be so.' And I replied to him, * Can
it be called by any other name than what it


4 [St. Augustine takes pains to remind us that these Acta are
not canonical. De Aninia, cap. 2, opp. Tom. x. p. 481.]


700


THE PASSION OF PERPETUA AND FELICITAS.


[chap. II.


is ? ' And he said, * No. ' * Neither can I
call myself anything else than what I am, a
Christian.' Then my father, provoked at
this saying, threw himself upon me, as if he
would tear my eyes out. But h« only dis-
tressed me, and went away overcome by the
devil's arguments. Then, in a few days after
I had been without my father, I gave thanks
to the Lord; and his absence became a source
of consolation 'to me. In that same in-
terval of a few days we were baptized, and to
me the Spirit ' prescribed that in the water of
baptism nothing else was to be sought for than
bodily endurance. " After a few days we are
taken into the dungeon, and I was very much
afraid, because I had never felt such darkness.

0 terrible day ! O the fierce heat of the shock
of the soldiery, because of the crowds ! I
was very unusually distressed by my anxiety
for my infant. There were present there
Tertius and Pomponius, the blessed deacons
who ministered to us, and had arranged by
means of a gratuity that we might be refreshed
by being sent out for a few hours into a
pleasanter part of the prison. Then going
out of the dungeon, all attended to their own
wants. 3 I suckled my child, which was now
enfeebled with hunger. In my anxiety for it,

1 addressed my mother and comforted my
brother, and commended to their care my son.
I was languishing because I had seen the'm
languishing on my account. Such solicitude
I suffered for many days, and I obtained leave
for my infant to remain in the dungeon with
me; and forthwith I grew strong and was re-
lieved from distress and anxiety about my
infant; and the dungeon became to me as
it were a palace, so that I preferred being
there to being elsewhere.

3. " Then my brother said to me, ' My
dear sister, you are already in a position of
great dignity, and are such that you may ask
for a vision, and that it may be made known
to you whether this is to result in a passion
or an escape.' * And I, who knew that I was
privileged to converse with the Lord, whose
kindnesses I had found to be so great, boldly
promised him, and said, 'To-morrow I will
tell you.' And I asked, and this was what
was shown me. I saw a golden ladder of
marvellous height, reaching up even to heaven,
and Very narrow, so that persons could only
ascend it one by one; and on the sides of the
ladder was fixed every kind of iron weapon.
There were there swords, lances, hooks,
daggers; so that if any one went up carelessly,
or not looking upwards, he would be torn to


» " Refrigeravit," Graece a.vifta.va*v, scil.
ai. e. the grace of martyrdom.

3 Sibi vacabant.

4 Commeatus.


requiem dedit.''


pieces, and his flesh would cleave to the iron
weapons. And under the ladder itself was
crouching a dragon of wonderful size, who lay
in wait for those who ascended, and frightened
them from the ascent. And Saturus went up
first, who had subsequently delivered himself
up freely on our account, not having been
present at the time that we were taken prison-
ers. And he attained the top of the ladder,
and turned towards me, and said to me,
' Perpetua, I am waiting fors you; but be
careful that the dragon do not bite you. '
And I said, ' In the name of the Lord Jesus
Christ, he shall not hurt me.* And from
under the ladder itself, as if in fear of me, he
slowly lifted up his head; and as I trod upon
the first step, I trod upon his head. And I
went up, and I saw an immense extent of
garden, and in the midst of the garden a white-
haired man sitting in the dress of a shepherd,'
of a large stature, milking sheep; and stand-
ing 'around were many thousand white-robed
ones. And he raised his head, and looked
upon me, and said to me, ' Thou art welcome,
daughter.' And he called me, and from the
cheese as he was milking he gave me as it
were a little cake, and I received it with folded
hands; and I ate it, and all who stood around
said Amen. And at the sound of their voices
I was awakened, still tasting a sweetness which
I cannot describe. And I immediately re-
lated this to my brother, and we understood
that it was to be a passion, and we ceased
henceforth to have any hope in this world.

CHAP. II. — ARGUMENT. PERPETUA, WHEN BE-
SIEGED BY HER FATHER, COMFORTS HIM.
WHEN LED WITH OTHERS TO THE TRIBUNAL,
SHE AVOWS HERSELF A CHRISTIAN, AND IS
CONDEMNED WITH THE REST TO THE WILD
BEASTS. SHE PRAYS FOR HER BROTHER DINO-
CRATES, WHO WAS DEAD.

I. "After a few days there prevailed a
report that we should be heard. And then
my father came to me from the city, worn out
with anxiety. He came up to me, that he
might cast me down, saying, ' Have pity my
daughter, on my grey hairs. Have pity on
your father, if I am worthy to be called a
father by you. If with these hands I have
brought you up to this flower of your age, if
I have preferred you to all your brothers, do
not deliver me up to the scorn of men. Have
regard to your brothers, have regard to your
mother and your aunt, have regard to your
son, who will not be able to live after you.


5 " Sustineo," Graece virofiefui, scil. " exspecto."
^ This was an ordinary mode of picturing our lord in the ora-
tories and on the sacred vessels of those days. [This p'-tssaRC will
recall the alle-rorj' of Hermas, with which the martyr was doubt-
less f.iiniliar.]


CHAP. II.]


THE PASSION OF PERPETUA AND FELICITAS.


701


Lay aside your courage, and do not bring us
all to destruction; for none of us will speak
in freedom if you should suffer anything.'
These things said my father in his affection,
kissing my hands, and throwing himself at
my feet; and with tears he called me not
Daughter, but Lady. And I grieved over
the grey hairs of my father, that he alone of
all my family would not rejoice over my pas-
sion. And I comforted him, saying, ' On that
scaffold' whatever God wills shall happen.
For know that we are not placed in our own
power, but in that of God.' And he departed
from me in sorrrow.

2. " Another day, while we were at dinner,
we were suddenly taken away to be heard,
and we arrived at the town-hall. At once the
rumour spread through the neighbourhood of
the public place, and an immense number of
people were gathered together. We mount
the platform. The rest were interrogated,
and confessed. Then they came to me, and
my father immediately appeared with my boy,
and withdrew me from the step, and said in a
supplicating tone, ' Have pity on your babe.'
And Hilarianus the procurator, who had just
received the power of life and death in the
place of the proconsul Minucius Timinianus,
who was deceased, said, ' Spare the grey hairs
of your father, spare the infancy of your boy,
offer sacrifice for the well-being of the em-
perors.' And I replied, 'I will not do so.'
Hilarianus said, ' Are you a Christian ? ' And
I replied, ' I am a Christian.' And as my
father stood there to cast me down from the
faiths he was ordered by Hilarianus to be
thrown down, and was beaten with rods. And
my father's misfortune grieved me as if I my-
self had been beaten, I so grieved for his
wretched old age.^" The procurator then de
livers judgment on all of us, and condemns us
to the wild beasts, and we went down cheer-
fully to the dungeon. Then, because my
child had been used to receive suck from me,
and to stay with me in the prison, I send
Pomponius the deacon to my father to ask for
the infant, but my father would not give it
him. And even as God willed it, the child
no long desired the breast, nor did my breast
cause me uneasiness, lest I should be tor-
mented by care for my babe and by the pain
of my breasts at once.

3. " After a few days, whilst we were all
praying, on a sudden, in the middle of our
prayer, there came to me a word, and I named
Dinocrates; and I was amazed that that name
had never come into my mind until then, and
I was grieved as I remembered his misfortune.


I " Catasta," a raised platform on which the martyrs were
placed either for trial or torture.


And I felt myself immediately to be worthy,
and to be called on to ask on his behalf.'
And for him I began earnestly to make sup-
plication, and to cry with groaning to the
Lord. Without delay, on that very night,
this was shown to me in a vision.* I saw
Dinocrates going out from a gloomy place,
where also there were several others, and he
was parched and very thirsty, with a filthy
countenance and pallid colour, and the wound
on his face which he had when he died. This
Dinocrates had been my brother after the
flesh, seven years of age,' who died miserably
with disease — his face being so eaten out with
cancer, that his death caused repugnance to
all men. For him I had made my prayer,
and between him and me there was a large in-
terval,*^ so that neither of us could approach
to the other. And moreover, in the same
place where Dinocrates was, there was a pool
full of water, having its brink higher than was
the stature of the boy; and Dinocrates raised
himself up as if to drink. And I was grieved
that, although that pool held water, still, on
account of the height to its brink, he could not
drink. And I was aroused, and knew that
my brother was in suffering. But I trusted
that my prayer would bring help to his suffer-
ing; and I prayed for him every day until we
passed over into the prison of the camp, for
v?e were to fight in the camp-show. Then was
the birth-day of Geta Caesar, and I made my
prayer for my brother day and night, groaning
and weeping that he might be granted to me.
, 4. " Then, on the day on which we remained
in fetters, 7 this was shown to me. I saw that
that place which I had formerly observed to
be in gloom was now bright; and Dinocrates,
with a clean body well clad, was finding re-
freshment. And where there had been a

2 [St. August, opp. iv. 541.]]
• 3 [The story in 2 Maccab.xii. 40-45, is there narrated as a thought
suggested to the soldiers under Judas, and not discouraged by him,
though it concerned men guilty of idolatry and dying in mortal
sin, by the vengeance of God. It may have occurred to early
Christians that their heathen kindred mi^ht, therefore, not be be-
yond the visitations of the Divine compassion. But, obviously, even
were it not an Apocryphal text, it can have no bearinK whatever on
the case of Christians. The doctrine of Purgator>- is that nobody
dying in mortal sin can have the benefit of its discipline, or any
share in the pravers and oblations of the Faithful, whatever.])

4" Oromate. [This vision, it must beobserx'ed, has nothinc to
do with prayers for the Christian dead, for this brother of Perpetua
was a heathen child whom she supposed to be in the In/eri. It illus-
trates the anxieties Christians felt for those of their kindred who
had not died in the Lord ; even for children of seven years of age.
Could the gulf be bridged and they received into Abraham's bosom ?
This dream of Ferpetua comforted her with a trust that so it
should be. Of course this story has been used fraudulently, to
help a system of which these times knew nothing. Cyprian *m.y%
expressly : " Apud Inft-ros confesaio non est, nee cxomologesis
iific figri ^tttsiy Epistola Hi. p. 98.0pp. Paris. 1574. In the
Edinburgh series (translations) this epistle is numbered 51, and
elsewhere 54.] ......

5 [There is not the slightest reason to suppose that this child had
been baptized : the father a heathen and Perpetua herself a recent
catechumen. Elucidation.]

6**Diadema," or rather "diastema, [Borrowed from Luke
xvi. 26. But that gulf could not be passed according to the
evangelist.]

7 " Nervo."


702


THE PASSION OF PERPETUA AND FELICITAS.


[chap. IV


wound, I saw a scar; and that pool which I
had before seen, / saw funv with its margin
lowered even to the boy's navel. And one
drew water from the pool incessantly, and
upon its brink was a goblet filled with water;
and Dinocrates drew near and began to drink
from it, and the goblet did not fail. And
when he was satisfied, he went away from the
water to play joyously, after the manner of
children, and I awoke. Then I understood
that he was translated from the place of pun-
ishment.

CHAP. III. ARGUMENT. PERPETUA IS AGAIN

TEMPTED BY HER FATHER. HER THIRD VISION,
WHEREIN SHE IS LED AWAY TO STRUGGLE
AGAINST AN EGYPTIAN. SHE FIGHTS, CON-
QUERS, AND RECEIVES THE REWARD.

1. ** Again, after a few days, Pudens, a sol-
dier, an assistant overseer' of the prison,
who began to regard us in great esteem, per-
ceiving that the great power of God was in us,
admitted many brethren to see us, that both
we and they might be mutually refreshed.
And when the day of the exhibition drew near,
my father, worn with suffering, came in to
me, and began to tear out his beard, and to
throw himself on the earth, and to cast him-
self down on his face, and to reproach his
years, and to utter such words as might move
all creation. I grieved for his unhappy olS
age.'

2. *' The day before that on which we were
to fight, I saw in a vision that Pomponius the
deacon came hither to the gate of the prison,
and knocked vehemently. I went out to him,
and opened the gate for him; and he was
clothed in a richly ornamented white robe,
and he had on manifold calliculae.^ And he
said to me, ' Perpetua, we are waiting for you;
come ! ' And he held his hand to me, and
we began to go through rough and winding
places. Scarcely at length had we arrived
breathless at the amphitheatre, when he led
me into the middle of the arena, and said to
me, * Do not fear, I am here with you, and I
am labouring with you;' and he departed.
And I gazed upon an immense assembly in
astonishment. And because I knew that I
was given to the wild beasts, I marvelled that
the wild beasts were not let loose upon me.
Then there came forth against me a certain
Egyptian, horrible in appearance, with his
backers, to fight with me. And there came


1 Optio.

2 [St. Aug. 0pp. Tom. V. p. 1284.]

3 It seems uncertain what may be the meaning of this word. It
is variously supposed to signify little round ornaments either of
cloth or metal attached to the soldier's dress, or the small bells on
the priestly robe. Some also read the word galliculte, small san-
dals.


to me, as my helpers and encouragers, hand-
some youths; and I was stripped, and became
a man.'* Then my helpers began to rub me
with oil, as is the custom for contest; and I
beheld that Egyptian on the other hand rolling
in the dust.s And a certain man came forth,
of wondrous height, so that he even over-
topped the top of the amphitheatre; and he
wore a loose tunic and a purple robe between
two bands over the middle of the breast; and
he had on callicula of varied form, made of
gold and silver; and he carried a rod, as if he
were a trainer of gladiators, and a green
branch upon which were apples of gold. And
he called for silence, and said, ' This Egyp-
tian, if he should overcome this woman, shall
kill her with the sword; and if she shall con-
quer him, she shall receive this branch.*
Then he departed. And we drew near to one
another, and began to deal out blows. He
sought to lay hold of my feet, while I struck
at his face with my heels; and I was lifted up
in the air, and began thus to thrust at him as
if spurning the earth. But when I saw that
there was some delay I joined my hands so
as to twine my fingers with one another; and
I took hold upon his head, and he fell on his
face, and I trod upon his head.^ And the
people began to shout, and my backers to
exult. And I drew near to the trainer and
took the branch; and he kissed me, and said
to me, ' Daughter, peace be with you: ' and I
began to go gloriously to the Sanavivarian
gate.' Then I awoke, and perceived that I
was not to fight with beasts, but against the
devil. Still I knew that the victory was await-
ing me. This, so far, I have completed sev-
eral days before the exhibition; but what
passed at the exhibition itself let who will
write."

CHAP. IV. ARGUMENT. SATURUS, IN A VISION,

AND PERPETUA BEING CARRIED BY ANGELS
INTO THE GREAT LIGHT, BEHOLD THE MAR-
TYRS. BEING BROUGHT TO THE THRONE OF
GOD, ARE RECEIVED WITH A KISS. THEY REC-
ONCILE OPTATUS THE BISHOP AND ASPASIUS
THE PRESBYTER.

I. Moreover, also, the blessed Saturus re-
lated this his vision, which he himself com-
mitted to writing: — "We had suffered," says
he, " and we were gone forth from the flesh,
and we were beginning to be borne by four
angels into the east; and their hands touched


4 [Concerning these visions, see Augustine, De Anima, cap.
xviii. el sea. "l^

5 " Afa ' IS the Greek word aitrf, a gri6 / hence used of the
yellow sand sprinkled over wrestlers, to enable them to grasp one
another.

6 [Ps. xliv. 5. Also Ix. 12. xci. 13, cviii. 13.]

7 4'his was the way by which the victims spared by the popular
clemency escaped from the amphitheatre.


CHAP, v.]


THE PASSION OF PERPETUA AND FELICITAS.


703


us not. And we floated not supine, looking
upwards, but as if ascending a gentle slope.
And being set free, we at length saw the first
boundless light; and I said, ' Perpetua ' (for
she was at my side), ' this is what the "Lord
promised to us; we have received the promise. '
And while we are borne by those same four
angels, there appears to us a vast space which
was like a pleasure-garden, having rose-trees
and every kind of flower. And the height of
the trees was after the measure of a cypress,
and their leaves were falling' incessantly.
Moreover, there in the pleasure-garden four
other angels appeared, brighter than the pre-
vious ones, who, when they saw us, gave us
honour, and said to the rest of the angels,
* Here they are ! Here they are ! ' with ad-
miration. And those four angels who bore
us, being greatly afraid, put us down; and we
passed over on foot the space of a furlong in
a broad path. There we found Jocundus and
Saturninus and Artaxius, who having suffered
the same persecution were burnt alive; and
Quintus, who also himself a martyr had de-
parted in the prison. And we asked of them
where the rest were. And the angels said to
us, ' Come first, enter and greet your Lord.'

2. ** And we came near to a place, the walls
of which were such as if they were built of
light; and before the gate of that place stood
four angels, who clothed those who entered
with white robes. And being clothed, we en-
tered and saw the boundless light, and heard
the united voice of some who said without
ceasing, ' Holy ! Holy ! Holy ! ' " And in the
midst of that place we saw as it were a hoary
man sitting, having snow-white hair, and with
a youthful countenance; and his feet we saw
not. And on his right hand and on his left
were four-and-twenty elders, and behind them
a great many others were standing. We
entered with great wonder, and stood before
the throne; and the four angels raised us up,
and we kissed Him, and He passed His hand
over our face. And the rest of the elders
said to us, * Let us stand; ' and we stood and
made peace. And the elders said to us, * Go
and enjoy.' And I said, ' Perpetua, you
have what you wish.' And she said to me,
' Thanks be to God, that joyous as I was in
the flesh, I am now more joyous here.'

3. '* And we went forth, and saw before
the entrance Optatus the bishop at the right
hand, and Aspasius the presbyter, a teacher,^


1 " Cadebant ;" but " ardebant"— " were burning"-- seems a
more probable reading. [The imitations of the SheJ>herd of
Hennas, in this memoir hardly need pointing out.]

2 Agios. . ,

3 A presbyter, that is, whose office was to teach, as distinct from
other presbyters. See Cyprian, Epistles, vol. i. Ep. xxin. p. '^«
^^f^ ^ t..o„cl rOTif. nf tlin«e referred to bv St. lames in. i, i


Other presDyters. see «_ypnan, iz-pimei, vui. i. i^y. **•«•• v ""•
note I, transl. [One of those referred to by St. James 111. i, and
by St. Paul, I. Tim. ""


^7-]


at the left hand, separate and sad; and they
cast themselves at our feet, and said to us,
' Restore peace between us, because you have
gone forth and have left us thus.' And we
said to them, * Art not thou our father, and
thou our presbyter, that you should cast your-
selves at our feet ? " And we prostrated our-
selves, and we embraced them; and Perpetua
began to speak with them, and we drew them
apart in the pleasure-garden under a rose-
tree. And while we were speaking with them,
the angels said unto them, * Let them alone,
that they may refresh themselves;* and if
you have any dissensions between you, forgive
one another.' And they drove them away.
And they said to Optatus, ' Rebuke thy
people, because they assemble to you as if
returning from the circus, and contending
about factious n^atters.' And then it seemed
to us as if the> vould shut the doors. And
in that place we began to recognise many
brethren, and moreover martyrs. We were
all nourished with an indescribable odour,
which satisfied us. Then, I joyously awoke."

CHAP. v. — ARGUMENT. SECUNDULUS DIES IN
THE PRISON. FELICITAS IS PREGNANT, BUT
WITH MANY PRAYERS SHE BRINGS FORTH IN
THE EIGHTH MONTH WITHOUT SUFFERING.
THE COURAGE OF PERPETUA AND OF SATURUS

. UNBROKEN.

1 . The above were the more eminent visions
of the blessed martyrs Saturus and Perpetua
themselves, which they themselves committed
to writing. 5 But God called Secundulus,
while he has yet in the prison, by an earlier
exit from the world, not without favour, so as
to give a respite to the beasts. Nevertheless,
even if his soul did not acknowledge cause for
thankfulness, assuredly his flesh did.

2. But respecting Felicitas (for to her also
the Lord's favour approached in the same
way), when she had already gone eight months
with child (for she had been pregnant when
she was apprehended), as the day of the ex-
hibition was drawing near, she was in great
grief lest on account of her pregnancy she
should be delayed, — because pregnant women
are not allowed to be publicly punished, — and
lest she should shed her sacred and guiltless
blood among some who had been wicked sub-
sequently. Moreover, also, her fellow-mar-
tyrs were painfully saddened lest they should
leave so excellent a friend, and as it were
companion, alone in the path of the same
hope. Therefore, joining together their


4 More probably, "rest and refresh yourselves." [*' Go and
enjoy," or, " play, ' or '* lake pleasure " in the section preceding.]

5 [To be regarded, like the Shepherd of Hernias, merely m
visions, or allegorical romances.]


704


THE PASSION OF PERPETUA AND FELICITAS.


[chap. VI.


united cry, they poured forth their prayer to
the Lord three days before the exhibition.
Immediately after their prayer her pains came
upon her, and when, witli the difficulty natural
to an eight months' delivery, in the labour of
bringing forth she was sorrowing, some one
of the servants of the Cataractarii^ said to
her, "You who are in such suffering now,
what will you do when you are thrown to the
beasts, which you despised when you refused
to sacrifice?" And she replied, **Now it is
I that suffer what I suffer; but then there will
be another in me, who will suffer for me, be-
cause I also am about to suffer for Him."
Thus she brought forth a little girl, which a
certain sister brought up as her daughter.

3. Since then the Holy Spirit permitted,
and by permitting willed, that the proceedings
of that exhibition should be committed to
writing, although we are unworthy to com-
plete the description of so great a glory; yet
we obey as it were the command of the most
blessed Perpetua, nay her sacred trust, and
add one more testimony concerning her con-
stancy and her loftiness of mind. While they
were treated with more severity by the tribune,
because, from the intimations of certain de-
ceitful men, he feared lest thay should be
withdrawn from the prison by some sort of
magic incantations, Perpetua answered to his
face, and said, "Why do you not at least
permit us to be refreshed, being as we are
objectionable to the most noble Caesar, and
having to fight on his birth-day ?=^ Or is it
not your glory if we are brought forward fatter
on that occasion?" The tribune shuddered
and blushed, and commanded that they should
be kept with more humanity, so that permis-
sion was given to their brethren and others to
go in and be refreshed with them; even the
keeper of the prison trusting them now him-
self.

4. Moreover, on the day before, when in
that last meal, which they call the free meal,
they were partaking as far as they could, not
of a free supper, but of an agape; with the
same firmness they were uttering such words
as these to the people, denouncing agatmt
them the judgment of the Lord, bearing wit-
ness to the felicity of their passion, laughing
at the curiosity of the people who came to-
gether; while Saturus said, "To-morrow is
not enough for you, for you to behold with
pleasure that which you hate. Friends to-
day, enemies to-morrow. Yet note our faces
diligently, that you may recognise them on
that day of judgment." Thus all departed

I "The gaolers," so called from the " cataracto," or prison-
gate, which they guarded.

a[A gentle banter, like that of St. Lawrence on the gridiron.]


thence astonished, and from these things
many believed.

CHAP. VI. — ARGUMENT. FROM THE PRISON

THEY ARE LED FORTH WITH JOY INTO THE
AMPHITHEATRE, ESPECIALLY PERPETUA AND
FELICITAS. ALL REFUSE TO PUT ON PROFANE
GARMENTS. THEY ARE SCOURGED, THEY ARE
THROWN TO THE WILD BEASTS. SATURUS
TWICE IS UNHURT. PERPETUA AND FELIC-
ITAS ARE THROWN DOWN ; THEY ARE CALLED
BACK TO THE SANAVIVARIAN GATE. SATURUS
WOUNDED BY A LEOPARD, EXHORTS THE SOL-
DIER. THEY KISS ONE ANOTHER, AND ARE
SLAIN WITH THE SWORD.

I. The day of their victory shone forth,
and they proceeded from the prison into the
amphitheatre, as if to an assembly, joyous
and of brilliant countenances; if prechance
shrinking, it was with joy, and not with fear.
Perpetua followed with placid look, and with
step and gait as a matron of Christ, beloved
of God; casting down the luster of her eyes
from the gaze of all. Moreover, Felicitas, re-
joicing that she had safely brought forth, so
that she might fight with the wild beasts; from
the blood and from the midwife to the gladia-
tor, to wash after childbirth with a second
baptism. And when they were brought to the
gate, and were constrained to put on the
clothing — the men, that of the priests of
Saturn, and the women, that of those who
were consecrated to Ceres — that noble-minded
woman resisted even to the end with con-
stancy. For she said, " We have come thus
far of our own accord, for this reason, that
our liberty might not be restrained. For this
reason we have yielded our minds, that we
might not do any such thing as this: we have
agreed on this with you. ' ' Injustice acknowl-
edged the justice; the tribune yielded to their
being brought as simply as they were. Per-
petua sang psalms, already treading under
foot the head of the Egyptian; Revocatus,
and Saturninus, and Saturus uttered threat-
enings against the gazing people about this
martyrdom. When they came within sight
of Hilarianus, by gesture and nod, they began
to say to Hilarianus, " Thou judgest us," say
they, "but God will judge thee." At this
the people, exasperated, demanded that they
should be tormented with scourges as they
passed along the rank of the venatores.^
And they indeed rejoiced that they should
have incurred any one of their Lord's passions.
2. But He who had said, "Ask, and ye


3 A row of men drawn up to scourge them as they passed along,
a punishment probably similar to what is called ''^running the
gauntlet."


THE PASSION OF PERPETUA AND FELICITAS.


705


shall receive,"' gave to them when they
asked, that death which each one had wished
for. For when at any time they had been
discoursing among themselves about tlieir
wish in respect of their martyrdom, Saturninus
indeed had professed that he wished that he
might be thrown to all the beasts; doubtless
that he might wear a more glorious crown.
Therefore in the beginning of the exhibition,
he and Revocatus made trial of the leopard,
and moreover upon the scaffold they were
harassed by the bear. Saturus, however, held
nothing in greater abomination than a bear;
but ht imagined that he would be put an end to
with one bite of a leopard. Therefore, when
a wild boar was supplied, it was the huntsman
rather who had supplied that boar who was
gored by that same beast, and died the day
after the shows. Saturus only was drawn out;
and when ke had been bound on the floor
near to a bear, the bear would not come forth
from his den. And so Saturus for the second
time is recalled unhurt.

3. Moreover, for the young women the
devil prepared a very fierce cow, provided
especially for that purpose contrary to custom,
rivalling their sex also in that of the beasts.
And so, stripped and clothed with nets, they
were led forth. The populace shuddered as
they saw one young woman of delicate frame,
and another with breasts still dropping from
her recent childbirth. So, being recalled,
they are unbound. = Perpetua is first led in.
She was tossed, and fell on her loins; and
when she saw her tunic torn from her side,
she drew it over her as a veil for her middle,
rather mindful of her modesty than her suffer-
ing. Then she was called for again, and
bound up her dishevelled hair; for it was not
becoming for a martyr to suffer with dis-
hevelled hair, lest she should appear to be
mourning in her glory. So she rose up; and
when she saw Felicitas crushed, she ap-
proached and gave her her hand, and lifted
her up. And both of them stood together;
and the brutality of the populace being ap-
peased, they were recalled to the Sanavivarian
gate. Then Perpetua was received by a certain
one who was still a catechumen, Rusticus by
name, who kept close to her; and she, as if
aroused from sleep, so deeply had she been
in the Spirit and in an ecstasy, began to look
round her, and to say to the amazement of
all, " I cannot tell when we are to be led out
to that cow." And when she had heard what
had already happened, she did not believe it^


«John xvi. 24.

2lta revocatae discinguntur. Dean Milmam prefers reading


this, " Thus recalled, they are clad in loose robes.
3 [Routh, /?£//>. Vol. I. p. 360.]
45


until she had perceived certain signs of injury
in her body and in her dress, and had recog-
nised the catechumen. Afterwards causing
that catechumen and the brother to appro.'ich,
she addressed them, saying, " Stand fast in
the faith, and love one another, all of you,
and be not offended at my sufferings."

4. The same Saturus at the other entrance
exhorted the soldier Pudens, saying, "As-
suredly here I am, as I have promised and
foretold, for up to this moment I have felt no
beast. And now believe with your whole heart.
Lo, I am going forth to that beast, and I
shall be destroyed with one bite of the leo-
pard." And immediately at the conclusion
of the exhibition he was thrown to the leo-
pard; and with one bite of his he was bathed
with such a quantity of blood, that the people
shouted out to him as he was returning, the
testimony of his second baptism, '* Saved and
washed, saved and washed."* Manifestly
he was assuredly saved who had been glorified
in such a spectacle. Then to the soldier
Pudens he said, " Farewell, and be mindful
of my faith; and let not these things disturi),
but confirm you." And at the same time he
asked for a little ring from his finger, and re-
turned it to him bathed in his wound, leaving
to him an inherited token and the memory of
his blood. And then lifeless he is cast down
with the rest, to be slaughtered in the usual
place. .And when the populace called for
them into the midst, that as the sword pene-
trated into their body they might make their
eyes partners in the murder, they rose up of
their own accord, and transferred themselves
whither the people wished; but they first
kissed one another, that they might consum-
mate their martyrdom with the kiss of peace.
The rest indeed, immoveable and in silence,
received the sword-thrust; much more Saturus,
who also had first ascended the ladder, and
first gave up his spirit, for he also was wait-
ing for Perpetua. But Perpetua, that she
might taste some pain, being pierced between
the ribs, cried out loudly, and she herself
placed the wavering right hand of the youth-
ful gladiator to her throat.* Possibly such
a woman could not have been slain unless she
herself had willed it, because she was feared
by the impure spirit.

O most brave and blessed martyrs ! O truly
called and chosen unto the glory of our Lord
Jesus Christ ! whom whoever magnifies, and
honours, and adores, assuredly ought to read
these examples for the edification of the
Church, not less than the ancient ones, so that


4 A cry in mockery of what was known as the effect of Christ-
ian baptism.

5 [Routh, Reliquise, VoL I. p. 358.]


706 ELUCIDATION.


new virtues also may testify that one and the ! and His Son Jesus Christ our Lord, whose is


same Holy Spirit is always operating even
until now, and God the Father Omnipotent,


the glory and infinite power for ever and ever.
Amen.


ELUCIDATION.

(Dinocrates, cap. H, p. 701.)

The avidity with which the Latin controversial writers seize upon this fanciful passage,
(which, in fact, is subversive of their whole doctrine about Purgatory, as is the text from the
Maccabees^) makes emphatic the utter absence from the early Fathers of any reference to
such a dogma; which, had it existed, must have appeared in every reference to the State of the
Dead, and in every account of the discipline of penitents, Arbp. Usher ' ingeniously turns
the tables upon these errorists, by quoting the Prayers for the Dead, which were used in the
Early Church, but which, such as they were, not only, make no mention of a Purgatory, but
refute the dogma, by their uniform limitation of such prayers to the blessed dead, and to
their consummation of bliss at the Last day and not before. Such a prayer seems to occur
in 11. Tim. i. 18. The context (vers. 16-18, and iv. 19) strongly supports this view; One-
siphorus is spoken of as if deceased, apparently. But, as Chrysostom understands it, he
was only absent (in Rome) from his household. From i. 17 we should infer that he had left

Rome.'

. , ,

I Republished, Oxford, 1838. » See 0pp. Tom. xi. p. 657. Ed. Migne.


VI.


OF PATIENCE.


(TRANSLATED BY THE REV. S. THELWALL.)


chap. i. of patience generally ; and ter-

tullian's own unworthiness to treat of

IT.

I Fully confess unto the Lord God that it
has been rash enough, if not even impudent,
in me to have dared compose a treatise on
Patience, iox practising \i\i\Q\\ I am all unfit,
"being a man of no goodness; =" whereas it
were becoming that such as have addressed
themselves to the demonstration and com.
mendation of some particular thing, should
themselves first be conspicuous in the practice
of that thing, and should regulate the con-
stancy of their commonishing by the authority
of their personal conduct, for fear their words
blush at the deficiency of their deeds. And
would that this "blushing" would bring a
remedy, so that shame for 7iot exhibiting that
which we go to suggest to others should prove
a tutorship into exhibiting it; except that the
magnitude of some good things — just as of
some ills too — is insupportable, so that only
the grace of divine inspiration is effectual for
attaining and practising them. For what is
most good rests most with God; nor does any
other than He who possesses it dispense it,
as He deems meet to each. And so to dis-
cuss about that which it is not given one to
enjoy, will be, as it were,, a solace; after the
manner of invalids, who since they are with-
out health, know not how to be silent about
its blessings. So I, most miserable, ever
sick with the heats of mpatience, must of
necessity sigh after, and invoke, and per-
sistently plead for, that health of patience
which I possess not; while I recall to mind,
and, in the contemplation of my own weak-
ness, digest, the truth, that the good health
of faith, and the soundness of the Lord's dis-


1 [Written possibly as late as a.d. 202 ; and is credited by
Neander and Kaye, with Catholic Orthodoxy.]

2 " Nullius boni ;" compare Rom. vii. 18.


cipline, accrue not easily to any unless pa-
tience sit by his side.' So is patience set
over the things of God, that one can obey no
precept, fulfil no work well-pleasing to the
Lord, if estranged from it. The good of it,
even they who live outside it,* honour with
the name of highest virtue. Philosophers
indeed, who are accounted animals of some
considerable wisdom, assign it so high a place,
that, while they are mutually at discord with
the various fancies of their sects and rivalries
of their sentiments, yet, having a community
of regard for patience alone, to this one of
their pursuits they have joined in granting
peace: for it they conspire; for it they league;
it, in their affectation of s virtue, they unani-
mously pursue; concerning patience they ex-
hibit all their ostentation of wisdom. Grand
testimony this is to it, in that it incites even
the vain schools of the world* unto praise
and glory ! Or is it rather an injury, in that
a thing divine is bandied among worldly
sciences? But let them look to that, who
shall presently be ashamed of their wisdom,
destroyed and disgraced together with the
world' (it lives in).

chap. II. — GOD himself AN EXAMPLE OF PA-
TIENCE.

To us^ no human affectation of canine'
equanimity, modelled '° by insensibility, fur-
nishes the warrant for exercising patience;
but the divine arrangement of a living and
celestial discipline, holding up before us God


3 ^Elucidation I.]

4 1. e. who are strangers to it.

5 Or, " striving after."

* Or, " heathendom"— ssecuH.

7 Saeculo.

8 i.e. us Christians.

9i. e. cynical = (cuftno? = dog-like. But Tertullian appears to
use "canina:'" purposely, and I have therefore retained it rather
than substitute (as Mr. Dodgson does) "cynical."
>o i.e. the affectation is modelled by ioseastbility.


7o8


OF PATIENCE.


[chap, IV.


Himself in the very first place as an example
of patience; who scatters equally over just
and unjust the bloom of this light; who suffers
the good offices of the seasons, the services
of the elements, the tributes of entire nature,
to accrue at once to worthy and unworthy;
bearing with the most ungrateful nations,
adoring as they do the toys of the arts and the
works of their own hands, persecuting His
Name together with His family; bearing witJi
luxury, avarice, iniquity, malignity, waxing
insolent daily:' so that by His own patience
He disparages Himself; for the cause why
many believe not in the Lord is that they are
so long without knowing ^^ that He is wroth
with the world. 3

CHAP. III. — JESUS CHRIST IN HIS INCARNATION
AND WORK A MORE IMITABLE EXAMPLE THERE-
OF.

And this species of the divine patience in
deed being, as it were, at a distance, may
perhaps be esteemed as among " things too
high for us;"^ but what is that which, in a
certain way, has been grasped by hand^
among men openly on the earth ? God suffers
Himself to be conceived in a mother's womb,
and awaits the tiytie for birth; and, when born,
bears the delay of growing up; and, when
grown up, is not eager to be recognised, but
is furthermore contumelious to Himself, and
is baptized by His own servant; and repels
with words alone the assaults of the tempter;
while from being " Lord " He becomes " Mas-
ter," teaching man to escape death, having
been trained to the exercise of the absolute
forbearance of offended patience.^ He did
not strive; He did not cry aloud; nor did
any hear His voice in the streets. He did
not break the bruised reed; the smoking flax
He did not quench: for the prophet — nay,
the attestation of God Himself, placing His
own Spirit, together with patience in its en-
tirety, in His Son — had not falsely spoken.
There was none desirous of cleaving to Him
whom He did not receive. No one's table
or roof did He despise: indeed. Himself
ministered to the washing of the disciples'
feet; not sinners, not publicans, did He repel;
not with that city even which had refused to
receive Him was He wroth,'' when even the
disciples had wished that the celestial fires
should be forthwith hurled on so contumelious

' See Ps. Ixxiv. 23 in A. V. It is Ps. Ixxiii. in the LXX.

2 Because they see no visible proof of it.

3 Saeculo.

4 So Mr. Dodgson ; and I^ Cerda, as quoted by Oehler. See
Ps. cxxxi. I in LXX., where it is Ps. cxxx.

5 I John i. I.

61 have followed Oehler's reading of this very difficult and
much disputed passage. For the expression, "having been
trained," etc., compare Heb. v. 8.

" Luke ix. 51-56.


a town. He cared for the ungrateful; He
yielded to His ensnarers. This were a small
matter, if He had not had in His company
even His own betrayer, and stedfastly ab-
stained from pointing him out. Moreover,
while He is being betrayed, while He is being
led up *'as a sheep for a victim," (for "so
He no more opens His mouth than a lamb
under the power of the shearer,") He to
whom, had He willed it, legions of angels
would at one word have presented themselves
from the heavens, approved not the avenging
sword of even one disciple. The patience
of the Lord was wounded in (the wound of)
Malchus. And so, too, He cursed for the
time to come the works of the sword; and,
by the restoration of health, made satisfaction
to him whom Himself had not hurt, through
Patience, the mother of Mercy. I pass by in
silence (the fact) that He is crucified, for this
was the end for which He had come; yet had
the death which must be undergone need of
contumelies likewise?^ Nay^ but, when
about to depart. He wished to be sated with
the pleasure of patience. He is spitted on,
scourged, derided, clad foully, more foully
crowned. Wondrous is the faith of equa-
nimity ! He who had set before Him the
concealing of Himself in man's shape, imi-
tated nought of man's impatience ! Hence,
even more than from any other trait, ought
ye, Pharisees, to have recognised the Lord.
Patience of this kind none of men would
achieve. Such and so mighty evidences — the
very magnitude of which proves to be among
the nations indeed a cause for rejection of
the faith, but among us its reason and rearing
— proves manifestly enough (not by the
sermons only, in enjoining, but likewise by
the sufferings of the Lord in enduring) to
them to whom it is given to believe, that as
the effect and excellence of some inherent
propriety, patience is God's nature.

CHAP. IV. DUTY OF IMITATING OUR MASTER

TAUGHT US BY SLAVES. EVEN BY BEASTS.

OBEDIENT IMITATION IS FOUNDED ON PA-
TIENCE.

Therefore, if we see all servants of probity
and right feeling shaping their conduct suit-
ably to the disposition of their lord; if, that
is, the art of deserving favour is obedience, »
while the rule of obedience is a compliant
subjection: how much more does it behove
us to be found with a character in accordance
with our Lord, — servants as we are of the


8 Or, " yet had there been need of contumelies likewise for the
undergoing of death ?"

9 " Obsequium," di.stingui.shed by Doderlein from " obedientia,"
as a more voluntary and spontaneous thing, founded less on au-
thority than respect and love.


CHAP, v.]


OF PATIENCE.


709


living God, whose judgment on His servants
turns not on a fetter or a cap of freedom,
but on an eternity either of penalty or of
salvation; for the shunning of which severity
or the courting of which liberality there needs
a diligence in obedience' as great as are the
comminations themselves which the severity
utters, or the promises which the liberality
freely makes. = And yet we exact obedi-
ence 3 not from 7nen only, who have the bond
of their slavery under their chin,-* or in any
other legal way are debtors to obedience,s
but even from cattle,* even from brutes; ^
understanding that they have been provided
and delivered for our uses by the Lord.
Shall, then, creatures which God makes sub-
ject to us be better than we in the discipline
of obedience?^ Finally, (the creatures)
which obey, acknowledge their masters. Do
we hesitate to listen diligently to Him to
whom alone we are subjected — that is, the
Lord ? But how unjust is it, how ungrateful
likewise, not to repay from yourself the same
which, through the indulgence of your
neighbour, you obtain from others, to him
through whom you obtain it ! Nor needs
there more words on the exhibition of obedi-
ence «> due from us to the Lord God; for the
acknowledgment'" of God understands what
is incumbent on it. Lest, however, we seem
to have inserted remarks on obedience " as
something irrelevant, (let us remember) that
obedience" itself is drawn from patience.
Never does an mpatient man render it, or a
patient fail to find pleasure " in it. Who,
then, could treat largely (enough) of the good
of that patience which the Lord God, the
Demonstrator and Acceptor of all good
things, carried about in His own self ?'^ To
whom, again, would it be doubtful that every
good thing ought, because it pertains '^ to
God, to be earnestly pursued with the whole
mind by such as pertain to God ? By means
of which (considerations) both commendation
and exhortation "^ on the subject of patience


' Obsequii.

2 " Pollicetur," not " promittit." ,

3 Obedientiam.

4" Subnixis." Perhaps this may be the meaning, as in Virg.
yfi'w. iv. 217. But Oehler notices " subnexis" as a conjecture of
Jos. Scaliger, which is very plausible, and would mean nearly the
same. Mr. Dodgson renders "supported by their slavery •" and
Oehler makes "subnixis" = " prseditis," " instructis." [Elucida-
tion II.]

S Obsequii.

^Pecudibus,'' i. e. tame domestic cattle.

7 " Bestiis," irrational creatures, as opposed to '' homines,"
here apparently w/Vi/ beasts.

8 Obsequii. For the sentiment, compare Isa. i. 3.

9 Obsequii.

10 See above, " the creatures . . . acknowledge xh^w mstsXcvi'''
»i Obsequio.

12 " Oblectatur" Oehler reads with the mss. The editors, as he
says, have emended " Obluctatur," whtch Mr. Dodgson reads.

13 See the previous chapter.

14 See chap. i.

15 [All our author's instances of this principle of the Praescriptio
are noteworthy, as interpreting its use in the Advs. Heereses.'\


are briefly, and as it were in the compendium
of a prescriptive rule, established. '*

CHAP. V. — AS GOD IS THE AUTHOR OF PATIENCE,
so THE DEVIL IS OF IMPATIENCE.

Nevertheless, the proceeding ** of a dis-
cussion on the necessaries of faith is not idle,
because it is not unfruitful. In edification no
loquacity is base, if it be base at any time."
And so, if the discourse be concerning some
particular good, the subject requires us to re-
view also the contrary of that good. F*or you
will throw more light on what is to be
pursued, if you first give a digest of what is
to be avoided.

Let us therefore consider, concerning Im-
patience, whether just as patience in God, so
its adversary quality have been born and
detected in our adversary, that from this
consideration may appear how primarily
adverse it is to faith. For that which has
been conceived by God's rival, of course is
not friendly to God's things. The discord
of things is the same as the discord of their
authors. Further, since God is best, the
devil on the contrary worst, of beings, by
their own very diversity they testify that
neither works for'^ the other; so that anything
of good can no more seem to be effected for
us by the Evil One, than anything of evil by
the Good. Therefore I detect the nativity of
impatience in the devil himself, at that ver>'
time when he impatiently bore that the Lord
God subjected the universal works which He
had made to His own image, that is, to man.*»
For if he had endured (that), he would not
have grieved; nor would he have envied man
if he had not grieved. Accordingly he de-
ceived him, because he had envied him; but
he had envied because he had grieved: he had
grieved because, of course, he had not pa-
tiently borne. What that angel of perdition *
first was — malicious or impatient — I scorn to
inquire: since manifest it is that either im-
patience took its rise together with malice, or
else malice from impatience; that subse-
quently they conspired between themselves;
and that they grew up indivisible in one pa-
ternal bosom. But, however, having been
instructed, by his own experiment, what an
aid unto sinning was that which he had been
the first to feel, and by means of which he


'6" Procedere :" so Oehler, who, however, notices an ingenious
conjecture of Jos. Scaliger — " procudere," the hammering out, or
forging.

•r Tertullian may perhaps wish to imply, xn grayer. See Matt.

VI. 7.

«8 Facere. But Fulv. Ursinus (as Oehler tells us) has suggested
a neat emendation — " favere," favours.

'9 See Ps. viii. 4-6.

"o Compare the expression m de Idol, iv., "perdition of blood"
= " bloodv perdition," and the note there. So here "angel of
perdition mays=" lost angeL"


lO


OF PATIENCE.


[chap. v»


had entered on his course of delinquency, he
called the same to his assistance for the thrust-
ing of man into crime. The woman,' im-
mediately on being met by him — I may say
so without rashness — was, through his very
speech with her, breathed on by a spirit in-
fected with impatience: so certain is it that
she would never have sinned at all, if she had
honoured the divine edict by maintaining her
patience to the end. What (of the fact) that
she endured not to have been met alone; but
in the presence of Adam, not yet her husband,
not yet bound to lend her his earSj^" she is
impatient of keeping silence, and makes him
the transmitter of that which she had imbibed
from the Evil One ? Therefore another hu-
man being, too, perishes through the impa-
tience of the one; presently, too, perishes of
himself, through his own impatience com-
mitted in each respect, both in regard of
God's premonition and in regard of the
devil's cheatery; not enduring to observe the
former nor to refute the latter. Hence,
whence (the origin) of delinquency, arose the
first origin of judgment; hence, whence man
was induced to offend, God began to be wroth.
Whence (came) the first indignation in God,
thence (came) His first patience; who, con-
tent at that time with malediction only, re-
frained in the devil's case from the instant
infliction 3 of punishment. Else what crime,
before this guilt of impatience, is imputed to
man ? Innocent he was, and in intimate
friendship with God, and the husbandman*
of paradise. But when once he succumbed
to impatience, he quite ceased to be of sweet
savour* to God; he quite ceased to be able
to endure things celestial. Thenceforward,
a creature^ given to earth, and ejected from
the sight of God, he begins to be easily turned
by impatience unto every use offensive to
God. For straightway that impatience con-
ceived of the devil's seed, produced, in the
fecundity of malice, anger as her son; and
when brought forth, trained him in her own
arts. For that very thing which had im-
mersed Adam and Eve in death, taught their
son, too, to begin with murder. It would be
idle for me to ascribe this to impatience, if
Cain, that first homicide and first fratricide,
had borne with equanimity and not impa-
tiently the refusal by the Lord of his own ob-
lations— if he is not wroth with his own brother
— if, finally, he took away no one's life.
Since, then, he could neither have killed un-


unless he had been impatient, he demon-
strates that what he did through wrath must
be referred to that by which wrath was sug-
gested during this cradle-time of impatience,
then (in a certain sense) in her infancy. But
how great presently were her augmentations !
And no wonder. If she has been the first
delinquent, it is a consequence that, because
she ha^ been the first, therefore she is the
only parent stem,^ too, to every delinquency,
pouring down from her own fount various
veins of crimes.^ Of murder we have spoken;
but, being from the very beginning the out-
come of anger,^ whatever causes besides it
shortly found for itself it lays collectively on
the account of impatience, as to its own ori-
gin. For whether from private enmities, or
for the sake of prey, any one perpetrates that
wickedness,'" the earlier step is his becoming
impatient of" either the hatred or the avarice.
Whatever compels a man, it is not possible
that without impatience of itself it can be per-
fected in deed. Who rc'er committed adultery
without impatience of lust 2 Moreover, if in
females the sale of their modesty is forced
by the price, of course it is by impatience of
contemning gain " thatMzV sale is regulated.'^
These (I mention) as the principal delinquen-
cies in the sight of the Lord,'* for, to speak
compendiously, every sin is ascribable to im-
patience. " Evil " is " impatience of good."
None immodest is not impatient of modesty;
dishonest of honesty; impious of piety; 's unquiet
of quietness. In order that each individual
may become evil he will be unable to perse-
vere^^ in being good. How, therefore, can
such a hydra of delinquencies fail to offend
the Lord, the Disapprover of evils ? Is it not
manifest that it was through impatience that
Israel himself also always failed in his duty
toward God, from that time when,'^ forgetful
of the heavenly arm whereby he had been
drawn out of his Egyptian affliction, he de-
mands from Aaron "gods'® as his guides;"
when he pours down for an idol the contribu-
tions of his gold: for the so necessary delays
of Moses, while he met with God, he had
borne with impatience. After the edible rain


> Mulier. See de Orat. c. xxii.

2 1 Cor. vii. 3 ; compare also i Pet. iii. 7.

3 Irapetu.

4 Colonus. Gen. 11. 15.

5 Sapere. See de Idol. c. i. sub fin.

6 Homo.


7 Matrix. Mr. Dodgson renders womb, which is admissible ; but
the other passages quoted by Oehler, where Tcrtullian uses this
word, seem to suit better with the rendering given in the text.

8 Compare a similar expression in de Idol. ii. ad init.

9 Which TertuUian has just shown to be the result of im-
patience.

10 i.e. murder.
«» i.e. unable to restrain.

12 i.e. want of power or patience to contemn gain.
»3 " Ordinatur ;" but "orditur" has been very plausibly con-
jectured.

14 Mr. Dodgson refers to ad Uxor. i. 5, q. v. sub fin.

>5 0r, " unduteous of duteousness.''^

'*i.e. impatient.

17 1 have departed slightly here from Oehler's punctuation.

»8 Ex. xxxii. I ; Acts vii. 39, 40.


CHAP. VII.]


OF PATIENCE.


7"


of the manna, after the watery following* of
the rock, they despair of the Lord in not en-
during a three-days' thirst;' for this also is
laid to their charge by the Lord as impatience.
And — not to rove through individual cases —
there was no instance in which it was not by
failing in duty through impatience that they
perished. How, moreover, did they lay hands
on the prophets, except through impatience
of hearing them ? on the Lord moreover Him-
self, through impatience likewise of seeing
Him ? But had they entered the path of pa-
tience, they would have been set free.^

CHAP. VI. PATIENCE BOTH ANTECEDENT AND

SUBSEQUENT TO FAITH.

Accordingly it is patience which is both
subsequent and antecedent to faith. In short,
Abraham believed God, and was accredited
by Him with righteousness;* but it was pa-
tience which proved his faith, when he was
bidden to immolate his son, with a view to (I
would not say the temptation, but) the typical
attestation of his faith. But God knew whom
He had accredited with righteousness. s So
heavy a precept, the perfect execution where-
of was not even pleasing to the Lord, he pa-
tiently both heard, and (if God had willed)
would have fulfilled. Deservedly then was
he "blessed," because he was "faithful;"
deservedly "faithful," because "patient."
So faith, illumined by patience, when it was
becoming propagated among the nations
through " Abraham's seed, which is Christ," *^
and was superinducing grace over the law,^
made patience her pre-eminent coadjutrix
for amplifying and fulfilling the law, because
that alone had been lacking unto the doctrine
of righteousness. For men were of old wont to
require " eye for eye, and tooth for tooth " ^
and to repay with usury "evil with evil;"
for, as yet, patience was not on earth, be-
cause faith was not either. Of course, mean-
time, impatience used to enjoy the opportu-
nities which the law gave. That was easy,
while the Lord and Master of patience was
absent. But after He has supervened, and
has united ^ the grace of faith with patience,
noiv it is no longer lawful to assail even with
word^ nor to say " fool " '° even, without


1 I.e. the water which followed them, after being given forth by
the smitten rock. See i Cor. x. 4.

2 See Num. xx. 1-6. But Tertullian has apparently confused
this with Ex. xv. 22. which seems to be the only place where "a
three-days' thirst" is mentioned.

3 Free, i.e. from the bondage of impatience and of sin.

4 See Gen. xv. 6 ; Rom. iv. 3, 9, 22 ; Gal. iii. 6 ; las. ii. 23.

5 i.e. the trial was necessary not to prove his faith to Cfod^ who
knows all whom He accounts righteous, but '• typically" to us.

6 Gal. iii. 16.

7 John i. 17 ; Rom. vi. 14, 15.

8 Matt. vi. 38, and the references there given.
9Composuit.

»o See Matt. v. 22 ; and Wordsworth in loco^ who thinks it prob-
able that the meaning is " apostate."


" danger of the judgment." Anger has l)een
prohibited, our spirits retained, the petulance
of the hand checked, the poison of the ton-
gue" extracted. The law has found more
than it has lost, while Christ says, " Love
your personal enemies, and bless yourcursers,
and pray for your persecutors, that ye may
be sons of your heavenly Father." " Do you
see whom patience gains for us as a Father?
In this principal precept the universal disci-
pline of patience is succinctly comprised,
since evil-doing is not conceded even when
it is deserved.

CHAP. VII. — THE CAUSES OF IMPATIENCE, AND
THEIR CORRESPONDENT PRECEPTS.

Now, however, while we run through the
causes of impatience, all the other precepts
also will answer in their own places. If our
spirit is aroused by the loss of property, it
is commonished by the Lord's Scriptures, in
almost every place, to a contemning of the
world; '3 nor is there any more powerful ex-
hortation to contempt of money submitted ^
(to us), than {the fact) the Lord Himself is
found amid no riches. He always justifies
the poor, fore-condemns the rich. So He
fore-ministered to patience " loss," and to
opulence "contempt" (as portion) ;'s demon-
strating, by means of (His own) repudiation
of riches, that hurts done to them also are not to
be much regarded. Of that, therefore, which
we have not the smallest need to seek after,
because the Lord did not seek after it either,
we ought to endure without heart-sickness the
cutting down or taking away. " Covetous-
ness," the Spirit of the Lord has through the
apostle pronounced "a root of all evils." •*
Let us not interpret that cotfctousness as con-
sisting merely in the concupiscence of what
is another's: for even what seefus ours is an-
other's; for nothing is ours, since all things
are God's, whose are we also ourselves. And
so, if, when suffering from a loss, we feel im-
patiently, grieving for what is lost from what
is not our own, we shall be detected as bor-
dering on covetousness: we seek what is an-
other's when we ill brook losing what is an-
other's. He who is greatly stirred with im-
patience of a loss, does, by giving things
earthly the precedence over things heavenly,
sin directly '7 against God; for the Spirit,
which he has received from the Lord, he


" Ps. cxl. 3 ; Rom. iii. 13 ; Jas. iii. 8.

X3 Matt. V. 44, 45.

'3 Sseculo.

uSubjacet.

'5 This appears to be the s^ense of this very difficult 1 _

Oehler reads it ; and of Fr. Junius' inlerprrt«tii»n ol it, which
Oehler approves.

»6 1 Tim. vi. 10. See </<" fdoi. xi. ad inii.

»7 De proximo. See «b<.vr, c. v. Dee d4 proximo amtctu,
most intimate friend to G<>d."


712


OF PATIENCE.


[chap. VIII.


i^reatl)"- shocks for the sake of a worldly mat- 1
ter. Willingly, therefore, let us lose things '
earthly, let us keep things heavenly. Perish |
the whole world, ' so I may make patience I
my gain ! In truth, I know not whether he !
who has not made up his mind to endure with i
constancy the loss of somewhat of his, either |
by theft, or else by force, or else even byi
carelessness, would himself readily or heartily
lay hand on his own property in the cause of
almsgiving: for who that endures not at all to
be cut by another, himself draws the sword
on his own body? Patience in losses is an
exercise in bestowing and communicating.
Who fears not to lose, finds it not irksome to
give. Else how will one, when he has two
coats, give the one of them to the naked,=
unless he be a man likewise to offer to one who
takes away his coat his cloak as well ? ^ How
shall we fashion to us friends from mammon,-*
if we love it so much as not to put up with its
loss ? We shall perish together with the lost
i?iammon. Why do we Jind here, where it is
our business to lose?^ To exhibit impa-
tience at all losses is the Gentiles' business,
who give money the precedence perhaps over
their soul; for so they do, when, in their cu-
pidities of lucre, they encounter the gainful
perils of commerce on the sea; when, for
money's sake, even in the forum, there is
nothing which damnation (itself) would fear
which they hesitate to essay; when they hire
themselves for sport and the camp; when,
after the manner of wild beasts, they play the
bandit along the highway. But us, according
to the diversity by which we are distinguished
from them, it becomes to lay down not our
soul for money, but money for our soul,
whether spontaneously in bestowing or pa-
tiently in losing.


CHAP. VIII. — OF PATIENCE UNDER PERSONAL
VIOLENCE AND MALEDICTION.

We who carry about our very soul, our very
body, exposed in this world * to injury from
all, and exhibit patience under that injury;
shall we be hurt at the loss^ of less impor-
tant things?^ Far from a servant of Christ
be such a defilement as that the patience
which has been prepared for greater tempta-
tions should forsake him in frivolous ones.
If one attempt to provoke you by manual
violence, the monition of the Lord is at hand:


1 Saeculum.

2 Luke iii. ii.

3 Matt. V. 40 ; Luke vi. 29.

4 Luke xvi. 9.

5" Alluding to Christ's words in Matt. x. 39" (Rigalt. quoted
by Oehler).
fi Saeculo.
7 Delibatione.
B i. e. money and the like. Compare Matt. vi. 25; Luke xii.

83-


"To him," He saith, "who smiteth thee on
the face, turn the other cheek likewise."'
Let outrageousness '° be wearied out by your
patience. Whatever that blow may be, con-
joined" with pain and contumely, it" shall
receive a heavier one from the Lord. You
wound that outrageous '^ one more by endur-
ing: for he will be beaten by Him for whose
sake you endure. If the tongue's bitterness
break out in malediction or reproach, look
back at the saying, "When they curse you,
rejoice." ** The Lord Himself was " cursed "
in the eye of the law; 's and yet is He the only
Blessed One. Let us servants, therefore, fol-
low our Lord closely; and be cursed patiently,
that we may be able to be blessed. If I hear
with too little equanimity some wanton or
wicked word uttered against me, I must of
necessity either myself retaliate the bitter-
ness, or else I shall be racked with mute im-
patience. When, then, on being cursed, I
smite (with my tongue,) how shall I be found
to have followed the doctrine of the Lord,
in which it has been delivered that "a man
is defiled,'^ not by the defilements of vessels,
but of the things which are sent forth out of
his mouth." Again, // is said that " impeach-
ment '7 awaits us for every vain and needless
word." '^ It follows that, from whatever the
Lord keeps us, the same He admonishes us
to bear patiently from another. I will add
(somewhat) touching the pleasure of patience.
For every injury, whether inflicted by tongue
or hand, when it has lighted upon patience,
will be dismissed '^ with the same fate as,
some weapon launched against and blunted on
a rock of most stedfast hardness. For it will
wholly fall then and there with bootless and
fruitless labour; and sometimes will recoil
and spend its rage on him who sent it out,
with retorted impetus. No doubt the reason
why any one hurts you is that you may be
pained; because the hurter's enjoyment con-
sists in the pain of the hurt. When, then,
you have upset his enjoyment by not being
pained, he must needs he pained by the loss
of his enjoyment. Then you not only go


9 Matt. V. 39.

'o Improbitas.

" Constrictus. I have rendered after Oehler : but may not the
meaning be " clenched," like the hand which deals the blow ?

12 As Oehler says " the blow" is said to " receive" that which,
strictly, the dealer of it receives.

'3lmprobum.

'4 Matt. V. II, 12 ; I-uke vi. 22, 23.

IS Deut. xxi. 23 ; Gal. iii. 13. Tertullian's quotations here are
somewhat loose He renders words which are distinct in the
Greek by the same in his I^tin.

»6 Communicari— »con'oi}<rfloi. See Mark vii. 15, '* made com-
mon," i.e. profane, unclean. Compare Acts x. 14, 15 in the
Greek.

'7 Reatum. See de Idol. i. ad init., " the highest impeachment
of the ajie."

•8 Matt. xii. 36. TertuUian has rendered a.fty6v by " vani et
supervacui."

19 Dispungetur : a word which, in the active, means technically
" to balance accounts," hence " to discharge," etc.


CHAT. X.]


OF PATIENCE.


7^Z


unhurt away, which even alone is enough for
you; but gratified, into the bargain, by your
adversary's disappointment, and revenged by
his pain. This is the utility and the pleasure
of patience.

CHAP. IX. — OF PATIENCE UNDER BEREAVEMENT.

Not even that species of impatience under
the loss of our dear ones is excused, where
some assertion of a right to grief acts the
patron to it. For the consideration of the
apostle's declaration must be set before us,
who says, " Be not overwhelmed with sadness
at the falling asleep of any one, just as the
nations are who are without hope."' And
justly; or, believing the resurrection of Christ,
we believe also in our own, for whose sake
He both died and rose again. Since, then,
there is certainty as to the resurrection of the
dead, grief for death is needless, and impa-
tience of grief is needless. For why should
you grieve, if you believe that (your loved
one) is not perished ? Why should you bear
impatiently the temporary withdrawal of him
who you believe will return? That which
you think to be death is departure. He who
goes before us is not to be lamented, though
by all means to be longed for.^" That long-
ing also must be tempered with patience.
F'or why should you bear without moderation
the fact that one is gone away whom you will
presently follow? Besides, impatience in
matters of this kind bodes ill for our hope,
and is a dealing insincerely with the faith.
And we wound Christ when we accept not
with equanimity the summoning out of this
world of any by Him, as if they were to be
pitied. " I desire," says the apostle, '* to be
now received, and to be with Christ." ' How
far better a desire does he exhibit ! If, then,
we grieve impatiently over such as have at-
tained the desire of Christians, we show un-
willingness ourselves to attain it.

CHAP. X. OF REVENGE.

There is, too, another chief spur of impa-
tience, the lust of revenge, dealing with the
business either of glory or else of malice.
But "glory," on the one hand, is everywhere
"vain;"-* and malice, on the other, is al-
wayss odious to the Lord; in this case in-
deed most of all, when, being provoked by a
neighbour's malice, it constitutes itself supe-
rior^ in following out revenge, and by paying


» I Thess. iv. 13, not very strictly rendered.
2 Desiderandus.

3 Phil. i. 23, again loosely rendered: t- g-^ oi'aAwa-ou = "'
weigh anchor, is rendered by TertuUian "recipi."

4 See Gal. v. 26 ; Phil. ii. 3.

5 Nunquam non.

* i.e. perhaps superior in degree 0/ malice.


wickedness doubles that which has once been
done. Revenge, in the estimation of error,'
seems a solace of pain; in the estimation of
truth, on the contrary, it is convicted of malig-
nity. For what difference is there between
provoker and provoked, except that the former
is detected as prior in evil-doing, but the lat-
ter as posterior? Yet each stands impeached
of hurting a man in the eye of the I^rd, who
both prohibits and condemns every wicked-
ness. In evil doing there is no account taken
of order, nor diO^ts place separate what similarity
conjoins. And the precept is absolute, that
evil is not to be repaid with evil." Like deed
involves like merit. How shall we observe
that principle, if in our loathing' we shall
not loathe rn'enge? What honour, moreover,
shall we be offering to the Lord God, if we
arrogate to ourselves the arbitrament of ven-
geance ? We are corrupt '" — earthen vessels. "
With our own servant-boys," if they assume
to themselves the right of vengeance on their
fellow-servants, we are gravely offended;
while such as make us the offering of their
patience we not only approve as mindful of
humility, of servitude, affectionately jealous
of the right of their lord's honour; but we
make them an ampler satisfaction than they
would have pre-exacted '^ for themselves. Is
there any risk of a different result in the case
of a Lord so just in estimating, so potent in
executing? Why, then, do we believe Him a
Judge, if not an Avenger too ? This He
promises that He will be to us in return, say-
ing, " Vengeance belongeth to me, and I will
avenge; " '-^ that is, Leave patience to me, and
I will reward patience. For when He says,
"Judge not, lest ye be judged," '5 does He
not require patience? For who will refrain
from judging another, but he who shall be
patient in not revenging himself ? Who judges
in order to pardoti? And if he shall pardon,
still he has taken care to indulge the impa-
tience of a judger, and has taken away the
honour of the one Judge, that is, God. How
many mischances had impatience of this kind
been wont to run into ! How oft has it re-
pented of its revenge ! How oft has its vehe-
mence been found worse than the causes which
led to it ! — inasmuch as nothing undertaken
with impatience can be effected without im-
petuosity: nothing done with impetuosity fails
either to stumble, or else to fall altogether,

7 i. e. of the world and iu eironeou* pbiloaophios.

8 Rom. xii. 17.

9 Fastidientes, i. e. our loathing or abhoireace of tin, Perluipt
the reference may be to Rom. xii. 9.

»° Isa. Ixiv. 6.

" Isa. Ixiv. 8 ; a Cor. iv. 7

" Servulis.

»3 Pra»umpsissent.

»4Deut. xxxii. 35 ; Ps. xciv. i; Rom. xii. 19; Heb. x. 30.

X5 Matt. \ni. i ; Luke vi. 37.


7H


OF PATIENCE.


[chap. XII.


or else to vanish headlong. Moreover, if
you avenge yourself too slightly, you will be
mad; if too amply, you will have to bear the
burden.' What have I to do with vengeance,
the measure of which, through impatience of
pain, I am unable to regulate? Whereas, if
I shall repose on patience, I shall not feel
pain; if I shall not feel pain, I shall not desire
to avenge myself.

CHAP. XI. — FURTHER REASONS FOR PRACTISING
PATIENCE. ITS CONNECTION WITH THE BEAT-
ITUDES.

After these principal material causes of im-
patience, registered to the best of our ability,
why should we wander out of our way among
the rest, — what are found at home, what
abroad ? Wide and diffusive is the Evil One's
operation, hurling manifold irritations of our
spirit, and sometimes trifling ones, sometimes
very great. But the trifling ones you may
contemn from their very littleness; to the very
great ones you may yield in regard of their
overpoweringness. Where the injury is less,
there is no necessity for impatience; but
where the injury is greater, there more neces-
sary is the remedy for the injury — patience.
Let us strive, therefore, to endure the in-
flictions of the Evil One, that the counter-zeal
of our equanimity may mock the zeal of the
foe. If, however, we ourselves, either by im-
prudence or else voluntarily, draw upon our-
selves anything, let us meet with equal patience
what we have to blame ourselves for. More-
over, if we believe that some inflictions are
sent on us by the Lord, to whom should we
more exhibit patience than to the Lord ? Nay,
He teaches' us to give thanks and rejoice,
over and above, at being thought worthy of
divine chastisement. "Whom I love," saith
He, '* I chasten. "3 q blessed servant, on
whose amendment the Lord is intent ! with
whom He deigns to be wroth ! whom He does
not deceive by dissembling His reproofs ! On
every side, therefore, we are bound to the
duty of exercising patience, from whatever
quarter, either by our own errors or else by
the snares of the Evil One, we incur the Lord's
reproofs. Of that duty great is the reward —
namely, happiness. For whom but the pa-
tient has the Lord called happy, in saying,
" Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is
the kingdom of the heavens ? " * No one,
assuredly, is "poor in spirit," except he be
humble. Well, who is humble, except he be


1 i. e. the penalty which the law will inflict.

2 Docet. But a plausible conjecture, " decet," " it becomes us,"
has been made.

3Prov. iii. ii, 12 ; Heb. xii. 5, 6 ; Rev. iii. 19.
4 Matt. V. 3.


patient ? For no one can abase himself with-
out patience, in the first instance, to bear the
act of abasement. " Blessed," saith He, " are
the weepers and mourners, "s Who, without
patience, is tolerant of such unhappinesses ?
And so, to such, *' consolation " and " laugh-
ter" are promised. "Blessed are the gen-
tle:"^ under this term, surely, the impatient
cannot possibly be classed. Again, when He
marks "the peacemakers " ^ with the same
title of felicity, and names them "sons of
God," pray have the impatient any affinity
with "peace?" Even a fool may perceive
that. When, however, He says, " Rejoice
and exult, as often as they shall curse and
persecute you; for very great is your reward
in heaven,"^ of course it is not to the im-
patience of exultation 9 that He makes that
promise; because no one will " exult " in ad-
versities unless he have first learnt to contemn
them; no one will contemn them unless he
have learnt to practise patience.

CHAP. XII. — CERTAIN OTHER DIVINE PRECEPTS.
THE APOSTOLIC DESCRIPTION t)F CHARITY.
THEIR CONNECTION WITH PATIENCE.

As regards the rule of peace, which '° is so
pleasing to God, who in the world that is
prone to impatience " will even 07ice forgive
his brother, I will not say "seven times,"
or" " seventy-seven times ? " '^ Who that is
contemplating a suit against his adversary
will compose the matter by agreement, *< un-
less he first begin by lopping off chagrin,
hardheartedness, and bitterness, which are
in fact the poisonous outgrowths of impa-
tience ? How will you " remit, and remission
shall be granted" you,'^ if the absence of
patience makes you tenacious of a wrong?
No one who is at variance with his brother in
his mind, will finish offering his " duteous
gift at the altar," unless he first, with intent
to "re-conciliate his brother," return to
patience.'* If "the sun go down over our
wrath," we are in jeopardy: '^ we are not al-
lowed to remain one day without patience.
But, however, since Patience takes the lead
in '^ every species of salutary discipline, what

5 Matt. V. 4.

6 Matt. V. 5.

7 Matt. V. 9.

8 Matt. V. II, 12, inexactly quoted.

9 Exultationis impatientias.
10 i. e. peace.

»' Impatientiae natus: lit. "bom for impatience." Comp. de
Paniten. 12, ad fin. " nee ulli rei nisi paenitentiae natus."

'2 Oehler reads "sed,' but the " vel ' adopted in the text is a
conjecture of Latinius, which Oehler mentions.

«3 Septuagies septies. The reference is to Matt, xviii. 21, 22.
Compare de Orat. vii. ad fin. and the note there.

14 Matt. V. 25.

'SLuke vi. 37.

16 Matt. V. 23, 24.

'7 F.ph. iv. 26. Compare de Orat. xi.

'SGubernet.


I


CHAP. XIII.]


OF P.'VTIENCE.


7'5


wonder that she likewise ministers to Repen-
tance, (accustomed as Repentance is to come
to the rescue of such as have fallen,) when,
on a disjunction of wedlock (for that cause,
I mean, which makes it lawful, whether for
husband or" wife, to persist in the perpetual
observance of widowhood),' she' waits for,
she yearns for, she persuades by her entrea-
ties, repentance in all who are one day to
enter salvation ? How great a blessing she
confers on each ! The one she prevents from
becoming an adulterer; the other she amends.
So, to, she is found in those holy examples
touching patience in the Lord's parables.
The shepherd's patience seeks and finds the
straying ewe:^ for //^patience would easily
despise 07ie ewe; but Patience undertakes the
labour of the quest, and the patient burden-
bearer carries home on his shoulders the for-'
saken sinner.-* That prodigal son also the
father's patience receives, and clothes, and
feeds, and makes excuses for, in the presence
of the angry brother's mpatience.s He,
therefore, who " had perished" is saved, be-
cause he entered on the way of repentance.
Repentance perishes not, because it finds
Patience (to welcome it). For by whose teach-
ings but those of Patience is Charity^ — the
highest sacrament of the faith, the treasure-
house of the Christian name, which the apos-
tle commends with the whole strength of the
Holy Spirit — trained? "Charity," he says,
" is long suffering; " thus she applies patience:
" is beneficent; " Patience does no evil: " is
not emulous;" that certainly is a peculiar
mark of patience: " savours not of violence; " ^
she has drawn her self-restraint from patience:
" is not puffed up; is not violent;" ^ for that
pertains not unto patience: " nor does she seek
her own " if, she offers her own, provided she
may benefit her neighbours: " nor is irritable;"
if she were, what would she have left to Im-
patience? Accordingly he says, "Charity
endures all. things; tolerates all things;" of
course because she is patient. Justly, then,
"will she never fail;"' for all other things
will be cancelled, will have their consumma-
tion. " Tongues, sciences, prophecies, be-
come exhausted; faith, hope, charity, are per-

I What the cause is is disputed. Opinions are divided as to
whether Tertullian means by it " marriage with a heathen" (which
as Mr. Dodgson reminds us,Tertullian—a'<r Uxor. n. 3— calls adul-
tery"), or the case in which our Lord allowed divorce. See Matt,
xix. ^.

2 1. e. patience.

3 Luke XV. 3-6.

4 Peccatricem, i. e. the ewe.

5 Luke XV. 11-32.

6 Dilectio = ayiTrrj. See Trench, New Testament Syn. s. v.
ayaTTij ; and with the rest of this chapter compare carefully, in the
Greek, i Cor. xiii. [Neander points out the different view our
author takes of the same parable, in the de Pudicit. cap. 9, Vol.
IV. this series.]

7 Protervum = Greek irepTrepeweTai.
SProterit = Greek oo-xTj/u-ovei.

9 Excidet = Greek e/cAeiirei, suffers eclipse.


manent: '* Faith, which Christ's patience in-
troduced; hope, which man's patience waiu
for; cliarity, which Patience accompanies,
with God as Master.

CHAP. XIII. — OF BODILY PATIENCK.

Thus far, finally, of patience simple and
uniform, and as it exists merely in the mind:
though in many forms likewise I !al)our after
it in body^ for the purpose of "winning the
Lord;"'° inasmuch as it is a guality which
has been exhibited by the Lord Himself in
bodily virtue as well; if it is true that the rul-
ing mind easily communicates the gifts" of
the Spirit with its bodily habitation. What,
therefore, is the business of Patience in thf
body? In the first place, // is the affliction"
of the flesh — a victim '^ able to apj^ease the
Lord by means of the sacrifice of humiliation
— in making a libation to the Lord of sordid '*
raiment, together with scantiness of fo<xl,
content with simple diet and the pure drink
of water's in conjoining fasts fo ail this; in
inuring herself to sackcloth and ashes. This
bodily patience adds a grace to our prayers for
good, a strength to our prayers against evil;
this opens the ears of Christ our God,'* dis-
sipates severity, elicits clemency. Thus that
Babylonish king,'? after being exiled from
human form in his seven years' squalor and
neglect, because he had offended the Lord;
by the bodily immolation of patience not only
recovered his kingdom, but — what is more to
be desired by a man — made satisfaction to
God. Further, if we set down in order the
higher and happier grades of bodily patience,
(we find that) it is she who is entrusted by
holiness with the care of continence of the
flesh: she keeps the widow," and sets on the
virgin the seal'' and raises the self-made
eunuch to the realms of heaven." That which
springs from a virtue of the wind is perfected
in the flesh; atidy finally, by the patience of
the flesh, does battle under persecution. If
flight press hard, the flesh wars with ** the in-
convenience of flight; if imprisonment over-


do Phil. iii. 8.

" " Invecta," generally =moveable», household furniture.

'» Or, mortification, " adflictatio."

'3i. e. fleshly mortification is a "victim," etc.

'4 Or, " mourning." Comp. de Pttn. c. 9.

'5 [The "water vt. wine" movement is not a discovery of our
own times. " Drink a little niine,"' said St. Paul medidnally ; hot
(as a great and good divine once remarked) " we must not Ujr
stress on the noun, but the adjective; let it be very Utile."]

«6Christi dei.

»7 Dan. iv. 31-37. Comp. de Pern. c. la. £1 have removed an
ambiguity by slightly toucning the text here.]

'8 1 Tim. v. 3, 9, xo ; 1 Cor. vii. 39, 40.

>9 1 Cor. vii. 34, 35.

20 Matt. xix. 12.

a» Ad. It seems to mean flesh has strength given it, by patience,
to meet the hardships of the flight. Compare the »pot vAna-
iu>}ri\v T^« (TopxiK, of St. Paul in Col. ii. 93. [Kaye compares this
with the De Fuga, as proof of the author's freedom from Mootan-
ism, when this was written.]


7i6


OF PATIENCE.


[chap. XV.


take ^ us, the flesh (still was) in bonds,
the flesh in the gyve, the flesh in solitude,'
and in that want of light, and in that patience
of the world's misusage.^ When, however,
it is led forth unto the final proof of happi-
ness,* unto the occasion of the second bap-
tism,5 unto the act of ascending the divine
seat, no patience is more needed there than
bodily patience. If the " spirit is willing, but
the flesh," without patience, "weak,"^
where, save in patietue^ is the safety of the
spirit, and of the flesh itself ? But when the
Lord says this about the flesh, pronouncing it
"weak," He shows what need there is of
strengthening, it — that is by patience — to
meet 7 every preparation for subverting or
punishing faith; that it may bear with all con-
stancy stripes, fire, cross, beasts, sword; all
which prophets and apostles, by enduring, con-
quered !

CHAP. XIV. — THE POWER OF THIS TWOFOLD
PATIENCE, THE SPIRITUAL AND THE BODILY.
EXEMPLIFIED IN THE SAINTS OF OLD.

With this strength of patience, Esaias is cut
astmder^ and ceases not to speak concerning
the Lord; Stephen is stoned, and prays for
pardon to his foes.^ Oh, happy also he who
met all the violence of the devil by the exer-
tion of every species of patience ! ' — whom
neither the driving away of his cattle nor thos^
^ riches of his in sheep, nor the sweeping away
of his children in one swoop of ruin, nor,

y finally, the agony of his own body in (one

J universal) wound, estranged from the patience

and the faith which he had plighted to the

,^ Lord; whom the devil smote with all his might
in vain. For by all his pains he was not
• drawn away from his reverence for God; but
he has been set up as an example and testi-
mony to us, for the thorough accomplishment
of patience as well in spirit as in flesh, as well
in mind as in body; in order that we succumb
neither to damages of our worldly goods, nor
to losses of those who are dearest, nor even to
bodily afflictions. What a bier '° for the devil
did God erect in the person of that hero !
What a banner did He rear over the enemy
of His glory, when, at every bitter message,
that man uttered nothing out of his mouth
but thanks to God, while he denounced his
wife, now quite wearied with ills, and urging


1 Prseveniat : " prevent" us, before we have time to flee,

2 Solo.

3 [Elucidation III.]
4 i.e. martyrdom.

5 Comp. Luke xii. 50.

6 Matt. xxvi. 41.

7 " Adversus," like the "ad" above, note 21


8 Acts vii. 59, 60.

9 Job. See Job i. and ii.


P- 713-


him to resort to crooked remedies ! How
did God smile,." how was the evil one cut
asunder," while Job with mighty equanimity
kept scraping off'^" the unclean overflow of
his own ulcer, while he sportively replaced
the vermin that brake out thence, in the same
caves and feeding-places of his pitted flesh !
And so, when all the darts of temptations had
blunted themselves against the corslet and
shield of his patience, that instrument'* of
God's victory not only presently recovered
from God the soundness of his body, but pos-
sessed in redoubled measure what he had lost.
And if he had wished to have his children also
restored, he might again have been called
father; but he preferred to have them re-
stored him " in that day." 's Such joy as that
— secure so entirely concerning the Lord — he
deferred; meantime he endured a voluntary
bereavement, that he might not live without
some (exercise of) patience.

CHAP. XV. GENERAL SUMMARY OF THE VIRTUES

AND EFFECTS OF PATIENCE.

So amply sufficient a Depositary of patience
is God. If it be a wrong which you deposit
in His care. He is an Avenger; if a loss, He
is a Restorer; if pain, He is a Healer; if
death. He is a. Reviver. What honour is
granted to Patience, to have God as her
Debtor ! And not without reason: for she
keeps all His decrees; she has to do with all
His mandates. She fortifies faith; is the
pilot of peace; assists charity; establishes hu-
mility; waits long for repentance; sets her
seal on confession; rules the flesh; preserves
the spirit; bridles the tongue; restrains the
hand; tramples temptations under foot; drives
away scandals; gives their crowning grace to
martyrdoms; consoles the poor; teaches the
rich moderation; overstrains not the weak;
exhausts not the strong; is the delight of the
believer; invites the Gentile; commends the
servant to his lord, and his lord to God;
adorns the woman; makes the man approved;
is loved in childhood, praised in youth, looked
up to in age; is beauteous in either sex, in
every time of life. Come, now, sec whether'*
we have a general idea of her mien and habit.
Her countenance is tranquil and peaceful; her
brow serene, '7 contracted by no wrinkle of sad-
ness or of anger; her eyebrows evenly relaxed


»o '' Feretrum" — for carrying trophies in a triumph, the bodies
of the dead, and their effigies, etc.


«i Compare Ps. ii. 4.

12 i. e. with rage and disappointment.

i3jobii. 8.

14 Operarius.

'SSee 2 Tim. iv. 8. There is no authority for this statement of
Tertullian's in Scripture. [It is his inference rather.]

16 Si. This is Oehler's reading, who takes " si"' to be = " an."
But perhaps "sis" (= " si vis"), which is Fr. Junius' correction,
is better : " Come, now, let us, if you please, give a general sketch
of her mien and habit."

»7 Pura ; perhaps " smooth."


ELUCIDATIONS.


7'7


in gladsome wise, with eyes downcast in hu-
mility, not in unhappiness; her mouth sealed
with the honourable mark of silence; her hue
such as theirs who are without care and with-
out guilt; the motion of her head frequent
against the devil, and her laugh threatening; '
her clothing, moreover, about her bosom
white and well fitted to her person, as being
neither inflated nor disturbed. For Patience
sits on the throne of that calmest and gentlest
Spirit, who is not found in the roll of the
whirlwind, nor in the leaden hue of the cloud,
but is of soft serenity, open and simple, whom
Elias saw at his third essay.' For where
God is, there too is His foster-child, namely
Patience. When God's Spirit descends, then
Patience accompanies Him indivisibly. If
we do not give admission to her together with
the Spirit, will (He) ahvays tarry with us ?
Nay, I know not whether He would remain
any longer. Without His companion and
handmaid. He must of necessity be straitened
in every place and at every time. Whatever
blow His enemy may inflict He will be unable
to endure alone, being without the instru-
mental means of enduring.

CHAP. XVI. THE PATIENCE OF THE HEATHEN

VERY DIFFERENT FROM CHRISTIAN PATIENCE.
THEIRS DOOMED TO PERDITION. OURS DES-
TINED TO SALVATION.

This is the rule, this the discipline, these


I Compare with this singular feature, Isa. xxxvii. 22.

2i. e., as Rigaltius (referred to by Oehler), explains, after the
two visions of angels who appeared to him and said, " Arise and
eat." See i Kings xix. 4-13. [It was xh^/ourth, but our author


the works of patience which is heavenly and
true; that is, of Christian patience, not false
and disgraceful, like as is that patienoc of the
nations of the earth. For in order that in
this also the devil might rival the Lord, he
has as it were quite on a par (except that the
very diversity of evil and good is exactly on
a par with their magnitude ') taught his dis.
ciples also a patience of his own; that, I mean,
which, making husbands venal for dowry, and
teaching them to trade in panderings, makes
them subject to the power of their wives;
which, with feigned affection, undergoes ever)'
toil of forced complaisance,* with a view to
ensnaring the childless; * which makes the
slaves of the belly' submit to contumelious
patronage, in the subjection of their liberty to
their gullet. Such pursuits of patience the
Gentiles are acquainted with; and they eagerly
seize a name of so great goodness to apply
it to foul practises: patient they live of rivals,
and of the rich, and of such as give them in-
vitations; impatient of God alone. But let
their own and their leader's patience look to
itself — a patience which the subterraneous
fire awaits ! Let us, on the other hand, love
the patience of God, the patience of Christ;
let us repay to Him the patiettce which He has
paid down for us ! Let us offer to Him the
patience of the spirit, the patience of the flesh,
believing as we do in the resurrection of flesh
and spirit.


having mentioned two, inadvertently calls it the third referrinf
to the "still small voice," in which Elijah taw His manileslatioa.J
< One is finite, the other infinite.

4 Obsequii.

5 And thus getting a place in their wills.

6i. e. professional " diners out." Comp. Phil. iii. 19,


ELUCIDATIONS.


L

(Unless patience sit by his side, cap. i. p. 707.)
Let me quote words which, many years ago, struck me forcibly, and which I trust, have
been blest to my soul; for which reason, I must be allowed, here, to thank their author, the
learned and fearless Dean Burgon, of Chichester. In his invaluable Commentary on the
Gospel, which while it abounds in the fruits of a varied erudition, aims only to be practically
useful, this pious scholar remarks: *' To Faith must be added Patience, the * patient waiting
for God,' if we would escape the snare which Satan spread, no less for the Holy One {i.e.
in the Temp, upon the Pinnacle) than for the Israelites at Massah. And this is perhaps
the reason of the remarkable prominence given to the grace of Patience, both by our Lord and
His Apostles; a circumstance, as it may be thought, which has not altogetJier attracted the


7i8 ELUCIDATIONS.


attentiomvhich it deserves.'' He then cites examples;' but a reference to any good con-
cordance will strikingly exemplify the admirable comment of this " godly and well-learned
man." See his comments on St. Matt. iv. 7. and St. Luke xxi. 19.

II.

(Under their chin, cap. iv. p. 709.)

The reference in the note to Paris, as represented by Virgil and in ancient sculpture,
seems somewhat to the point •

" Et nunc ille Paris, cum semiviro comitatu.
Mseonia nientum mitra crinemq, madentem,
Subnixus, etc."

He had just spoken of iht pileus as a " Cap of freedom," but there was another form of
pileus which was just the reverse and was probably tied by fimbrice.^ under the chin, denoting
a low order of slaves, effeminate men, perhaps spado?ies. Now, the Phrygian bonnet to
which Virgil refers, is introduced by him to complete the reproach of his contemptuous
expression (semiviro comitatu) just before. So, our author — " not only from men, i.e. men
so degraded as to wear this badge of extreme servitude, but even from cattle, etc. Shall
these mean creatures outdo us in obedience and patience?"

III.

(The world's misusage, cap. xiii. p. 716.)

The Reverend Clergy who may read this note will forgive a brother, who begins to be
in respect of years, like " Paul the aged," for remarking, that the reading of the Ante-
Nicene Fathers often leads him to sigh — " Such were they from whom we have received
all that makes life tolerable, but how intolerable it was for them: are we^ indeed^ such as they
would have cofisidered Christians V God be praised for His mercy and forbearance in our
days; but, still it is true that "we have need of patience." Is not much of all that we
regard as "the world's misusage," the gracious hand of the Master upon us, giving us
something for the exercise of that Patience, by which He forms us into His own image ?
(Heb. xii. 3.) Impatience of obscurity, of poverty, of ingratitude, of misrepresentation,
of " the slings and arrows" of slander and abuse, is a revolt against that indispensable dis-
cipline of the Gospel which requires us to " endure afflictions " in some form or other. Who
can complain when one thinks what it would have cost us to be Christians in Tertullian's
time ? The ambition of the Clergy is always rebellion against God, and " patient waiting "
is its only remedy. One will find profitable reading on this subject in Massillon,' de
VAvtbitiofi des Clercs: ** Reposez-vous sur le Seigneur du soin de votre destinde: il saurabien
accomplir, tout seul, les desseins qu'il a sur vous. Si votre elevation est son bon plaisir,
elle sera aussi son ouvrage. Rendez-vous en digne seulement par la retraite, par la frayeur,
par la fuite, par les sentiments vifs de votre indignity. . . c'est ainsi que les Chrysostome,
les Gregoire, les Basil, les Augustin, furent donnes ^ I'Eglise."

» See — A Plain Commentary on the Four Gospels, intended chiefly for Devotional Reading. Oxford, 1854. Also (Vol. I. p.
a8) Philadelphia, 1855.

a CEuvres, Tom. vi. pp. 133-5. Ed. Paris, 1824.


INDEXES


i


I


TERTULLIAN


PART FIRST. — APOLOGETIC


INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


Amphitheatre, to be abhorred even

by heathen, 87.
Anaxagoras, his theory of mind, 192.
Angels, fallen, inventors of idolatry,

62 ; of astrology, 65.
Archimedes' hydraulic organ, 193.
Aristotle's theory of mind, 192.
Arts, heathen, anticipated in the Old

Testament, 97,
Ass's head, charge of worshipping,

refuted, 121.
Astrology, invented by fallen angels,

65 ; allied to magic, 65.
Augustine, St., influence of on the

German Reformation, 3.
Augustus, Emperor, refused divine

honours, 44.

Baptism, renunciation in, 81 ; cus-
toms of, 94, 103.

Blasphemy, fear of, vain excuse for
heathen customs, 69.

Caradoc, perhaps a Christian, 105,
108 ; his words quoted by Bede,
108.

Carpocrates, heresy of, its origin in
the fable of transmigration, 216.

Carthage, church of, a source of
Latin theology, 3.

Christ, His Nature and Divinity,. 34 ;
Incarnation, 35 ; Jews' unbe-
lief in Him, 35 ; miracles of His
Death and Resurrection, 35,
58 ; reality of His Person and
works, 197 ; alone without sin,
as being God, 221.

Christians, seek to be known as
such, 17 ; vindicated by martyr-
dom, 18 ; unjustly accused, i8,
1 10 ; hatred of the name, 20 ;
crimes imputed to, 21, 23, 24;
protected by good rulers, 22,
57 ; heathen practices imputed
to, 25 ; why refuse to sacrifice,
41 ; pray for the Emperor in
martyrdom, 42 ; more loyal than


I heathen, 44 ; honour all men,

45 ; their number in the Em-
pire, 45, 107 ; their worship,
46, 58 ; agapae. 47 ; falsely ac-
cused of public calamities, 47 ;
value to the State, 49 ; more
perfect morality, 50, 59 ; in
life, not philosophy, 50, 59 ;
chastity, 51 ; triumph in mar-
tyrdom, 54, 59 ; surpassing the
' heathen in heroism, 55 ; their
blood the seed of the Church,
55, 60 ; free from crime, 105 ;
sacrifice to God only, 106 ; their
persecutors Divinely punished,

106 ; their prayers answered,

107 ; their purity, 107 ; glory in
the profession of Christ, 109 ;
their illegal trial and punish-
ment, no; persecuted only for
the name of Christ, in ; how
known by their character, 112 ;
the name not condemned by un-
worthy disciples, nor by unjust
laws, 113 ; defamed by rumour
only, 114 ; absurdly accused of
crime, 115 ; how wide-spread,
117 ; not a cause of calamity to
the State, 117 ; alone possess
absolute truth, 127.

Circumcision, a sign to distinguish
Israel only before Christ, 154.

Circus, idolatrous in name and ori-
gin, . 83 ; combats in, evil cus-
toms of, 86.

Consitalia, origin of, 82.

Covetousness, why allied to idolatry,
67. ■

Cross, adoration of, falsely im-
puted to Christians, 31 ; sign
of, when used, 94, 103 ; wor-
ship of, retorted on the heathen,
122; typified by the "horns"
of Joseph, 165, by Moses, 166,
by the Brazen Serpent, and other
types in the Old Testament,
166, by Elisha, and Isaac, 170.


Crown, laurel, idolatrous origin and
nature of, 97, 9S, 99 ; crowns
not allowed in Holy Scripture,
98 ; military, idolatrous, 100 ;
civil, unlawful for Christians,
ID2 ; heavenly only, for Chris-
tians, 103.

Cyprian, St., influence of on the
English Reformation, 3.

Death, contempt of. Christian and
heathen, 126; heathen idea of
in Horace, 177 (note), in Plato,
178 (note) ; Epicurean theory
of, 221, 227 ; heresy of Menan-
der regarding, 227 ; separation
of soul and body, 22S ; a vio-
lence to nature, 229.

Demons, power given to, 36 ; off-
spring of fallen angels, 36 ;
spiritual nature of, 36 ; decep-
tions of, 37 : subject to Chris-
tians, 37 ; confess their true
character, 38.

Departed, offerings for, 94, 103.

Dreams, an ecstasy of the soul, 223 ;
prophetic, stories of, 224, 225 ;
how far inspired by God, 225 ;
physical and mental causes of,
226.

Dress of heathen ofBcials unlawful
to Christians, 72 ; condemned
by Christ, 73.

East, turning to, in worship, 31 ;
not a worship of the Sun, 123.

Elymas the Sorcerer, sin and pun-
ishment of, 66.

Emperor, prayed for by Christians,

42 ; rules by God's appointment,

43 ; not divine, but subject to
God, 43 ; true and false loyalty
to, 44 ; how honoured by Chris-
tians, 71.

Enoch, his prophecy of idolatry, 62.
Eucharist, given after Baptism, 94,
103.


722


TERTULLIAN : INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


Eve, her creation from Adam sym-
bolizes the Church from Christ,

222.

Exorcism unavailing to theatre-
goers, 90.

Feasts, idol, temptations to, 66 ; un-
lawful to Christians, 68-70 ; of
Emperors, involve idolatry, 70 ;
private feasts lawful, 71.

Flowers, right use of taught by
nature, 96.

God, the true object of Christian
worship, 31 ; incomprehensible,
32 ; proved by His works, 32 ;
how revealed in the Old Testa-
ment, 32 ; His gifts perverted
by man, 80 ; not known by phil-
osophy, 130 ; immaterial, 133 ;
governs the course of nature,
134 ; the only source of natural
power, 146 ; acknowledged in
various ways, 176,

Gods, heathen, human origin of, 26 ;
their vile character, 28 ; absur-
dities of their worship, 29, 39 ;
witness to Christianity, 38 ;
their worship a late invention,
40 ; cannot give blessings, 49 ;
despised by heathen as well as
by Christians, 118, 119, 120;
Varro's threefold division of,
129 ; speculations of philos-
ophers on, 131 ; cannot include
the elements, 131 ; name not
from verb of motion, 132 ; hea-
venly bodies not gods, nor sub-
ject to change, 134 ; attributes
given by poets to heroes, 135 ;
objects deified by different na-
tions, 136 ; Roman, how classi-
fied, 137 ; unworthy character
of, 138 ; their number and of-
fices, 139, 144; absurd fables
of. how interpreted, 140, 141 ;
examples of vice, 143, 148 ; im-
potent to help, 146.

Graves, how honoured by heathen
and by Christians, 177.

Hades {aptid hi f eras), a place of
happiness, 69 ; position of, 231 ;
Christ's descent into, 231 ; abode
of the soul from death to judg-
ment, 233 ; two regions of, 233 ;
souls do not come from thence,
234 ; not a sleep, but a disci-
pline of the soul, 235.

Hercules, his unworthiness in fable,
143-

Hermogenes, his theory of the soul
refuted, 191.

Hermotimus, story of, 223. [120.

Homer, a contemner of the gods,

Idol, meaning of the word, 62.

Idolatry, in wider sense includes all
sin, 61 ; not confined to acts of
worship, 62 ; origin of the name,
62 ; includes idol-making, 63 ;
renounced in Baptism, 64 ;
Christian law against, 76.


Idol-making, included in idolatry,
62-4 ; vain excuses for, 63 ; ex-
cludes from the Ministry and
Sacraments, 64 ; arts allied to,
64 ; unlawful for maintenance,
65, 68.

Idols not to be named as gods, 73 ;
oaths by, unlawful, 74 ; bless-
ing by, a denial of God, 74 ; ac-
knowledged by writing as well as
speech, 75 ; not found in the
Ark, 76.

Incense, heathen, trade in unlawful
to Christians,. 67.

Infanticide a heathen practice, 123.

Isaac a type of Christ, 165.

Jerome, St., his account of Tertul-
lian, 5.

Jesus Christ, alone reigns over all
nations, 151, 173 ; fulfils proph-
ecies of Daniel, 158, of Isaiah,
161, of the Psalms, 162 ; proph-
ecies of His names in the Old
Testament, 163 ; proved by His
preaching and power, 164 ; typ-
ified in Isaac and Joseph, 165,
170 ; types of His Passion and
Burial, 166 ; foretold by Ezek-
iel, 167 ; proved by the calling
of the Gentiles, 168, by His
birth in Bethlehem, 169, by the
destruction of Jerusalem, 169 ;
His First and Second Advent
prophesied, 172.

Jews, the chosen people, 34 ; their
history a witness of Christ, 34 ;
conquered through rejecting
.Him, 40 ; apostate through idol-
atry, 151.

Joseph, his history the origin of the
legend of Serapis, 136 ; a type
of Christ, 165.

Judgment, Last, condemnation of
heathen shows, 91.

Kneeling in public worship, when
not allowed, 94, 103.

Law of Moses, developed from the
law given to Adam, 152 ; un-
written before Moses, 152 ; not
necessary to righteousness, 153 ;
abolished in Christ, 157.

Law, Roman, how unjust, 21 ; vain-
ly enacted against Christians,
22 ; not enforced against lux-
ury, 22. [105.

Liberty of conscience a human right,

Literature, heathen, not to be taught
• by Christians, 66, [70.

Lord's Day, Christian observance of,

Mag^, their offering and return anoth-
er way a witness against idol-
atry, 65.

Magical arts, subjugated by Chris-
tian faith, 234.

Marcion, heretic, 7.

Martyr, story of a Christian, 93.

Martyrdom, a triumph over demons,
41 ; only entrance to Paradise,
231.


Military service unlawful to Chris-
tians, 73, 76, 99, but not an im-
pediment to Baptism, 100.

Munus (sacrifice to the dead), idol-
atrous in origin and character,
85.

Oaths, heathen, refused by Chris-
tians, 126.

Offices, public, how far lawful to
Christians, 71.

Onocoetes, calumny of, retorted on
the heathen, 123.

Organ, hydraulic, invented by Ar-
chimedes, 193.

Paradise, abode of martyrs only, 231.
Pentecost, Christian observance of.

Philosophers, heathen, their specu-
lations on the gods, 131, on the
world, 133.

Philosophy, not a substitute for
Christianity, 50 ; its failure in
morals, 51 ; vain speculations on
Divine things, 52 ; cannot teach
the nature of the soul, 182 ; fal-
lacies and conflicting schools,
183-4.

Plato, his idea of death and judg-
ment, 178 (note) ; his argument
for the incorporeal nature of
the soul refuted, 185, 186, 187.

Pleasure, how far lawful to Chris-
tians, 79 ; not condemned by the
wise, 80 ; how far renounced,

Poets, mythic, why irreligious, 135.

Prayers of Christians, answers to,
107.

Prophecies fulfilled in Jesus Christ,
of Daniel, 158, of Isaiah, 161-4,
of David, 162.

Psammetichus,his method of discern-
ing primeval man, 116.

Pythagoras, his theory of transmi-
gration originated in falsehood,
209 ; philosophically, absurd,
210, 211 ; still more as taught
by Empedocles (as a transmi-
gration from animals), 212 ; con-
trary to idea of justice, 213,
214 ; the origin of Simon Ma-
ges' heresy, 215.

Resurrection of the body, arguments
and analogies for, 53 ; a ground
of Christian courage, 127,

Roman customs, licentiousness of,
124.

Sabbath, Jewish, not observed by
Christians, 70 ; temporal only,
155 5 a figure of eternal rest,

155.
Sacrifices, Jewish, temporal, and

figures of spiritual, 156.
Samuel, his apparition a pretence,

234-
Satan, acknowledged as a demon,

176, 180.
Saturn, fables of, 141 ; of human

race, 142.


TERTULLIAN : INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


7n


Schoolmasters, Christian, how temp-
ted to idolatry, 66 ; not to teach
heathen learning, 66.

Scriptures, Hebrew, translated in
Septuagint, 32 ; antiquity of,
33 , prophecies fulfilled, 34 ;
forbid what they do not allow,
94.

Senses, Plato's theory of as decept-
ive, refuted, 195, 196 ; equal to
and one with intellect, 199.

Serapis, legend of, originated in his-
tory of J oseph , 135.

Serpent, Brazen, why made, 63 ; an
exception to law against image
making, 76.

Severus, Emperor, his clemency to
Christians, 107.

Shows, heathen, idolatrous origin
of, 81.

Simeon and Levi, types of persecu-
tors of Christ, 165.

Simon Magus, sin and punishment
of, 66 ; follower of theory of
transmigration, 215 ; pretence
of his disciples to magic, 234.

Sleep, a natural function, 221 ;
philosophical theories of, un-
founded, 221 ; an image of death
and resurrection, 223.

Socrates, reason of his sacrifice to
Esculapius, 51 ; wise in deny-
ing heathen gods, 112, 119 ; his
death not an example of true
philosophy, 181.

Sodom, destruction of, 48 ; apples
of 48.

Soul, the conscious witness to God,


176, 179, to Christian truth,
178. and against heathen living,
179 . its nature revealed in Holy
Scripture, 1 84 . birth of, 184 ;
corporeal, 184 ; this shown by
the parable of the Rich Man
and Lazarus. 187 : philosophical
objections refuted, 1 87; revealed
to a Montanist sister. 188; the
soul not originated from matter,
191 ; how related to the mind,

191 ; its supremacy over mind,

192 ; undivided, with various
functions, 193 ; its vitality in
the heart, 194 ; rational in na-
ture, irrational only in sin, 194:
has perception through the in-
tellect and senses, 198 ; implies
knowledge (instinct) as well as
vitality, 199, illustrated. 200 ;
one in nature, but subject to va-
rious development and change,
201 ; defined, 202 ; heretical
theories of its origin derived
from Plato, 203 ; his theory of
self-existence inconsistent, 204 ;
existence of the soul before
birth shown from physiology.
206, from Holy Scripture, 207 :
of one formation with the body,
208, 217 ; theories of transmi-
gration refuted, 209-15 ; grows
with growth of body, 21S ; cor-
rupted by sin, 219, and the
source of sin to the body, but
not totally depraved, 220; re-
generated by water and the Holy
Spirit. 221 ; wholly separated


from the body by death. 230 .

not unconscious in Hades, 33$
Spirit, in the sense of breath (or

life) identical with soul, igo .

but more probably the spirit of

God or of evil, coming upon the

soul, not born with it. 191
Sunday (Lord's Day), its observance

not worship of the sun, 133.

Tertullian, birth and education of.
Introauction, 3, 5 , a Catholic
theologian. 4. 56 (note) . his
subsequent heresy. 4 ; Icrome's
account of him. 5 ; his learning.
7, 56 ; works concerning him, 8 ;
chronology of his life and writ-
ings, 8-1 1, 57; lost works of. 12.

Theatres, their idolatry, 84. licen-
tiousness. 86. cN-il customs. 89.

Trades ministering to idolatry, 67.

Traditions of worship. 94-5, 103 .
apostolic, authority for Chris-
tian customs, 95. 104.

Transmigration, Pythagorean doc-
trine of, an argument for the
resurrection of the body. 53.

Valentinus, his theory of a trinity of

nature refuted. 202.
Varro, his classification of heathen

gods, 129. of Roman gods, 138.

Worship. Christian, description of.
46.

Zeno, his distinction between God
and matter, 133.


TERTULLIAN.


PART FIRST. — APOLOGETIC


INDEX OF TEXTS.


Gen. i. 26, 27.

i. 28 .

iii. 2, 3

ii. 7 •

ii. 7 .

ii. 16 .

ii. 16, 17.

ii. 17 .

ii. 21 .

ii. 21 .

ii. 23, 24

ii. 24, 25

iii. I .

iv. 1-7

iv. 2-14

V. 22 .

V. 24 .

V. 24 .

vi. 2 .

vi. 9 .

vi. 18

vii. I .

vii. 2, 3

ix. 3 .

ix. 6 .

xi. 31

xii. 5 .

xii.-xv.

xiv

xiv. 18

XV. 13

xvii. .

xix. 1-29

xix. 23-29

xxi. 5.

xxii. i-io

xxii. 1-14

xxii. 18 .

xxv. 7 .

XXV. 21-23

xxv, 22, 23

xxv. 26 .

xxv. 26 .

xxxiv. 25-3:

xxxvii. .

xlix. 5-7
Ex. iii. 8 . .


PAGE

70

208

184
207
219

227

222
223
201
191
166

156

153
227

65
152
153
152
153
219

70
153
153
153
153
152
153
153
153
162
151
165
171

151
151

207

151
207
165
165
165
163


PAGE

1

PAGE

1

rACK

Ex. iv. 24-26 ... 153

I Deut. xxii. 5 . .

. 89

Ps. xxii. 16, 17 . . f6Q

iv. 25 .

.

. 163

xxix. 5 . .

. 155

xxii. 18

. 165

vii. 12 .

.

. 234

xxxii. 21 .

. 74

xxii. 21

.

. 166

vii. viii.

. 66

xxxiii. 17 .

. 165

xxiv. 4 .

74

xii. i-ii

. 167

Josh. V. 2-9 . .

. 163

xxvi. 9 .

• 63

xii. 6 .

. 160

vi. 1-20. .

• 155

xxix. I, 2

.

. 156

xii. 16 .

• 155

xxiii. 7 . .

. 67

XXXV. 12

.

. 165

xii. 40-42

153

Judg. ix. 2 . . .

9

xxxviii. 17

. 1

^,172

XV. 22-26

. 170

xiii. 12 . .

. 161

xiv. 2, 3, 4

. 162

xvii. 8-16

166

I Sam. X. 6. . .

. 191

xiv. 5 . .

. 163

XX. 4 .

62

X. II . .

191

xlviii. 12

. 159

XX. 4 .

64

xxviii. 6-16

234

xlix. II

. 159

XX. 4 .

166

2 Sam. vii. 13 . .

173

xlix. 18

. 86

XX. 7 .

74

xii. 14. .

69

xlix. 20

. 213

XX. 8 .

156

xvi. 7 . .

63

1. 14 .

. 156

XX. 8--II

155

xxii. 44, 45

154

Ii. 2

• 194

XX. 12-17

152

I Kings i. 39 • •

169

Ii. 17 .

156

XX. 14 .

80

xii. 25-33

152

Iv. 23 .

63

xxi. 24, 25

154

2 Kings ii. II . .

227

lix. II .

171

xxiii. 13 .

57, 73

ii. 16. .

170

Ixii. 12 .

. 162

xxiii. 20, 21

163

vi. 1-17 .

170

Ixvii. 6 .

169

XXX. 22-33

169

xiv. 9. ,

9

Ixix. 4 .

. 165

xxxii. I .

151

xvii. 7-17

152

Ixix. 21

165

xxxii. 4

152

xvii. 15 .

74

Ixix. 21

169

xxxii. 6 .

62

xviii. 4 .

63

Ixxii. 15

162

xxxii. 23

151

I Chron. xvii. 12 .

173

Ixxviii. 25

155

xxxiii. 20

163

2 Chron. xiii, 1 1 .

123

Ixxxv. 12

169

Lev. vi. 30 .

173

Neh. ix. 21 . .

155

Ixxxviii. 4, 5

173

xvi. .

173

Esth. i. I . . .

158

Ixxxviii. 30

173

xvii. 1-9

156

viii. 9 . . .

158

Ixxxviii. 36, 3

7, 1

8 173

xix. 18

152

Ps. i. I . . . .

81

Ix.xxix. 3, 4

»73

xxiv. 2

123

i. 4 ...

151

Ixxxix. 29 .

173

xxiv. 17-2

2

154

i. 1-3 . .

71

Ixxxix. 35, 36,

31

173

xxvi. I

62

ii, 7, 8 . . .

16S

xcii. 12-15

71

Num. xii. 2

217

v. 6 ...

63

xcvi. 5 . . .

74

xii. 5-8 .

163

viii. 2 . . . .

200

xcvi. 7, 8 .

156

xiii. 16

163

viii. 5 . . . .

172

xcvi. 10

166

xxi. 4-9.

166

viii, 5, 6 , . .

172

cvi. 19-22

152

Deut. V. 8 .

62

xvi, 4 , , . .

67

ex. 4

152

V. 12-15 .

156

xviii. 43, 44 . .

154

ex. 4 .

173

V. 16-21 .

152

xix. 4 . . . .

156

exi. 10 . .

130

vi. 4» 5 • •

152

xix. 4 . . . .

157

cxv. 4-8

99

viii. 4 . .

155

XX. 7 . . . •

101

exv. 8 . .

63

xii. 1-26 .

156

xxii

166

cxxxii. 17 .

163

xix. 11-21 .

154

xxii. 6 . . . .

172

cxxxix. 23 .

J94

xxi. 22, 23.

164

xxii. 16 . . .

160

Prov. ix. 10 .

130

xxii. 5 .

71

xxii. 16 . . .

165

xxiv. 12

194

726


TERTULLIAN : INDEX OF TEXTS.


PAGE

PAGE

PAGE

PAGE

Isa. i. 2 . 154, 155. 162

Jer. ii. 1(^13 . .

. 170

Matt. V. 44 . . . 42

Mark xv. 33 . .

. 170

i. 4 154

iv. 3, 4 . .

- 154

V. 44 .

74

XV. 37, 38 .

. 170

i. 4. 7. 8

• 171

xi. 19 . . .

. 166

V- 45 -

. 226

xvi. 9 . .

. 206

i. 7. .

. 169

xvii. 9 . .

. 172

vi. 24

. 68

xvi. 15, 16 .

. 156

i. 7, 8 .

• 154

xxxi. 20 . .

. 105

vi. 24

90

Luke i. 20 . . .

• 75

i. 10 .

. 162

xxxi. 27 . .

• 152

vi. 24

lOI

i. 22 . . .

• 75

i. II .

. 156

xxxi. 31, 32 .

• 154

vi. 24

• 195

i. 27 . . .

. 164

i. 11-14

. 156

Ezek. viii. 12-ix. 6

. 168

vi. 25

. 68

i- 35 - - •

- 171

i. 13 .

• 155

xvi, 3 . .

. 162

vi. 27

• 89

i. 37 . • .

. 68

i. 14 .

. 70

xvi. 45 . .

. 162

vi. 28

. 68

i- 41-45 • -

. 207

i. 15 .

• 154

xxii. 2 .

• 63

vi. 31

. 68

i. 46. . .

. 207

i. 20 .

• 171

xxii. 8 . .

- 155

viii. 5

73

i. 62. 63. .

75

i. 22

. 184

xxxvi. 20 .

. 69

viii. 15

- 197

i- 78, 79 -

157

ii. 2, 3 .

■ 154

xxxvi. 20, 23

171

viii. 20

• 72

ii. 1-7 . .

. 164

ii. 3 •

. 1S4

xxxvi. 23 .

69

ix. 4 .

. 194

ii- 25-33 •

. 168

ii. 3. 4

• 154

Dan. i. 8-14 . .

226

ix. 9 .

. 68

iii. 12, 13 .

73

ii. 20. .

• 171

ii. I . . .

226

X. 24.

. 231

iv. 14-18 .

168

iii. I. 3

171

ii. 34, 35 •

154

X. 33-

69

iv. 22. . .

166

V. 2

171

ii- 34. 35 •

172

xi. 8 .

73

iv. 27 . .

170

V. 6. 7 .

171

ii. 35 . .

151

xi. 10

. 163

V. 10, II

68

V. 12 .

98

ii. 44. 45 .

154

xi. 13 .

. 160

V. 29 . .

68

vi. 10 .

35

ii- 44. 45 -

172

xi. 14.

■ «

i 216

vi. 20 . .

68

vii. 13, 14

161

iii

71

xii. 19, 2C

)

. 164

vi. 27 . .

216

vii. 15 .

161

vi

71

xii. 37

73

vi. 43. 44 .

202

viii. 4 .

161

vii. 13, 14 •

172

xii. 40

. 231

vii. I . . .

73

viH. 8, 10

161

ix. 24-27

159

xiii. 25

• 195

vii. 25 .

73

viii. 14

172

ix. 26 . . .

158

xiii. 31-4

3

• 152

vii. 27 . .

163

ix. I, 2

157

ix. 26 . . .

169

xiii. 55

. 166

ix. 23 . .

68

ix. 6 .

166

X. 2 . . .

226

xvi. 13

. 68

ix. 26 . .

69

xi. I .

lOI

Hos. i. 10 . . .

155

xvi. 24

. 231

ix. 58 . .

72

xi. I, 2

164

ii. 17 . . .

67

xvii. 3-8

• 197

ix. 59, 60 .

68

xix. I .

162

ii. 23 . . .

152

xvii. 12

216

ix. 62 . .

68

xxviii. 16

165

vi. I . . .

171

xviii. 8

. 64

X. 18. . .

197

xxviii. 16

172

xi. 8 . . .

105

xix. 21 .

68

x. 25-28 .

152

XXX.

162

Joel ii. 22 . . .

170

xix. 26 .

68

xii. 22-24 •

68

xxxi. .

162

iii. I . . .

225

xix. 27-3

3

68

xii. 27 . .

95

xxxiii. 17, 18

169

Amos viii. 9 _. .16

7. 170

xix. 28 .

73

xii. 28 . .

68

XXXV. 4, 5, 6 .

164

Mic. V. 2 .

169

xxi. 15 .

200

xiv. 26 . . .

68

xxxviii. 21

97

Hag. i. I . . .

173

xxi. 16 .

200

xiv. 27 . . .

68

xl. 3 . . .

163

i. 12 . . .

173

xxii. 21

70

xiv. 2S-30 . .

68

xl. 15 .

151

ii. 2, 4 . .

173

xxii. 21 .

lOI

xvi. 13 . .

68

xli. 8 .

152

Zech. iii. . . .

172

xxii. 30 .

218

xvi. 16 . . .

160

xlii. 2, 3

164

vi. II . . .

173

xxii. 34-4

0

152

xvi. 19-31 . .

69

xlii. 5 .

191

X. 9 . . . .

152

xxiv. 24.

234

xvi. 23, 24 i3

7. 189

xliii. 6, 7

168

xii. 10, 12 . .

172

XXV. 41 .

166

xvi. 26 . . .

234

xliv. 8 .

63

xiii. 2 . . .

67

xxvi. 17 .

167

xviii. 22 . .

68

xlv. I .

157

xiv. 14 . . .

162

xxvi. 7-12

197

xviii. 27 . .

68

xlv. I, 2 .

158

Mai. i

157

xxvi. 27, 28

197

xix. 41-44 - -

171

xlix. .

155

i. 10, II . . .

156

xxvi. 52 .

73

XX. 25 . . .

70

1. II .

171

iii. I . . . .

163

xxvi. 56 .

165

xxii. 7 . . .

160

Hi. 5 .

69

iv. 5 . . . .

217

xxvii. 11-14 .

171

xxii. 7 • - •

167

liii. 2 .

73

Matt. i. 23 . . . .

161

xxvii. 20-25

171

xxii. 15 . .

195

liii. 2 .

172

ii

65

xxvii. 24, 25

160

xxii. 19, 20 .

197

liii. 3 .

164

ii. 1-12 . . .

162

xxvii. 34

102

xxii. 28 . .

73

liii. 5 . .

171

ii. 3-6 . . .

169

xxvii. 34. 35

165

xxii. 30 . . .

73

liii. 7 .

164

ii. iC^iS. . .

200

xxvii. 45. . .

170

xxiii. 13-25 .

171

liii. 7, 8

171

iii. 7-9 . . .

202

xxvii. 50-52 .

170

xxiii. 44, 45 .

170

liii. 8. 9, I

0 .

166

iii. 10 . . .

lOI

xxviii. 19, 20 .

156

xxiv. 42 .

102

liii. 9 . .

165

iii. 17 . . .

197

Mark i. 2 . . . .

163

xxiv. 44 . . .

160

liii. 12 . .

166

iv. I2-I6 . .

157

i. 19, 20

68

xxiv. 45-48

156

Iv. 4 .

128

iv. 21, 22 . .

68

ii. 14 .

68

John i. 4

1 68

Iv. 5 . .

173

V. 14 . . . .

71

vi. 1-9 . .

206

i. 17 . . . .

153

Iv. 6, 7 .

171

V. 16 . . . .

70

vi. 3 . . .

166

i. 18 . . . .

163

Ivii. 2 .

166

V. 17 . .

163

viii. 34 .

68

i. 21 . . . .

216

Ivii. 16

191

V. 20 . . . .

62

viii. 38 .

69

i. 23 . . . .

163

Iviii. I, 2 .

164

V. 22 . . . .

62

X. 29, 30. .

68

i. 29 . . . .

163

lix. 4 . .

74

V. 25 . .

216

xii. 17

70

i. 36 . . . .

163

Ixi. 2 .

167

V. 25 . . . .

235

xii. 28-34 .

152

ii. i-io . . .

197

Ixv. 2 .

169

V. 26 . . . .

216

xiii. 32 .

215

iii. 5 . • •

220

Ixv. 13-16

170

V. 28 62, 75, 19^

, 220,

xiv. 12 .

160

V. 1-9.

171

Ixvi. 23

155

235

xiv. 12 .

167

V. 17, 18. . .

i6a

[er. i. 5 . . .

207

V- 34-37 - - .

67

XV. 1-5 . .

171

V. 35 . . . .

163

ii. 10-12

170

V. 38. . . .

154

XV. 8-15.

171

V. 43 - • • •

169

TERTULLIAN : INDP:X OF TEXTS.

' ~ /

I'AGE

HAGE

rACB

rAca

John vi. 15 . . .

73

Rom. vi. 4 . . .

220

2 Cor. xi. 3

. . 166

Heb. ii. 6-9

17a

vi. 31. 32 .

155

viii. 5 . .

220

xi. 14.

15 . . 166

iv. 12

162

vi. 44 • • •

195

ix. 5 . . •

165

xi. 14

• 234

iv. 13

163

vi. 70 , . . .

172

ix. 10-13 .

151

xii. 2-4

. . 189

V. 5-10

'73

vii. 35 • • •

170

ix. 32. 33 •

165

Gal. i. lo .

69

V. 10.

152

vii. 37-39 •

170

ix. 32, 33 •

172

iii. 13 .

164

vii. 1-3

'52

X. 31-33 • • •

164

X. 10

194

iii. 16 .

'51

vii. 10

15a

X. 37, 38 • • •

169

X. 14-17 .

. ^54

iv. 8, 9

'55

vii. 15

'52

xi. 25 . . . .

168

X. 18 . . 15

6. 157

V. I

155

vii. 17

152

xiii. 1-5 . . .

98

X. 21

I6q

v. II

. 165

viii. 8-1 ■•■,

'54

xiii. 1-17 . .

73

xii. 15 . .

6q

V. 12 .

• 195

X. 22

42

xiii. 2. . . .

172

xiii. I . .

74

V. 16 .

. . 220

xi. 4 . .

»53

xiv. 6 . . .

168

xiii. 4

211

Eph. i. 10 .

. . 172

xi. 5 . .

153. 227

xiv. 9 . . .

163

xiii. 9 . .

152

ii. 3 ■

195

xi. 7 . .

15a

XV

166

I Cor. i. 20 . .

66

ii.3 •

. . 202

xi. 9 .

151

xvi. 20 . . .

69

i. 23 . .

165

ii, 20, 21

171

xi. 32-38

170

xvi. 20 . . ,

90

iii. 6-9

154

V. 5 • •

. 67

xiii. 10-13

173

xvi. 20 . . .

lOI

iii. 10 . . .

171

V. 8 .

. 202

Jas. i. 12 . .

loa

xviii. 28'.

167

iii. 16 . .

230

V. II, 12

65

ii. 23 .

'52

xviii. 36 . .

73

V. 7 • •

167

V. 31. 32

191

v. 12

67

xix. 8-12 . .

171

V. 10 . .

69

V. 32.

. . 201

I Pet. i. I .

170

xix. 12 . .

160

V. 10 . .

75

vi. 17

. . 162

ii. 4 .

'72

xix. 12-16 . .

171

V. 10 . .

216

Phil. i. 10 . .

171

ii. 4-8

171

xix. 17 . . .

165

vi. 2, 3

73

i. 23 .

90

ii. 10

'55

xix. 23. 24 . .

165

vi. II . .

202

ii. 15 •

• • 71

ii. 13. 14

71

xix. 28 . .

165

vi. 19 . .

230

iii. I, 2

• • 154

ii. 22

165

xix. 32-37 •

165

vii. 14 . .

220

iii. 5 •

151

!!!• 3

102

XX. 27 . . .

197

vii. 20 .

63

iii. 15

• • 95

HI- 9

74

XX. 28 . . .

158

vii. 31 . .

66

iii. 20

. . lOI

iii. 19

-'31

xxi. 19 . .

51

vii. 39 . .

lOI

iv. 3 .

. . lOI

2 Pet. ii. 5 .

•53

xxi. 23 . .

228

viii. . .

71

Col. i. 15 .

. 163

ii. 6-9

'53

Actsii. 9, 10 , .

158

viii. 4 . .

85

ii. 8 .

. . 183

I John i. I .

197

ii. 22 . . .

171

viii. 10 . 6

6, 100

ii. 14. 15

. . 166

iii. 15 .

62

iii. 13 . . .

160

ix. 9, 10 .

154

iii. 4 •

. . 168

iii. 20

I'M

v. 39 . . .

106

ix. 16 . .

157

iii. 5 •

. . 67

Rev. i. 3 .

167

••2
vii. 0 . • •

153

ix. 19 . .

72

I Thess. i. 9,

10. . 152

i. 7 .

172

vii. 38-41 .

152

ix. 22 . .

69

iv. 11

. • 63

i. 10 . .

188

vii. 39, 40 •

151

X. 4 . . .

163

iv. If

) . . 231

L13 .

173

vii. 51, 52 •

170

X. 6 . . .

64

iv. I"

1 . . 231

1. 16 .

162

viii. 9. . .
viii. 9-24

234

X. 7 . . .6

2, 152

V. 15

J . . 51

ii. 10 .

102

66

X. II . .

64

2 Thess. ii. 4

. . 234

ii. 12 .

162

viii. 18-21 .

215

X. 14 . .

99

iii. 6

-12 . 63

ii. 24 .

62

viii. 21

66

X. 19 . .

. 183

I Tim. i. 4 .

. . . 183

ii. 26, 27

73

xii. 23 . .

106

X. 21 . .

85

i. 19

. . . 67

iii. 21

73

xiii. 6-1 1 .

. 66

X. 27-29 .

71

ii.2.

. . . 42

iv. 4 .

I02

xiii. 8 . .

234

X. 28 . .

99

ii. 9.

. . . 102

vi. 2 . .

103

xiii. 17 . •

155

X. 32, 33 •

. 69

iii. I

. . • 195

vi. 9 .

188

XV. 1-31 .

. 76

xi. 7 • •

70

V. 23

. . • 97

VI. 9. .

231

xvi. 16

90

xi. 10 . .

102

vi. 10

. • 67

X. I . .

103

xvii. 21 . .

. 183

xi. 14 . •

. 96

2 Tim. ii. 12

. . . 69

xi. 3 • ■

. 228

xvii. 23 . .

137

xi. 25 . .

. 197

iii. 8

. . . 99

xii. 9 .

166

xxvi. 18 . .

. 170

xii. i-ii .

. 188

iv. 8

. . . 103

xii. 10 .

. 216

xxviii. 2 .

73

XV. 3 • ■

. 231

iv. 13

. . 98

xvii. .

162

Rom. i. 20.

• 199

XV. 46 . .

191

Tit. i. 12 .

. 142. 201

xviu. 4

lol

i. 26 . . ■

. 96

XV. 52 . .

231

i. 15 .

. . 99

xix. 15

162

ii. 6 . . .

. 162

2 Cor. IV. 14 • •

90

iii. I .

. . 71

xix. 21

1 6a

ii. 14 • •
ii. 24 . .
iv. . . •

. 96

vi. 14 . •

. 69

iii. 14 •

. . 65

xxi. 6

170

• 171

vi. 16 . .

. 230

Heb. i. 3 ■

. . 163

xxii. I

170

• 153

X. 4 • •

73

ii- 5-9

. . 172

xxii. 17

170

iv. II . •

. 153

TERTULLIAN.


PART SECOND. — ANTI-MARCION.


INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


Abraxas, Basilides' name for the Su-
preme Deity, 649.

.Eons of Valentinus, 506-g, 650.

Angels, of human flesh, unborn, 328.

Anicetus at Rome, 630.

Antichrist, the Man of Sin, 453, 463.

Antipas, martyr, 646.

Apelles, heretic, 257; origin of his
heresy, 257; opinion on the
Flesh of Christ, 653.

Apostles, how sent by Christ, 252;
seeds of heresy noted by them,
259; martyrs, 648.

Apostolic Churches, origin of, 252;
the faith held in their commun-
ion only, 253; succession in
faith and bishops, 258, 260;
hold Scripture as the basis of
faith, 262; witness to the Apos-
tles' teaching against heresies,
286.

Aquileia, church of, custom in re-
citing the Creed, 584-5.

Aratus, Greek poet, 643.

Attributes of God, how related to
His substance, 622.

Baptism, unavailing if there is no
loss by sin, 293; for the dead,
how understood, 449, 581 ; an-
swer in, 5S2; falling away after,

639-

Basilides, heretic, 649.

Beginning, as applied to Creation,
488.

Blastus, Judaizer, 654.

Body, real in Christ as in man, 459,
467; dignity as God's work, 549,
and as sheath of the soul, the
shadow of God's soul, 550; her-
etics confound it with the soul,
586; its present functions not
essential, 592; not useless after
this life, 592.

Bull, Bp.,.on Tertullian's orthodoxy,
629.

Cadaver, derivation of word, 558,
594-


Cainites, heresy of, 651.

Carpocrates, heresy of, 651.

Cataphrygians, heresies of, classi-
fied, 654.

Census in Judea under Saturninus,
378, note.

Cerdo, heresy of, 653.

Cerinthus, follower of Carpocrates,
651.

Change not destruction, 588.

Charismata, 550, 594.

Cherubim on the mercy-seat, not
idolatrous, 314. [591.

Children, the I hree of the Captivity,

Christ, His coming foretold, 322; not
proved by miracles only, 322;
His Incarnation worthy of God,
329; truly born, 330, 447; name
implies incarnation, 334; types
in i )ld Testament, 334, 336. 364;
His fulfilment of prophecy, 351,
352, 353, 354; His birth and
miracles typified, 356, 357; fore-
told as Son of Man, 357, and
in His teaching, 365-8 ; has
attributes of the Creator, 366-8,
as shown by His teaching and
miracles, 372-6, 380-2, 392,396,
411, by His transfiguration,
382-5, His reproof of Israel,
385, 393-5. 403. 412-14. His
love of children, 386, 477, note;
mission of the Seventy, 387;
His Sonship to the Creator
shown by His thanksgiving for
revelation to babes, 389, by His
exposition of the Law, 390, 404,
407, by His Prayer, 391, by
parables, 397, 402. 406, 409,
412, by signs of His second com-
ing, 4T4-17, by His Passion,
417-21, and Resurrection, 421-
3; His Passion the purpose of
the Creator, 439; Head of man
as created in God's image, 445;
Image of the invisible God, 470;
His session at the right hand
of God, 584, 627; when Lord,
when God, 60S; calls Himself


Son, 616; distinct from the
Father as expected Messiah,
618; the Father's "Commis-
sioner" {Vicaritis), 620: adores
the Father, 622; a surname,
624; heresy of Abraxas con-
cerning His Flesh, 650.

Christians, the third race, 643.

Church, keys given through S.
Peter, 643.

Circus, martyrdoms in, 643.

Constantine as catechumen, 426,note.

Creation, a gradual work, 493 ; in-
cludes all things, 494; from
nothing, 502.

Creed, Apostles', substance of, 249;
customs in reciting, 584-5.

Cruelty, app>arent in both bodily and
spiritual healing, 637.

Cuttle-fish, type of heretical deceit,
313.

Demiurge, fable of. 513-14, 643.

Disciples, called by Christ brethren,
not children, 621.

Dositheus, heretic, 649.

Dualism, of Marcion, origin of, 272,
475, note; sclf-contradictorj',
273. 276; creates a new god,
276, 277; not manifested by
creation, 279; results in poly-
theism, 282; not taught bv
Christ, 284, nor by St. Paul,
285-6; its material conceptions
of God, 288; destructive of Di-
vine goodness. 2(;o, and justice,
291, 320.

Earth, how cursed for man. 564.

Ebion. successor of Cerinthus, his
heresy, 651.

Economy, term applied to the Trin-
ity, 599, 603.

Egyptians, spoiling of, defended,

3*3- . . . , ,_

Eleusinian mystenes imitated by

Valentinus, 503.
Eleuthcrus, Bishop of Rome, his

toleration of heretics, 631, note.


/o^


TERTULLIAN : INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


Elijah, appears at the Transfigura-
tion, 589.

Emmanuel, name prophetic of the
Incarnation, 331.

Enoch and Elijah, translation and
present state of, 591.

Eternity made known by the Resur-
rection, 590.

Euxine vSea, barbarity of inhabitants
on its coasts, 271, 331.

Father, the whole Substance of God,
603 ; addressed as God in prayer.
608.

Flesh of Christ, as real, denied by
certain heretics, 521, who there-
in deny His true Nativity, 522,
and attribute falsehood to Him,
523; shown by appearance of
angels in human body, and of
the Holy Dove, 520, 542, note;
really suffered and rose again,
525-6; not sidereal and unborn,
526; recognizes human rela-
tions, 527, 543, note; pure, yet
natural and human, not angelic,
530. 533. 535; distinct from
soul, not spiritual, 533, 534;
born by miracle as Adam, 536;
proved by gospel history of His
birth, presentation, and proph-
ecies, 538, 539, 540, 541.

Flesh of man exalted by Christ's In-
carnation and by His love of
man, 523.

Freewill, man's likeness to God in,
301 ; necessary condition of obe-
dience, 302.

Funeral rites, heathen, 545.

•Games, Greek, in Africa, 638.

Gate, guardians of the, Roman su-
perstition, 643.

■Genesis, beginning of in Hebrew ac-
cording to some, 600.

<jnostics, 633,

<iod, supreme, therefore one, 373,
in essence, not name merely,
275; known always by intuition,
278; Creator of things visible
and invisible, 283; His good-
ness natural and rational, 278,
288, not simple goodness, 290,
shown in creation of man, 300,
not impugned by man's sin, 302,
303, 304, compatible with jus-
tice, 307, and with penal evil,
308, proved by Old Testament
history and law, 310, essential,
637; He must punish transgres-
sion, 292; knowledge of Ilim
His best gift to man, 299; fear
of Him necessary to morality,
292, 307; not author of sin,
305; not subject to human pas-
sions, 310; He elects and re-
jects according to desert, 315;
Father of mercies as Creator,
452; eternal as God, but not as
Lord, 498; a body (corporeal
soul) as well as spirit, 602.

Government, Christian, subjection to


not inconsistent with martyr-
dom, 647
Grotius, on the word Spir-ittts. 630.

Hades, Tertullian's view of, 406,
428, note, 557, 563, 595.

Heavens, Valentinus' view of, 642.

Hegemonikon, philosophical term for
faculty ruling the senses, 535.

Heracleon, agrees in substance with
Valentinus, 652.

Heresies foretold, 243; their analo-
gy with bodily disease, 243;
condemned by St. Paul, 245;
proceed from self-will, 245;
offspring of heathen philoso-
phy, 246; never rest in the
truth, 248; their false pretence
of St. Paul's authority, 254; of
late origin, 257, 598; have no
succession from Apostles, 258;
a mockery of Christian truth,
264.

Heresy, Adam's sin, 298.

Heretics falsely claim authority in
Holy Scripture, 250; have no
right to Scripture, 251, which
they pervert, 251, 261; their ir-
regularity of conduct and dis-
cipline, 263; their women-
teachers, 263; fabric idols with
"words, 613; their Christology,
623.

Hermogenes, origin of his heresy,
259; his character, 477, 629;
maintains eternity of matter,
478, making matter Divine, yet
not equal to God, 480, and God
the author of evil, 482; makes
matter neither corporeal nor in-
corporeal, and neither good nor
evil, 498.
Herodians maintained Herod to be
Christ, 649.

Humanity of Christ, 624

laldabaoth, primary Aeon of the

Ophites, 650.
Image of Christ, man created in,

607.
Immortality, a "clothing upon" of

the flesh, 576.
Imperfections alleged in God, how

explained, 612.
Impossible, the, possible with God,

principle how abused, 605.
Incarnation, the, necessary as a

revelation of God's goodness,

31 8; foreshadowed in the Theo-

phanies, 6l2.
Invisibility of the Father, 609.
Irenaeus, St., adversary of hereticSj

506.
Israel forbidden idolatry; transgres-
sion and punishment, 636.

Jehovah, Basilides' view of, 650.
Jesus, name of our Lord; Christ an

adjunct, 625.
Jewel, Bp., his challenge in proof

of Catholic doctrine, 266, note.
John, St., statements regarding

Christological heresy, 625.


John Baptist, St., Christ s message
to, 375, 427, note.

Jonah, type of the Resurrection, 591.

Joshua, type of Christ in name and
character, 334.

Justice and goodness unite in God,
307, 308, 309; reveal Him as
Father and Master, 308; case of
the Ninevites, 315, of Adam, of
Cain, and of Sodom, 317; their
union refutes Marcion's dual-
ism, 320.

Justin Martyr, adversary of heresy,
506.

Laodiceans, Epistle to, sent to the
Ephesians, 464.

Law of Moses abrogated by the
Creator, 436 ; the shadow of
Christ, 471.

Lepers, cleansing of, how typical,
356 ; parable of the ten, inter-
preted, 407.

Life, earthly, only confession of
Christ, 643.

Logos, not a mere attribute of God,
601 ; not an empty word, im-
plies creation, 602.

Love of enemies, taught alike in
Law and Gospel, 370, 372.

Lucan, follows Marcion and Cerdo,
653.

Magi, their offering foretold by
Isaiah, 332.

Man, creation of, a preparation for
a higher life, 299 ; token of
God's goodness, 300 ; like Got!
in freewill, 301 ; above angels
in obedience, 303 ; his three-
fold nature symbolized by Cain,
Abel and Seth, 517 ; animated
out of God's substance, 600 ;
his natural perverseness, 637.

Marcion, heretic, 591, 599 ; history
of, 257 ; his mutilation of Scrip-
ture, 262 ; origin of his heresy,
272 ; his contempt of the body
irrational, 290 ; his condemna-
tion of marriage refuted, 293,
361 ; his Docetic fallacies, 328,
354 ; \\\% Antitheses absurd, 346;
his mutilation of the Gospels,
351 ; his idea of Christ impos-
sible, 352-3 ; analysis of his
heresy, 423, note ; excommu-
nicated, teaches Cerdo's system,

653-
Marcus and Colarbasus, heresy of,

653-
Marriage, a holy state, 293 ; Christ's

law of, 404, 443.
Martyrdom, God's remedy against

idolatry, 636 ; a complete vic^

tory, 638 ; a sacrament, 641 ;

foretold by Christ, 641 ; not

admitted by Basilides, 650.
Martyrs, absolved from sin, 639 ;

glory and crowns of, 646.
Matter, not eternal, 47S, 480, 487,

as shown by history of creation,

489 ; not equivalent to earth,

490 ; motion in, irregular, 500.


TERTULUAN: INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


731


Maximilla, prophetic gifts of, ac-
knowledged by Victor of Rome,
597-

Menander, disciple of Simon Magus,
649.

Millenium, prophecies and types of,
342, 343-

Miltiades, adversary of heresies,
506.

Miracles, lingering influence of in
the Church, 633.

Monarchianism, heresy of, 597, 604.

Monarchy, Latin use of term, 599 ;
not applicable to the Trinity,
603,

Montanus, his prophetic gifts ac-
knowledged by Victor of Rome,
597 ; notice of, 630, 631.

Moses, intercession of, a type of
Christ's, 318 ; his appearance
at the Transfigfuration, 589.

Naaman, healing of, interpreted,

356.
Nero, fi st Roman persecutor, 648.
Nicander, writes about scorpions,

633-

Nicolaus, one of the seven deacons,
obscenity of his doctrines con-
demned in the Apocalypse, 650.

Ninevites, God's justice towards,
316.

Oath of God, meaning of, 317.
Ophites, heresy of, 650.

Pamelius, 629.

Parables, teaching by, foretold in
the Old Testament, 376.

Paraclete, the, 598, 621,

Paradise, for martyrs only, 576.

Patripassianism, synonym for Mon-
archianism, 597, 598, 605, 612,
625, 626.

Paul, St., typified in the blessing of
Benjamin, and in Saul, 430 ;
his witness to the Creator, 430 ;
agreement with other Apostles
in doctrine, 433 ; teaches the
Creator revealed in Christ, 440,
466, and as final Judge, 457 ;
his precepts those of the Old
Testament, 468 ; his Christol-
ogy, 625; persecutor, persecuted
and martyr, 647.

Penance, Roman doctrine of, 425,
note.

Persecution, tortures of, 634 ; of
the righteous, throughout his-
tory, 640.

Person, applied to the hypostasis in
the Divine Nature, 613, 615,
621 ; of Jesus Christ, 624.

Petavius, charges Tertullian with
quasi-Arianism, 630.

Peter, St., modern claims from, 266,
note; receives keys of the King-
dom of Heaven, 643.

Pharisees, divided from the Jews,
649.

Phcenix, legend of, 554.

Polycarp, his superior authority at
Rome, 630.


Polytheism, not deduced from doc-
trine of the Trinity, 608.

Portion, term used of one Person of
the Godhead, 622.

Praxeas, his heresy, 597 ; author of

Monarchianism at Rome, 597 ;

hether Patripassian, 626; with

/ictorin s, makes Christ the

Father, 654.

Prescription (against heresies), mean-
ing of, 243, 263 ; sets aside
modern Roman claims, 266,
note.

Prisca, prophetic gifts of acknowl-
edged by Victor of Rome, 597.

Procession, term applied to the Son,
598 ; of the Spirit from the
Father through the Son, 599.

Prodicus, 648.

Prolation, use of the term, 602; true
doctrine of, 603.

Prophecies of the Old Testament,
principle of their interpretation,
324 ; foretell Christ's rejection,
325, humiliation, 326, 335,
majesty, 327 ; in type of the
goats on the day of atonement,
327 ; of Christ's Incarnation, in
Isaiah, Zechariah, Ezekiel, and
the Psalms, 332 ; of the Passion,
337, and its results in the conver-
sion of the world, 338, the call-
ing of the Gentiles, 339;
labours and sufl"erings of the
Apostles, 340, dispersion of the
Jews, 341, millenium, 342, king-
dom of glory, 343 ; their har-
mony with the Gospels, 346.

Psalms, Messianic, represent con-
verse of the Father and the
Son, 656.

Ptolemy and Secundus, heresies of,
652.

Race-course, injuries in not redressed
by law, 638.

Reason, Divine, not on the face of
things, 547 ; with God from
the beginning, 600.

Repentance, how attributed to God,
315 ; case of Saul and of Nine-
vites, 315.

Resurrection of the body vindicated,
447, 449, 450, 452, 454 .implies
judgment of the body, 456 ;
questions concerning, 548 ;
written on God's works before
books were made, 553 ; how a
birth, 571 ; the resurrection-
body perfect, 590.

Rock, the, interpreted of Christ by
the Fathers, 426, note.

Rome, Church of, glorious in mar-
tyrs and faith, 260 ; modern
claims of, 266, note, 630.

Rufinus, quoted on Aquileian cus-
tom in reciting the Creed, 585.

Rule of Faith, the Apostles' Creed,
249; declared I rst by Christ,
then through Apostles, 252,
253 ; not secret, 255 ; the
same everywhere, 256; pre-
served by Apostolic Churches,


3««. 350; •greed on bjr the

Apostle*, 348 : in earliest, not
later rccorcU, 348, 350, 598.

Sabbath, law of. forbids man's
work, not God's, 313; kept by
Christ, 362 ; error of the Phar-
isees concerning. 363.

Sacrifices, not acceptable without
faith. 314.

Sacrifices, human, to heathen dei-
ties, 64a

Sadducees, their origpn, 649.

Samaritans, relation of to Israel,
408,

Satan, author of idolatrous imita-
tions of Christianity. 262 • de-
stro>^ truth under pretence of
defending it, 597.

Saturninus, 649.

Scorpion, mentioned by Nicander,
633-

Scripture, not a common rule to
C^ ristians and heretics, 2s i ;
held uncorrupt by Ap^jstolic
churches, 262 ; how pcr\ericd
by heretics, 251, 261, 262 ; il»
own interpreter, 613, 6x5 ; in
sections in Tcrtullian's time.
635 ; understood by disciples of
Christ and the Apostles. 645.

Secundus, 652,

Semler, his patristic criticism, 266,
note; view of Tertullian's ortho-
doxy, 629.

Sermon on the Mount, its harmony
with type and prophecy in the
Law, 366, 368.

Serpent, Brazen, not idolatrous, 314;
type of Chrisi's Passion, 337.

Sethites, heresy of, 651.

Simon Mag^is, 649.

Simplicity the first defence of Chris-
tian truth, 505.

Son, the, will d liver the Kingdom
to God the Father, 600 ; a der-
ivation from or portion of the
whole, 604 ; receives the titles
of Deity, 613 ; to I e reckoned
as in the Father, though not
named, 613 ; of GfKl and of
Man, 619 ; how forsaken on the
Cross, 626,027; eternity of,629.

Soul and spirit, distinction of, 463,
note, 474, note ; soul, nature
and functions of. 532 ; how
corporeal, 557. 57«» 587-

Spiritus, used of ihc ! »iv ^n,. Nature
of Christ, 609.

Tatian, disciple of Justin Mart)T,
his views, 654.

Tertullian, how far Montanistic,
239. 475. note ; \'alue of his
defence of the Faiths 474. note ;
witness to orthotlox truth, 270 ;
his Latinity, 270; withdraws
from the communion of the
Bishop of Rome, 59S ; char-
acter a d writing of. 628; dan-
gers of his doctrinal statements.
629. \o{, 654.

Theotloius, the Ilyzanline. heresy


IZ^


TERTULLIAN : INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


Theophanies of the Old Dispe sa-

tion, 612 ; by the Son, not the

Father, 616.
Thought, generation of in man,

analogous with the Logos in

Deity, 601.
Transfiguration of Christ, proof of

His Sonship to the Creator, 382,

385.

Transubstantiation, repudiated by
Tertullian, 572, 595.

Trinity, the, 598 ; orthodoxy of
TertuUian's view of, 604 ; at
the Creation, 606, 607 ; illus-
trated from nature, 617.

Truth, the object of search, 247 ; to
be kept unchanged, 248 ; not
sought I y heretics, 249 ; not
impugned by heretical imita-
tions, 603.


Tyre, Prince of, denotes fallen
angels, 305.

Unity of Godhead, Scriptural wit-
ness against idolatry, 613.

Usury, forbidden in the Law and
Gospel, 372, 426, note.

Valentinus, heretic, 560, note, 589,
594, 599, 623, 642, 648 ; origin
of his heresy, 259, 505 ; his
followers, 505, 550, note, 591,
633 ; his theory and f .bles of
Aeons, 506-11, 652, of the ori-
gin of matter, 511, of the devil,
514, of man, 515, concerning
Christ, 516, good works, 517,
the last judgm nt, 518 ; varia-
tions of his fables, 519, 520 ;
theory of prolation, 602, 603.


Victor, Bishop of Rome, gives
"peace" to the Asiatic Churches
and recalls it through Pra.x.as,
597, 630.

Virgin, the Blessed, Christ's fare-
well to, 427, note.

Virtue, abode of, 649.

Visibility of the Son, 609.

Wisdom, the Word of God, 487, 601,
614, 629.

Witnesses, the Three, spurious text
of, 631.

Word, the, foretold in the Psalms,
299 ; the Eternal Judge, 318 ;
His humiliation the sacrament
of man's salvation, 319; meant
by wisdom, 487 ; how incar-
nate, 623,


TERTULLIAN.


PART SECOND. — ANTI-MARCION.


INDEX OF TEXTS.


Gen. i. . .
i. 2 .
i- 3 •
i. 14 .
i. 22 .
i. 26 .
i. 28 .
ii. 7 .
ii. 17
ii. 18
iii. 3
iii. 9, I]
iii. 16
iii. 18
iii. 19
iii. 22
iii. I, 4
vi. 1-4
xviii. 21
xix. 17
xxii. 17
xxvii. 28
xxvii. 39
xxviii I2-]
xxxii. 28
xlix. 6
xlix. II
xlix. 27
Ex. i. 18 .

i. 22 .

ii. 13, 14

ii. 15-21

iii. 8 .

iii. 17 .

iii. 22 .

iv. 10-12

viii. 19

X. 2 .

xii. . .
xii. 16 .
xii. 34-35
XV. 27 .
xix. I .
XX. 9, 10
XX. 10 .
XX. 12 .
XX. 13-16
XX. 14 .


PAGE

300

392

454

;298

440

452

. 300, 445

294

.290

304

300

300

413

316

. 306

446

306

447

317

445

470

317

387

473

343

343

343

415

336

419

.

430

313

313

396

386

324

324

.313

457

415

393

469

443

363

387

387

355

313

363

.391

469

374

229

HAGE

PAGE

fACK

Ex. XX. 15 . .

457

Deut.

xviii. 15

. 384

I Kings xvii. 7-16 . 381

XX. 16 .

363

xviii. 19

384

xix. 12 .

386

XX. 17 . .

294

xix. 15,253.384,422

xxi. 27. 29

452

xxi. 24 .

3ir

. 370

xxi. 21 . .

468

xxi. 29 .

358

xxiii. 20, 21

.

335

xxi. 23 . . 336, 434

2 Kings i. 9-12 .

386

xxviii. 13-21

364

xxii. 28, 29

405

ii. II . .

• 456

xxxii. I

401

xxiii. 3 . .

388

ii. 23. 24 3c

x>. 386

xxxii. 6

311

xxiv. I . .

404

iv. 23 .

364

xxxii. 10 .

3i8

xxiv. 12, 13

373

iv. 26

• 387

xxxii. 32 .

318

XXV. 4 444, 38

0.387

iv. 29

■ 387

xxxiii. 13-2

385

464

iv. 42-44

. 381

xxxiii. 20 .

319

, 470

XXV. 5 . .

406

V. 9-14 .

. 356

xxxiii. 23 .

385

XXV. 5, 6 .

405

xix. 14

. 448

Lev. X. 9 .

468

xxvi, 9, 15 .

324

XX. I . .

- 3»o

xiii.

407

xxix. 5 . .

387

XX. 3. 5 .

• 452

xiii. 2-6 .

440

XXX. 11-13

409

I Chron. xxi. i

• 339

xiv. . .

407

xxx. 19. .

368

Job i. 12 . . .

. 456

XV . .

440

xxxii. 20, 21

402

V. 12, 13

• 471

XV. 19

379

xxxii. 25 .

461

V. 13 . .

. 442

xvi. 5-7 .

327

xxxii. 35 .31

r. 370

X. ID .

. 382

xvii. 11-19

.

407

xxxii. 39 . 34

6, 453

Ps. 1. I . .

31

2. 421

xviii. 8 .

443

xxxiii. 17 .

336

i. 2 .

312

xix. 17 .

407

Josh.

iii. 9-17 . .

378

i. 3 .

312

xix. 17, 18

461

X. 13 . .

421

ii. I. 2 . 2

SO.' 42

0. 434

xix. 18 407,

437

461

I Sam. ii. 6-8 .. .

407

ii. 2 . .

460

XX. 10, 13, I

5 .

294

ii. 7, 8 .

456

ii. 2. 3 . .

. 340. 437

xxi. I . .

386

ii. 8 . . 36

6,397

ii. 3 • .

. 2S6. 434

xxiii. 5 .

417

ix

315

ii. 7. .

. 338. 384

XXV. 4

3"

ix. 2 . . .

315

ii. 8. .3

90. 416, 465

Num. vi. 6, 7 .

386

xiii. . . .

315

iii. 4

. 364

xi. . .

308

xiii. 14 . .

244

iv. 4

. -,I2. 468

xii. 6-8 .

385

xiv. 43-45

358

iv. 7

xiv. 27 .

388

xiv. 45

310

vii. 9

■. J-

xxi. . .

308

XV. II . .

315

viii. 631b, .

520. 3h2,44S

xxi. 8, 9

314

XV. 28 . .

316

viii. 5, 6

326

xxii.-xxiv.

396

415

xvi. 7 .

244

viii. 7 .

. 465

xxxiii. 9 .

364, 387

xviii. 8, 9 .

244

ix. 17, 18

366

Deut. vi. 2 . .

391

xxi. 2-6 .

362

ix. 18 .

415

vi. 5 •

394

437

2 Sam. V. 8 . .

411

xvi. 10 .

353

viii. 12-14

369

.417

v. 6-8 . .

411

xviii. 26

468

x. 16 .

437

458

xi

244

xix.4 . •

■ 423. 470

xi. 26 .

434

xii. 133". 35

8.452

xix. 5

340

xiv. .

313

xxiv. I .

339

xix. 5. (^

361

XV. 2 .

373

I Kings iii. 5-13 . .

368

xix. 7 .

• 34''

XV. 4 .

371

XI. 4 . . .

244

xix. II .

■ ■ ^:^

XV. 7, 8

371

xi. 14 . .

339

XX. I

. . 461

xvii. 6 .

422

xi. 29-39 .

408

xxii.

• • 337

xviii. I, 2

444

xii. 15 . .

408

xxii. 2 .

304

734


TERTULLIAN : INDEX OF TEXTS.


PAGE

PAGE

PAGE

PAGE

Ps. xxii. 6 . .

. 335, 382

Ps. exviii. 8. g

. . 369

Isa. xxvii. i . . . 388

Isa. Hii. 5 .... 382

xxii. 7 . .

. . 326

exviii. 9 394

442, 461

xxvii. 2 . . . 422

Hn. 7 . 326, 418, 420

xxii. 7, 8, i6

. . 421

exviii. 21 .

. . 409

xxviii. II . . . 446

lin. 8 .... 327

xxii. 15 . .

. . 420

cxxvi. 5

. 366. 369

xxviii. 14 . . . 395

Hn. 9 . .

• • 342

xxii. 16 .

• 337, 420

e.xxxii. II .

. . 338

xxviii. 16 . . 439, 442

Hii. II . .

. . 468

xxii. 18 . .

. . 420

exxxiii. i .

. . 312

xxix. 13 363, 374, 419

Hii. 12. 338

, 358. 420

xxii. 22, 25

• • 341

exlv. 8 . .

. . 452

453, 460

Iv. 3 . .

338, 346

xxiv. 4, 5 .

. . 312

cxlvii. 6

• • 456

xxix. 14 325, 389, 439

Iv. 4, 5 •

• . 338

xxiv. 8 . .

• ■ 379

Prov. i. 7 . .

. . 264

471

Ivi. 2 . .

• • 363

xxiv. 10 .

• . 465

Eccles. iii. 17 .

. . 438

xxix. 18 . . . 393

Ivn. I . 340,

382, 395

xxix. 3 . .

• . 379

Song of Sol. iv. 8

. 361

.XXX. 27, 30 . . 399

Ivii. 2 . .

. . 422

xxxi. 5 . .

. . 421

Isa. i. 2 . . 332

343, 448

xxxii. 9, 10 . . 376

Iviii. 6 . .

. 312. 412

xxxiii. 18, 19

. . 312

i. 2, 3 . .

• • 325

xxxiii. 14 . . . 407

Iviii. 7 . 312, 372, 373

xxxiv. 13,14

. . 312

i. 3 • •

390, 460

xxxiii. 14-16 . 406

401, 412

xxxiv. 14 .

. . 461

i- 3, 4 • •

• • 341

X.XXV. I ... 355

Ivin. 13 . . . 363

xxxiv. 19 .

. 312

i. 4 . . .

. • 325

XXXV. 2 ... 357

Ix. 8 . .

343, 462

xxxiv. 20 .

. 312

i. 7. 8 . . .

. 341

XXXV. 3 . . 357, 364

Ixi. I . .

. . 367

xxxiv. 22 .

. 312

i. 8 . . 390

402, 421

XXXV. 3, 5, 6. . 388

Ixi. 2 . .

. 367

xli. 9 . .

. 418

i. 10 . .

332, 394

XXXV. 4. ... 357

Ixi. 3 . .

. 367

xlv. I . .

. 365

i. II . .

• 314

XXXV. 8, 9 . . 388

Ixiii. I . .

. 418

Xlv. 2 . .

333, 335

i. II, 12 .

. 312

xxxix. , . . . 397

Ixiii. 3 . .

. 390

xlv. 2, 3

. . 326

i. II, 14 .

. 314

xxxix. 6 . . . 369

Ixiii. 9 . .

. 384

xlv. 3 . .

332, 468

i. 13, 14 286,

363, 436

xl. 3 . . . . 404

Ixv. 5 . .

• 390

xlv. 4 .

• 333

i. 14 . .

. 362

xl. 4 . . . . 436

Ixv. 13

366. 369

xlv. 5 . .

• 333

i. 16, 17 .

. 312

xl. 8 . . . 404, 417

Ixv. 13, 14

. 366

xlix. 16, 17

. 369

i. 17 . . .

373, 399

xl. 9 . . . 364, 432

Ixv. 17

431, 472

xlix. 18

. 361

i. 17, IS . .

. 366

xl. 13 441, 461, 468

Ixvi. 5 . .

. 370

1. 13 . . .

• 314

i. 18 . . .

• 358

xl. 13, 14 . . 298

Jer. ii. 31 . .

. 401

li.x. II . .

• 341

i. 20 . . .

. 341

xl. 15 . ,247,390

iv. 3 . .

361, 472

Ixi. 10 . .

. 361

ii. 2 . . .

. 436

xl. 18 . . . 273

iv. 3, 4 .

. 346

Ixii. 11 . . .

. 369

ii. 3 • • .

346, 436

xl. 25 . . . 273

iv. 4 . 286,

437, 458

Ixviii. 18 . .

. 446

ii. 4 . . .

340, 346

xl. 28 . . . 314

vn. 23 . .

. 401

Ixviii. 19 .

. 468

ii. 12 . . .

• 403

xli. 18, 19 . . 324

vii. 24 . . .

. 401

l.xviii. 25 .

• 392

ii. 19 . . .

400, 463

xlii. 2, 3 . . . 386

vii. 25 . . .

. 401

Ixviii. 26

• 341

ii. 20 . . .

• 341

xlii. 4 ... 437

vii. 26 . . .

. 401

Ixx. 8 . . .

• 449

iii. 1-3 . .

341

xlii. 4, 6 . . . 436

viii. 9 . . .

. 471

Ixx. 9 . . .

• 449

iii. 2, 3 . .

446

.xlii. 6 .... 389

ix. 23, 24 . .

369, 440

Ixx. II . . .

■ 449

iii. 3 . . .

442

xlii. 6 . 432, 440, 442

xi. 8 . . .

. 401

Ixx. 17 . . .

• 449

111. 3, 4 . .

395

xlii. 6, 7 . . . 338

xi. ig . . .

337.418

Ixx. 18 . . .

• 449

iii. 12 . . .

369

xlii. 19 . . 325, 465

XV. 14 . . .

• 399

Ixx. 19 . . .

. 449

iii. 13, 14 . .

420

xliii. 18. 19 . 346, 431

xvi. 16 .

• 355

Ixxii. I . . .

• 448

iii. 14, 15 .

366

472

xvii. 5 . 36g,

403, 442

Ixxii. 4 . . .

. 366

iii. 16-24 • •

369

xliii. 19 2S5. 361, 456

xvii. 10

. 403

Ixxii. 6 .

. 449

V. 5, 23 . .

395

xliii. 20 . . . 364

xviii. II . .

. 316

Ixxii. 10

• 332

V. 6, 7. . .

341

xliv. 5 . . . . 415

XX. 12 . . .

. 403

Ixxii. II . .

. 366

V. 7 . . .

399

.xliv. 8 . . . . 317

xxn. 3 . . .

• 399

Ixxii. 12, 13, I

4 . 366

V. II, 12 . .

468

xliv. 25 . . . 389

xxii. 5 . . .

. 317

Ixxii. 15 . .

• 332

V. 14 . . .

369

xliv. 26 . . . 384

x.xv. 4 . . .

. 401

Ixxviii. 2 . .

. 362

V. 21 . . .

461

xlv. 3 . 389, 440, 460

xxvi. 5

40I

Ixxxii. I . .

• 273

V. 26 . . .

366

xlv. 7 . 272, 283, 308

xxxi. 29 .

. 309

Ixxxii. 3, 4

. 365

vi. 9 . . .

376

316, 346

x.xxi. 31, 32 .

• 346

Ixxxii. 6 .

• 273

vi. g, 10 .

325

xlvi. 12, 13 . . 467

xxxi. 32

. 2S6

Ixxxvi. 15 .

■ 452

vi. 10 . . .

401, 453

xlix. 6 . . . 389, 454

x.xxii. 7-15 .

. 418

Ixxxvii. 4, 5

. 365

vii. 4 . . .

. 331

.xlix. 12 ... 365

x.xxn. 19 . .

• 244

xci. 13 . . .

. 388

vii. 9 . 3S0,

3S9, 453

xlix. IS . 343, 365

XXXV. 15 . .

. 401

xciv. II . .

. 442

vii. 14 . . .

331, 358

xlix. 21 . . . 365

xliv. 4 . . .

. 401

xcvi. 10

• 337

viii. 4 . . .

331, 468

1. 3 421

Lam. iv. 7 . . .

• 354

-xcvii. 3 . .

• 399

viii. 14 326,

365, 409

1. 4 . . 415, 417, 420

Ezek. ix. 4 . . .

• 340

civ. 4 . . .

• 304

439

1. 10 . . . 336, 384

xi. 22, 23 .

. 421

cix. 8 . . .

. 252

ix. 2 . . .

• 454

1. II ... . 341

^ .xvi. 3 . .

• 332

ex. . . .

• 448

ix. 6 . . .

• 337

li. 4 .... 346

xviii. 7 . .

■ 372

ex. I . . .

419, 465

x. I, 2 . . .

. 366

li. 7 .... 367

xviii. 16

■ 373

ex. I, 2

• 448

X. 2 . . .

• 395

Hi. 5 . • . 341, 367

xviii. 23

• 303

ex. 3 . . .

448, 449

X. 23 . . .

• 372

Hi. 6 .... 364

xxviii. 11-16 . 306

ex. 4

. 448

X. 33 • • •

. 369

Hi. 7 . 340, 364, 407

xxxin. II .308, 358

exi. 10 . .

. 264

xi. I

• 346

432. 438

452

exii. 4 . .

• 452

xi. I, 2 . .

• 335

Hi. II . . . . 340

xlviii. 30-35 . 342

cxiii.5, 8 .

. 366

xi. 1-3 . . .

445, 446

Hi. 14 . . . 326, 335

Dan. n. 19, 20

452

cxiii. 7 . . .

397, 407

xi. 2 . . .

. 465

Hii. 2 .... 335

n. 34 . .

326

exvi. 15 .

. 312

xi. 8, 9 . .

. 388

Hn. 2, 3 ... 326

in. 25 . .

359

cxvii. 22

• 467

xiv. 13, 14 .

. 466

lin. 3. 4 . • • 326

in. 25, 26 .

381

c-xviii, 4 .

. 312

xiv. 14 . .

. 454

Hii. 3, 7 . ■ • 336

in. 28, 29 .

452

exviii. 8

• 442

xxv. 8 . . .

452'

Hii. 4 . . . 336, 354

iv. 33 . .

310

TERTULLIAN : INDEX OF TEXTS,


735


343


19


Dan. iv. 34, 37

vii. 13 343,

vii. 13, 14

vii. 14

ix. 24
Hos. i. 6, 9
ii. II .
V. 15 .
vi. I. 2
vi. 6 . 308,

viii. 6
viii. 14
X. 6 .
xii. 4 ,
xiii. 14
joel. ii. 28 .
ii. 28, 29
iii. 18 .
iii. 28 .
iii. 30, 31
Amos ii. 6 .
ii. 12
V. 21
vi. I
vi. 1-6
viii. 9
ix. 6
Jonah iii. 8 ,
iii. 10
iv. 2 .
Mic. vi. 8 .
vii. 6 .
vii. 18,
Nah. i. 4

i. 15 .
liab. ii. 4 .

iii. 2 .

iii. 9-12

iii. ID

iii. 13
Zech. ii. 8 .

iii.

iv. 3, 14

iv. 7 .

vii. 10

viii. 16

viii. 17

ix. 15, 16

xi. 12, 13

xii. 10, 12

xiv. 4

xiv. 14
Mai. i. 10, II
ii. 15 .
iii. 1-3
Matt. i. 21 .

iii. 12

iv. i-ii

iv. 14

iv. 16

v. 15 . .

V. 17 352


V. 32 .
V. 37 .
V. 45 .
V. 48 .
vi. 34
vii. 6
vii. 7
vii. 13


376


452


PAGE

• 452

359. 416

419, 448

. 326

. 416

• 353

• 372
286, 436

. 422
422
310, 373
376
394
399
420

417

452
465
446
324
436
416
418
468
436
408

369
421

407, 462
452

316, 358
452
410

399

358
379
364
434. 435
385
416

379
416
407
327
385
326
370
399
370
415
418

327

417

332

341. 346

405

376

353

244

441

3^

454

255

357. 364

410, 461

. 405

. 256

310, 410

. 289

. 316

255. 263

. 247

. 307


Matt. vii. 15
vii. 16
ix. 13.
ix. 16, 17
X. 5 .

X. 22 .

X. 24.
X. 27.
X. 34-
X. 37-
xi.

xi. 27
xii. 7 .
xii. 37
xii. 48
xiii. II
xiii. 12
XV. 13
XV. 14
XV. 24
XV. 26
xvi. 17
xvi. 18
xvii. i-S
xviii. 16
xix. 4, 6
xix. 8
XX. 16
xxii. 30
xxii. 37
xxii. 44
xxiv. 4
xxiv. II
xxiv. 13
xxiv. 24
xxvii. 3-10
xxvii. 25
xxviii. 18
xxviii. 19

Mark ii. 8 . .
iv. 34 .
xiv. 21 .

Luke i. I . .
i. 35 • •
i- 52 397
ii. 32 .
ii. 34. .
iii. I . .
iii. 4, 5 •
iv. 16-30
iv. 23
iv. 24 .
iv. 27
iv. 29
iv. 31 .
. iv. 32 .
iv. 33. 34
iv. 34
iv. 40
iv. 41
iv. 42
iv. 42, 43
v. i-ii .
v. 12-14
v. 14. .
V. 16-26
v. 27-39
v. 31 . .
V. 34. 35
vi. 1-4 .
vi. 5 . •
vi. 7 • ■


FACE

• 243

.245

257

394

334

247

244

349

255

333

378

375

.252

.319

394

317

•377. 378 1

253

298

244

250

•247

. 352

352

360

253

253

.251

422

404

404

244

451

308

448

243

243

415

•243

322

418

309

319

.247

252

423

575

.252

253

257

255

353

407

456

356

439

351

434

354

354

354

356, 408 1

354

351

. 352

364

353

441

354

354

355

355

355

355

357

357

360

360

361

362

363

363

Luke vi. 9 .
vi. 12
vi. 13-19
vi. 14
vi. 20
vi. 21
vi. 22
vi. 24
vi. 25
vi. 26
vi. 27, 28
vi. 28
vi. 29


22


VI. 30
vi. 31
vi. 34
vi. 35
vi. 36
vi. 37, 38
vi. 39
vi. 40
vi. 41-45
vi. 43
vi. 46
vii, ,
vii. i-io
vii. 11-17
vii. 16
vii. 20
vii, 21
vii. 25
vii. 26, 27
vii. 28
vii. 36-50
viii. 8
viii. 16
viii. 17
viii. 18 298
viii. 20
viii. 21
viii. 25
viii. 28
viii. 30
viii. 43-46
viii. 48
ix. 1-6
ix. 7, 8
ix. 10-17
ix. 20
ix. 21
ix. 22
ix. 24
ix. 26
ix. 23
ix. 28-36
ix. 33
ix. 35
ix. 41
ix. 47, 48
ix. 51-56
ix. 57, 58
ix. 59, 60
X. I .
X. 4
x. 5
X. 7 •
X. 9 .

X. II .

X. 16.
X. 18.
X. 19.
X. 20.

X. 21 .


PAC«

• 364

• 365
365. 367

20ft, 367
367
368

369

3^7. 369
370
394
370
371
372
372
373
373
374
374

259. 374
374
272
374
375
374
375

375, 377
375
375
376
376
376
376
377
377
377
7.412
329
393
378
379
373
379
380
380
381
381
I, 406
381
381
3S1
382
384
383
383

383, 406
385
386
386
386
3S6
387
3S7
387
387
387
388
388
306
388

353
389


38


Luke X. 83 . .
». 23. 24
X. a? . .

X. 2:
xi. I
xi. 1
xi. 3
xi. 4
xi. 5
xi. 5-8
xi. 8 .
xi. 9
xi. 11-13
xi. 14
xi. 18
xi. 19
xi. 20
xi. 21, 22
xi. 27
xi. 27, 28
xi. 29
xi. 33
xi. 37-52
xi. 39
xi. 40
xi. 41
xi. 42
xi. 46
xi. .}-
xi. 5-
xii. I-
xii. 2 .
xii. 4
xii. 5
xii. 8 .
xii. 9 .
xii. ic
xii. II, 12
xii. 13, 14
xii. 16-20
xii. 22-28
xii. 24-27
xii. 28 .
xii. 30 .
xii. 31 .
xii. 35 .
xii. 36 .
xii. 39 .
xii. 41
xii. 41-46
xii. 49 .
xii. 51
xii. 53 .
xii. 56
xii. 57 .
xii. 58. 59
xiii. 15 .
xiii. 20, 21
xiii. 25 .
xiii, 25-28
xiii. 28 .
xiv. 12-14
xiv. 16 .
xiv. 18 .
xiv. 18-20
xiv. 21 .
xiv. 23 .
XV, 8 . .
XV. i-io
xvi. 11
xvi. 12 .
xvi. 13 .
xvi. le


tAcm

yp

yjo
377
. 446
y)t
393
yfi
y)9
249
392
393
a49. 39a
yn
393
393
393
393
393
329
393
394
394
394
394
398

3'M

yn

395
3;s

395
395
395
396
396
396
396
396
396
397
397
397
397
397

343, 39*
3«>a
39a
598
398
398
399
399
399
399
399
399
400
400
400
400
400
401
401
401
401
401
401
249
402
403
403

402, 403
403


736

TERTULLIAN : INDEX OF TEXTS.

PAGE

FAGE

PAGE

PAGE

Luke xvi. i6 404,

431. 446

Luke xxii. 15 . .

. 417

Acts xxi. 23-26 .

■ 433

I Cor. iii. 23 . . . 444

xvi. 17 .

. 404

xxii 15-20 .

. 445

Rom. i. 3. 4 . .

• 375

iii. 25 .

. 246

xvi. iS .

404, 405

xxii. 19 . .

. 418

i. 16, 17, 18

• 457

iv. 5 • • .

. 442

xvi. 19-31

. 406

xxii. 20 . .

. 418

i. iS. . .

• 457

iv. 9 . . .

• 442

xvi. 23 .

. 406

xxii. 22 . .

• 419

i. 20

280, 464

iv. 15 . .

. 446

xvi. 29 .

247, 406

xxii. 34, 54-

^2 419

i. 20-23 •

. 389

V. I . .

. 443

xvii. I, 2

. 407

xxn. 47-49 •

• 419

ii. 2 . . .

. 457

, V. 5 . . .

• 443

xvii. 3 .

. 407

xxii. 66, 67

• 419

ii. 12--16

• 457

V. 7 . . .

• 443

xvii. 4 .

• 407

xxii. 67 . .

. 419

ii. 16

• 457

V. II

• 355

xvii. 14 .

. 408

xxii. 69 .

. 419

ii. 21 .

. 457

V. 13 . .

443, 468

xvii. 15 .

. 408

xxii. 70 . .

419, 420

ii. 24 .

. 457

vi. 3 . . .

• 305

xvii. 17 .

. 408

xxii. 71 .

. 420

ii. 28 .

• 458

vi. 13 . .

• 443

xvii. 19 . .

408, 409

xxiii. I, 2

. 420*

ii. 29

• 458

vi. 14

• 443

xvii. 20, 21 .

• 409

xxiii. 3 . .

. 420

iii. 19 .

. 458

vi. 15 .

405, 443

xvii. 21 . .

• 409

xxiii. 7 .

. 420

iii. 21, 22 .

• 458

vi. 20 . .

• 443

xvii. 25 . .

• 409

xxiii. 8, 9

. 420

iv. II .

• 435

vii. 7, 8 .

• .443

xvii. 26-30 .

. 409

xxiii. 25 .

. 420

V. 20 . .

• 458

vii. 9, 13, 14 . 443

xvii. 32 .

• 409

xxiii. 33 . .

. 420

V. 21 . .

. 458

vii. 10 .

• 443

xviii. 1-3 .

• 409

xxiii. 45 . .

. 421

vi. 2 . .

. 458

vii. 10, II

• 443

xviii. 2, 3 .

• 249

xxiii. 46 . .

. 421

vii. 4 . ■

. 458

vii. 27 .

• 443

xviii. 7, 8 .

• 409

xxiii. 47-55

. 421

vii. 7 . .

• 459

vii. 29 294,

443, 446

xviii. 8 .

■ 372

xxiii. 51 . .

. 421

vii. 8 . .

• 459

vii. 39 .

• 443

xviii. 10-14 •

. 410

xxiv. I .

. 422

vii. 13, 14 .

• 458

viii. I, 13

• 446

^ xviii. 18-20

. 410

xxiv. 3 .

. 422

vii. 23 .

• 459

viii. 2 .

. 256

* xviii. 19

. 410

xxiv. 4 .

. 422

viii. 3 .

• 459

viii. 4 .

• 444

xviii. 21, 22

. 410

xxiv. 6, 7 .

. 421

vii. 5-^3 .

. 460

viii. 5 333,

444. 452

xviii. 38

411, 414

xxiv. 13-19

- 422

viii. 8 . .

. 45'

viii. 6 .

. 444

xviii. 39 .

. 411

xxiv. 21 . .

. 422

viii. 10 II

. 460

ix. 7 . .

• 444

xviii. 40 .

. 4"

xxiv. 25 . .

. 421

viii. II . .

. 460

ix. 9 . .

324, 444

xviii. 42 . .

250, 411

xxiv. 27 . .

. 253

ix. 33 •

• 365

ix. 13 .

• 444

xix. i-io

. 412

xxiv. 37-39

. 421

X. i-4 .

. 460

ix. 13, 14

• 444

xix. 8 .

. 412

xxiv. 39 . .

. 423

X. 15 . .

• 340

ix. 15 .

. 444

xix. 9

. 412

xxiv. 41 . .

. 423

X. 17 . .

. 460

ix. 20 .

• 254

xix. 10 .

. 412

xxiv. 47 . .

• 423

xi. 33 . •

298, 460

ix. 20, 22

• 434

xix. 12, 13

. 416

John i. I . .

• 244

xi. 34 .

. 298

ix. 22 .

254. 348

xix. 20-24

• 255

i. 3 . •

• 470

xi. 34, 35

. 461

x. 4 • 324.

409, 444

xix. 22 .

. 412

i. 14 . . .

• 458

xii. 2

. 461

X. 6 . .

• 444

XX. 4 . .

. 412

iii. 14 . .

• 314

xii. 9

. 461

x. 7, 10

• 444

XX. 5 . .

• 413

Hi- 35 •

• 319

xii. 10 .

. 461

X. II

. . 444

XX. 6 . .

. 412

iv. 12, 20

. 408

xii. 12 .

. 461

X. 25-27

• • 444

XX. 8 . .

• 413

iv. 22 . .

. 408

xii. 16 .

. 461

xi. 3 •

• 445

XX. 20 .

• 377

V. 22 . .

• 319

xii. 17

. . 461

xi. 5, 6 .

• . 446

XX. 27-33

• 413

V. 31 . .

• 254

xii. iS, 19

. . 461

xi. 7 .

■ . 445

XX. 33 .

. 414

V. 39 . .

• 247

xii. 19 .

• 311,370

xi. 9 .

• • 445

XX. 34 .

• 413

vi. 63 . .

• 375

xiii. 9 .

. . 461

xi. 10 .

444, 445

XX. 35, 36

413, 416

vi. 66 . .

. 244

XV., xvi. .

. . 460

xi. 18 .

245, 262

XX. 36 .

329, 451

vi. 67 . .

. 244

I Cor. i. 3 . .

• . 438

xi. 18, 19

• • 445

XX. 39 .

• 414

vi. 68 . .

. 244

i. 10 . .

.245, 255

xi. 19 243, 245, 257

XX. 41 .

■ 414

x. 25 . .

. 301

i. 12-15

. . 442

262

XX. 41-44

• 414

X. 34 . .

. 446

i. 18. .

. • 439

xi. 23-29 . . 445

xxi. 7

. 416

xii. 34 .

. 446

i. 19. .

. 439, 471

xii. I .

• • 445

xxi. 8 .

414, 430

xiii. 25 .

. 253

i. 20. .

• ■ 439

xii. 4-11

. . 446

x.xi. 9-1 1

. 415

xiv. 26 .

. 256

i. 21 . .

. 298, 439

xii. 8 .

. . 250

xxi. 9, 22, 2

8, 31-33,

XV. 25

. 446

i. 22. .

. • 439

xii. 8-1 1

. . 446

35, 36

• 415

XV. 26 .

. 256

i. 23 . .

. • 439

xii. 12-30

• . 446

xxi. 12, 13

• 415

xvi. 12, 13

■ 253

i. 25. .

. 440, 298

xii. 31 .

446

xxi, 12-14

. 415

xvi. 13 .

. 247

i. 27. .

. 440, 471

xiv. 21 .

• • 44^'

xxi. 16, 17

• 415

xvi. 30 .

. 244

i. 29, 31

. . 440

xiv. 25 .

• • 447

xxi. 19 .

• 415

xviii. 20 .

• 255

ii. 6, 7 .

• • 440

xiv. 26 .

. . 447

xxi. 20 .

. . 416

xix. 20 .

• 253

ii. 7 . •

. . 440

xiv. 32 .

• • 349

xxi. 23 .

. 404

xix. 31 .

. 436

ii. 8 . .

. . 441

• xiv. 34 .

. . 446

xxi. 25, 26

. 416

xxi. 20 .

• 253

ii. II

. . 298

xiv. 34, 35 • 446

xxi. 26 .

. . 416

Acts. i. 15-20 .

. 252

ii. 14 .

. 298, 383

XV. 3, 4, 14, 17, 18

xxi. 27, 28

. 416

ii. 16-33 •

. 325

iii. I .

. . 256

328

xxi. 29-31

. . 417

ii. 17 . .

• 436

iii. 10 .

• • 441

XV. II . . 285, 349

xxi. 31 .

. . 416

ii. 17, 18

. 446

iii. 11 .

• ■ 442

XV. 12 259, 290, 447

xxi. 33 .

.416, 417

iii. 5 • .

. 246

iii. 16

• • 442

XV. 13-18 . . 328

xxi. 34. 35

• . 417

iv. 25-30

. 340

iii. 17

. . 442

XV. 21 . . . 447

xxi. 34-33

• . 417

vii. 38 .

■ 355

iii. 18 .

. 246, 442

XV. 25, 27 448, 449

xxi. 37 .

■ • 417

ix. 3-8 .

• 429

iii. 19 .

• . 442

XV. 29 . . .449

xxi. 38 .

. . 417

xiv. 10 .

. 263

iii. 19, 20

• 442

XV. 50 . . . 451

xxii. I .

. • 417

XV. 5-29 .

■ 432

iii. 21 .

• . 442

XV. 35 . • . 450

xxii. 3

• • 441

xvi. 3

• 433

iii. 21, 22

• 444

XV. 37, 38

• 450

TERTULLIAN : INDEX OF TEXTS.


m


1 Cor. XV

XV
XV,
XV,
XV,
XV
XV
XV
XV
XV
XV
XV
XV
XV
XV

2 Cor. i.

ii.
iii.
iii.
iii.
iii.
iii.
iii.
iii.
iv.
iv.
iv.
iv.
iv.
iv.
iv.
iv.
iv.

V.
V.


38 .

• 3^41
. 41 .
. 42 .

• 42, 43

44 •

45 •

46 .

47 .
49 •

• 50 452
51. 52
52

. 53

• 55
3 •

17

6.

7,8

7, 13

14

15

16

18

4
6

7
8-12

ID
II

14
16

16-18
I .
2, 3
4-
5.
6.
8.

ID
17


453


36]


vi. 14
vii. I
xi. 2
xi. 4
xi. 9
xi. 13
xi. 14
xii. 5
xii. 7, 8
xii. 9
xiii. I
xiii. I, 2
xiii. 10
XV. 52
Gal. i. I .

i. 6 .

i. 6, 7


PAGE

. .

450

. .

450

. ,

473

450

450

.

450

. ,

450

.

450

451

451

'45*6

460

473

451

.451

455

452

452

468

452

453

453

453

453

453

453

,454

466

454

454

454

454

455

455

455

455

455

455

455

455

455

455

. 264, 456 1

, 431

, 456

472

.

328

456

.

456

.

254

294

456

!246

,456

281

456

456

• 253

,422

456

456

455

430

256

.'285

.432

PACK

Gal. i. 6-9 . .

. . 456

i. 7 . .

• . 432

i. 8 246, 2

57. 349. 432

i. 11-24

• . 432

i. 13 ■

• . 254

i. 18 . .

. . 254

i. 24 . .

■ . 254

ii. I, 2 .

• • 433

ii. 2 . .

. 348, 433

ii. 3 . .

. . 433

ii. 4 .

• 2S5, 433

ii- 4. 5

• • 433

h. 9 .

• 254,434*

ii. 9, 10

• . 433

ii. ID .

. . 434

ii. 12 .

• • 434

ii. 13, 14

. . 348

ii. 16 .

• • 434

ii. 18 .

• • 434

ii. 19 . .

• . 458

iii. I .

. . 256

iii. 6 . .

. . 435

iii. 7, 9. 2

9 • • 435

iii. II .

• . 434

iii. 13 •

• 336, 434

iii. 15.

. . 435

iii. 16.

. . 435

iii. 22 .

. . 458

iii. 26. .

. . 435

iii. 27 .

• . 331

iv. 3 .

• ■ 435

iv. 4 • .

. 435, 446

iv. 5 .

. . 436

iv. 6 .

• . 436

iv. 8 .

• . 434

iv. 9 .

. 259. 436

iv. 10 .

. . 436

iv. 19.

. . 446

iv. 21-26,

31 • 437

iv. 22, 24

-■ . 324

iv. 26 .

. 342, 462

V. I .

• • 437

v. 2 .

. . 259

V.6 .

• • 437

V. 7 .

. . 256

V. 10 .

. • 437

V. 14 .

• • 437

V. 19-21

. • 451

V. 20 .

. . 245

vi. 2 .

. . . 438

vi. 7 •

. . . 438

vi. 9 .

. . . 438

vi. 10 .

. . . 438

vi. 14 .

• . 438

vi. 17 .

• • . 438

Eph. i. 9, 10

. • . 465

i. 10 .

• • . 472

i. 12, 13

. . . 465

i. 17 .

. . . 465

Eph. i. 18 .
i. 19-22
i. 23 .
ii. I, 2

ii. 3 .
ii. 10 .
ii. 10-13
ii. 12 .
ii. 14, 15
ii. 15, 16
ii. 17 . .
ii. 17-20.
ii. 20 . .
iii. 8, 9 .
iii. 10 . .
iv. 5 . .
iv. 8 . .
iv. II
iv. 16
iv. 25, 26
V. II . .
v. 18, 19
V. 22, 23, 24
V. 25, 28, 29
V. 31, 32
V. 31, 32
vi. I. 2
vi. 4 .
vi. II
vi. 12 262,


Phil.


14-17

19, 20

[4-17, ]

6, 7 .


11

ii. a . .
iii. 4-6 .
iii. 7, 8, 9
iii. 20, 21
iii. 20
iii. 21
Col. i. 5, 6 .
i. 15 .
i. 16 .
i. 19 .
i. 20, 21
i. 22 .
i. 24 .
ii. 8 .
ii. q .
ii
ii

ii. 18 .
ii. 18, 19


13 .
16, 17


21


u. 22 . .
I Thess. ii. 15

iv. 3, 4. 5
iv. 15-17
iv. 16, 17
iv. 17 .


fAOB

465

471
466
466
467
466

454
467
467
465
467
415
467
467
449. 450
446, 468
. 250
. 446
. 468
. 468
. 468
. 469
. 469 j

. 324

. 469

. 469

• 469
. 469

469, 470

• 333
. 470

• 472

• 472

• 473

• 473 I

• 473!

• 451 !

342. 473
. 473
. 470

470. 473
. 283
. 470
. 471

• 471
. 471

246. 471

. 326

. 471

. 471

• 259
. 472
. 472
. 461

462
462
473
343


1 Thess. V. 19, 20

V. 21
V. 23

2 Thess. i. 6-8

i. S, 9

«. 3. 4
ti.9 .
ii. xo
ii. 10-12
ii. II
ii. 13

1 Tim. i. 4 .

i. 18
i. 20
iii. 16
iv. I
iv. 1-3
iv. 3
V. 13
V. 21
vi. 3,
vi. 13
vi. 20

2 Tim. i. 14

i. 15
ii. 2

ii- 3
ii. 14
ii. 17
ii. 19
iv. 1-4
Tit. iii. 9 .
iii. ID .
iii. 10, II
Heb. i. 5 .
i. 14 .
ii. '^ .
iv. 15
ix. 8 .
ix. 14
ix. 19
X. 30.
X. 35.
xi. 26

1 Pet. ii. 8 .

iii. 18-20

2 Pet. i. 4 .

ii. I .
iii. 16
I John ii. 19
iv. 1-3
iv. 3
i. 16 .
ii. 14 .
xxi. 2 .
xxi. 10-23
xxii. 14
xxii. 15


Rev.


TERTULLIAN.

PART THIRD.— ETHICAL TREATISES.


INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


Absolution, form of, 668.

Baptism, repentance necessary for,
66 1, 662 ; not to be hastily re-
ceived, 662; sin after, 662 ;
remission of sins in, 669 ; Cain-
ite heresy concerning, 66g;
outward simplicity of, a stum-
bling-block to unbelief, but a
motive to faith, 66g, contrasted
with heathen ceremonial, 669 ;
formula implies the Church, 672 ;
Chrism in, 672; imposition of
hands with invocation of Holy
Spirit following, 672; types of,
673; of John, not celestial, 674;
not administered by Christ,
674, nor by St. Paul, 676; ob-
jections to its necessity, 674,
676; baptism of Christ, 675 ;
received by the Apostles, 675;
of St. Paul, 676; not received
by Abraham, 676; oneness of,
676; heretical baptism invalid.
676; second baptism, of blood,
677; may be given by laymen,
but not by women, 677; of the
Eunuch, 678; of infants to be
deferred, 678; of the unmar-
ried, 678; seasons for, 678;
preparation for, 679.

Beatitudes, 712.

Charity, St. Paul's description of,
713; connection with patience,

713-

Chrism in baptism, 672.

Church, implied in baptismal form-
ula, 672.

Confession, primitive systems of, 666,
667; Eastern, 666; Western,
667.

Covetousness, 709, 710.

Dove in the Ark, type of Holy

Spirit in Baptism, 673.
Dress in prayer, 685; of women,

687.

Exomologesis, 664; unreasonable
dread of, 664, 665; a spiritual
medicine, 665, 666.

Fasting before and after baptism,
679; of our Lord, 679, Secret,
686.


Felicitas, martyrdom of, 696, 702,
703.

Holy Spirit brooding on the waters
in the Creation, 671; invoked
by imposition of hands after
baptism, 672; typified by the
Dove, 673.

Hours of prayer. 689, 690.

Icthus, 669.

Impatience, the Devil author of,
707; of Adam and Eve, 708; of
Cain, 708; of Israel, 708, 709;
a source of all sin, 708.

Jesus Christ, the Spirit, Reason,
and Word of God, 681; teaches
us to pray, 681; representa-
tions of, 698 ; example of
patience, 706.

Job, patience of, 714.

John, St., baptism of, 674.

Kneeling in worship, 689.

Lord's prayer, an epitome of the
Gospel, 681; analysis of, 681-4;
our own prayers may be added,
684.

Martyrs, trials and blessings of in
prison, 693; soldiers an ex-
ample for, 694; other instances
of endurance, 695.

Obedience due to God, 707; drawn
from patience, 707.

Parables of forgiveness (in St. Luke
XV.), 663.

Patience, honoured by heathen, 705;
God an example of, 705, 706;
Christ an example of, 7(j6; obe-
dience drawn from, 707; union
with faith, 709; under worldly
loss, 709, 710, violence, 710, be-
reavement, 711; pleasure of, |
710; connection with the Be- .
atitudes, 712 ; ministers to re-
pentance, 713; connected with j
charity, 713; bodily, 713; power i
of spiritual over body, 714; of
Job, 714; virtues of, 714; pic-
tures of, 714, 715; of heathen,
715- i


Penitents, proper conduct of. 664.

Perpetua, Martyr, imprisoned. 698;
her visions, 698, 699, 700. trial,
699, courage, 702, martyrdom,
696, 702, 703.

Prayer, taught by Christ, 681; by
St. John Baptist, 681: secret,
681; not lengthy, 681; the
Lord's Prayer, meaning of, 681;
essential conditions of, 685;
of the Israelites, 685; customs
in, 685; kneeling in, 6S9: place
fo', 689; hours of, O90; fol-
lowed by Psalms, 690; a sacri-
fie , 690; power of, 690;
offered by all creatures. 691;
for the departed, 704.

Repentance, defined, 657; heathen,
of good deeds, 657; a prepara-
tion for the Holy Spirit. 658;
good because commanded by
God, 659; sin after, a despising
God, 660; necessar)- before
baptism. 661; for sin after bap-
tism, 662; outward manifesta-
tion of, exomologesis, 664.

Revenge. 711.

Revocatus, martyrdom of, 702.

Saturninus, martjTdom of. 702.

Saturus, vision of, 701; martyrdom
of, 703.

Secundulus, death of, 701.

Sin, in will, as great as in deed, 658,
all sins forgiven on repentance,
659: after repentance, prefer-
ring Satan to God, 660: after
baptism, to be feared. 662, but
may be pardoned, 663.

Unction in baptism, 672.

Volcanoes, 665.

Water, why used in baptism, 670;
first brought forth life in the
Creation, 670; sanctified by the
brooding of the Holy Spirit.671 ;
cleanses flesh and spirit. 671;
heathen uses of. 671; blessed at
the pool of Bethesda, 671 ; uses
of typical of baptism. 673.

Woman, dress of, 6S7; veiling of,
687, 689; meaning of the word,
687. 688.

World, a prison to martyrs. 693.


TERTULLIAN.


PART THIRD.— ETHICAL TREATISES.


INDEX OF TEXTS.


Gen.


)2, 495


PAGE

I 479, 488, 4S9, 490

492, 494

1,2. . . 492, 670

2490,491,494,495,

496

479, 601, 607

607

670

492

494

493

490

607

490

484

600, 606

• 549
492, 607
578, 657

• 491
536, 586

. 549

• 479
. 708

• 495
550, 687

. 688
650, 651

• 495
. 688
. 688
. 612
. 688

550, 558,
563. 586
594, 606
666
550
685
495
564
684
684

591

688

552
612
651


3 •
6,7
6, 7, 8
7 •
9 •
9, 10
II, 12

14, 16

20, 21

21, 22

26 .
26, 27

27 .

28 . 477
31

7 49
7, 8

15, 16
15 •
21, 23

23 •
27 •

• 1-7

• 5 •
. 6 .

• 7 •

• 9 •
.10, II

. 19 495


22 .

24.

. 31-

6.7

10 .

11 .

15 .
24.
24 .

2 .

3 •
. 6 .

, I, 2


65


Gen. ix. 5 .

ix. 5, 6

ix. 7 .

ix. 19 .

XV. 6 .

xviii. .

xviii. .

xviii. 14

xix.

xix. 24

xxii. 30

xxiii. 4

xxiv. 64,

XXV. 34

xxvii. 25

xxxii .

xxxii. 30

xlv. 24
Ex. iii. 2 .
iii. 13-16
iii. 17 .
iv. 2-9
iv. 6, 7
viii. 25, 28
X. 10, II
x. 24 .
xiii. 2 .
xiv. 15-31
xiv. 27-30
XV. 22 . .
XV. 24, 25
xvi. 3, 7 .
xvii. II, 12
xviii. 23 .
xviii. 32 .

XX. 2 . .
XX. 7 . .
XX. 22, 23

xxiv. 8
xxix. 7
xxxii. .
xxxii. I .
xxxiii. 1 1 609,
xxxiii. 13 .
xxxiii. 20 609

xxxiv. 29 .
xxxiv. 35 .


PAGE
565

573
651
651
711
523
690
605

523
608
610
558
689
646
646

523
609
685

633

682

634
565
565, 588
673
673
673
541
666

673
711

673
679
685
684
684

634
602

634
593
672
636
710

610, 684
609

610, 611,

620

. 588

. 588


PAGE

Lev. iv. 5 . .

. 672

iv. 16 . .

. 672

iv. 18. .

. 672

viii. 12 .

. 672

XXV. 55 .

. 635

xxvi. I .

• . 635

Num. xii. 6-8 .

. 609

XX. 1-6 .

. 711

xxi. 4-9

. . 650

xxi. 5 .

. 679

XXV. I .

. 636

Deut. V. 26 .

. 610

vi. 4 .

. . 635

VI. 12 .

. 635

viii. 3 •

• 593

xi. 27 .

. 635

xii. 2, 3

. 635

xii. 30 .

. 635

xiii. I .

. 635

xiii. 6 .

. 635

xiii. 6-10

. 684

xiii. 16 .

. 635

xix. 15 .

. 672

-xxi. 23 .

626, 712

xxvii. 15

. . 635

xxix. 5 .

. 591

xxxii. 2

. 661

xxxii. 35

. 713

xxxii. 39

552. 5^5

.xxxiii. 9

. 684

Judg. ii. 8-13 .

. 636

ii. 20, 21

. 636

xiii. 22 .

. 610

I Sam. ii. 6 .

. 565

X. 6 .

. 589

I Kings viii. 54

. 685

xix. 4-13

. 717

xix. 8 .

• 593

xviii. .

. 690

2 Kings i. . .

. 693

ii. II .

• 591

iv. 42-44

. 693

Job i. . . .

. 716

ii. . . .

. 716

ii. 8 . .

. 716

Ps. i. 3 . . .

• 659

ii. 1,2. .

• 559

ii. 2 . . .

. 625

604


487.


Ps. ii. 4
ii. 7
ii. 9 .
ill. I
viii. 4-0
viii. 4-6
viii. 5 .
viii. 6 . .
xii. 13 . .
xix. 10 .
xxii. I .
xxii. 6 .
xxii. 8 . .
xxii. 9 . .
xxii. 17
xxiv. I .
xxiv. 7 .
xxviii. 2
xxxii. I . .
xxxiii. 6 502
xxxviii. 8 .
xliv. 5
xlv. I
xlv. 6.
I. i^
Ii. 1
Iv. 17 .

Ix. 12 .

Ixii. 4 .
Ixiv. 7 .
Ixix. 22
Ixxi. 18
Ixxiv. 23
Ixxviii. 24
Ixxxii. I
Ixxxii. 6
Ixxxvii. 5
xci. II .
xciv. I .
xcvii. I .
xcvii. 5 .
cii. 25 .
cii. 25. 26
ciii. 22 .
cvii. 16.
cviii. 13
ex. I 483. 561


')!,


rAOK
716
605
' ?9
06

• • .057
. • 709

619. 534

535.612
702
'.14
' "4
535
559
539
559
493
643
68s
639

602, 614
664
70a

601, 605
607
634
68s
690
70a
68s
50a
559
606
708
527
60S

480. 608
623
597
713
564

497. 612
502
497
682
577
702

600,606,

607, 627


742


TERTULLIAN : INDEX OF TEXTS.


PAGE

PAGE

PAGE

PAGE

Ps. ex. 3 . .

. . 605

Isa. xliv. 20 .

• • 547

Zech. iii. 8 . . .

• 504

Matt. viii. 12 . . . «;7i

ex. 4 . .

. . 654

xliv. 24 .

. 480, 614

vi. 12 . .

• 504

viii. 24 . .

• 675

exv. 4 . .

. . 636

xliv. 24, 25 . . 614 1

xi. 12 . .

• 559

viii. 29 . .

. 622

exvi. 15

. . 640

xlv. I . .

. 606, 625

xii. 10 561,

564, 584

ix. 4 . . .

• 555

exviii. 26

. . 613

xlv. 5 514

, 541, 613,

xiii. 9 . .

• 639

ix. 9 . . .

• 675

exxx.

. . 708

614, 615

Mai. iv. 2, 3 . .

. 567

ix. 13 . .

. 663

exxxii. II .

. ■ 540

xlv. 7 . .

• • 495

iv. 5 . . .

. 561

ix. 16, 17

. 681

exxxiii. 2 .

. . 672

xlv. 14, 15

. . 607

Matt. i. I . . .

. 540

x. 7 . .

• 569

cxxxv. 15 .

. . 636

xlv. 18 4c

)3, 494, 614

i. 16 . . .

. 538

X. 16 504,

641, 673

cxl. 3 . .

. . 7"

xlv. 23 .

. . 480

i. 20 . . .

. 538

X. 19 .

. 644

exliii. 6. .

. . 685

xlvi. 9 . .

. 514. 541

i. 23 . 536,

539, 559-

X. 21

• 644

el. 4. . .

. . 672

xlviii. 13 .

. . 502

623

X. 24 .

. 651

Prov. i. 20, 21

• . 639

xlviii. 12 .

. . 480

ii. I . .

. 522

X. 28 .

• 570

iii. II, 12

• . 714

xlix. 6 . .

. . 606

ii. II .

. 522

X. 29, 30

• 571

viii. 22 .

. 48S

1.4. . .

. 617, 619

ii. 16-18

. 522

X. 32, 33

.• 622

viii. 22, 23

. . 502

1.6. . .

. .559

iii. I, 2 .

. 658

X. 33 • .

525. 554

viii. 22 .

. 601, 605

li.9 .

• • 564

iii. 3. .

. 672

X. 34

• 644

viii. 22-25

. 602, 605

liii. I .

. . 607

iii. 6 . .

• 679

X.37.

675, 684

viii, 24 .

. . 495

liii. I, 2

. . 606

iii. 7-12

. 674

X. 39-

644, 712

viii. 27-31

. . 487

liii. 2 .

• • 530

iii. 9 . .

484, 498

X. 42

. 673

viii. 2 7 .

. 601, 614

liii. 3 . .

• 534. 535

iii. 10 .

. 659

xi. 2-6

. 674

viii. 27-30

. . 601

liii. 5, 6

. . 627

iii. II .

. 674

xi. II

. 675

viii. 28 .

. 496, 602

liii. 7 .

• • 559

iii. II, 12

. 674

xi. 12

. 691

viii. 30 .

. . 614

liii. 7, 8

. . 678

iii. 12 .

. . 659

xi. 22

• 569

ix. 2 . .

. . 639

liii. 12

• • 559

iii. 13-17

653, 673

xi. 25

. . 622

xxi. I

. . 683

Ivii. I .

. . 640

iii. 16 .

523, 673

xi. 25, 26

. . 622

Eccles. i. 15 .

. . 676

Ivii. 16

• . 495

iii. 17 .

. . 614

xi. 27, 603

, 620, 622

V. 6 .

. . 672

Iviii. 8 .

. . 565

iv. 1-4 .

. . 679

xii. 8 .

. 534

Sol. i. I . .

. . 504

Ixi. I .

. 606, 672

iv. 3 . .

• . 597

xii. 36

. 712

Isa. i. 2 . . .

. . 6S2

Ixiii. 9 .

• . 534

iv. 3, 6 .

. . 622

xii. 41, 42

• . 537

1.3. • .

. . 709

Ixiv. 6, 8

• . 713

iv. 4 . .

. 564, 593

xii. 48

• . 527

i. II . .

. . 6qo

Ixvi. I .

. . 612

iv. 6 . .

. . -597

xiii. 3

• . 645

i. 15 . .

. . 685

Ixvi. 14

. . 567

iv. 10 .

648, 684

xiii. 10

. . 568

i. 18 . .

. . 646

Ixvi. 23, 2

4 . . 567

iv. 21, 22

. . 675

xiii. 13

. . 568

i. 19 . .

. . 564

Jer. i. 9 . .

. . 617

V. 3, 4, 5

. . 714

xiii. 30

. . 598

ii. 19 . .

. 497, 561

viii. 4 .

. . 663

V. 9 . .

. 676, 714

xiii. 34

. . 568

iii. 13 . .

• • f!^

xvii. 8 .

• • 659

V. 10 .

• 575, 641

xiii. 42

■ . 571

V. 18 . .

. . 665

xvii. 9 .

• • 534

V. II, 12

712, 714

xiii. 54

• • 530

V. 20 . .

• 541, 634

xxxi. 8

. . 678

V. 17 .

. . 685

xiv. 3

. . 640

vi. 3 • •

. . 632

xxxi. 15

. . 522

V. 21, 22

. . 685

xiv. 25

. . 673

vi. 9 . .

. . 56S

xxxi. 34

. . 661

V. 22 .

. . 711

xiv. 28, 29

. . 675

vii. 2 . .

. . 536

xxxviii. 8

. . 678

V. 22, 23

. . 685

XV. 10, II

. . 685

vii. 14 . 525

i, 539, 541,

li. 15 .

. . 502

V. 23. 24

. . 714

XV. 17-20

. . 685

559

liii. 9 .

. . 610

V. 25 .

. . 714

XV. 26 .

. . 683

vii. 34 • •

• . 541

Lam. iv. 20

. . 610

V. 26 .

. . 575

xvi. 13 .

. . 643

viii. 4 . .

• • 559

Ezek. xviii. 23

• . 552

V. 27, 28

. . 659

xvi. 16 .

. . 618

X. 14 .

. . 612

xviii. 30,

32 . 659

V. 28 . .

. . 555

xvi. 16, 17

. . 615

xi. 6 . .

. . 4S3

xxxiii. J]

. 659, 634

V. 37 . •

. 541, 604

xvi. 17 .

. . 622

xxvi. 19 .

. . 567

xxxvii. I

-14 . 566

V. 39 .

. . 712

xvi. 23 .

. . 648

xxvi. 20 .

. . 565

Dan. ii. 35 .

. . 659

V. 40 .

. . 712

xvii. 3 .

. . 609

XXX. 18 .

. . 682

iii. . .

. . 690

V. 44 .

. . 682

xvii. 2-4

• . 589

xxxiv. 4 .

. . 496

iii. 12 .

. . 640

V. 44, 45

. . 7"

xvii. 5 .

. 619

XXXV. 5 .

. ■ 559

iii. 16.

. . 640

V. 45 •

. . 564

xvii. 6 .

. 611

XXXV. 10 .

. . 590

iii. 21 .

. 502, 686

vi. 5, 6 .

. 686, 689

xviii. 16

. 672

xxxvii. 22

. . 717

iii. 27 .

• • 591

vi. 8 . .

. . 6S4

xviii. 20 .

664, 672

xxxviii. 12,

13, 16 565

iv. 25 .

. . 665

vi. 9. .

. . 619

xviii, 21, 22 684, 714

xl. 3 . .

. . 672

iv. 33-37

• • 715

vi. 14, 15

. . 685

xviii. 21-35 . 684

xl. 5 . .

. . 552

vi. . .

. . 690

vi. 16-18

. 686

xviii. 22 . . . 660

xl. 5, 7 •

• • 591

vi. 10 .

. . . 690

vi. 21 .

. . 694

xix. 9 .

. 715

xl. 6 . .

. . 518

vii. 10

• • 599

vi. 25 .

. 712

xi.K. 12 .

564, 715

xl. 7 ■ .

• • 552

vii. 13

. • 534

vi. 32 .

. . 683

xi.x. 14 .

. 678

xl. 12 . .

. . 502

vii. 13, i^

^ . . 560

vi. 33 .

. . 683

xix. 26 .

. 590. 604

xl 14 . .

. . . 487

Hos. vi. 6 .

. . 663

vi. 34 •

. . 683

XX. 16 .

. . 677

xl. 15 . .

. 643 659

xiv. 2 .

. . 690

vi. 38 .

. . 711

XX. 20 .

. 674

xl. 15, 17 .

. • 591

Joel ii. 10 .

. . 612

vii. I

. . 713

XX. 20-23

. 646

xl. 28 . .

. . 612

ii. 28, 29

• 594, 697

vii. 6

. . 677

xxi. 23 .

. 674

xli. 4 . .

. 4S0. 614

iii. I .

. . . 552

vii. 7 .

679, 684

xxi. 25 .

. 673

xli. 17 . .

. . 497

iii. 9-15

. . 560

vii. 9 .

. . 683

xxi. 31. 32

. 674

xlii. I . .

. . bo6

Amos iv. 13

• 495- ^'-^5

vii. 12 .

. . 643

xxi. 32 .

. 670

xlii. 4 . .

■ • 591

ix. 6 .

. . . 643

vii. 17 .

. 529, 653

xxi. 33-41

. . 622

xlii. 15 .

■ • 497

Jonah i. 17

■ . . 591

vii. 18 .

. . 484

xxi. 45 .

. 568

xliv. 5 . .

• • 639

ii. 10

. . . 591

viii. 5 .

. . 674

xxii. II, 12 565

xliv. 6 .

. 480, 614

' Zech. i. 14 .

• • • 534

viii. 5, 6

• • 517

x.\ii. 13

• 571

TERrULLlAN : INDEX OF TEXTS.


743


PAGE

PAGB

fACI

tM*U

Matt. xxii. 21 . . 561, 648

Luke iv. 8 . .

. . 684

Luke xxiii. 31. . . 659

John vii. 5 . .

%2B

xxii. 23-32

• 571

iv. 18

. 606

xxiii. 43 . . . 666

vii. 37. 38

3«u

673

xxii. 30 .

. 593

V. 31 . .

• • 552

xxiii. 46621. 623, 627

Wi. y) .

• 674

xxii. 37-40

. 552

V. 36. 37

. . 681

xxiv. 4 , . . 678

viii. 16-19

. 617

xxii. 37 .

. 639

vi. 22, 23

. . 712

xxiv. 39 • • . 526

viii. 26 .

603

xxiii. 9 .

663, 682

vi. 23 . .

. . 641

xxiv. 49 . . . 623

viii. 26. 27

. 617

xxiii. 25, 26

. 685

vi. 29

. . 712

John i. I 488. 489, 602,

viii. 28, 29

. 617

xxiii. 26

. 662

vi. 30

677, 678

603, 607, 6ii, 614

Tiii. 38 .

. 617

xxiii. 27

• fi^

vi. 31

. . 643

i. 1-3 . . 489, 615

vui. 40 .

534. 617

xxiii. 31

. 685

vi. 37 6S4

713, 714

i. I, 2 ... 610

viii. 42 .

. 617

xxiv. 29

. 496

vi. 39 •

. . 568

3490. 502, 549/>o2,

nii. 44 .

• • 597

xxiv. 32, 33

. 561

vi. 40

. 651

607, 611, 614

viii. 49 ,

. . 617

xxiv. 35

. 496

vii. 3 . .

. 674

i. 6-36 ... 674

viii. 54. 55

. . 617

xxiv. 36

. 623

vii. 7 . .

• 674

i. 9 . . .607, 674

viii. 56 .

. . 618

XXV. 30 .

. 571

vii. 18-23

. 674

i. 12 . . . . 682

ix. 4 . .

. . 618

xxv. 36 .

. 644

vii. 29, 30

• 679

i. 13 ■ . . 537. 541

ix. 35-38

. . 618

XXV. 38 .

. 690

viii. II .

. 568

i. 14 537. 538, 572.

X. 15 . •

. . 618

XXV. 40, 45

. 690

viii. 17

. . 661

610, 615, 622

X. 17. 18

. . 6t8

XXV. 41 .

533. 483

viii. 20, 21

• 527

i. 16, 17 . . . 672

x. 24--30 .

. . 618

XXV. 45 .

. 690

ix. 26 . ^.

• • 525

i. 17 . . .651. 711

X. 30 488.

603, 615.

xxvi. 26

. 683

ix. 30 . '.

. . 678

i. 18 . 603, 610, 611, •

620.

621. 682

xxvi. 38

533, 558

ix. 51-56

. 708

615

X. 32 . .

. . 618

xxvi. 41

530, 679,

ix. 56

• • 532

i. 29 . . . . 615

X. 34-3 .

. . 618

684

696, 716

ix. 59, 60

. . 675

i. 29-34 ... 653

xi.27. .

. . 618

xxvi. 53

. 623

X. 5 . .

. 690

i. 33 • . • • 674

xi.41. .

. . 622

xxvii. 24

. 673

X. 21 . .

. . 622

i. 49 . . . . 618

xi. 41. 42

618. 664

xxvii. 24

. 685

X. 22 . .

. . 622

i. 49, 50 . . . 615

xii. 27, 28

. . 618

xxvii. 32

. 650

X. 25 . .

. . 528

ii. 5 . . . . 676

xii. 28 .

. 619, 682

xxvii. 46,62

1,623,626

xi. 5-9 .

. . 683

ii. i-ii . . . 673

xii. 30 .

. . 619

xxviii. 18

. 611

xi. 9 . .

679, 684

ii. 16 . . . . 616

xii. 44, 45

. , 619

xxviii. 19

. 676

xi. II

. 683

ii. 19 . . . . 558

xii. 49 .

. . 619

Mark i. 4 . .

658, 674

xi. 27, 28

• . 529

ii. 21 . . . . 558

xii. 50 .

619

i. 9-1 1 .

• 653

xi. 48 .

. 685

iii. 5 • • • . 675

xiii. 1-3 .

619

i. 24 . .

. 622

xii. 16-20

. 683

iii. 6 . . . 537, 624

xiii. 1-12

. 673

ii. 5 . •

• 675

xii. 23 .

. 712

iii. 13 . . . 627

xiii. 8, 9. K

5 . 675

ii. 8 . .

. 674

xii. 29 .

. 683

iii. 14 . . . 650

xiii. 9. 10

. - 675

ii. 21, 22

. 681

xii. 50 . .

677, 716

iii. 16, 17, 18 . 616

xiii. 10 .

662. 676

iv. 36 .

. 673

xiv. 14 .

• 569

iii. 30, 31 . . 674

xiii. 16 .

. . 651

vii. 15 .

. 712

xiv. 26 .

644, 684

iii. 30, 31. 32 . 681

xiii. 31. 32

. . 619

vii. 27 .

. 683

XV. 3-6 .

• 715

iii. 35 . • • 611

xiv. 2 . .

• . 575

viii. 38 .

• 525

XV. 3-7 .

. 663

iii- 35. 36 • . 616

xiv. 5-7 .

. . 620

ix. 4 . .

. 609

XV. 7 . .

. 663

iv. 2 . . . . 674

xiv. 6

620, 650

ix. 6 . .

. 611

XV. 8-10 .

. 663

iv. 6 . . . . 673

xiv. 7 .

. . 620

ix. 37

. 690

XV. 10

. . 663

iv. 24 .495. 551, 602

xiv. 8, 9 .

. . 620

X. 14 . .

. 678

XV. 11-32

663, 715

iv. 25 . . . 616

xiv. 9, 10

615

X. 35 . •

• 674

XV. 29-32

. 663

iv. 34 . . . 616

xiv, 10, II .

620, 621

X. 52 . .

• 675

xvi. 9

. 712

v. 1-9 .. . 671

xiv. II .

. . 603

xi. 30

. 673

xviii. I .

. 568

v. 17 . . . . 616

xiv. 16 .

604, 621

xii. 18-27

• 571

xviii. 7 .

. 645

V. 19 . . . . 611

xiv. 25 .

(*i>4, 610

xiv. 13 .

. 678

xviii. 9-14

. 686

v. 19-27 . . . 616

XV. I

^21

xiv. 31 .

. 684

xviii. 16 .

. . 678

V. 21 . . . . 620

xvi. f . : .

<'74

XV. 21 .

. 650

xviii. 27 .

605, 669

V. 22 . . . . 611

xvi. 13 .

627

xvi. 19 . .

584, 627

xviii, 42 .

. 675

V. 24 . . . . 572

xvi. 14 .

. 621

Luke i. 26-38

. 522

xix. 10 .

552, 569

V. 25 . . . . 572

xvi. 15 ,

. 613

i. 31 • •

. ^'^Q

XX. 4 . .

. 673

V. 28, 29 . . 572

xvi. 24 ,

• 705

i. 35 • 534, 622, 623,

XX. 19 .

. 568

V. 36, 37 . . 616

xvi. 28 .

620

624

XX. 27-38

• 571

V. 43 612, 6i6, 619,

XN-ii. I .

621

i. 41 • • • • 540

XX. 36 .

• 593

682

xxni. 6 .

613. 6S2
. 621
. 685

i. 76 . .

672, 674

XX. 36, 37

• 571

vi. 29, 30, 32 . 616

xni. II .

i. 78 . .

. 504

xxi. 24 .

. 560

vi. 31 . . . • 572

xvi'u 14 .

ii. 1-7 .

522

xxi. 25, 26

. 561

\-i. 33 . • • • 6S3

xix. 34 .

673. 677

ii. 8 . .

522

xxi. 26-28

. 561

vi. 35 . • • • 683

xix. 37 .

561. 5M

ii. 13 . .

522

xxi. 2g, 30

. 561

vi. 37-46 . . 616

XX. 17 . .

621, 625

ii. 22-24 .

522

xxi. 31 .

. 561

vi. 38 570. 603. 682

XX. 29 .

. 570

ii. 23 . .
ii. 25-35

54'
522

xxi. 36 .
xxi. 37 .

. 561
. 627

vi. 39 . . . 571
vi. 44 ... 620

XX. 31 . .

XXI. 18

616, 621
. 648

. 678

ii. 34 . .

541

xxii. 10 .

. 678

x\. 49 . • • 572

Acts i. 3

ii. 36-38 .
ii. 49 • •
iii. 4-6 .

522
622

xxii. 28, 29
xxii. 29 .

. 679
. 623

vi. 51 . . 533. 572
vi. 53. . . . 677

i. 9. >
i. 10. li .

5*4

, 678

561. 627

. 690

. 690

658

xxii. 40 .

. 684

vi. 58. ... 572

i. II . 542.

iii. II

712

xxii. 42 .

. 683

vi. 63 . . . 572. 583

ii. 1-4 . •

iii. 21-22

653

xxii. 61 .

. 658

vi. 66-68 . . 617

ii. 14, 15

iii. 22 .

673

xxiii. 26 .

. 650

vii 617

ii. 17-18 . .

• 594

744

TERTULLIAN : INDEX OF TEXTS.

PAGE

PAGE

PAGE

PAGE

Acts ii. 22 . .

. 534, 613

Rom. viii. 8 .

• 552

I Cor. xiv. 34, 35 . , 677

Gal. V. 21 . .

. 583

ii. 30 .

. . 540

viii. 8, 9

. 579

XV. 3 . . 611, 625

V. 26 . . ,

. 713

ii. 36 .

. . 625

viii. 9 . .

. 583

XV. 3, 4 . 581, 627

vi, 9 . .

. 562

iii. I .

. . 690

viii. II .

. 625

XV. 12-18 . . 581

vi. 17 . . .

• 552

iii. 19-21

. . 562

viii. II, 12

13 579

XV. 19 . . . 562

Eph. i, 14 . .

. 587

iv. 27

. 625, 672

viii. 17, 18

. 574

XV. 21, 22, 23 581

i. 17 . .

. 625

V. 31 .

. . 674

viii. 17 . .

. 646

XV. 29 . . . 581

ii. 10 . . .

. 672

V. 40 .

. . 648

viii. 18 .

. 552

XV. 24, 25 . . boo

iii. 14, 15 •

. 663

vi. 1-6

. . 650

viii. 19, 20,

21 483

XV. 26 . . . 584

iii. 17 . .

• 574

vi. 15 .

. . 588

viii. 32 . .

627, 639

XV. 27, 28 . . 600

iv. 4, 5, 6 .

. 676

vii. 39. 4C

) . . 710

viii. 35 .

. 647

XV. 30, 31,32. 582

iv. 5 . . .

675, 676

vii. 53

. . 651

ix. 5 . •

.608,611

XV. 32 . . . 583

iv. 9 .

. 627

vii. 55

. . 627

ix. 20 .

. 550

XV, 35 • . . 582

iv. 22 . .

578, 583

vii. 59

. . 648

xi. 34 502

614, 640

XV, 36 . . . 585

iv. 22-24

. 578

vii. 59, 6(

) . 589. 716

xi. 34, 35

. 487

XV. 37, 38, 39 585

iv. 25-32 .

. 578

viii. 9-24

. . 649

xii. I

581, 686

XV. 40, 41 . . 582

iv. 26 . . .

685. 714

viii. 26-4C

) .671, 678

xii. 9

. 713

XV. 41 , . . 639

iv. 27 . . .

. 689

viii. 28-3

D . .678

xii. 17

. 713

XV. 41-44 . • 586

iv. 30 . .

6S5, 693

viii. 32, 3

3 . . 678

xii. 19

. 713

XV. 44, 45, 46, 47 587

iv. 31 , ,

. 685

ix. 1-31

. . 676

xiii. I

. 647

XV. 45 . . . 586

vi. iS . . .

6S9, 690

ix. 2 .

• . 685,

xiii. 6

. 647

XV. 46

. . 672

Phil. i. 23 . .

■ 713

ix. II .

. . 678

xiv. 17

. 685

XV. 47

. • 529

i. 29, 30 .

. 647

ix. 43 .

. . 67S

XV. 12

• 591

XV. 47,

+8 . . 582

ii. 3 . •

. 713

X. 9 .

. . 690

xvi. 16

. 686

XV. 49

. . 582

ii. 6 . .

549, 602

X. 14, 15

. . 712

I Cor. i. II, 12

. . 676

XV. 50 581, 583, 584

ii. 8 . .

. 524

X. 38 .

. . 672

i. 14, 16

. 676

XV. 51-53 • . 575

ii. 17 . .

. 647

xii. 2 .

. . 648

i. 17 . .

, . 676

XV. 52 . .58.:, 693

iii. 8 . .

• 715

xii. 15

. . 672

i. 27 524,

590, 605,

XV. 52, 53 . . 590

iii. II, 12

. . 562

xiv. 15-1-

' . . 660

669

XV. 53 . . 584, 592

iii. 13, 14

. 562

xvi. 25

. . 689

i. 24

. 614

XV. 53-55 . • 588

iii. 19 .

• 717

xvii. 24

. . 612

i. 20. .

547

XV. 54-56 . . 584

iii. 20, 21

. . 580

xvii. 32

• • 573

ii. 2 . .

525

XV. 55 . . . 580

iii. 21 . .

. . 589

xi.x. 1-7

. . 674

ii. 9 . .

. 564

xvi. 20 . . . 686

iv. 6, 7 .

. . 685

xix. 2-5

• • 679

ii. II 487,

60

3,614

2 Cor. i. 8 . . . . 582

Col. i. 15 . .

. . 601

xix. 4 .

• . 674

iii. 3, 4 •

676

i. 21, 22 . . 674

i. 21 . .

. . 561

xix. 9 .

. . 685

iii. 16 .

552

i. 22 ... 5S7

ii, II . ,

• . 550

xix. 23

. . . 685

iii, 19 .

547

iv. 6, 7 . . . 577

ii. 12, 13 .

. . 561

xxi, II

. . 648

iii. 22 .

591

iv, 7. . . . 713

ii. 12 . .

. . 661

xxii, II

. . 611

iv. 7 • .

689

iv, 8 . , . . 647

ii. 20 . 561

579, 661

xxiii. 6

• ■ 573

V. 13 .

. 483

iv, 10, II , , 577

ii. 23 . .

• • 715

xxiii. 8

■ . 649

vi. 3 .

. 663

iv. 14 . . . 577

iii. I, 2, 3

. . 561

xxvi. 22

• • 573

vi. 15 .

. 552

iv. 16 . . 556, 574

I Thess. i. 9, 10

. . 562

.Kxvii. 35

. . 689

vi. 20 .

. 556

iv. 17. 18 , . 574

ii. 19.

, . 562

xxviii. 3

• . . 633

vii. 31 .

. 549

V. I . . . . 575

iii. 13

. , 562

Rom. i. 3 .

. • 540

vii. 34 .

. 687

V. 2, 3 . . . 575

iv. 4 .

. • 556

i. 3. 4

. . 624

vii. 34, 35

. 715

V. 3, 4 • • • 576

iv. 8 .

. . 674

i. 7 .

. . 608

vii. 39, 49

• 715

V. 4 . . . . 587

iv. 13

• • 713

i. 8 .

. . 625

viii. 3 •

. 710

V. 5 • 584. 587, 674

iv. 13-17

562, 590

i. 20 .

. . 502

viii. 5 .

479

V. 6, 7, 8 . . 576

iv. 15-17

• 575

i. 25.

• . 564

ix. I

. 611

V. 9, i'-^ • • 577

iv. 16

, . 693

ii. 28, 2{

) . . 564

ix. 25 .

694

V. 10 . . . 592

V. 1-3

. . 563

iii. 13

. . . 709

X. 2 . .

679

vi. 7.

• • 550

V. 17.

. . 689

iv. 3.

. . . 709

X. 4 . .

711

vii. 5

• • • 574

V. 23.

. 581, 590

iv. 7 .

• • 639

X. 6 . .

591

X. 13

. . 689

V. 26 .

. . 686

iv. 9.

. . '11

X. II .

612

xi. 14

. . . 589

2 Thess. i. 4 .

. 646

iv, 22

. . 711

X. 23 .

677

xi. 23

• . 647

ii. 1-7

• 563

iv. 25

. . 640

X. 45 •

584

xii. 4

. . 666

ii. 8-10

. 563

V. 3 •

. . 646

.xi. 1-16

687

xii. 9

• 580, 552

I Tim. i. 4 . .

. . 505

V. 20

• 569, 580

.xi. 3 . .

610

xii. 10

. . 647

i. 16 .

• 659

V, 21

. . . 580

xi. 3-16

686

xiii. I

. . 672

i. 17 .

. 611

vi. 3. 4,

:; . . 580

xi. 4,5 .

688

xiii. 12

. . 686

i. 20 .

• 535

vi. 3. 4

' . . 661

xi. 5 . .

687

Gal. i. I .

. . 625

ii, I .

. 682

vi. 6 .

. . 580

xi. 10 ,

688

i. 8 . .

, 526, 542

ii- 5 534,

584, 593.

vi. 8.

. 580, 661

xi. 14 .

688

iii, 6 .

. . 7"

624

vi. ii-i:

) . . 580

xi. 19 506

57

4, 594

iii. 8 .

• • 540

ii. 8 672,

685, 689

vi. 14, I

5 • • 711

xii, 4-12

679

iii. 13 .

.626, 712

ii. 9, 10

. 689

vi. 19-2;

} . . 580

xii. 23 .

552

iii. 16 .

. 540, 711

ii. II, 12

. 669

vii. 17

• . 579

xii. 26

664

iii. 19 .

. . 651

V. 3 • .

• 715

vii. 20

. . . 579

xiii. .

715

iii. 27 .

■ . 675

V. 9, 10 .

• 715

vii. 23

. 579. 5S4

xiii. 3

597

iv. 4 .

• . 538

V. 17 . .

. 703

viii. 2

. . 579

xiii. 12

609

V. 5 . •

. . 562

V. 22 . ,

. 677

viii. 3 5

35, 556, 579

xiv. 15

690

V. 17 .

• . 552

vi. 10 . .

• 711

viii. 6, 7

• . 579

xiv. 20

504

V. 19 . .

. . 57S

vi. 14. 15 •

. 562

TERTULLIAN : INDEX OF TEXTS.


745


1 Tim. vi. i6

vi. 20

2 Tim. i. 7, 8

i. 15
i. 18
ii. I
ii. 8
ii, II
iv. 6
iv. 8
iv. 13
iv. 14
Heb. V. 7 .
vii. 1-3
viii. II
X. 24 .
X. 26, 27
X. 30 .
xii. 5, 6
xiii. 2
xiii. 10
Jas. i. 13 .
ii. 23 .
iii. I .
iii. 8 .
V. 16 .
V. 17, I^
I Pet. i. II.


PAGE
610, 611, 612
562
647

477. 562
562
6S7
540
647
647
716
686

535
664

654
661
682
673
713
714
690
685
684
711
703
711
664
690
674


29


PAGE

I Pet. ii. 5 . .

. 690

ii. 13 .

. 648

ii. 20 . .

• 645

iii. 1-6 .

. 687

iii. 7 •

. 710

iii. 9

. 685

iii. 20 .

. 651

iii. 21 .

. 582

iv. 8 .

'>39

iv. 12 .

• 645

v. 14 .

. 686

2 Pet. i. 9 . .

673

iii. 10 .

. 496

I John i. I . . .

610, 708

i. 2 . .

• 532

i. 3- •

. 625

i. 5 • .

. 661

ii. 22 .

. 625

iii. 2 .

. 562

iii. 9 .

. 660

iii. 16 .

. 646

iv. 2, 3

. 625

iv. 3 •

542. 561

iv. 12 .

. 611

iv. 15 .

. 627

iv. 18 .

. 646

V. I

. 625

V. 6 .

. 677

PACE

I John V. 12 . . . 627

V. 18

. 660

Rev. i, 7 . .

584. 653

i. 8

. 613

ii. 4

. 663

ii. 6

. 650

ii. 7-

663,666

ii. 10

. 646

ii. II

. 663

ii. 13

. 646

ii. 14.

15

. 663

ii. 17

. 663

ii. 20

. 663

ii. 27

• 659

ii. 29

. . 663

iii. 2

. 663

iii. 4

• • 564

iii. 5

. • 565

iii. 6

. . 663

iii. 10

. . 646

iii. 13

. . 653

iii. 17

. 663

iii. 19

• 714

iii. 21

627, 663

iv. 8

. . 682

V. 9

. . 589

vi. 9

. . 646

vi. 9,

10

. . 563

Rev.


VI. 9-1 1
vi. 10 .
vi. 13 .
vi. 14 .
vii. 14
vii. 17
viii. 3. 4
xiv. 3 ,
xiv.
xvi. 4 .
xvii. 6
xvii. 14
xviii. .
xviii. 2
xix. 4 .
XX. 2 .
XX. 3 .
XX. 4-6
XX. 10

XX. II

XX. 12-14
XX. 13-15
xxi. I .
xxi. 4 .
xxi. 6 .
xxi. 8 .
xxii. 13
xxii. 18,


PACK

573
683
497
496
646

IS
589

564. 688
563
646
677
563
561
635
563
483
563
590
496
563
590

496. 497
590
653
646

653
490


D


I»^'


THE ANTE-NICENE FATHERS


TRAXSI.A TIONS OF


THE WRITINGS OF THE FATHERS OF THE CHRISTIAN
CHURCH BEFORE THE COUNCIL OF NICiEA.


J\rV ONE DOLIvA*R A VOLUME.

THE TWENTY-FOUR VOLUMES REDUCED TO EIGHT VOLUMES; AND THE PRICE,

$72.00, REDUCED TO $24.00.

AN AMERICAN REPRINT OE THE EDINBURGH SERIES.


UNDER THE EDITORIAL CHARGE OF

RIGHT REV. ARTHUR CLEVELAND COXE, D.D.,

ASSISTED BY SEVERAL MEN OP LETTERS AITD CHKI8TLAN SIVXNBB.


For an announcement of the order in which the original volumes will appear, please
see volume one of this series.

The fourth volume the publishers expect to have ready for delivery about Nov. i, 1885
and the remaining volumes will be issued, one each three months, as previously announced.

The subscription price of the series is three dollars for each volume of the American
edition ; one dollar for each original volume. Thus an edition, chronologically arranged^
revised and annotated, and beautifully printed from new plates, is offered at one-third oj
the price of the foreign edition.

The new edition is sold strictly by subscription, and will not be found at the booksellers.


ANNOUNCEMENT.


The American Publishers take great pleasure in announcing that their negotiations
with Messrs. T. & T. Clark, the Publishers of the Edinburgh Edition, have been com-
pleted, and that this edition of The Ante-Nicene Library is published by Special
Arrangement with the Messrs. Clark on the basis of a liberal honorarium. This
announcement has been delayed by the settlement of details, and the lapse of time
necessary for transferring to this Company entire control of the original edition. The
publishers of this edition by the existing arrangement Control the sale of the Foreign
Series in America, and will supply the Edinburgh volumes when desired.

THE CHRISTIAN LITERATURE FIBLISHING CO.


I


University of Toronto
Library


DO NOT

REMOVE

THE

CARD

FROM

THIS

POCKET


Acme Library Card Pocket
LOWE-MARTIN CO. limited
